Retired tool and die maker Jack Moody turns to making guitars

Guitarist and instructor Jack Moody plays a song Tuesday on a guitar he built with other examples of his handiwork on display in the background at his Loveland home. ( Steve Stoner )

If Jack Moody isn't strumming some jazzy tune on one of his guitars, it's probably because he's out in the garage making a new one from scratch.

"I've got three granddaughters. I fix up guitars for them," Moody said, in the garage-turned-shop of his Loveland home. "From scratch I've made about 10."

The guitars he makes are in the style of the classic archtop, hollow-body Gibson guitars that date back to the 1930s. "In the big band era," he added.

"I started making guitars by repairing them, until I learned everything on them," Moody said.

He is a retired tool and die maker and as such was able to pick up on the craft of designing high-quality acoustic-electric guitars. Along with the six-stringed instruments, he's also fashioned bows, ventriloquist dummies, figurines, rubber band guns and much more.

"I'm the kind of person who won't throw anything away. I made this ventriloquist dummy out of a single block of wood," he said.

When he retired, he disposed of a lot of his tools, so that he wouldn't be tempted to go back to that kind of work. But he ended up making his own tools himself. He fashioned tools out of wood to measure the thickness and arch of what will become a guitar, holding dimensions within 0.005 of an inch.

"My wife insists I should devote myself to playing guitar instead of building, but the problem is when I'm done with one, I have wood left over, so I always end up making something else."

He starts the process of guitar-making by ordering the wood, making certain it's of the highest quality, a point he stressed.

Advertisement

"Every part of the spruce has a difference in tone, just like the human voice," he said.

He soaks a long piece of wood, about 1/10 of an inch thick, in water, then warps it into the shape of the guitar siding, using a heated piece of metal that he fixed to a blow torch and a vice. He then places the siding in a mold, which he also made himself.

"All the tools are homemade," Moody said.

Jack Moody holds a wooden mold as he talks Tuesday about the various steps required when building guitars in his Loveland workshop. ( Steve Stoner )

He then cuts out the top and back of the guitar and uses a drill press to set the depth of the curves for the arched top. The arch in most guitars of this style is supported by glued-in pieces of wood, but Moody tediously carves the supports right out of the back of the arched guitar front, using a chisel.

He smoothes out the curves, puts in the floating or built-in pickups, volume and tone knobs and cable input. Next, the tops and bottoms are glued and clamped onto the sides, using clamps he made himself.

In all, he estimates each guitar takes upward of 40 hours of work and at least a week to complete. He hasn't sold a guitar yet or made one special for a non-family member, but said he wouldn't be able to let one go for less than $4,000.

He said if someone wanted a guitar made, the price would depend on how much body work they'd want and what kind of wood it would be constructed from.

"I played guitar since childhood. As far as making guitars, as a tool and die maker ... you learn to make things," he said.

He belongs to the Catfish Jazz Society and has jammed with some of the leading jazz musicians and has a guitar signed by many greats like Willie Nelson, Jerry Reed and Ray Benson. He taught an advanced-level music course at St. Ambrose University, Iowa.

His favorite musicians are Gene Autry and Louis Armstrong. He never took any formal guitar lessons, but picked things up from the great musicians he's played with.

Having only lived in the city for 21/2 years, Moody said he's interested in reaching out to the local music community and giving lessons to people who are serious about learning guitar.

For those interested in learning anything from country to jazz, to blues to rock, from a man who has an intimate knowledge of the instrument, call 970-612-2532 or email moody566@aol.com to speak with Moody.

"I'm just a born tinker and I'm always making stuff. I've been accused of having too much imagination for my own good."

James Garcia can be reached at 970-635-3630 or garciaj@reporter-herald.com. Follow him on Twitter: @JamesGarciaRH.