Topics: From the Wires, News

LISBON, Portugal (AP) — Beware of bankers bearing a grudge.

An investigation by Portugal’s Parliament into last summer’s collapse — and 4.9 billion euro ($6 billion) bailout — of the country’s largest listed bank has turned into gripping television as members of the wealthy Espirito Santo banking dynasty wash their dirty laundry in public.

The finger-pointing involves alleged shady businesses, struggles for power, and murky dealings in Africa.

Regulators have already accused Banco Espirito Santo’s leadership of fraud, forgery and money-laundering in the run-up to its collapse in July.

Banco Espirito Santo’s demise reignited fears over Portugal, which is one of the eurozone’s most fragile economies and which needed to be bailed out in 2011. It also raised questions over other potential financial skeletons in Europe.

The committee hearings are trying to figure out how Espirito Santo’s international tourism-to-farming business empire, with the bank at its heart, collapsed so suddenly.

The tensest moment of the hearings in Parliament came last week with the testimony of two cousins: dapper former bank CEO and family patriarch Ricardo Espirito Santo Salgado, 70, who rubs shoulders with European royalty; and pugnacious board member Jose Maria Ricciardi, who is 10 years younger and tried to oust Salgado in a boardroom coup last year.

In almost 17 hours of testimony that ended in the early hours of the morning, the pair testified separately and gave contradictory versions of events.

Salgado denied any wrongdoing and pointed the blame at others. The Portuguese government and Bank of Portugal, he claims, refused his last-minute plea to help the bank avoid bankruptcy.

And Salgado accused a rogue Luxembourg-based company accountant of concealing debts of more than 1 billion euros. He also regretted obscure business deals at the bank’s Angolan arm, BES Angola, which holds more than 1 billion euros in bad loans to reportedly unidentified creditors.