Topics: HBO, Jon Stewart, Religion Dispatches, the brink, The Daily Show, Entertainment News

This article originally appeared on Religion Dispatches

This couldn’t be a more topical interview. Aasif Mandvi might be most famous for his hilarious commentary on The Daily Show, but he’s also a very well-regarded actor, creator, artist, and writer.

At a time when we’re not having a debate about Islam and extremism so much as we’re slinging talking points past each other, Aasif Mandvi took time out of a very busy schedule to talk about Halal in the Family and much more.

Namely: He teases us with glimpses into his upcoming HBO show, The Brink; his time with Jon Stewart on The Daily Show, and some valuable insights on the fine line between free speech and hate speech.

I read your book, No Land’s Man, [Note: You should too. It’s wonderful.], and I’ve watched Halal in the Family. What’s sparked your interest in combating Islamophobia?

We did a piece on the Daily Show five years ago, sort of spawned by Katie Couric’s saying American Muslims need their own Cosby Show, and we took that literally. We created this sketch, put it on the show, it was very funny and very popular, and that was the end of that.

Then, years later, I was approached by my manager, Lillian LaSalle, with a company called Moore and Associates, and they said to me, “Is there anything you want to talk about? Anything to make a social impact?” I had been on the Daily Show for a number of years at this point, and spoken to a lot of Islamophobes, people who had a lot of misinformation about Islam and Muslims.

It was a personal thing to me, and it was an issue I thought I could lend my voice to in a satirical space.

Were there any particular misconceptions or fears you wanted to address?

There was a lot of stuff about Shari’ah Law, the protests against the mosques, the standard stuff—the stories that kept coming up.

You work as an actor, a writer, a comedian, in a lot of creative spaces. What’s the line between free speech and bigotry?

Wow. What is the line between free speech and bigotry? Look, there’s always going to be free speech, and it’s a fundamental right. We are allowed to speak our minds. But bigotry will always exist—there will always be a certain amount of prejudice, and I don’t think you can eradicate that. What I wanted to do was address some of that prejudice, the misinformation that gets put out there.

You can talk about and think about Muslims as you want, but you can’t stop Muslims from building a mosque. You can hate Muslims from the comfort of your house, or publicly, but when that becomes stopping Muslims from building a mosque, or worshipping, then we are crossing the line into something else.

How do you feel Hollywood deals with diversity—is it getting better, or is it getting worse?

We are definitely seeing more diversity today, in television and in movies. Probably more than we ever have. There are certainly more Asians, more South Asians, more people from the Middle East, portrayed on television today, as compared to when I started out.

But in Hollywood, Caucasian is still the norm. Your heroes are still Caucasian. So that is somewhere we need more diversity, in terms of who’s creating the stories, who’s starring in the stories, who the stories are about. You can have a lot of brown people, but if the story’s really about white people, then it’s diversity, but not the kind we need.

It doesn’t matter, at the end of the day, that you have more brown people. Nobody’s not watching a show because there’s not enough brown people on it.

You mentioned, in No Land’s Man, how you got the job on The Daily Show. It put you in a fascinating position. A lot of people in my generation turned to Jon Stewart for the news, and so they turned to you as a Muslim voice. They look at you as a spokesperson for Muslims. Do you then feel any responsibility to speak for Muslims? Does it limit you, or pressure you, in any way?

It’s not a responsibility that I chose to take on. It’s something that happened in the culture because there are so few Muslim voices, so few faces, so little representation. It became a thing: “You’re our friendly Muslim guy.” And because of the nature of what the Daily Show was.