Several chains are celebrating Halloween with various promotions, according to several company press releases. They include:

Chuck E. Cheese's: Every costumed child to visit a Chuck E. Cheese’s location during October will receive 50 free tickets. In addition to 50 free tickets for costumed kids, Chuck E. Cheese's is offering other promotions during October:

The new "Them Bones" song – This song and dance helps families to learn about the body.

A "Them Bones" instructional YouTube video to help families learn the dance’s moves before their visit.

A costume parade and Nerds Candy Splash at 12:30, 2:30 and 4:30 p.m. on Saturdays and Sundays throughout October.

A Chuck E.'s Trick or Treat bag for $1.99.

Chuck E. Cheese's and Party City have also partnered to offer 100 free tickets with the purchase of any costume at Party City. The 100-ticket code will be printed on each Party City costume receipt and can be redeemed at Chuck E. Cheese's locations nationwide.

MOOYAH Burgers, Fries & Shakes: Through Nov. 1, MOOYAH will offer "Frankenfries, which is a half order of MOOYAH’s French fries and a half order of sweet potato fries, served with "Spooky Sauce," a mash-up of MOOYAH’s BBQ sauce and mayonnaise, and "Dracula Dip," a spicy ranch sauce. During Halloween week, Monday, Oct. 26 through Sunday, Nov. 1, guests who enjoy their favorite MOOYAH burger in costume will be able to add Frankenfries to their order for $1 with any purchase.

Chipotle Mexican Grill: From 5 p.m. untl closing on Saturday, Oct. 31, Chipotle returns its Halloween fundraiser, “Boorito.” Chipotle will offer $3 burritos, bowls, salads and tacos to customers dressed in a costume with an, "unnecessary" addition. Proceeds from the fundraiser, up to $1 million, will benefit the Chipotle Cultivate Foundation. To showcase the simplicity of its ingredients, Chipotle is asking Boorito participants to add an unnecessary addition to their costumes in order to redeem the $3 Boorito offer. This twist on the costume guidelines supports the company’s larger vision of serving only the highest quality ingredients versus the complex array of unnecessary additives and preservatives that are typically found in fast food.

Orange Leaf Frozen Yogurt: Orange Leaf is introducing its new Salted Caramel Latte froyo and bringing back the Pumpkin Spice Latte froyo. Both flavors are available through Nov. 29 at participating Orange Leaf locations across the country.

Dunkin’ Donuts: Iced Pumpkin coffee, lattes, the new Pumpkin Macchiato and Pumpkin Cheesecake Square, Pumpkin Muffins, Pumpkin Donuts and Pumpkin Munchkins donut hole treats.

Krystal: Krystal is treating guests ages 12 and under who come dressed in costume on Halloween with a free kid’s meal with any full-priced adult combo purchase. The offer is good from 11 a.m. to midnight on Oct. 31 at participating Krystal restaurants. There is a limit of two free kids’ meals per purchase.