Bullitt County Medical Center lab assistant Margo Griffin, from left, sorts patient paperwork with medical assistant Pam Harmon and physicians assistant Christina Jackson. The small family practitioner's office has had to increase the number of staff in charge of handling billing and paperwork due to increasing layers of complex billing requirements by insurance companies. Oct. 31, 2014 (Photo: Alton Strupp/Special to USA Today)

Dr. Mohana Arla has cared for generations of Samantha Hardin's family.

During a recent visit, he checked her persistent staph infection, recalled that he's known her since she was born, and asked about her mother and grandmother as her toddler son played nearby.

Such interactions are why the 64-year-old country doctor is still in medicine after 35 years. When he's with patients, he loves his job. But that storied doctor-patient relationship is fading further into the nation's past, he said, as medicine becomes more about insurance, regulations, paperwork and money — despite health reform.

"The backbone of health care everywhere in the world is the family doctor," said Arla, who helps run Bullitt County Family Practitioners. "I don't want a third party who's not in the room telling me what to do and what not to do. Don't come between me and my patient."

It's been his refrain for years.

RELATED | Then and now: A doctor's struggles amid reform

RELATED | What makes an Obamacare health site work?

RELATED | More than 100,000 enrolled in kynect plans

In 1989, former Courier-Journal reporter Gideon Gil spent a day with Arla, and wrote that doctors "have lost some control to those paying the bills — employers, private insurers and the government."

The Courier-Journal spent another day with Arla this fall, and he acknowledged that the last quarter-century has been a time of rapid and unending change. Nationally, there's new technology and treatments and the Affordable Care Act. Locally, there's a new road named in Arla's honor that leads to his office, and his physician son Praveen, a child in 1989, now works beside him.

But the loss of control over care that so troubled Arla 25 years ago persists today. In fact, he said, it has only gotten worse for the nation's family doctors.

It's a view shared by many physicians — although challenged by others.

"There is still enormous power a physician has with his patients," said Dr. Divya Cantor, a medical director for Anthem Blue Cross and Blue Shield in Kentucky. "And that's not going away."

Then and now

Arla spent part of one morning in 1989 poring over a letter from an insurance company that compared average medical expenses incurred by members Arla treated with the average for the company. It found Arla's patients' expenses were below average but warned that doctors whose patients' expenses were out of line, presumably too high, would be looked at more closely.

"Who am I working for really?" Arla said at the time. "Am I working for the insurance company, or am I working for the patient? I get confused."

Arla expressed the same frustration recently, saying "nothing has changed" and lamenting that "what's happening in my office is happening all over the country."

He said he often must get pre-authorizations from insurers before knowing they will pay for treatments, procedures, tests or specialists he recommends. He said he spends hours dealing with them, sometimes railing against denials.

Recently, he tried to help 60-year-old patient Bernard Woods and his wife Pamela sort out a complicated, insurance-related issue regarding a chemotherapy infusion pump he needs for his lung cancer. He apologized that they had to deal with such problems while fighting the disease and put his arm around Pamela Woods as she walked out of his office into the waiting room.

Longtime patient Bonita Schott, who is on Medicare, said the insurance covers some of her family's medical needs but not others, such as glasses. "It's so confusing," she said. "I don't know how the doctors keep up with it."

Not only do insurers exert too much influence on care, Arla said, doctors also lose out financially since "the health care dollars are going to third parties." Reimbursements to him for common procedures have been steadily dropping, he said. His $40 charge for a chest X-ray was reimbursed in full in 1980, but he gets only $16 today from one insurer. And he gets less than $5 for a $25 complete blood count test, compared with full reimbursement back then.

Meanwhile, insurance billing has become a growing part of his operation. Today, 15 of his office's 26 staff members work in billing — compared with one in 1989.

"You've got to feel for Dr. Arla because things sure have changed," said Anthem's Mike Lorch, who heads up Kentucky provider relations.

But Anthem officials said many of those changes reflect larger shifts that reach beyond insurers. For example, Cantor said, patients often come to doctors with information they've gathered from the Internet or elsewhere, feeling more empowered and asking for tests or scans. Anthem officials acknowledged requiring pre-authorizations for some care but said denials are often based on a doctor's failure to fully and correctly document the patient's problem, and there are many ways to appeal a denial.

Cantor and Lorch pointed to what they consider positive recent developments. One is a slow move toward paying for overall quality rather than the sheer numbers of services, and passing savings along to doctors who provide quality care. Another is greater collaboration and data-sharing between insurers and doctors. While a primary care doctor may see a patient for an acute problem such as a sore throat, an insurer can tell the doctor whether the patient has gone to the emergency room or had a mammogram lately. Lorch said Arla participates in an "enhanced primary care program" that provides this sort of information.

Hazy horizon

But Arla said he sees no move to put doctors back into the center of health care in this era of health reform. He calls the ACA "unaffordable, high-cost, low care."

He said he's happy it has given uninsured patients insurance. The practice's Medicaid patient load has risen significantly in just one year, he and his son said, and some are getting long-delayed care. But at the same time, they said, many commercially insured patients are seeing deductibles double. Arla tries to help financially strapped patients find the least expensive quality care —sending them to independent MRI centers in the area instead of to hospitals for the scan, for example, or helping them find deals on medication.

"These insurance companies have gotten richer and richer. The people have insurance by name only. It's good for catastrophes," Arla said. "This really is a tragedy."

Insurance company officials say higher deductibles often encourage people to shop more intelligently and responsibly for health care. Cantor said they "make people pause for a moment to ask: Is this what I need?"

But Arla sees something different: More and more commercially insured patients skipping care to save money.

He is also struggling with a bevy of new requirements for doctors under the ACA; "I'm bogged down with so many rules and regulations, there's no time to think about the patient anymore."

Rules concerning electronic medical records are one example. Doctors who take Medicare must show "meaningful use" of such records by 2015 or face a lower reimbursement adjusted down by 1 percent a year.

Arla's office began using these records this year and said they've added hours of extra work for doctors and inconvenience for patients. Before electronic medical records, the wait time for a patient without an appointment was 15 minutes to half an hour. Now it can exceed an hour, partly because doctors are busy on computers.

"Computers made life horrible for us," Arla said as he typed in a record in the hallway between exam rooms.

Despite all of his frustrations, however, Arla perseveres. Since moving from his native India to the United States in 1976, he said he has believed in America — and still does. He offers some solutions: reimbursing independent family physicians at higher rates, reducing insurance premiums and deductibles, and requiring insurance to pay not just for preventive care but for basic care, such as four doctor visits a year for each patient.

But he's worried such changes may never happen. And so is his son, who is likely to outlast his father in the profession.

"We're supposed to be the gatekeepers," ushering patients into the health care system, said the younger Arla. "But the gates are flooded. And we have no idea where things are going."

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/16A3Tn3