Share

Tweet



Share

Send

Link



During a now infamous congressional hearing in February 2012 on contraception coverage under Obamacare, two female representatives stormed out in protest when they realized the expert witness panel did not include a single woman.

“What I want to know is: Where are the women?” New York Rep. Carolyn Maloney asked House Oversight Committee Chairman Darrell Issa prior to walking out. “I look at this panel and I don’t see one single individual representing the tens of millions of women across the country who want and need insurance coverage for basic preventative health care services, including family planning.”











A photo of the testosterone-laden panel quickly went viral as the public gawked in disbelief, but according to a report released this week, the gaping gender gap is business as usual when it comes to witnesses at congressional hearings. The study from the Sunlight Foundation, a nonprofit that supports transparency in politics, shows that women account for only 23 percent of the witnesses called to testify before the House, despite making up 51 percent of the overall population. The researchers focused specifically on expert witnesses who appeared before House committees during the 113th session. (Data on the Senate was less accessible, according to Sunlight.)

The findings are particularly troubling because witness panels have a huge impact on how most laws get made. During committee hearings, House members depend on witnesses to impart their expertise and share personal stories, which ultimately helps shape each piece of legislation. It’s hard to imagine how you ensure equal treatment under the law without considering the perspective of half the population.









The sausage fest before the House Oversight Committee at a hearing on contraception coverage under Obamacare in February of 2012.

Deborah Tannen, a Georgetown University professor of linguistics and author of the bestseller You Just Don’t Understand: Men and Women in Conversation, believes the gender imbalance may stem in part from antiquated notions of what an expert looks like. “When it comes to figures of authority, those figures are almost always thought of as male,” she says. “I’m actually surprised that the [percentage of female witnesses] was as high as 23 percent.”

Tannen also notes that the issue extends well beyond Congress. A recent survey of guests on U.S. news programs found that 89 percent of the experts on ABC’s Nightline and 87 percent of those on PBS’ NewsHour were male. Similarly, in a study on the demographics of newspaper sources, only 41 percent of print articles were found to cite at least one female.

The solution, according to Tannen, is pretty obvious: Open up more leadership roles to women. “The more women people see in positions of authority, the more likely people are to choose them as experts,” she says.