Alabama again topped the list of states with the least competitive commercial health insurance markets, according to a report released today by the American Medical Association.

Last year, the AMA found Alabama to be No. 1, with a single insurer, Blue Cross Blue Shield of Alabama, accounting for 88 percent of the state's health insurance market. This year, Alabama retained its perch, although the AMA says BCBS has dropped to an 86 percent market share, according to the AMA study.

The list was developed from the 2013 edition of AMA's Competition in Health Insurance: A Comprehensive Study of U.S. Markets. The report was compiled with data from 2011.

"In far too many states, one or two insurance companies dominate the market, which can hurt patients, physicians and employers," said AMA President Ardis Dee Hoven in a statement. "Without rivals to compete against, a large health insurance company can take advantage of patients by raising premiums and dictating important aspects of patient care."

The doctors' lobbying group found these 10 states to have the least competitive commercial health insurance markets: 1. Alabama, 2. Hawaii, 3. Michigan, 4. Delaware, 5. Alaska, 6. South Carolina, 7. North Dakota, 8. Nebraska, 9. Louisiana and 10. Rhode Island.

The study also found that 15 states had a single health insurer with a commercial market share of 50 percent or more.

The 10 states that experienced the biggest drop in competition levels between 2010 and 2011 were: 1. Louisiana, 2. Idaho, 3. Oklahoma, 4. Iowa, 5. Texas, 6. Missouri, 7. Nebraska, 8. Kansas, 9. Ohio and 10. Arkansas.

The AMA report looked at insurance plans in 386 metropolitan areas in all 50 states and Washington D.C.

Blue Cross and Blue Shield of Alabama spokeswoman Koko Mackin said Alabama's insurance premiums are among the lowest in the country.



"Our customers' faith in us has provided us our market share, and we have to continue to earn that every day," Mackin said in an email.

Mackin said among the 50 states, Alabama has the lowest average family premiums among employers, according to the federal government's 2012 Medical Expenditure Panel Survey.

But experts say the Alabama outlook on insurance rates is changing as provisions of the Affordable Care Act begin to take hold.

Requirements in the ACA eliminating underwriting for medical reasons and requiring certain minimum coverages ensure that Alabama's historically low rates will likely rise while other states, with higher premiums and no underwriting, may see rate drops, experts say.

Updated 4:22 p.m., Nov. 7, to include Blue Cross and Blue Shield response.