SIGN UP FOR OUR NEWSLETTER

Half of all U.S. adults believe mass immigration from poor, violent Third World countries has driven up crime rates while hurting the economy, according to a bilingual survey conducted by Pew Research Center.

Fifty years after the U.S. passed the Immigration and Nationality Act of 1965, which all but eliminated immigration from America’s traditional European stock and culture in favor of migrants from the Third World, Americans and descendants of recent immigrants aren’t pleased with the results.

SIGN UP FOR OUR NEWSLETTER

Nearly half of all respondents (49 percent) want current immigration levels to be decreased. Currently the U.S. government voluntarily imports 1.05 million foreigners on green cards alone each year. Green card holders will outnumber the populations of Iowa, New Hampshire, and South Carolina combined within only ten years if existing levels of immigration are allowed, a prospect which alarms some Americans concerned about highly unnatural and extreme population increases. Pew asked respondents to which word comes to mind when they think of immigrants:

When asked what one word first comes to mind when thinking about immigrants in the U.S. today, the word “illegal” is offered by 12 percent of American adults—more than any other word. Other respondents offered words such as “overpopulation” (5 percent), “legality” (4 percent), “jobs” (3 percent), “deportation” (3 percent) and “work ethic” (3 percent).

Noticeably absent are the supposed virtues of immigration touted by the elite: “diversity,” “enrichment,” “vibrancy.” In Chapter Four of its report under the heading, “Relatively Little Knowledge About U.S. Immigration Facts,” Pew snootily reports “35 percent of Americans say that the U.S. foreign-born share is actually higher [than 13 percent, or 41.45 million foreigners]: 28 percent say about four-in-ten Americans are foreign-born, and seven percent say that more than half of the U.S. population is foreign born.” Maybe Pew stumbled on Americans who lived in historically black neighborhoods which became entirely Hispanic almost overnight.

These results are unsurprising, considering:

1) media members and law enforcement work furiously to cover up mass immigration’s destabilizing effect on every aspect of American life,

2) the government does not keep track of any immigrant crime statistics, and

3) when a flood washes away your home, you don’t spend time counting out individual droplets that wiped out the foundation.

The 28 percent of respondents who said four-in-ten Americans are foreign-born are on the mark. By 2060, one-fifth of all Americans will be foreign-born, and only non-Hispanic, native-born whites will suffer a population decline, a decline of 16 million in a mere 45 years — in a country founded by George Washington and built by European settlers and pioneers. In less than 100 years after the government took steps that could destroy its traditional demography, Hispanics will be 29 percent of the population, numbering over 110 million.

That prospect doesn’t excite all Hispanics, however: 20 percent of them told Pew that immigrants make America worse off. As Breitbart News previously reported, current policies admitting huge numbers of immigrants “continues unaltered at a time when automation is reducing hiring, and when a record share of our own workers here in America are not employed,” a terrible deal for everyone living here except Democrats and the super-rich:

Unemployment stands at 5.6 percent and outstanding student loan debt at over $1.2 trillion, both the Bush and Obama administration’s immigration policies have shut Americans out of the growing job market. Between 2000 and 2014, every new job created went to legal and illegal immigrant workers. Furthermore, for every new job created, two immigrants arrived in America: That’s 18 million foreign-born workers for 9.3 million American jobs. Within the next five years, Hispanic foreigners alone will take 75 percent of newly-created American jobs.

Respondents sense that taking in tens of millions of immigrants from countries such as Mexico is making America less safe, especially for women and children cherished by America’s historic Anglo-Saxon culture. Breitbart News has exposed many, many crimes committed by immigrants that the media did its best to cover up. While the murder of Kathryn Steinle, allegedly at the hands of a five-times deported Mexican illegal alien, elicited nationwide outrage (and a blank stare from the Obama administration), other crimes are buried. For example:

Michigan police arrested Mexican illegal alien Aurelio Hernandez-Gomez, 23, for kidnapping and sexually assaulting a 13-year-old Florida girl.

Illegal alien sex offender Keane Dean, 26, allegedly raped a mentally-challenged 14-year-old girl in Santa Clarita after luring her into a garage — while free on bond. Since he was arrested in Los Angeles county, a “sanctuary” jurisdiction, there’s a 99 percent chance he’ll never be deported even if he serves time.

Pakistani immigrant Sohail Khan, 42, kidnapped and raped a drunk passenger who passed out in his cab. Illustrating why perhaps Pakistan doesn’t have its own Silicon Valley, Khan couldn’t figure out how to erase footage from his cab’s camera. He’ll serve less than five years in jail and will never be deported back to his native Pakistan.

Ohio police booked Mexican illegal alien Juan Emmanual Razo after he went on a crime spree, murdering 60-year-old Margaret Kostelnick in her home, trying to rape his 14-year-old niece, and shooting another woman who was walking with children. Local authorities found Razo was in the country illegally a few weeks before, but Border Patrol told him to stand down; at that point, Kostelnick’s days were numbered.

U.S. Marshals booked a Hispanic man with U.S. citizenship, 45-year-old Robert Guardiola, accused of years-long child sex abuse after he fled to Mexico.

Missouri police arrested illegal alien Marvin Castellanos for attempting to rape a woman at knifepoint. “Don’t look at my face,” he told his screaming victim, before punching her. Castellanos admitted to police he had previously been deported.

Illegal alien Victor Aureliano Martinez Ramirez broke into Marilyn Pharis’s home in the dead of night, beat her so savagely he broke her neck and both eye sockets, strangled her, raped her with a foreign object, and left her for dead — as he broke into another home. Pharis succumbed to her injuries eight days later. Santa Maria Police Chief Ralph Martin attacked Democrats for protecting violent immigrants: “I am not remiss to say that, from Washington, D.C., to Sacramento, there is a blood trail into the bedroom of Marilyn Pharis.” Ramirez was on probation during his rampage. Local police said they “don’t care” he’s an illegal alien.

Previously-deported Honduran illegal alien Nelson Ochoa-Puentes, 33, pulled a gun on a cop after fleeing from a traffic stop. Allowing foreigners who don’t speak or read English to drive on American roads seems like a poor policy. But at least this story has a happy ending: The cop shot the alien menacing him.

Mexican national and previously-deported illegal alien Francisco Javier Chavez skipped his August court appearance after smashing a toddler’s limbs. Despite racking up multiple felonies and savagely beating his 2-year-old victim nearly to death, police released him only 24 hours after arresting him, despite an ICE request to detain him. Predictably, he disappeared, and now there’s a child beater running free with a $600,000 warrant out for his arrest.

Cue complete radio silence from the media: Jose Andres-Jose, an illegal alien from Guatemala, allegedly raped a child in Pennsylvania on July 18. Despite the shocking nature of the crime and the high bail of $9.5 million, no other national news outlet besides Breitbart News even noticed the crime.

Mexican illegal alien Juan Jimenez-Olivera, pled guilty to strangling 30-year-old Sviatlana Dranko in her home, stealing $6,000 from her, setting her body on fire, and lying to police. He also raped her, but those charges were dropped in exchange for his plea deal. If Mexico refuses to take him back , he’ll remain in the U.S. for the rest of his life and will be free to roam unsuspecting American neighborhoods after serving his sentence. His law-breaking employer has blood on his hands, but at least he got a bargain on Obamacare

Illegal alien sex offender Jesus Atrian allegedly raped a 16-year-old girl with Downs Syndrome, having previously been convicted of a similar attack on an eight-year-old victim.

Illegal alien Ala Asaf — known as “man” to journalists — allegedly lured a woman into his New Orleans apartment before raping her. In January, he was arrested for a DWI but was never identified as an immigrant, let alone an illegal alien.

A traumatized motel clerk was repeatedly stalked by an illegal alien who attempted to rape her. “He was waiting, he was waiting and he was sober this time. He was ready to hurt me,” the victim told the one news outlet in the entire country (besides Breitbart News) who reported on the case. “No one helped me. No one helped me. They left me there to be attacked again, the police, my manager, Extended Stay America with no cameras. Everyone left me.”

A Republican party that promised to crack down on crime and curb immigration would thrill and motivate its base. The Pew survey shows how at odds the GOP establishment is with its base on immigration.

In 2013, establishment darling Sen. Marco Rubio, still pushing to hand out U.S. citizenship like candy, then pushed the Gang of Eight bill, which would have ramped up the green card giveaway to 30 million in only ten years, tripling already unpopular levels of immigration. But 67 percent of Republicans want immigration levels decreased — and don’t want their children to live in a poorer and more dangerous country where foreigners and their descendants, who have no affection for or attachment to traditional America, account for 88 percent of population growth within only 50 years. Control of the economy and government will by then be neatly transferred into the hands of an imported population if Republicans spit on or ignore their base.

Email Katie at kmchugh@breitbart.com.