The state's insurance agency wants to hear from people covered by Community Health Alliance insurance plans who are experiencing problems with hospitals or physicians accepting their coverage. (Photo: iStock / ThinkStock)

Recent comments from the state's insurance commissioner raised questions about whether Community Health Alliance's proposed health insurance premium increases would be enough for it to re-list its plans for 2016 on the federally run exchange.

Community Health Alliance, Tennessee's only health insurance cooperative established by the Affordable Care Act, stopped selling its plans on the federal exchange in January after its low-cost plans attracted more enrollees than expected — raising concerns about its ability to serve its members.

The co-op is requesting an average rate increase of 32.6 percent for 2016, but insurance commissioner Julie Mix McPeak testified in Washington, D.C., recently that its request might not be enough.

"I don't know that is going to be sufficient to make the company sustainable and to remove the freeze for the upcoming year," McPeak told the oversight subcommittee of the U.S. House of Representatives' Ways and Means Committee on June 24.

Knoxville-based Community Health Alliance filed its 2016 rate requests in May. The state's actuarial consultants sent a list of more than 30 questions to the co-op on June 16 as part of its review process.

"To my knowledge, our rates are still under review, and I can't speak to Commissioner McPeak's intent in her remarks," Ranee Randby, spokeswoman for Community Health Alliance, said in an email to The Tennessean.

The Tennessee Department of Commerce and Insurance has until late August to approve final rate requests.

Community Health Alliance approached the state with its situation in January and received approval to be removed from the exchange about a month before open enrollment ended.

It reported having 35,761 covered lives, or people enrolled in individual plans, as of May 15, while it had 2,287 members — with 186 on individual plans — at the end of 2014. Community Health Alliance had a net loss of $22 million at the end of 2014.

"We have a financial exam underway so we know exactly where they stand," McPeak told the committee.

The average rate requests, which range by insurer from 0.4 to 36.3 percent, for plans sold on the federally run exchange are largely attributable to the newness of the exchange: Insurers are now getting a better idea of the costs associated with those who buy policies on the exchange.

The federally run marketplace, approaching its third open enrollment season, has been an uncertain place for insurers to sell plans. Premiums are priced on claim history associated with a group of people and the risk associated with that collection.

President Barack Obama remarked in his July 1 speech on health care in Madison that he thought rates would ultimately be lower than requested, while McPeak has talked about requested rates not being enough to ensure financial solvency, as previously reported by The Tennessean.

Community Health Alliance premiums

Requested a 32.6 percent average increase with a range from 16.2 percent to 65.2 percent.

2015 premiums range from $68.22 to $1,062.05 per month, with an average premium of $269.38 before a tax credit.

2016 premiums could range from $92.51 to $1,160.80 per month, with an average premium of $349.19 before a tax credit.

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/1IFQCZR