KODIAK, Alaska (AP) - Jeff Miranda trained four months for his debut in mixed martial arts fighting.

His match lasted less than 10 seconds.

Miranda connected on a powerful overhand right that knocked out Brandon Steele seconds after the opening bell. Steele fell, Miranda raised both arms and the estimated 700 people in attendance inside the Kodiak Island Fairgrounds pavilion went wild.

That was the shortest of seven fights during the inaugural Havoc MMA1 event. If you blinked, you missed it.

“I wanted to end it quickly, but I didn’t think it would be that quick,” said Miranda. “I just landed that lucky shot.”

He wasn’t the only one to land a few shots. Zach Ward pummeled Josh Goss in one of the first fights of the evening. Ward said he wanted a first-round victory, but was pleased with finishing his opponent by submission in the second round.

This was Ward’s first time in the cage, but it wasn’t his first time grappling. He has been wrestling since a kid and wrestled at the 1/2/3A state tournament while at Craig High School.

“I wanted to see what I had,” said Ward, who added 20 pounds to his 180-pound frame leading up to the fight. “I had never done anything like this. I’m just a natural warrior, hard worker and just wanted to put myself to the test.”

Ward and Miranda were not the only winners as Steven Gauna, Sean Costello, Sam Loggins, Jaron Steele and Matt Ivanoff all picked up victories.

Gauna, a former Kodiak running and wrestling star, defeated Ryan Gabor in the third round by submission.

“It was a lot of fun,” Gauna said. “I don’t think I have ever felt an adrenaline dump like that ever in my life.”

Sean Costello, a two-time state champion wrestler for Kodiak, won by unanimous decision over Arky Garcia. Costello used his wrestling background and controlled the match on the ground.

Sam Loggins led the night off with a first-round victory over John Sousa, while Jaron Steele earned a first-round submission win over Josh Cislo-Welter.

While mostly everybody was making their inaugural appearance in the cage, it was the final one for Danger Bay logger Butch McGavran. It didn’t end well for McGavran as Ivanoff won by submission in the first round of the main event.

After battling a drug addiction his entire life, McGavran turned to MMA in 2008 at the age of 40. The sport took him all over the United States as he fought 14 professional fights and more than 12 amateur bouts before returning to Danger Bay several years ago.

May 30 was his first fight in four years and the last in his career.

“It was a fun ride,” McGavran said. “I enjoyed it.”

___

Information from: Kodiak (Alaska) Daily Mirror, http://www.kodiakdailymirror.com