The Assembly Health Committee will hear testimony Thursday about a resolution, something that doesn’t have the full effect of law. But introduction of the resolution, along with the testimony, should send a message to Gov. Christie about the state’s Medicaid program.

I’m vitally interested in this message and grateful to Assemblywomen Angelica Jimenez, D-West New York, and Shavonda Sumter, D-Passaic, as well as Assemblyman Charles Mainor, D-Jersey City, its sponsors. It concerns money due to federally qualified health centers (FQHC) in New Jersey. I’m the president of the largest of them with 11 sites in Hudson, Bergen and Passaic counties.

I wasn’t in on the beginning of the lawsuit, but the facts behind it and the outcome aren’t in dispute. In July 2012, United States District Court Judge Joel A. Pisano ruled the State of New Jersey was violating its own Medicaid regulations, the federal Medicaid statute, and the Fifth and 14th amendments to the U. S. Constitution by withholding money due FQHC’s for care of Medicaid patients.

Saying FQHCs would suffer irreparable harm if the money grab continued, he ordered Medicaid to immediately make interim emergency payments to the health centers in amounts equal to what they would have received if Medicaid hadn’t been breaking all those rules. Although FQHCs received the back-due money, almost immediately Medicaid officials returned to their old ways, withholding funds.

When FQHCs were created by the federal government to provide care for low-income people in medically underserved areas, they were awarded continuous funding under the Public Health Service Act. That required states to fund 100 percent of the pre-approved costs of treating Medicaid patients. Allocation formulas are established by each state, but reimbursement rates are set by the U.S. Secretary of Health.

The payment system worked well for more than a decade until New Jersey contracted with managed care organizations (MCO) as intermediaries between Medicaid and healthcare providers. Under those contracts, Medicaid patients were assigned to several insurers who had to reimburse FQHCs for a portion of the care delivered. Medicaid was obligated to make up the difference.

In 2011, the state tried to compare reports prepared by the MCOs with reports submitted by FQHCs and they found some differences. In their brief to the court, Medicaid officials acknowledged they could not figure out how to reconcile the numbers, so they simply accepted the ones prepared by the MCOs.

Thus if an MCO challenged or denied a claim for any reason and did not reimburse an FQHC within 90 days, Medicaid refused to pay anything on that claim. No one argued care was not given to eligible patients. But any minor error, which could have been made by any party involved, meant the FQHCs got no money.

So the organization representing 20 FQHC’s sued Medicaid, and the judge ruled in their favor more than two years ago. Today Medicaid still is not paying fully and is still violating its own rules, the federal law and the U.S. Constitution.

That’s cost North Hudson Community Action Corporation $1.6 million to date, about 15 percent of the cost of caring for Medicaid patients. Other, smaller FQHCs, are suffering even more.

Assembly Concurrent Resolution 172 calls on the governor to ensure Medicaid pays in full, as the federal law demands.

Gov. Christie is one of the few Republican governors who agreed to expand the Medicaid system making more people eligible for care. Expansion costs are funded 100 percent by the federal government. He has consistently praised FQHCs as models of efficiency. So perhaps he simply hasn’t noticed what’s going on in his Medicaid office. This resolution is designed to get his attention.

EDITOR’S NOTE: A former state assemblywoman from Jersey City, Joan Quigley is the president and CEO of the North Hudson Community Action Corp. in Union City. Her column appears in The Jersey Journal every Tuesday.