Gov. John Kasich keeps the nice-guy persona going in South Carolina as the death of Justice Antonin Scalia dominates the debate. Read more in Ohio Politics Roundup.

John Kasich sidesteps Scalia politics: The unexpected death of U.S. Supreme Court Justice Antonin Scalia has shaken up the presidential race. Many Republicans argued over the weekend that President Barack Obama should leave the conservative's seat open and allow the winner of the November election to make the pick next year.

Kasich attempted to stay above the politics Saturday. His initial statement on Scalia's death said nothing about the political implications. And at the GOP debate in Greenville, S.C., the Ohio governor lamented how quickly his colleagues pounced, though he said he hoped Obama would leave the decision to the next president. Kasich opened up a little more Sunday morning on NBC's "Meet the Press," saying it "would just be great" if Obama held off – but also acknowledging a likely impasse with the Senate.

"You and I both know in the real world, they're not going to confirm anybody," Kasich told moderator Chuck Todd. "Unless they pick somebody who's so beloved that everybody goes, "That's great," ... I don't think that's going to happen."

See how other Ohio pols reacted to Scalia's death.

How Kasich did at the debate: He "remained above the fray and positioned his presidential candidacy as a unifying force in politics," cleveland.com's Mary Kilpatrick writes. "The Prince of Light radiated good will. He appeared incredulous and sad about the infighting within the Republican party. ... Kasich said last week that he wouldn't be a marshmallow if attacked. And when [former Florida Gov.] Jeb Bush roasted Kasich on his decision to expand Medicaid in Ohio, [Kasich] defended his record."

Who won the anti-Trump bracket? "John Kasich and Jeb Bush both want to become the 'anti-Donald Trump' candidate but took different strategies to make their case" Saturday night, the Cincinnati Enquirer's Chrissie Thompson observes.

"The CBS News event played out as a series of arguments between several pairs of candidates. Bush battled Trump capably in several heated exchanges, most notably when the billionaire repeatedly trashed the presidency of his brother, George W. Bush. Later in the debate, battles raged between Marco Rubio and Ted Cruz, and then Cruz and Trump.

"Kasich, on the other hand ... offered commentary on the bickering that ranged from the briefly viral exasperation 'jeez-oh-man' to a suggestion that the GOP could lose the general election to Democrat Hillary Clinton if candidates continue to skirmish."

Debate watchers give Kasich high marks: "Thirty-two percent ... say Marco Rubio won the debate, beating out Donald Trump (24 percent) and John Kasich (19 percent), who are ranked second and third, respectively," CBS News reports.

"But when it comes to ... who is best prepared to be president, Republicans and independent[s] choose John Kasich first (22 percent), just edging out Donald Trump."

On today's episode of Jeb vs. John: Team Kasich takes to Twitter to retaliate against Bush for criticizing the governor's Medicaid expansion in Ohio. Kasich's advisers are calling particular attention to a June 2015 post from the New York Times' Upshot blog.

"Jeb Bush the candidate is not a fan of Obamacare. But Jeb Bush the investor made a big bet on the Affordable Care Act, and it paid off," the piece begins.

Go with God? "Republican presidential candidate John Kasich has said he won't use God to win votes, but a new campaign ad focuses on his faith," cleveland.com's Jeremy Pelzer notes. "'My parents were killed by drunk driver, but my parents did not die in vain,' the Ohio governor says in the ad, aimed at South Carolina's sizable evangelical population. 'I was transformed. I discovered my purpose by discovering the Lord.'"

What the Kasich Show sounds like in South Carolina: "The Republican presidential primary in South Carolina is becoming a nasty, brawling affair, just as it has been every four years here," the Washington Post's Philip Rucker writes. "But you wouldn't know it listening to John Kasich. "As he addressed a shivering overflow crowd of hundreds here Saturday that spilled into the parking lot of a barbecue joint called Mutt's, the Ohio governor said nothing about Donald Trump or any of his opponents.

"Instead, Kasich talked about sunshine and healing and joy. He talked about people who cry alone, about those who have no advocates. He invited two boys on stage and, like a stern father, reminded them that nothing good comes from messing around with drugs." (In other words, it sounds a lot like it did in New Hampshire.)

Former Clemson QB backs Kasich: "From a personal level, I feel like he's the most approachable person that we have running right now as a candidate," Tajh Boyd told the conservative news site TheBlaze before campaigning Saturday with Kasich.

"I just love his values, his morals. In New Hampshire he talked about not necessarily the government changing things, but we the people, our hearts changing things, and that's something I can agree with. [And] I think [South Carolinians] can agree with."

A blockbuster for the Ohio Democratic Party: Presidential hopefuls Hillary Clinton and Bernie Sanders will both speak at the state party's March 13 Legacy Dinner – two days before the Buckeye State's critical primary, Pelzer reports.

ICYMI: Bill Clinton campaigned Friday in Cincinnati. "The former president never directly referred to his wife's opponent in the Democratic primary, Vermont Sen. Bernie Sanders, during a get-out-the-vote rally before a crowd of 500 at the Clifton Cultural Arts Center," the Enquirer's Jeremy Fugleberg reports. "Instead, he touted her government experience, calling her 'the best change-maker I have ever known.'"

Meanwhile at the Statehouse ... "Just how far state law should go to protect students' religious expression at school is under debate at the Statehouse, tied to a bill that supporters hope will clarify the issue for school officials," the Columbus Dispatch's Jim Siegel reports. "Current law allows a district to limit the exercise of a student's religion to lunch periods or other non-instructional time when students are free to associate. A House committee has started hearings on a bill that would eliminate that restriction."

Tips or links? Send here. Follow along on Twitter: @HenryJGomez.

Subscribe to Battleground Briefing, our daily politics newsletter: Sign up here.