When health IT companies develop software for medical staff to improve outcomes, figuring out a solution that fits into workflows is a big challenge. Health IT startup Acupera has raised $2 million in bridge financing to advance its Software as a Service tool. It is using the funding to develop its population health and workflow management tool.

Its patient care management platform uses patient data from EHRs to create vivid displays of each patient’s vitals, lab results and care teams. It can also identify patients at high risk of readmission.

The latest financing from The Whittemore Collection follows $4 million it raised in a Series A supported by Liebkind and Whittemore.

“We have created an engine for team care,” said Dr. Ronald Razmi, Acupera CEO. He sees medical centers and Accountable Care Organizations as its primary customers.

Advertisement

One component helps create care plans for each patient. Each member of the patient’s care coordination team can view a list of outstanding tasks, who has been assigned to each one and the deadlines for carrying out those tasks. Users can check off each task when it’s completed.

Another component is designed for Accountable Care Organizations and to help medical centers shift from fee-for-service to outcomes-based care — a long-term goal of the Affordable Care Act. This population reporting and analytics tool helps give staff insights into costs, utilization, co-morbidities and behavioral health assessments to prioritize patients and manage care.

Razmi trained as a cardiologist before he went to business school and worked for Navigant and McKinsey before he started Acupera in San Francisco in 2011. The Chief Medical Informatics Officer, Qin Ye, was a surgical oncologist before he shifted to IT and worked for Pfizer Health Solutions and Medversant.

Ye said he likes applying technology to medicine because he can improve the lives of a greater number of people.

The company’s SaaS tools fit in with a big need for the healthcare industry — products that can help medical centers make the transition from fee-based to outcomes-based care.