Neil Patrick Harris as Chester, Erika Ervin as Amazon Eve, Mat Fraser as Paul the Illustrated Seal in “American Horror Story: Freak Show.” Fx

After enduring the heartbreaking previous episode, “Orphans,” this eleventh episode of “American Horror Story: Freak Show” begins with Stanley talking to Jimmy Darling through the bars of a jail cell. He’s offering Lobster Boy a chance at getting a solid lawyer to spring him from the joint, but the price will be one of his hands.

Jimmy eventually gets on board with Stanley’s plan, drinks the magical pukey-juice, and the guards put him on a stretcher that goes directly into an ambulance under Stanley’s control.

The next thing Lobster Boy sees is a nurse inside of a hospital as he wakes up chained to the bed. She informs him that the cops will be returning to take him back to jail soon. Jimmy looks over to his hands and sees that Stanley wasn’t exactly true to his word. Both of his lobster claws are now gone and he’s left with two bloody stumps.

Back at the freak show, the Tattler twins are writing in their diary again as we see all the various freaks having fun around camp. At least the girls seem to be on the same page again now.

“This place. These people are our world,” they say in voiceover.

It seems Bette and Dot’s new plan is to find someone to hook up with. Why not, right?

They toss their diary in a garbage can fire and we move inside of the big tent where a travelling salesman named Chester (played by Neil Patrick Harris) is showing some of the freaks one of his adorable chameleons.

We quickly jump into Chester’s point of view and realize that he doesn’t quite see things very clearly. He’s quick and witty and the freaks seem to like him. This is Neil Patrick Harris in his element.

After a few minutes, he shows the crowd his act: magic. Bette and Dot are totally enamored and set their sights on poor Chester to be their man.

We cut to Jimmy’s hospital room where Dell Toledo has barged in to see his son lying in bed with two hand-less arms. For some weird reason, Jimmy still believes in what Stanley is selling.

Dell helps Jimmy eat his food while trying to comfort the kid with stories of other people with no hands. It doesn’t really work, but Lobster Boy is in surprisingly good spirits for a guy that just lost his hands.

He asks his father why he doesn’t have the family’s lobster claws and Dell tells him that he is the freak of the family “for being normal.” Weird how things work out, huh?

In Elsa’s tent, Chester is doing his best to entertain Ms. Mars, but she’s not very impressed.

“We are a freak show,” she says, “Not a magic show.”

FX

He pulls out a creepy ventriloquist dummy, which Elsa seems to enjoy, but she’s still not interesting in bringing Chester into the fold. She tells him that he can do a little bit of his act if he helps out with the freak show’s bookkeeping. He’s extremely thankful, but we feel a bit bad for him because this can’t possibly end well for Chester.

We slide over to Chester’s prep area where he’s getting his makeup on and talking to his ventriloquist dummy. Looks like Chester has a few more screws loose than we already thought.

After the break, we catch up with Amazon Eve and Legless Suzi in Elsa’s tent. In walks Dell who is looking for Stanley. Elsa tells him that he has to get him out of there and Dell takes off. Amazon Eve follows and offers to help bust him out.

Meanwhile, Chester pays a visit to the Tattler sisters to give them a special gift. They open the cute little music box and then he tells them that he’s found a genuine sawbox in Elsa’s storage area. He wants them to be his assistant so he can pull off one of his tricks.

Chester sweet-talks the girls as we head into a flashback that shows Chester watching two ladies making love while he sits in the corner in his uniform with his ventriloquist dummy on his lap.

We cut to Chester’s act in progress on the stage with the Tattler twins on his side assisting. He performs the sawbox act and everything goes off basically without a hitch. Chester and the Tattlers make a pretty good team.

Back at the hospital, the cops have arrived and toss Jimmy in the back of their car to haul him back to jail. Amazon Eve and Dell, however, have other plans. They stop the car and take out of the cops in a rather bloody sequence that ends with one cop’s face completely smashed.

Meanwhile, the Tattlers get their very sexiest garb on and head over to Chester’s tent. They start in with the smooching and make a grab at Chester’s nether region, but he pushes them away. They give him a massage to relieve some tension, but he can’t stop the crazy voice coming out of his dummy’s little wooden body.

We see more of Chester’s flashback where the two ladies pretty much humiliate him. Yeah, he’s clearly got problems.

He’s reluctant, but Bette and Dot continue to push forward with their plan to have Chester deflower them. He finally starts to go along, but first decides to grab his dummy.

“I’m sorry,” he says. “She relaxes me.”

Bette and Dot don’t seem to mind and the three of them get down to business.

Cut to Dandy Mott’s bedroom where his hired gun comes back with the sad news that his beloved Tattler sisters are likely making the move towards a new man.

“They were supposed to be mine,” Dandy says, choking back tears.

It’s nighttime at the freak show now and Chester is stuffing his dummy back in her crate. She’s pretty angry about it, so he has to push himself to make it happen. It triggers a flashback to his wife’s lover giving him the business again, and we actually get to see Marjorie come to life (played by the awesome Jamie Brewer).

Back in the present, Chester is once again in Elsa’s tent where they’re talking business. She’s trying to put her affairs in order before she heads off to Hollywood and she needs Chester to help her do that.

He, however, is really only concerned with what happens to Marjorie so he rushes back to his tent to get her, but she’s nowhere to be seen. Looks like Chester is about to lose it.

Not only that, but it seems the cops are on the prowl at the freak show now. After the death of two cops at the hands of Amazon Eve and Dell Toledo, the place is swarming with police. They’re looking for Jimmy Darling, but Chester comes out and starts yelling at the cops to look for Marjorie.

The cops begin searching the camp and Chester goes off on his own to try to find Marjorie. He wanders through the freak show and stumbles upon Dandy Mott, who has clearly stolen Marjorie. It brings us to a flashback of Dandy learning that Chester killed both his wife and her lover, and then decided to blame the crime on Marjorie (which we also get to see in flashback).

Chester just wants his dummy back, so Dandy tells him to head over to the big tent. There, he finds Marjorie (in life size form) on the stage. Not only does she want top billing in the show, but she also tells Chester that he has to saw the Tattler twins in half.

We cut quickly to Elsa’s tent where Esmerelda has come to pay a visit. She has something to show Ms. Mars.

They head off and we follow Dell as he stumbles into his trailer where Desiree is waiting with a loaded gun. She grills him about what he’s been up to. He gives her a line about being a good guy, but she’s not buying it.

“You killed one of your own,” she tells him.

Meanwhile, we see Esmerelda leading Elsa into a tent where Ma Petite is floating in formaldehyde. Elsa screams and the sound echoes in Dell’s head as he finally admits to Desiree that he killed the diminutive freak.

As soon as the words “I killed Ma Petite” exit his lips, we hear a bang and he falls as we see Elsa holding that smoking gun that has ended his life.

“That’s all I needed to hear,” she says as this week’s episode, and Dell’s life, both come to a close.

A Few Stray Observations:

Neil Patrick Harris is one of this season’s most highly anticipated guest stars, so it’s great to see him get a pretty substantial part to play, even if it’s late in the season.

Jamie Brewer! It’s so awesome to see Jamie Brewer back and causing trouble on this season of “American Horror Story.”

With only two more episodes left this season, I assume we’ll probably see quite a few more major deaths, but it was still pretty shocking to see Dell go down this week.

Despite the great batch of actors that have graced “American Horror Story” this season, it really does feel like there have been too many characters for the stories to work as well as they might have otherwise. Story wise, at least, a slightly more intimate “Freak Show” might have worked better. Then again, we still have two more episodes for this season to redeem itself.

‘American Horror Story: Freak Show’ airs on FX on Wednesdays at 10 PM ET. Follow our recaps all season long. Follow Scott Neumyer on Twitter.