Could a Vanderpump Rules spinoff be in Stassi Schroeder’s future? Although nothing has been confirmed by Bravo, Schroeder appears to be on board with the idea.

“I love Bravo and I love filming,” Schroeder revealed to the Wrap‘s Joseph Kapsch of a possible Vanderpump Rules spinoff. “So if it was something like [focusing on fashion], that would be great. I’m not really about the cheating scandals and relationship drama anymore.”

As fans will recall, Vanderpump Rules was spun off of the long-running Bravo series The Real Housewives of Beverly Hills, which stars the boss of SUR Lounge, Lisa Vanderpump.

Schroeder, who, as the Inquisitr reported, recently launched a jewelry line, also addressed Vanderpump Rules spinoff rumors in a separate interview.

“I think that would be so much fun!” Schroeder told Fashion & Style earlier this year. “Anything having to do with fashion or being creative would be great. I’m getting a little tired of pouring my heart out and letting people see every facet of my life.”

Following Season 2 of Vanderpump Rules, Schroeder was admittedly undecided on a Season 3 return. “After last season I just felt like a little bit disjoined,” she explained. “You think people are one way and you trust them and then realize they aren’t and it’s just kind of exhausting. I didn’t really think that I had left to give but then my boyfriend [Patrick Meagher] got a job here so I was back. And it was like well the stars are kind of aligned so I’m here and may as well give what I have left.”

Expecting backlash when she did decide to return for Season 3 after seemingly dissing the show and the majority of it’s stars, Schroeder, who, according to an Inquisitr report, was rumored to be pregnant earlier this year, was excited to see her fans had not turned against her.

“I am amazed and so appreciative! Because my fans could have easily been people that thought I was an a**hole. I’m really lucky that they can see it is all in good fun. I try my best to do the right thing and I don’t try to hurt people unless they have hurt me and that’s when the claws come out and I feel that people have related to that and that’s fantastic. I try to be creative!”

Also in the interview with Fashion & Style, the possible Vanderpump Rules spinoff star confirmed her boyfriend would not be seen on Vanderpump Rules Season 3.

[Photo via Twitter]