Frankly, I’m sick of the dishonesties that gush from President Obama’s mouth. Last week, he promised an “administrative fix” for Obamacare, which was nothing more than an attempt to revive his tanking poll numbers, protect at-risk Democrats up for reelection in 2014, and deflect blame to insurance companies.

Obama doesn’t care that his “administrative fix” won’t fix anything. What he really cares about is his party regaining control for his last two years in office. And if they do, expect Democrats to bring about a “real” Obamacare fix by fulfilling their lifelong dream of socialized medicine in America.

Those with common sense question the constitutionality of Obama’s newest proposal, and surely Obama knows full well it’s a logistic impossibility to reinstate insurance plans for a year. But, he’ll say anything to deflect blame. That’s how he rolls. Lest we forget:

He once blamed the Founding Fathers for creating a system of checks and balances which prevented him from achieving the radical change he believed in.

High gas prices were blamed on big oil companies and big cable networks like Fox News got the rap for his unpopularity. He blamed President Reagan for federal deficit spending and then blamed Congress for his. He blamed Rush Limbaugh for the partisanship in D.C. and then blamed being a dad for his own partisanship, and later said “partisan brinkmanship” was the reason for America’s first-ever credit rating downgrade.

He blamed his predecessor for everything under the sun and then blamed Republicans for blaming him for blaming Bush.

State and local government caused high black unemployment, the rich were blamed for poverty; technology for weak job numbers; generic “bad decisions” for the weak economy, and that same weak economy was why he didn’t keep his promise for immigration reform. John Kerry got blamed for his poor reelection debate performance and blamed “bad luck” for failures, “messy democracy” for failed policies and blamed Congress for not closing GITMO.

The NRA was blamed for gun violence, guns were blamed for Chicago’s violence, America for Mexico’s, and Bush, again, for the Mexican gun running scandal Fast and Furious. He blamed workplace violence for a terrorist attack at Ft. Hood, an internet video for attacks in Benghazi, and open internet access for future terrorism.

He blamed the “entire world” for his Syrian “redline” statement, the Navy for America’s trouble with North Korea, Europe for America’s bad jobs report, a Japanese Tsunami for slow economic growth, and Hawaii for his own “deep-down laziness.”

He blamed Republicans for a government shutdown and the government shutdown for Obamacare’s rollout failures. He blamed “bad apple “insurance companies for his broken promise that Americans could keep their plans and then turned insurers into scapegoats last week when he offered a plan for extension, knowing future cancellations will be blamed on them.

Obamacare is self-imploding under its own ineptitude. Even if it was logistically feasible, Obama’s “administrative fix” is like plugging a hole in a leaky dam with bubble gum. It may hold for a moment, but it will eventually come crashing down.

It is reassuring to know Republicans back in 2009 had the wisdom to see Obamacare for what it was. Not a single Republican voted for it while Democrats like Rep. Nancy Pelosi (D-Calif.) ran around the country telling Americans, “We have to pass the bill so that you can find out what’s in it.” Americans already know, you can sprinkle sugar on a pile of manure, but in the end it’s still a cow patty.

Susan Stamper Brown is an opinion page columnist who writes about politics, the economy and culture. Email Susan at writestamper@gmail.com or her website at susanstamperbrown.com