“Without that, there was not much reason for me to stay,” he said. “The rest of the research staff will stay as researchers and Mathematica employees.”Ginsburg, 68, said in an interview Monday that his recent work brought him back to his roots in healthcare policy analysis as a deputy assistant director of the non-partisan Congressional Budget Office and the founding executive director of the Physician Payment Review Commission, now the Medicare Payment Advisory Commission . Both of those posts, as well as his experience at the helm of the Center for Studying Health System Change, have prepared Ginsburg well for a topic he says will continue to be a huge issue in healthcare.“I believe provider payment reform will be very important,” Ginsburg said. “ACOs, global payments, bundled payments—I see there is such strong interest to get away from the very fragmented payment approaches we've used to motivate the delivery system to coordinate its work and manage chronic disease better,” he added. “I think that is going to be the most important thing.”Meanwhile, he said there is a connection between the evolution of insurance that will be influenced by the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act and the speed with which provider payment reforms are processed. He plans to continue examining all of these areas in the next phase of his career.Ginsburg said word began to spread last month about his departure after he told colleagues of his plans. Those plans will include consulting work and possibly serving on various boards. He said he's also been contacted about possible positions. “My consulting will focus on helping people understand developments in healthcare markets,” Ginsburg said, “and working with people to analyze different policy approaches.”In an e-mail to several of his contacts on Sunday, Ginsburg wrote that the Center for Studying Health System Change had received “generous core support” from the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation for many years, and, more recently, funding from the National Institute for Health Care Reform that gave his organization the opportunity to pursue large-scale, high-quality research projects. Without that funding, he noted in the e-mail, the Center for Studying Health System Change can no longer continue its mission.As he completes his tenure, Ginsburg struck a reflective note about the Center's work and accomplishments for nearly 19 years, saying he received about 100 e-mail messages in the last two days from people who told him how valuable that work has been in the healthcare community.“I think the main thing is to celebrate the accomplishments,” he said. “And to the degree I have a lot of wisdom and experience in healthcare and policy to bring, I'm hoping to continue to bring that,” only in a different way, he added.