Organizers admit some at demonstration paid to participate

About 30 people, waving "Free Gaza" and "Cut $$$ to Israel" signs, gathered at the corner of Broadway and Canyon Boulevard in downtown Boulder on Saturday for a peaceful protest against Israeli attacks on civilian Palestinians.

The hour-long demonstration, organized by the Rocky Mountain Peace and Justice Center, drew a constant stream of supportive honks from drivers.

"I think we all feel strongly to be out here, and I think that the people in the cars were very receptive to our message," said Carolyn Bninski, one of the organizers. "The people in Gaza are just going through the most horrific experience that Americans could never imagine."

James Duncan holds signs protesting with the Rocky Mountain Peace and Justice Center on the corner of Canyon Boulevard and Broadway against Israel's military action in Gaza. (David R. Jennings / Broomfield Enterprise)

The protest took place just as a 12-hour ceasefire was expiring in the Gaza Strip. More than 100 bodies were recovered across Gaza during the ceasefire, bringing the Palestinian death toll to more than 1,000.

"These are war crimes going on," Bninski said. "You can't just bomb the hell out of people."

Dan Winters, a Veterans for Peace member, said his stay in Gaza in 2009 left him angered by the violence that civilians there are regularly subjected to.

"They just feel totally trapped. Building after building after building was destroyed. They didn't have clean water. Sanitation was shot," he said.

Winters and many others at Saturday's protest said their frustration was equally driven by the United States' support of Israel's military.

"We are implicated. Our tax money implicates us in these war crimes," said Frederick's Ida Audeh, whose mother lives near the Palestinian city of Ramallah.

"I don't think people here realize that the Gaza Strip is a place where people live," she added. "It's easy to politicize it and write it all off, but it's really where, at one point, eight million people lived. There's no justification for bombing families."

Roughly one-fifth of the protestors were homeless people, paid $5 apiece by the Rocky Mountain Peace and Justice Center, which has been open about its history of giving the homeless money in exchange for a bit of sign-waving.

"I have a certain amount of money which I allocate to hiring them to hold signs," said Tom Mayer, one of the organizers. " They don't have to hold the signs if they don't agree with them, but we feel like it's a way to accomplish both protest against the war and support for the homeless."

Nicole Sisneros, a homeless Boulder resident, said she would have held a sign for free.

"I mean, a lot of us do agree with the whole concept that America does need to quit funding these artilleries, so the whole thing can stop," she said. "I just think the whole thing is ridiculous. I don't understand people anymore."

Organizers of Saturday's protest said they'll be back at the same corner at 11 a.m. Aug. 2.

Contact Camera Staff Writer Alex Burness at burnessa@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/alex_burness.