Buy Photo Justine Talarico gasps as firefighters blast the ceiling of her salon with a hose. (Photo: Andrew Ford // ASBURY PARK PRESS)Buy Photo

OCEANPORT – Justine Talarico stood across the street from her burned business of 41 years, Just Hair and Nails. She looked past policemen and firefighters as they extinguished the last of a three-alarm blaze Friday night. She said after Superstorm Sandy left her salon under two feet of water, she was up and running within a week. She said she’d quickly rebuild after this fire.

Then she saw inside.

She got close enough to her shop to peek through the entrance. Hair products were still neatly lined up in front of the mirrors along one wall, the floor was soaked and dirty, the front window was grimy from smoke, firefighters blasted ceiling tiles with a hose.

Talarico gasped. This damage was worse than the storm.

Talarico’s business was one of three in the building damaged in the fire, which began at about 9 p.m., according to Oceanport Police Lt. Michael Kelly. Talarico’s salon and adjoining Enzo’s Deli and Pizza suffered “significant” damage, Kelly said. An adjacent post office endured lighter smoke and water damage.

One firefighter was taken to a hospital to be examined after suffering from heat exhaustion, according to Kelly. Nobody else was injured.

Authorities believe the fire started near the back of the businesses. They’re investigating the cause, but have no reason to believe it is suspicious.

Authorities had the fire under control in about 15 minutes, Kelly said. They spent another hour and half extinguishing hot spots and examining the building.

Buy Photo Just Hair and Nails was one of three Oceanport businesses damaged in a fire Friday night. (Photo: Andrew Ford // ASBURY PARK PRESS)

Talarico, now 65, started attending a beauty course at night when she was in high school. At 18, she graduated and started working. At 24, her parents spotted a vacant shop and helped her start her business. She payed them back and stayed in the same shop ever since.

Talarico and her employees cleared their appointments for the weekend, expecting crowds and traffic for Sunday’s William Hill Haskell Invitational horse race, which will take place just a few blocks away.

But she has to work quickly to find a way to serve customers and keep her business.

“You can’t lose your business,” she said. “If I don’t work, I’m going to lose my customers.”

Andrew Ford: 732-643-4281; aford3@gannettnj.com

Read or Share this story: http://on.app.com/1IaZ55v