David Gardner For the Camera

If you're like many investors, you may be using a method to pick retirement plan investments that is almost guaranteed to delay your financial independence day.

Before we look into this doomed-to-fail strategy, log into your 401(k) or other retirement plan web site. Look at your current investments and which of them are receiving new contributions. Now think about how you chose those investments. You may have looked at their performance when you started with your company, picked out the best earning investments at the time, and haven't given it another thought.

Those of you who are more actively involved with your savings may scoff at this neglect. Unlike your colleagues who may "set it and forget it," you scrutinize your investment mix each year. You track the performance of the investment choices and regularly move your portfolio into the best investment of the last year. We'll call it the Chasing Portfolio.

It turns out the Chasing Portfolio is a disastrous investment scheme.

How bad is it?

It's about 5 percent worse annually than simply placing your savings in a balanced fund. Plus the Chasing Portfolio is much riskier, so on a risk-adjusted basis is even worse than it initially seems.

Advertisement

Craig Israelsen, who teaches at Utah Valley University, looked at the returns of twelve different asset classes between 1999 and 2013 to evaluate the Chasing Portfolio. He includes eight equity-type asset classes including U.S. large cap stocks, commodities and real estate. Also four fixed-income asset classes are considered such as cash, U.S .bonds and TIPS.

In 1998, U.S. large cap stocks earned 28.7 percent. His study then simulates the Chasing Portfolio by moving all funds into that asset class for the next year. This strategy seductively did pan out in 1999 with large cap stocks earning 20.4 percent.

Once 1999 was over, all funds were shifted into emerging market stocks, which had just had eye-popping returns of 61.8 percent that year. For 2000, this asset class got clobbered with -27.5 percent return.

The study continues this strategy through 2013 with every year moving the entire retirement plan balance into the best performing asset class of the previous year.

According to Israelsen, picking last year's winners during the 15 year period earned 2.7 percent annualized return. The most common measure of portfolio risk, standard deviation, for this portfolio was a relatively high 23.7 percent. Remember with standard deviation, the higher the number the more volatile the asset price.

In short, this Chasing Portfolio has awful absolute performance and on a risk-adjusted basis is almost unbelievably poor.

You may be thinking that if investing in last year's best performing asset class doesn't work, what about investing the worst performer in the previous year? You could call it the Loser Portfolio.

Strangely enough, if you had enough fortitude to move your entire balance into the last ranked asset class each year, your performance would have been much better than the Chasing Portfolio.

Investing all of your funds in an S&P 500 fund would have yielded much better returns with less risk at 4.6 percent return and standard deviation of 14.4 percent in the same period. A low-cost balanced fund performed still better with 5.7 percent annualized growth with much less risk.

The best return of all was saved for those who invested in 12 disparate asset classes and then rebalanced every year. The returns at 8 percent annualized and risk at 12.8 percent standard deviation were phenomenal by comparison.

While this success may not continue, it's safe to say that you should avoid a Chasing Portfolio (and investing mentality) at all costs.

David Gardner is a certified financial planner with a practice in Boulder County and can be reached through his website at yellowstonefinancial.com and on Twitter @Dave_CFP.