Topics: AlterNet, Celebrity, Church of Scientology, going clear, Hollywood, Religion, Scientology, South Park, Tom Cruise, Entertainment News, News

This article originally appeared on AlterNet

The HBO documentary Going Clear, an investigation inside the Church of Scientology, premieres on March 29. Unsurprisingly, the organization refused to cooperate with the film’s directors. Sheila Nevins, president of HBO Documentary Films told the Hollywood Reporter that the network had 160 lawyers look at the film due to fears of backlash from the church (which some consider a cult). Her concern is well-founded given that Scientology has always used fear tactics to squash critics.

The Church’s modus operandi stems from a policy called “fair game,” which states: An enemy of Scientology, referred to as a suppressive person (SP), “may be deprived of property or injured by any means by any Scientologist without any discipline of the Scientologist. May be tricked, sued or lied to or destroyed.”

Back in the day before the Internet publicized the secrets of Planet Xenu, Scientology relied on lawsuits to intimidate its detractors. Between 1991 and 1996, John Travolta’s religion filed more than 50 lawsuits against the Cult Awareness Network (CAN),eventually forcing it into bankruptcy. The Church then bought its name and assets in bankruptcy proceedings and used CAN as the title of an unrelated organization.

These tactics trickle down from L. Ron Hubbard. In a 1966 policy letter, the author and founder of Scientology instructed his followers on the proper procedure for handling investigations.

1. Spot who is attacking us.

2. Start investigating them promptly for FELONIES or worse using own professionals, not outside agencies.

3. Double curve our reply by saying we welcome an investigation of them.

4. Start feeding lurid, blood sex crime actual evidence on the attackers to the press.

5. Don’t ever tamely submit to an investigation of us. Make it rough, rough on attackers all the way.

Vicki Aznaran, a former church leader, stated in an affidavit that: “throughout my presidency of RTC, fair game actions against enemies were commonplace. In addition to the litigation tactics described below, fair game activities included burglaries, assaults, disruptions of enemies’ businesses, spying, harassive [sic] investigations, abuse of confidential communications in parishioner files and so on.”

As Aznaran’s testimony suggests, the organization routinely uses legal action and its immense financial resources to harass and cause professional ruin. We can only imagine what its reaction will be to HBO’s Going Clear. Until then, here is a brief history of some of the shocking fear tactics the church has used against its critics.

1. Scientology vs. South Park

In the classic 2005 South Park episode “Trapped in a Closet,” creators Matt Stone and Trey Parker take on Tom Cruise, John Travolta, and the entire philosophy behind the Planet Xenu cult. The South Park creators became targets of Corporate Scientology’s OSA Operations as they attempted to squash the episode and ruin the creative duo. The results of their investigation, which involved extensive surveillance of Stone and Parker, were leaked to the Village Voice. Through informants, private investigators, and public records, the organization searched for “vulnerabilities” in the pair’s personal and business lives.

Scientologist Isaac Hayes, who played the character Chef on the show, promptly quit over the controversy. In his parting statement, Hayes said, “There is a place in this world for satire, but there is a time when satire ends and intolerance and bigotry towards religious beliefs of others begins. Religious beliefs are sacred to people, and at all times should be respected and honored. As a civil rights activist of the past 40 years, I cannot support a show that disrespects those beliefs and practices.”

In true South Park fashion, Matt and Trey responded by brutally killing off Hayes’ character.

2. Scientology vs. Los Angeles Times

In 1990, Joel Sappell and Robert Welkos wrote a groundbreaking series on Scientology for the Los Angeles Times . After the series appeared, the church struck back. The Sea Org-ers purchased space on 120 billboards and 1,000 bus placards around Los Angeles, publishing ads featuring the journalists’ bylines, the newspaper’s name, and context-free quotes from their articles that made it seem as if their series was actually endorsing Scientology.

On a personal front, private investigators were hired by the church to obtain Sappell and Welkos’ financial records, phone records, and other data. Welkos received an envelope at his home from a mortuary; inside was a brochure trumpeting the benefits of arranging your funeral before you die that read, “Investigate the pre-arrangement program at our memorial park now. You’ll be glad you did, and so will your family.”