Cornell recruit nearly toppled 29-year old state mark

Monarch's Andrew Barlow will head to Cornell with a consecutive state pole vault titles as well as the 2015 BoCoPreps.com boys track and field Athlete of the Year award. ( Jeremy Papasso / Staff Photographer )

LOUISVILLE — Over the past several seasons, Monarch High School pole vaulter Andrew Barlow has developed a flare for the dramatic and an adventurous spirit when it comes to the Colorado high school state track and field championships.

Barlow's willingness to push himself to new heights on the biggest stage paid off in the form of two Class 5A state titles during this final two years of prep track and field and the opportunity to continue his career at Cornell. As a senior Barlow even took a shot at a 29-year-old state meet record.

Before he leaves Colorado to reach for even higher marks at the collegiate level, Barlow has been named the 2015 BoCoPreps.com boys track and field Athlete of the Year.

"I thought this was a really great season," Barlow said. "It was good to get things set up for the future and jumping in college. At the state meet, I wasn't necessarily trying to PR. I just wanted to go out there, have fun and win."

Barlow won. He also hit a new personal record.

With a jump of 16 feet, 18.5 inches, the Monarch senior won the 5A state title by over a foot. Once he had the title locked up, Barlow took a couple attempts at the state meet record of 17-03 set by Aurora Central's Pat Manson in 1986, over a decade before Barlow was born.

Barlow didn't quite break the record but his final mark at this year's state meet will stand as the third-best height in Colorado prep history.

The bonus-time performance was reminiscent of Barlow's first state title in 2014. As a junior, Barlow locked up the state title at 15-06 and went on to clear the bar at 16 feet, something he had never even attempted before that day at Jefferson County Stadium.

"This year was definitely a different feel from junior year because people know you a little bit more and maybe the pole vault gets a little more attention at meets," Barlow said. "Of course, your senior season is always special and you want to make the most of it. This was the best team we've had in my four years at state so that made it even more fun."

Since he finished in a five-way tie for 10th place in 2013, the vaulting pit at Jefferson County Stadium has basically belonged to Barlow. Every time he got to the state meet, he found a way to accomplish the spectacular.

Coaching an athlete who always seems to be at his best when it matters most the way that Barlow has was a privilege for Monarch head coach Kent Rieder.

"He obviously had a great year," Rieder said. "He jumped well at state last year and this year. He jumped his best at the state meet and you want all your athletes to peak at the end. He definitely did that both years."

Barlow's sophomore teammate Isaac Green also won the 5A state title in the 1,600-meter run and the Monarch boys finished ninth in the team scoring.

Follow Brad on Twitter: twitter.com/BradCochi