Buy Photo Fort Collins legislators Sen. John Kefalas and Reps. Jeni Arndt and Joann Ginal answer questions at a community forum at New Belgium on Dec. 21. (Photo: Coloradoan library)Buy Photo

The big things were left undone.

Reclassifying the hospital provider fee, which would have freed up hundreds of millions of dollars and led to "rapid" expansion of Interstate 25, failed in an 11th hour bid at the 2016 Colorado legislative session. A bill to ask voters to bond $3.5 billion for transportation projects throughout the state couldn't find traction. Reform to construction defects law, which developers said would spur condo construction in the state, likewise sputtered out.

The divided Legislature, staring down an election year, didn't find the common ground on those issues, all of which have floated around the public sphere since the last session gaveled out. But Fort Collins' lawmakers also point out that the session wasn't one of sitting on their hands. They point to meeting the Constitutional requirement of passing a balanced budget and, more than that, one that averted the $20 million in cuts initially slated for higher education funding and slightly increased the funding for K-12 education.

ELECTIONS: Presidential primary revival falls apart in Colorado

The three legislators — Sen. John Kefalas and Reps. Jeni Arndt and Joann Ginal, all Democrats — shook off the post-session cobwebs to share their accomplishments and the dangling threads they hope to address if voters send them back to Denver next year.

Jeni Arndt

Rep. Jeni Arndt (Photo: Courtesy photo)

It took three years, but Arndt finally stewarded through a water bill that began with her predecessor, former Rep. Randy Fischer. The soon-to-be-signed law won't necessarily change the day-to-day for most Coloradans, but it makes an important change to state water law.

In a nutshell, the law allows those who hold agricultural water rights to temporarily sell those rights without fear of losing them permanently. According to Arndt, that allows farmers more flexibility when planning harvests, as they can switch to a low-water crop for a season or let a field go fallow, and reap market-based benefits from it by turning water over to other users.

"When we can use water more flexibly, I think that's good for Colorado," Arndt said.

Arndt said she pulled the companion bill, which would have created a sort of bank for unused water rights, so it could be better streamlined for next session.

She expressed disappointment over a "right to rest" bill that would have allowed camping in any open space in Colorado, but added that the bill wasn't quite there yet. Arndt supports efforts to decriminalize homelessness, but this measure would have essentially let anyone camp anywhere, she said.

ELECTION 2016: What Colorado will vote on

Another bill fell victim to the politics of the session. Arndt ushered a bill through the Democrat-controlled House to add measurable goals to the Colorado Climate Action Plan. Kefalas carried it in the Republican-led Senate, where it failed to make it out of committee.

"To me that's intuitive — why have a plan if you don't have goals in it?" Arndt asked. She added that she may not bring that bill back if its message is heard by stewards of the plan.

Arndt is the only local legislator who is unopposed in the November general election.

John Kefalas

Sen. John Kefalas (Photo: Courtesy photo)

Kefalas points to two bills in particular that he worked on that will have tangible impact on people's lives. The first is the so-called employment first bill. In a nutshell, it shifts the goals of state agencies away from essentially just keeping people with intellectual and developmental disabilities occupied and cared for to helping those people find regular employment that helps them integrate into the community and workforce. Ginal carried the bill in the House.

"That was quite a legislative work of art, in that we didn't think we were going to make it to the governor," Kefalas said.

His second targets veterans, and specifically those veterans most vulnerable to the whims of government. An amendment to the state constitution about a decade ago added disabled veterans to those who qualified for the homestead property tax exemption. But when enabling legislation passed the next year, it excluded military veterans on medical retirement.

CAPITOL HILL: Divided Colorado Legislature wraps year of scant agreement

Kefalas also had disappointments, though he finds the silver linings in those as well. A bill to modernize the Colorado Open Records Act and make electronic records available under the open-government law failed in committee but led to a working group and technical group to hash out issues with the bill. An effort to protect mobile home parks' place in the housing conversation — an effort Kefalas has made for several sessions now — likewise failed to go anywhere. Nonetheless, Kefalas said he's moved the needle in helping the state Division of Housing understand that mobile homes can play a key role in preserving affordable housing in Fort Collins.

Joann Ginal

Rep. Joann Ginal (Photo: Courtesy photo)

Ginal arguably took some of the biggest swings this legislative session, pushing several bills that danced perilously close to political third rails. Her End of Life Options Act narrowly passed out of committee this year, though she stopped it short of a floor vote. It was the second year she ran a bill to allow terminally ill patients with a life expectancy of six or fewer months to petition their doctors for life-ending medication.

"The biggest (disappointment) was the End of Life Options Act," Ginal said. "It had so many people — and it was a polarizing bill — but I had so many people supporting it, more than those that were opposed to it."

Compassion and Choices, a death-with-dignity advocacy group, is pushing a ballot initiative now. Ginal said she'd rather it go through the Legislature, rather than the constitutional amendment the group wants, so it could be more easily tweaked. If if fails muster at the ballot box, and she succeeds in being re-elected, Ginal plans to bring her bill back.

Another bill would have forced pharmaceutical companies to reveal the production costs of exorbitantly priced medications. Though it failed to make it out of its House committee, Ginal described it as a successful first step simply for getting stakeholders to the table. She listed off the support of Colorado's county governments, unions and small businesses.

Don't miss a thing Download our apps and get alerts for local news, weather, traffic and more. Search "Coloradoan" in your app store or use these links: iPad|Android phone and tablet

Subscription and activation: Activate your digital access Download our apps and get alerts for local news, weather, traffic and more. Search "Coloradoan" in your app store or use these links: iPhone Subscription and activation: Subscribe now

"People need to know why their health care costs are going up," Ginal said. "I think a lot of people blame health insurance companies — and I'm not saying they're innocent — but a lot of it probably has to do with higher prescription drug costs contributing to health insurance costs."

That said, Ginal points to success stories like tax credits to encourage doctors-in-training to practice in rural areas, helping veterinarians keep better stocks of medicine on hand, and a bill to pave the way for pharmacists to play a larger role in patient's health care through expanded practices.

She also ushered a bill to ban marijuana-infused products that are shaped like common children's snacks.

"I believe it's about parental responsibility, but in part it's also about what it looks like," she said of keeping marijuana out of children's hands.

Read or Share this story: http://noconow.co/1TgLz5S