Transcript for Suave Facing Class-Action Lawsuit

now, starting with a popular hair care brand under fire. Hundreds of women have brought a complaint against the company suave. This is a serious lawsuit that was first filed last year by women who said their hair was singed and broke off in clumps. The makers of the product tried to get the case thrown out. But now, a judge has decided the class-action can move forward. And the case is going to court. It was marketed as a do-it-yourself makeover for your mane. Transforms, frizzy, unmanageable hair, into hair that is smoother, seeker and easier to style. Reporter: But this morning, women from all over the country are calling this product a hair nightmare. Extremely damaged. Literally broken, from the root to the tip. Reporter: Take a look at what these women say are before and after pictures. They're part of a class-action lawsuit, claiming suave professionals keratin infusion kit had harsh chemicals that hurt their scalp. The product was advertised as formaldeh formaldehyde-free. Reporter: The lawsuit claims the company didn't do enough to warn customers. Many of the women we represent, purchased the product and used the product after the so-called recall. It's affected my self-esteem, my ability to want to go places. Reporter: The lawsuit is already highlights what many in the beauty industry are calling the root of a growing problem. Women will go to any length to get thick, straight hair. You can get it blow dried straight. Or use an iron. But more and more, women are turning to chemicals. We met up with style expert gretta monahan at dream dry in new york city. Anytime you're changing the hair from its natural state, you're causing damage to do it. That's why it's difficult to administer the chemicals at home. Reporter: Unilever would not comment on an ongoing lawsuit directly. But did tell us the company takes these claims very seriously. Our hair care pros say, if you have permed or color-treated hair, you have to be careful about adding more harsh chemicals. The 30-day smoothing kit did come with several warnings for the types of hair that would not react well to the product. But one woman said she didn't fall under any of the categories and her hair still fell out. That's scary. It tells a story. Thanks, juju. Coming up next in the "gma

This transcript has been automatically generated and may not be 100% accurate.