Thursday, September 3, 2015

A Walling, Tn., man is facing multiple charges after leading Red Bank Police on a wild chase on Wednesday.

The driver gave several different names, but he finally was identified as Marty Eugene Lance, 21.

Just before 3 p.m., a Red Bank officer conducted a traffic stop on Highway 27 south with a Chevrolet S-10 pickup.

The officer said, "I stopped the truck because I observed it traveling at a high rate of speed in the area of the 5/0 marker of Highway 27 south. Lidar confirmed it was going 76 mph in a 45 mph zone.

"I approached the driver and asked for his license, insurance, and registration. The driver advised he did not have his license, but that his name was Joshua Baker and he did not know his date of birth. I questioned him further and he proceeded to state his name was Bobby Joe Hayes Oliver DOB December 11, 1992. I was able to pull up that person; and the picture looked similar to the driver, but I did not believe him to be the person from the photo.

"I called for another unit and while I was waiting the driver fled from me in the pickup truck. I proceeded to follow the driver at an approximate speed of 55 mph while he swerved from lane to lane on Highway 27 south passing other drivers in the process in a disregard for their safety. He exited on Manufacturers Road in the opposing lane of traffic, and drove at a speed on Manufacturers Road at approximately 50 mph, while passing cars in the opposing lane of traffic.

"It was at that point I stopped the pursuit due to traffic volume and safety concerns. I turned off my emergency lights, and observed the truck drive through a parking lot at the end of Manufacturers Road at a high rate of speed and went towards Market Street. That is the last location I saw the truck at when I turned left from Manufacturers Road onto Cherokee Boulevard. I believed it had turned left on Market Street, so that’s the BOLO I gave for it.

"I was back in the Red Bank city Limits when I heard on the radio that a crash had happened with that vehicle at the intersection of Frazier Avenue and Market Street. I proceeded back to that location where Sgt. Hope had located the driver in a back yard not far from the crash. The driver was taken into custody, and EMS was called due to his statements that he swallowed meth when I initially pulled him over. He also stated he had shot up meth earlier in the day.

"I discovered at that time the registration plate displayed had expired in April 30, 2015, but was displaying a 2016 sticker. The driver was transported to Erlanger downtown where I learned he had given his correct name to EMS personnel. I discovered the driver was Marty Eugene Lance Jr. I ran Mr. Lance’s information and found he currently has a suspended license, and has an active warrant out of White County. After Mr. Lance was released from Erlanger I transported him to the Hamilton County Jail."