New Jersey Bankers Education Foundation Trustees presented checks to Rutgers University Office of Veterans Affairs, Rider University's Veteran Entrepreneurial Program and Operation First Response

The Foundation Trustees represented by Robert Stillwell (L), Foundation Chairman presents check to Steven Abel (R), Director, Office of Veteran Services, Rutgers University. (Photo: Photo courtesy of New Jersey Bankers) Story Highlights The foundation has contributed more than $37,000 to the Rutgers Office of Veterans Affairs

Operation First Response provides services to active duty and disabled veterans service members

In January, the New Jersey Bankers Education Foundation Trustees presented checks to two New Jersey universities that support active and veteran service members and an organization that supports wounded/disabled veterans and their families.

• Rutgers University Office of Veterans Affairs — Since 2010, the foundation has contributed more than $37,000 to the Rutgers Office of Veterans Affairs to assist veteran students facing temporary financial difficulties (auto repairs, reduction in employment hours, etc.) impacting their ability to continue with their education.

• Rider University's Veteran Entrepreneurial Program — Through an initial grant by Grand Bank to Rider University, a seven week boot-camp style entrepreneurship program for active service members and veterans was successfully kicked off in the summer of 2014. The bank has made another contribution for the summer of 2015 program and the foundation has contributed to this initiative.

• Operation First Response — This 501(c)(3) organization was suggested to the foundation by Ocean City Home Bank and provides services to active duty and disabled veterans service members and their families. Foundation funds will be dedicated to provide academic and personal coaching tutoring services for the service members and their dependents with a New Jersey connection.

The foundation is managed by its Chairman Robert E. Stillwell (Boiling Springs Savings Bank); and trustees: Samuel J. Damiano (former NJ League president), Paul E. Fitzgerald (First Bank), Thomas J. Holt (Bank of America), Stewart E. McClure, Jr. ( Lakeland Bank), John E. McWeeney, Jr. (NJBankers), James M. Meredith (NJBankers), Gerald L. Reeves (Sturdy Savings Bank), James R. Silkensen (former NJ League president and former NJBankers co-president), Angela Snyder (Fulton Bank of New Jersey) and James S. Vaccaro (Manasquan Savings Bank).

The New Jersey Bankers Education Foundation has been able to distribute more than $116,000 in support of veteran and dependent education programs since its inception. If you are interested in providing support, checks can be made payable to the New Jersey Bankers Education Foundation and mailed to the NJBankers office at 411 North Ave. East, Cranford, NJ 07016. The foundation is a 501(c)(3) organization and contributions are tax deductible.

For information contact Jim Meredith at 908-272-8500, Ext. 614, or jmeredith@njbankers.com.

Read or Share this story: http://mycj.co/1GkQOcK