Old Tale Road likely to be largest of flood-related annexations, but some residents balk at price

Sally Kingdom pours a glass of water at her home on Old Tale Road on Friday. Residents of Old Tale have had city sewer service for years, but they use private wells for their water. During and immediately after the 2013 flood, the water quality in many of the wells was too poor to drink. (Cliff Grassmick / Staff Photographer)

The residents of Old Tale Road aren't desperate. They've had city sewer service for years, and most of their wells recovered after the September 2013 floods.

But when Boulder came knocking with a $1 million state grant for infrastructure improvements related to flood recovery, it was an offer that most of the residents found hard to turn down.

Now 20 of the 28 residences on the rural, tree-lined street just east of Flatirons Golf Course are likely to be annexed into the city of Boulder, the largest of a series of post-flood annexations of county enclaves.

"It's having the relief, long-term, of not having to worry about the water issue," said Lew Kingdom, a resident of Old Tale Road since 1976. "It's not an immediate worry, but it is a long-term worry."

Later this month, the Boulder City Council will take its second vote on the 22-acre annexation, which received initial approval March 17.

Altogether, the city has made contact with 160 homeowners in county enclaves whose wells and septic systems were affected by the floods. Those whose septic systems were within the floodway could not put in new septic under county rules.

'The flood was a game-changer'

Many residents of county enclaves have resisted annexation for years, and some take pride in not being under the authority of the City Council. Boulder officials took pains early in the ongoing electric utility municipalization process to tell county residents they might want to serve as electricity customers that they would not attempt to annex their neighborhoods.

Advertisement

Boulder planner Chris Meschuk, who has been working on the flood-related annexations, said the flood changed how some people viewed the city.

"The flood was a game-changer for some of these folks who had, quite frankly, no interest in annexing into the city," he said. "For a lot of them, the impacts of the flood changed that view. For some of them, they didn't have another option. If their property was in the floodway and their septic was in the floodway, we don't want to put septic back into the floodway because in another disaster, it increases the likelihood of another disaster. Getting them connected to a sewer not only helps the property owner, it furthers public health goals."

The city offered favorable terms, waiving all administrative fees and excise taxes usually associated with annexations — $159,180 for 27 properties, including the 20 on Old Tale — but homeowners still would have to pay tens of thousands of dollars in connection fees and "plant investment fees," which offset the cost of infrastructure investment, as well as provide the city easements on their property for flood mitigation work and even future trails.

The connection and plant investment fees run from a little more than $11,000 to almost $45,000, depending on the home, and that doesn't cover the cost of bringing water from the main to the house, which several homeowners estimated at $10,000. Some homeowners also would have to come into compliance with certain city regulations, such as the prohibition on wooden roofs.

So far, the city has annexed seven scattered parcels, some of whose owners faced dire conditions as they lived in homes without functional wells or septic systems. But those homeowners also lived on streets that already had city water and sewer pipes, so they didn't have to pay for that infrastructure to be built.

Those whose homes don't sit near that infrastructure faced significant additional cost.

"It's still really expensive," Meschuk said. "There are folks who expressed an interest in annexation, or at least understanding that option, who chose not to go forward."

Last year, the city applied to the Colorado Department of Public Heath and Environment for a grant from state flood recovery funds and was awarded $1 million to put toward new water infrastructure in areas affected by the flood. Of several county neighborhoods where wells or septic systems were affected by the flood, residents of Old Tale Road expressed the most interest in annexation, and the city decided to apply its grant to putting in a water main on the street, repaving the road and using remaining funds to offset residents' Northern Colorado Water Conservancy District fees.

Residents of Old Tale Road have had city sewer service for years, going back to a time when the city didn't require annexation to get that service, but they use private wells for their water. During and immediately after the flood, the water quality in many of the wells was too poor to drink.

Most residents' wells recovered with time, but the concern remained.

Sherry Bruff's well remained sound throughout the flood and its aftermath, but she's still going forward with annexation.

"This state money is important money," she said. "I don't like the taste of city water. Our well water is perfect. We've never had a problem. But here's the money, and now is the time. It significantly reduces the burden, and that's very attractive."

Not everyone is sold, though.

Too expensive for some

Ray Hedberg, who has lived on Old Tale Road since 1968, said the city is asking for too much money from residents for not enough benefit in return. He points to the 60-foot easement the city wants along South Boulder Creek and the roughly $20,000 in stormwater management plant investment fees the city wants, even though there are no plans to put in storm sewers along Old Tale.

Hedberg also wants to keep his well, while the annexation agreement would require him to connect to city water before selling the house or adding more than two fixtures. The connection would cost another $10,000, he said.

Hedberg said he has no problem with many of his neighbors annexing, though he doesn't understand the motivation. The city won't force him to join, and he'll still get the benefit of city street maintenance.

But "philosophically," he said, he has a problem with the city charging fees with no plans for infrastructure improvement, and he said he wished the city were more "flexible" on its terms.

Kingdom, though he's reached a different decision, shares Hedberg's resistance to the stormwater fee.

"They are taking our subdivision exactly as it stands," he said. "We are not creating infrastructure costs to anyone. They are not putting in curb, gutter, storm sewer or sidewalks."

Kingdom said residents also feel a certain amount of pressure because the city needs to issue the water line contract soon or risk losing the grant.

"It's a very fast-tracked deal," he said. "I'm appreciative because it's less brain damage, but it does not give us an opportunity to say, 'Should these fees be looked at?'"

Kingdom estimates annexation will cost him roughly $75,000, with some $20,000 of that being the stormwater plant investment fee and another $20,000 being the cost of a new roof to replace his wooden one.

He takes personal responsibility for the roof, but the stormwater fees seem "out of proportion," he said.

'This is why we have cities'

Meschuk said collecting the plant investment fees on water, wastewater and stormwater represents an important principle for the city.

"Each property pays the plant investment fee for each of those utilities," he said. "It's about investing in the system that is already developed and in the future system. Everybody pays into the system, and we slowly do projects throughout the city to benefit the entire city, and that's the logic of that fee."

The city is working on a South Boulder Creek flood mitigation plan, but Kingdom has a hard time seeing the connection, as Old Tale Road doesn't create any additional need for flood mitigation, that project will go forward eventually regardless of the annexation and Old Tale residents will pay normal stormwater fees on their utility bills to support the broader system.

Obtaining easements along important drainageways also creates a community benefit in exchange for the annexation, Meschuk said.

"After the flood, there was a massive amount of sediment in the creeks and drainageways around the city," he said. "Where we had an easement, we were able to go onto private property and remove it, and we were eligible for a small amount of FEMA reimbursement. Where we didn't have an easement, the private property owner was responsible. This allows for flood mitigation work in the future. It reduces the community's overall flood risk, and it helps the community's flood rating, which gets residents discounts on flood insurance. That's the really big driver."

Boulder City Councilwoman Lisa Morzel, for her part, believes the city should be more flexible. She said she is disappointed so few county residents have taken the city's annexation offer and believes it may show that the city should have done more to reduce costs.

"They are human beings who have water and sanitation needs who now, through no fault of their own, are sitting on the edge of the city," Morzel said. "We need to stay true to the purpose of these annexations, which is health and safety, or what are we doing?"

Morzel said she doesn't understand why the flood-control easement along South Boulder Creek needs to be 60 feet or why the city wants stormwater fees when it's not putting in storm sewers.

"It's a public health and safety issue," she said. "I'm not interested in exacting anything from people. We're going to have future floods, and people are going to have future issues. In these drainages, it's better for everyone to get them in the city. Maybe we could have offered a better deal. I don't hold these people as my enemies. They are people in need, and this is why we have cities."

In the previous flood-related annexations, the City Council has held firm that owners are responsible for the remaining fees.

Boulder Mayor Matt Appelbaum said the Old Tale annexation is "appropriate" and good for the city and residents. But city residents have already paid into infrastructure, and county residents need to do the same when they come into the city.

"Everybody in the city has contributed to basic infrastructure," he said. "Those annexing need to do so as well. Nobody gets a free ride. Many, many years ago, we decided that when it comes to flood control, everybody should pay, regardless of where they are in the city. It's too important to the city as a whole not to."

That record leaves Kingdom without much optimism for relief.

"They control the leverage," he said. "We can take it or leave it, pretty much."

Erica Meltzer: 303-473-1355, meltzere@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/meltzere