James H. McKinstry of Mead, who was a United pilot for 38 years, was recently inducted into the Colorado Aviation Hall of Fame. ( Lewis Geyer / Longmont Times-Call )

James H. McKinstry first took flight in 1950 when his mom booked his Cub Scout pack on an airport tour that included a surprise free flight for each kid.

Other mothers scolded her for inviting their boys to go on such a dangerous adventure.

But that trip sparked something in the 9-year-old that still burns today in the now 72-year-old McKinstry. He still considers his mother a leader for adopting the pack and letting him fly - something he did safely both as a United Airlines commercial pilot from 1964 through 2001, and as a stunt pilot in modified and stock World War II fighter planes at air shows such as the annual National Championship Air Races and Air Show at Reno, Nev.

"Anything worth doing in life, there's some risk," McKinstry said. "... And when you fly small airplanes, there are just some days you don't open the hangar."

This past November, his unblemished safety record and passion for flying earned him an induction into the Colorado Aviation Hall of Fame by the Denver-based Colorado Aviation Historical Society Hall of Fame committee.

The distinction inspires him to stay his course "every hour" while undergoing radiation treatment for brain cancer diagnosed in late January, he said.

Letters of recommendation noted McKinstry's commitment to aviation history as evidenced by the eight World War II-era airplanes he built off blueprints -- five Pitts Specials, two Aresti Ganadors, and one Stearman.

Lynda McKinstry, his wife of 50 years, helped him stitch fabric with a foot-long needle to wing spars and ribs in the 70-plus aircraft he has built or rebuilt.

"Yes, we have had wings in our basement," she said, smiling at her husband. "Not many people can say that."

Their son, James D. McKinstry - also a United Airlines pilot - echoed her sentiment on their airplane-centric lifestyle.

The plaque commemerating James H. McKinstry's induction into the Colorado Aviation Hall of Fame. (Lewis Geyer / Longmont Times-Call)

"My first recollection of his aviation talents were (when I was) sitting in his 1941 Stearman biplane's metal fuselage when it was in pieces in a one-car garage," he wrote in recommending his father to the Hall of Fame induction committee.

Sky is the limit

James H. McKinstry's mechanical inclination with airplanes started even before the airport tour that unexpectedly sent him airborne.

It helped that the Town of Southbridge, Mass., exercised its right of eminent domain in 1946, when he was 5, and bought 80 acres of his parents' 360-acre dairy farm for the new municipal airport.

"Later, when I started hanging around a bit, I found out that pilots don't work hardly as hard as dairymen," he said.

By 1955, at age 14, McKinstry successfully bartered with airport manager Stanley Krupinski. In exchange for flight instruction and flying time, McKinstry agreed to sweep the hangar, clean airplanes, scrub furnace rust, and train as an assistant mechanic.

The deal led him to practice in World War II surplus planes such as the Stearman two-seater biplane, the Fairchild PT-19, and the North American T-6 Texan.

A photo of him ran the next summer in the Southbridge Evening News when he and a buddy in the Southbridge Aero-Piston Club designed a model airplane that could fly 60 mph - their byproduct of studying plane design, flight, and aero-mechanics fundamentals, he said.

Building on that foundation eventually led him to much greater adventures and challenges in the growing aviation field.

Besides flying airshows for competition and charity events, he moonlighted as a stunt pilot in "Stand Up and Be Counted," the 1972 Columbia Pictures film starring Jacqueline Bisset and directed by Jackie Cooper at Jefferson County Airport, since renamed Rocky Mountain Metropolitan Airport, in Broomfield.

During Hurricane Andrew, a category 5 storm in 1992 that killed 15 people in south Florida, McKinstry acted as United Airline's chief pilot and directed crisis management.

He eventually oversaw United's fleet operations that spanned the United States, Central and South America, Europe, and all of Asia. In 1999, he made the first United Airlines flight over the North Pole.

"My Dad asked me one time if I felt more responsibility flying with 480 passengers than flying by myself. No. I wanted to stay safe. I wanted all of us to stay safe," McKinstry said.

The wild blue yonder

Daily radiation treatments at University Hospital in Aurora have grounded him for now, but McKinstry still keeps a yellow-and-red 1950 DHC-1 Chimpmunk in the heated hanger paces from his back door.

Thirty years of living in Mead in a stucco home on an estate they call Rancho de Aero - Spanish for "Air Ranch" - suits him and Lynda.

They have taken off and landed on their grass air strip between Interstate 25 to the east and a small private lake to the west countless times and look forward to their next flight.

"I'm not ready to give up yet," said McKinstry, who received The Wright Brothers Master Pilot Award from the Department of Transportation's Federal Aviation Administration in 2012. "I still love to fly as much as I did 50 years back."

Of course.

His cockpit windshield has framed unforgettable beauty around the world at altitude. He mentioned the sun rising over the South American Andes Mountains; waterfalls tumbling in Africa; and thunderstorms crackling over Europe.

Those perspectives all speak to some part of heaven on earth, he explained.

"It would be impossible for any pilot to be an atheist," he said. "... You couldn't believe that there isn't a creator, whatever you call that creator, behind this entire thing."

Pam Mellskog can be reached at Mellskog@msn.com or at 303-746-0942.