Former state Sen. Van Wanggaard (left) of Racine and investment banker and lawyer Jonathan Steitz of Pleasant Prairie are running for the 21st Senate District. Associated Press / Michael Sears Credit: Associated Press / Michael Sears

By of the

Madison — Two state Senate candidates are appealing to the most conservative voters in a primary for a seat with new boundaries that make it one of the most Republican-friendly ones in Wisconsin.

Former Sen. Van Wanggaard of Racine — who lost in a 2012 recall over his vote for limits on collective bargaining for public workers — and investment banker and lawyer Jonathan Steitz of Pleasant Prairie are running for the seat. Steitz ran and lost in 2011 in a recall election against Sen. Bob Wirch (D-Somers).

Wanggaard and Steitz are touting their support for deep tax cuts, "right-to-work" legislation, voucher school expansion and repeal of the Common Core education standards.

Some differences have emerged, on issues such as taxes and guns.

It is the first time an election is being held using new boundaries for the 21st Senate District, which includes the strongly Republican areas of Kenosha and Racine counties. The district used to consist of most of Racine County and was one of the most evenly divided in the state.

With the new lines, the winner of the Aug. 12 primary is all but certain to go on to take the seat in the Nov. 4 general election against ironworker Randy Bryce, the Democratic candidate.

Wanggaard has far more money than Steitz. He raised $47,000 in the first half of the year and had almost $85,000 in his campaign account as of June 30. Steitz raised more than $23,000 in the first six months of 2014 and had more than $20,000 on hand as of June 30.

Steitz is presenting himself as the best fit for the district, saying voters should choose the most conservative candidate now that the district has a heavily Republican tilt.

"The Senate has been the place where conservative legislation goes to die," Steitz said.

Steitz, 40, recently left his job as an investment banker at Robert W. Baird & Co. so he could campaign full time. Before that, he worked in securities law in London and Chicago.

Wanggaard, 62, said he has a track record of voting for conservative legislation, even when, in the case of Act 10, he knew it would lead to a recall effort against him.

"It's about sticking up for what you believe in," he said. "My record shows I do what I say I'm going to do."

A retired police officer and former Racine County supervisor, Wanggaard is hoping to return to the Senate after being recalled from there for his vote approving the public-sector labor limits known as Act 10.

Taxes. In the short term, Steitz would like to eliminate the 7.65% income tax rate on the top earners and merge the bottom two income tax brackets. Together, that would drop the number of tax brackets from four to two.

Steitz said he wants to eliminate the corporate income tax and would like to eventually eliminate all income taxes, something he said could be accomplished in perhaps eight years. He said he would be willing to accept a modestly higher sales tax to accomplish that.

Wanggaard said eliminating the income tax is not realistic and could more than double the sales tax rate. He said he is committed to cutting income taxes, property taxes and retirement taxes.

"I think it's got to be an all-of-the-above approach," Wanggaard said.

Act 10. Many aspects of Act 10 do not apply to law enforcement and firefighters, so those employees can fully negotiate over their wages.

Steitz said he would like to extend Act 10 to public safety workers. Wanggaard, who was a cop for nearly 30 years, said he had not considered that change and would have to think about whether he would support it.

Before Wanggaard voted for Act 10, he worked with Gov. Scott Walker to get tweaks to it that created civil service protections for local government workers meant to be similar to ones already in place for state workers. Steitz said he opposed those changes.

"I, like a lot of conservatives, think we need to be reforming civil service protections, not expanding them," Steitz said.

Wanggaard said the original version of Act 10 would have taken away protections for workers when they were wrongly disciplined or terminated. Having a grievance system in place will spare local governments from litigation costs, he said.

Right to work. Both candidates support right-to-work legislation, which would ban labor contracts between unions and private businesses from containing provisions requiring workers to belong to the union.

Guns. Steitz backs a "constitutional carry" law — one that would allow people to carry concealed weapons without a permit, provided they could legally possess firearms.

Wanggaard wants to keep in place a requirement that people get training to be allowed to carry concealed weapons. He has proposed a change that would allow people to carry concealed weapons as long as they got training certificates from private instructors, allowing them to avoid taking the extra step of getting a state permit.