Statewide ban on texting while driving needed

Photo: LM Otero /Associated Press Image 1 of / 1 Caption Close Image 1 of 1 A man uses his cell phone in 2013 as he drives through traffic in Dallas. San Antonio has banned such a practice and the fines are filling city coffers. A man uses his cell phone in 2013 as he drives through traffic in Dallas. San Antonio has banned such a practice and the fines are filling city coffers. Photo: LM Otero /Associated Press Statewide ban on texting while driving needed 1 / 1 Back to Gallery

One issue plaguing Texans is the advent of distracted driving in the form of texting while driving. Texans are calling on their lawmakers to address this safety issue.

As a lawmaker, I cannot in good conscience ignore this life-threatening safety issue as Texans continue to die in car crashes as other drivers threaten lives while checking their email. I heard Texans calling for action and answered their pleas.

Bill filing for the 84th Texas Legislature has begun. I filed the Alex Brown Memorial Act, a bill proposing a statewide law banning texting while driving, for consideration during this upcoming state legislative session.

We can no longer ignore the increasing frequency with which regular drivers use cellphones to send or read a text or email while driving, resulting in this dangerous practice emerging as one of the most common causes of crashes or near-crashes.

We can no longer ignore the 507 deaths and 19,994 serious injuries in Texas involving driver distraction in 2013 as reported by the Texas Department of Transportation.

We can no longer ignore the combined visual, cognitive and manual distractions that are uniquely posed by texting while driving that consequently increase the risk of crashing by eight to 23 times.

It is time that lawmakers value the lives of all Texans and enact a statewide law to ban texting while driving. The state can do this, and law enforcement can enforce a ban because we already do.

State law already bans texting while driving by drivers younger than 18. Additionally, school bus drivers are prohibited by state law from using a cellphone while driving with children on the bus.

Current state law prohibits drivers from using a cellphone or other hand-held wireless device in an active school zone where signs are present.

Lacking a statewide law banning texting while driving, many Texas cities are individually addressing this safety issue by enacting local ordinances banning the dangerous driving habit. I applaud the estimated 38 cities around the state for being proactive about reducing this threat to our safety and protecting our roads.

From a policy perspective, this patchwork of state laws and local ordinances confuses drivers and erodes safety. With one uniform law, drivers will easily understand that state law prohibits texting while driving on city streets and county roads, and through school zones.

Drivers do change their cellphone behavior when faced with good laws, tough enforcement and public education campaigns. Across the nation and in some Texas cities, texting while driving bans are having the desired effect of reducing crashes and saving lives. Texas must answer this life-threatening safety issue with life-saving legislation.

Like drunken driving, texting while driving risks more than the life of the driver. Texting while driving poses a threat to the lives of other Texas drivers, passengers, cyclists and pedestrians.

Distracted driving kills and injures people in Texas every day. These deaths and injuries are unnecessary and completely preventable.

Although today there is no statewide law stopping Texans from picking up their phone to text while driving, I implore everyone to think of your life, think of your passengers, think of the bike rider on the shoulder, think of the other vehicles around you, think of the blind pedestrian on the corner, think of the child running into the street after his ball, and put your phone away. It can wait.

The Alex Brown Memorial Act enjoys the support of Texans from across the state. Rest assured that the joint authors, Rep. Byron Cook, Rep. Patricia Harless, Rep. Eddie Lucio III, Rep. Jose Menendez and I, are committed to seeing this law enacted.

Please help us in this effort to enact the Alex Brown Memorial Act and make our state's roads safer by banning texting while driving by contacting your Texas House member and state senator today.

Tell your lawmakers that you want this law to protect the lives of your loved ones. Tell them that the right to text should not trump the right to live. Tell them that you want them to vote yes for the Alex Brown Memorial Act.

If this law saves one life, it will be worth it.

Tom Craddick from Midland is the representative for Texas House District 82.