The implementation of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act has made most employers “rethink” their employee benefit offerings, including increasing employees’ share of cost even more via consumer-driven plans. According to Benefits Selling’s 2014 Employer Survey, 70 percent of employers said PPACA has made them rethink their employee benefit offerings, compared to 30 percent who said the health care reform law hadn’t had any impact on their offerings. Complete your profile to continue reading and get FREE access to BenefitsPRO.com, part of your ALM digital membership. Benefits:

Your access to unlimited BenefitsPRO.com content isn’t changing. Once you are an ALM digital member, you’ll receive: Critical BenefitsPRO.com information including cutting-edge post-reform success strategies, comprehensive service provider listings, educational webcasts and videos, resources from industry leaders, and informative eNewsletters.

Exclusive discounts on ALM, BenefitsPRO Magazine and BenefitsPRO.com events.

Access to other award-winning ALM publications including LifeHealthPro.com, ThinkAdvisor.com and Law.com. Register Now Already have an account? Sign In X Sign in with your ALM Account Remember Me Or... Sign In With LinkedIn

The move also helps Orica comply with the minimum benefit requirements of PPACA, while at the same time lowering costs. “We knew if we didn’t do something like this, in 10 years our costs would have been just out of control,” Peabody said in a later interview. “Aon’s exchange enables us to offer a wider range of plans, because trying to administer five plans on our own would have been a nightmare.”

Loretta Camp, principal of Davidson and Camp Insurance Services in San Antonio, said that as a small employer, she was in a position to consider health care “on an individualized basis.” The firm found that employees could get more affordable plans either through their spouses’ employers, or individual coverage either on or off the exchange, so the firm discontinued its own plan. “I think the biggest hurdle for employers today is making sure our employees understand how to review their benefit options, comparing group plans and individual opportunities both on and off exchange and to quell some of the panic over how the media — and misinformed consumers — is now portraying how horrible health care plans now are because of [PPACA],” Camp says.

In the survey, nearly two-thirds (64 percent) of respondents said they expected their employees to pick up more of the tab for their own benefits in the coming year, as opposed to 36 percent who did not.

When asked which benefits were considered most important to their employees, the vast majority (77 percent) said health insurance, while only one in 10 said consumer-driven health care was most important; dental, 3 percent; life insurance, 2 percent; short-term disability, 2 percent; executive benefits, such as supplemental executive retirement plans, executive life insurance, executive long-term disability income benefits, supplemental medical reimbursement plans, 2 percent; vision, 1 percent; long-term disability, 1 percent; limited medical plans, 0 percent; long-term care insurance, 0 percent and other, 4 percent.

Peabody says her firm has offered a wellness program with health risk assessments, but for this year the company is suspending the program because of all of the changes it is implementing. However, in 2016, Orica plans to launch a new expanded program that includes the use of biometrics to enable employees to receive discounted premiums. Slightly half (52 percent) of the survey respondents offered flexible working benefits, compared to 48 percent that did not. However, 68 percent offered retirement benefits, as opposed to 32 percent that did not.

The survey also delved into how employers felt about their brokers’ service, though 24 percent said they did not use a benefits broker or an agent. Of those who did use a broker or an agent, the vast majority (84 percent) were commission-based, as opposed to 16 percent who were fee-based.