NASHVILLE — With no time to stop and savor her Democratic primary victory in South Carolina on Saturday, presidential hopeful Hillary Clinton plowed on with a hectic campaign schedule that includes stops in five states in two days before voters head to the polls on Super Tuesday.

Clinton addressed an overflowing crowd at the Cal Turner Center on the campus of Meharry Medical College in Nashville on Sunday afternoon — a city her democratic opponent Sen. Bernie Sanders bypassed for rallies in Colorado and Oklahoma.

The candidate reiterated her support for affordable healthcare and education while calling for an overhaul of the criminal justice system and an end to systemic racism.

“My campaign is really about breaking down barriers,” Clinton said. “America doesn’t need to be great, it needs to be whole.”

Clinton supporters and others who just wanted to catch a glimpse of the former first lady, senator and Secretary of State waited in line for more than two hours in warm weather before being allowed inside.

Samantha Hampton, a Clarksville fourth-grader, said she wanted to see Clinton because she really wants to see a female president.

“I think she’s a really good person,” Hampton said.

And although the crowd appeared to represent a wide-range demographically, Clinton’s efforts to gain minority votes appeared evident in her choice of venue. Meharry Medical College is the oldest and largest historically black institution of its kind in the nation.

An estimated 800 people filled the Center’s ballroom — with a posted legal capacity of about 500 — with the overflow being sent to a nearby auditorium.

Will Nelms, a communication major at Middle Tennessee University in Murfreesboro, came to the rally with two friends despite favoring a candidate from the Republican party nomination.

“I’m a [Marco] Rubio supporter,” he said. “But I’ve always been fascinated with the politics and the primaries. I’m just here to take part in the process, whatever that means.”

Clinton’s introduction to this Sunday crowd came via rousing endorsements from Nashville Mayor Megan Barry and actor Tony Goldwyn, who portrays fictional U.S. president Fitzgerald Grant III in the television drama “Scandal.”

Goldyn’s mention of Republican candidates Donald Trump and Ted Cruz drew a chorus of boos from the crowd, but the speaker said he respected Sanders for his stance on some of the issues, but contended Clinton’s primary opponent offered no solutions for funding his plans.

“We need to fight for Hillary as hard as we know she’s going to fight for us,” Goldwyn said.

Clinton said she wants work somewhere between government and the private sector to create more jobs and to increase the minimum wage.

“We also have a lot of work to do that’s invisible,” she said, referring to the nation’s infrastructures like clean drinking water.

The candidate said she supports healthcare reforms made under President Barrack Obama and vowed to work to improve it to ensure affordable health care for everyone.

“We can’t go back,” she said.

Concerning education, Clinton said she wants to help make getting a college education affordable, and vowed to create a special fund to ensure historically black colleges continue serving their communities. Her latter comment drew applause and screams from a group of Meharry students wearing white lab coats.

Clinton also said it didn’t make sense that Americans can refinance their cars and homes, but college students cannot refinance their college loans.

“The interest rates on college rates now are outrageous,” she said.

On the issue of criminal justice and systemic racism, Clinton — although supporting law enforcement — said there are some who need retraining.

“We want all people to be equal before the law,” she said. “If you join me in this journey, I know we can do this.”