The amount that American elderly need to cover their health care costs in retirement is 9.4% less than it was a year ago, according to the Employee Benefit Research Institute. (Photo: AlexRaths, Getty Images)

The number is daunting. A couple with a greater-than-average prescription drug expenses would need $326,000 saved at age 65 if they wanted to be highly confident about paying for health care expenses in retirement.

The good news? The amount that American elderly need to cover their health care costs in retirement is 9.4% less than it was a year ago, according to the Employee Benefit Research Institute (EBRI), a Washington, D.C.-based non-partisan research group.

In 2013, a 65-year-old couple needed $360,000 in savings for health care expenses. The decrease in the projected savings target is due in part to enhanced prescription drug coverage provided by the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (PPACA), EBRI said in its report.

Even better news? In 2014, a man would need just $64,000 in savings and a woman would need $83,000, if each had a goal of having a 50% chance of having enough money saved to cover health care expenses in retirement, EBRI said. And, if either instead wanted a 90% chance of having enough savings, $116,000 would be needed for a man and $131,000 would be needed for a woman.

Of note, Fidelity Investment earlier this year said a 65-year-old couple retiring today would need on average $220,000 set aside in savings to pay for health care in retirement. Read EBRI's report, Amount of Savings Needed for Health Expenses for People Eligible for Medicare: Good News Not So Rare Anymore. Read the EBRI Read Fidelity's report.

To be sure, EBRI's (and Fidelity's) numbers are overwhelming. But EBRI's (and Fidelity's) projected savings targets also need to be put in perspective. First, many American elderly tend to pay for health care expenses in retirement out of savings and current income, not just savings.

What's more, the projected savings targets reflect what's called the net present value of a stream of outflows. In other words, it represents how much money you would need now to pay for health care expenses over the course of 20 or so years.

When you look at those expenses on an annual basis, however, the number is less daunting. According to an analysis by the Kaiser Family Foundation (KFF), health expenses accounted for 14% of Medicare household budgets in 2012, or $4,792 per year. And that number seems much more manageable than saying you need $147,000 to $326,000 in savings now for health care expenses in retirement. Read the KFF report.

Still, experts say you should plan for health care expenses in retirement now, especially unexpected health-care costs and long-term care costs. Here's what to consider:

Stay healthy. First, eat right and exercise. Many individuals grossly underestimate the importance health has on retirement, says Stephen Stellhorn, president of MSM Capital Management in Tampa. "The difference between entering retirement in good health vs. poor health could be tens of thousands of dollars in reduced medical expenses, which can be reallocated to cover other retirement needs," he says.

Save, save, save. According to EBRI, you'll need to save upward of $326,000 to fund health care in retirement. But research shows many couples haven't even saved this much for their entire retirement needs, says Stellhorn. In fact, the Federal Reserve's 2013 Survey of Consumer Finances report shows that 401(k)/IRA balances for the typical working household approaching retirement stood at just $111,000 in 2013, half of what Fidelity says is needed to fund just health care in retirement.

What's more, the EBRI analysis also didn't include potential costs for long-term care needs, which only compounds the health care funding issue during retirement. Nor does EBRI's report factor it Medicare surcharges that would affect upper income retirees, or about 5% of people with Medicare. Higher-income beneficiaries pay higher premiums for Part B (medical insurance) and Part D (Medicare prescription drug coverage premiums).

"While the trend since 2011 has been favorable in the EBRI analysis, projected savings needs for a couple at age 65 will continue to remain a significant hurdle for many in their retirement planning," Stellhorn says.

The bottom line: Save, save, and save some more.

Don't risk it. Unless you like to take such risks, don't gamble with funding health care expenses in retirement. Instead, strive to be as confident as possible that you've saved for such expenses. "Hoping for a 50% level mediation costs in retirement is a crap shoot," says Katy Votava, president of Goodcare.com, a health care consulting firm based in Rochester, N.Y. "I recommend sticking closer to the 90% level."

Why so? "First, if you plan for a 50% level and experience a 90% expense level that cost will not be optional therefore requiring you to dent the nest egg," Votava says.

And secondly, "we face public policy challenges for Medicare funding that has already resulted in higher out-of-pocket costs for all Medicare beneficiaries and even more so for higher income individuals," Votava says. And that's a trend that she anticipates will continue.

Others agree. "While Medicare spending growth has slowed in recent years, we cannot assume this will continue," says Kip Piper, editor of PiperReport.com and a senior consultant with Sellers Dorsey, a health-care consulting firm based in Philadelphia.

You're not average. No matter whether you want to save enough to cover 50% of expected health-care costs or some other level, consider this: It won't be easy figuring out how much you'll really need.

"It involves a variety of variables," Stellhorn says. "The age at which you retire, family medical history, longevity outlook, health care inflation, access to quality medical care and your current health status are all factors to consider."

Plan for the worst case. Another wrinkle in the saving-for-health-care expenses in retirement puzzle? Specialty drugs are rapidly hitting the market, Piper says.

"The good news is these often provide excellent new, long-awaited treatments for cancers, Alzheimer's, and other serious conditions," he says. "However, they are exceptionally high cost, often costing $100,000 a year or more. And Medicare beneficiaries are responsible for 20% co-payments unless they have Medicare supplement – Medigap - insurance, or a robust Medicare Advantage plan."

What to do? "Plan for the worst and hope for the best," Votava says.

Shop smart. It's a hotly debated issue, but consider enrolling in a high-quality, low-out-pocket cost Medicare Advantage plan. Doing so will "help control health care costs and make medical spending more predictable during retirement years," Piper says.

If, however, you want Medicare Part A and Part B benefits through a traditional, fee-for-service, Piper recommends shopping around for a strong, cost-effective private Medigap insurance plan to help cover the co-payments and co-insurance.

Shop for the right Part D prescription drug plan, too. "By picking the right plan packages, you can minimize your out-of-pocket spending for the portion of unplanned and exceptionally high medical costs Medicare doesn't pay for," Piper says. "The tradeoff is higher monthly premiums."

Cash flow is king. If you don't plan to set aside a portion of your nest egg for health care expenses in retirement consider earmarking your Social Security benefits to pay for health care expenses.

"For budget planning, earmarking expected Social Security checks to cover health care expenses makes a great deal of sense," Piper says. "Of course, not everyone can afford to do that, of course, but it underscores how Medicare coverage is limited, involves premiums, deductibles, and cost-sharing. It goes to show how, for many, Social Security, is just enough to pay for health care not covered by Medicare."

Others, however, say how you fund health-care expenses in retirement is a matter of personal preference, though it's wise not to lose sight of this: "The bottom line is that cash flow needs to be available for those costs in retirement," Votava says.

Optimize Social Security. Stellhorn says using Social Security to pay for health care expenses highlights the importance of Social Security planning prior to retirement. "Not adequately evaluating all options as to when to take benefits could have serious consequences later in life when going back to work is no longer an option," he says.

Build a floor. When contemplating expenses in retirement, consider what's essential and what's discretionary. Fund your essential expenses, such as health care, with guaranteed sources of income, such as Social Security, and your discretionary expenses with variable sources of income.

This, says Stellhorn, "will give many retiree's piece of mind as they navigate their retirement years."

Robert Powell is editor of Retirement Weekly, contributes regularly to USA WEEKEND, USA TODAY, The Wall Street Journal and MarketWatch and teaches at Boston University.

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1wRwSux