When Pope Francis delivered his speech before Congress, he drew loud applause on the lawn of the Capitol by declaring that the Golden Rule "reminds us of our responsibility to protect and defend human life at every stage of its development." The pontiff went on to dedicate a full paragraph to opposing the death penalty and spoke in depth about climate change, poverty and immigration. He allocated only the one, vague sentence in his entire speech to the unborn.

In fact, the pontiff never explicitly mentioned the word abortion or unborn, a huge disappointment to pro-life Catholics eager to hear more from Francis on this moral issue, particularly in the wake of the investigation into Planned Parenthood's harvesting of baby parts. On the lawn of the Capitol, I saw more signs that read "protect the common good" than signs calling to "protect the unborn," which illustrates a change in the pope's messaging.

It was one of many missed opportunities to reassure conservatives that the pontiff stands with practicing Catholics on moral issues they feel he has minimized during his trip to America in favor of more liberal-sounding policies.



[SEE: Editorial Cartoons on Pope Francis]

This approach was also on full display at the White House, where the pope delivered a softball speech stressing the need for action on the environment – remarks that followed the political line of President Barack Obama's playbook. Francis gave the president the opportunity to pat himself on the back for his work on climate change and escape accountability for supporting Planned Parenthood and the abortion industry. Once again, the pontiff made one reference to religious liberties and shied away from the tough and controversial moral issues of our times.

However, later that evening, Pope Francis did flex his muscles in a low-key visit to the Little Sisters of the Poor, who are suing the Obama administration for having to comply with the birth control mandate required by the Affordable Care Act. He was sending a deliberate message to the White House to back off these nuns. Yet his visit to the convent was hardly covered by the mainstream media, which was another missed opportunity.

When I listened to the pontiff speak to the joint session of Congress, he appeared to be a lobbyist, gently threading his political priorities into a poetic and inspiring message. It was an important message of hope and challenges, where he shared his grave concern for the state of global affairs. He spoke as if he understood the current dysfunctional state of our divided and hostile Congress and the need to unite for the common good. This message of unity is exactly what Congress needed to hear, and it was well-received by both sides of the aisle. Clearly the pontiff's message resonated with House Speaker John Boehner, who resigned a day after the Pope's visit and echoed how long-term turmoil was damaging for his members.



[READ: Ronald Reagan, Pope John Paul II and the Alliance That Won the Cold War]

While we will need to wait and see if Francis changed the hearts and minds of the members of Congress, I am not placing any bets on his influence in changing the hearts and minds of the Castro brothers in Cuba. As a Cuban American and daughter of a former political prisoner in Cuba, I was similarly disappointed in the pope's silence on the dictator's oppressive tactics and human rights abuses on the island.

The pontiff's visit to Cuba and the United States appears to be less about the Golden Rule and more about a rule of politeness – "Let's not offend thy leader." Maybe the pontiff felt that his holiness and spirituality would simply rub off on dictators and lead them to feel guilty for their oppression of the Cuban people.

In his attempt not to rock the boat, the pope missed an important opportunity to stand up for the oppressed and voiceless in Cuba. He failed to mention human rights and call for freedom in a country in desperate need of political and economic change. The Cuban dissidents who face daily threats from the Castro regime were left defenseless with no hope. The Ladies in White, a movement that peacefully protests the political imprisonment of family members, were prevented from attending the papal mass.



[READ: A Stand Against Death]

Long gone are the days when the pope condemned communism as a broken system that atrophies the souls of individuals and controls the lives of its citizens with an iron fist. Francis should have continued Pope John Paul II's legacy of speaking forcefully against human rights abuses and the absolute power and control of a communist system where the individuals have no freedom of expression.

As I have followed and prayed for Francis during his first visit to America, I've realized that conservative practicing Catholics like me are not his main focus. He's got us. Despite my grumblings about his missed opportunities, I will continue to defend the Church and follow its teachings. Francis is reaching out to those who have left the church and those in search of a spiritual home. The pontiff is delivering a broader message using a different marketing tactic.