Opinion

Letters to the editor, Feb. 17

I'm a Marin fellow far removed from the Silicon Valley commute-bus dramas. I instinctively had little sympathy for the "neighborhood have-nots" whining about the "haves" and their well-intended commute buses.

That was until I saw one in the Mission earlier this week!

This anonymous-sinister looking silver and black monster literally loomed over everything like a ship from "Close Encounters of the Third Kind." It cast a very unfriendly vibe.

It seems to me, much of the offending nature of these vehicles could be neutralized with appropriately scaled buses with friendly liveries and see-in windows that show they're just carrying people and not weapons of mass destruction.

R. Gene House, Kentfield

GOP's opportunity

Thanks to Martin Nolan ("The GOP's green moment," Feb. 12) for a perceptive essay on the critical issue of climate change. Unfortunately, climate change itself has often been the subject of partisan debate.

But as Nolan suggests, by advocating for a national, revenue-neutral fee on carbon, the GOP has the opportunity to defy this trend and shuffle electoral politics in their favor.

At the same time, the GOP party leadership would enjoy the deeper satisfaction of promoting clean, secure energy sources that strengthen America as no imported fossil energy ever could. American wind and sun only blow and shine within our borders; the benefits to national health and security should be obvious.

Andrew Beahrs, Berkeley

Time for action

Most Republicans have little faith that the federal government can solve any of the world's problems, and so oppose federal regulations on carbon emissions or investment in renewable energy. Why should the government pick winners and losers, the argument goes, when the market can do that better?

Martin Nolan's piece correctly points out that Republicans should favor a carbon tax precisely because it would allow the market to select the best low-carbon energy sources as we transition away from fossil fuels.

A carbon tax would help the market account for the many costs of burning fossil fuels, including severe weather events, sea level rise and crop failures.

And Republicans need not fear that a carbon tax would fund big government because a revenue-neutral tax could be returned to households to offset higher energy prices.

Americans are increasingly pushing for government action to address climate change. A revenue-neutral carbon tax is a solution that Republicans should be able to support.

Eric Ettlinger, Berkeley

Whole Foods' woes

Regarding "Whole Foods results, outlook down," Business, Feb. 13: I would suggest another reason why Whole Foods' profits fell below forecasts, beyond those cited by the Associated Press.

That would be company CEO John Mackey's vocal criticism of Obamacare, which has generated a national backlash against the chain, resulting in lost sales.

Steve Heimoff, Oakland

Solar's friend

At Pacific Gas and Electric Co., we agree with Ann Hancock's assertion ("Rooftop solar could be left in the dark," Feb. 13) that solar generation is a vital part of California's energy future.

That's why we are proud to have connected more solar installations than any other utility in the nation - more than 100,000, or a quarter of all those in the United States. We also have contracts to purchase power from seven of the 10 largest solar photovoltaic projects in the world.

We hope she agrees that a modern utility grid is necessary to support even greater use of solar energy while keeping service on 24/7, and that all customers should pay equitably for the maintenance of that grid. Without reform, non-solar customers in California will end up subsidizing solar customers to the tune of $1.1 billion a year - $600 million in PG&E's service area alone by 2020, according to a study released five months ago by the California Public Utilities Commission.

There's no debate here in California about the merits of solar. We are working to speed its adoption and to keep investing in the modern electric grid that makes solar possible. We just need to make sure the job is done right and equitably for all of our customers.

Steve Malnight, vice president, Customer Energy Solutions, PG&E, San Francisco

Tech story lacked depth

The Feb. 7 story on the demographics of the Bay Area technology labor force (" 'Bro culture' locks many minorities out," Business) has several obvious errors in logic and statistical inference.

The article, which is about Silicon Valley, misleadingly supplies national data. As of the 2010 census, 41 percent of Bay Area tech workers are white, as opposed to the 71 percent national figure. The author also ignores the 50 percent of this labor force that is Asian, a truly bizarre omission.

Even on the national level, the analysis makes no sense: The author and those he interviews advance the idea that the proportion of whites is unfair, somehow overlooking the fact that it's within a percentage point of the makeup of the national labor force.

The author also conflates meritocracy with diversity, getting the idea of a meritocracy exactly wrong.

A systematic failure to hire qualified candidates or reject unqualified ones would constitute evidence against a tech meritocracy, though the author never suggests such a failure exists.

If instead, as he does suggest, the disparities are likely a result of unequal education, then he does a poor job of explaining why the industry deserves the abuse it receives in his article.

This was a low-quality treatment of an important issue.

Justin Costa-Roberts, San Francisco

Guns and the law

The two conservative Ninth U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals jurists who struck down California's sensible restrictions on concealed weapons appear to view the U.S. Constitution as enshrining a Hobbesian state of nature in which citizens are in continual fear and danger of violent death, and life is solitary, nasty and brutish.

This dystopian view of the American democratic experiment couldn't be further from the intent of the founders to create a more perfect union that would insure domestic and promote the general welfare.

David Long, Mill Valley

What we already know

It looks to me as if the judges on the Ninth U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals don't keep up with newspaper headlines. Here we see one national story after another of supposed law-abiding citizens using their concealed weapons to murder other people in routine daily circumstances.

First there was George Zimmerman murdering Trayvon Martin because Trayvon made the mistake of walking down the street wearing a hoodie in the wrong neighborhood at the wrong time. Then there was case of Michael Dunn shooting a teenager, Jordan Davis, outside a Jacksonville convenience store because he was playing his music too loud. Most recently there was the case of an ex-police officer, Curtis Reeves, allegedly shooting Chad Oulson in a movie theater because Oulson had the gall to be texting his child's babysitter during the previews of a movie.

All these incidents affirm what we already know about guns. When guns are accessible, they increase the chances that routine disagreements can easily escalate into fatal confrontations. Public policy that helps facilitate more people carrying around more guns, concealed or otherwise, is very shortsighted and will undoubtedly contribute to many more needless tragedies to come.

Loren Spiekerman, Foster City

Defend yourself?

I agree with the Feb. 14 editorial, "An assault on public safety," about the ruling on California's concealed-weapons law. It is a dark day for all muggers, rapists and general criminals that prowl the street every day. They are no longer safe to rob, rape and beat the hell out of innocent law-abiding citizens.

Not to fear. I'm sure The Chronicle is just as outraged at this injustice to criminals . The thought of someone defending themselves or their family is repulsive and makes me sick to my liberal stomach. Nobody has the right to defend themselves against violence because it would be violent to defend yourself.

James Bolling, Mount Shasta