LaRita Jacobs, 53, has severe arthritis and delayed neck surgery until it got so bad she couldn‘t lift a fork. She is delaying shoulder surgery her doctor recommends. (Photo: Melissa Lyttle / for USA TODAY)

Physician Praveen Arla is witnessing a reversal of health care fortunes: Poor, long-uninsured patients are getting Medicaid through Obamacare and finally coming to his office for care. But middle-class workers are increasingly staying away.

“It’s flip-flopped,” says Arla, who helps his father run a family practice in Hillview, Ky. Patients with job-based plans, he says, will say, “My deductible is so high. I’m trying to come to the doctor as little as possible. … What is the minimum I can get done? They’re really worried about cost.”

It’s a deep and common concern across the USA, where employer plans cover 60 percent of working-age Americans, or about 150 million people. Coverage long considered the gold standard of health insurance often requires workers to pay so much out-of-pocket that many skip doctor visits, put off medical procedures and ration pills, much as the uninsured have done.

A recent Commonwealth Fund survey found that four in 10 working-age adults skipped some kind of care because of cost. The portion of workers with annual deductibles — what consumers must pay before insurance kicks in — rose from 55 percent eight years ago to 80 percent today, according to research by the Kaiser Family Foundation. A Mercer study showed that 2014 saw the largest one-year increase in enrollment in “high-deductible plans” — from 18 percent to 23 percent of all covered employees.

The size of the average deductible more than doubled in eight years, from $584 to $1,217 for individual coverage. Add this to co-pays, co-insurance and the price of drugs or procedures not covered, and it’s all too much for many Americans.

Locally, prices have risen, but at a much smaller rate than nationally, according to Dr. Chris Jones, CEO of Vantage Health Plan in Monroe.

“Louisiana has been pretty good in the exchange plans,” he said. “Deductibles are a little higher than what you’d find in Medicare or large group, but deductibles as a whole are not nearly as high as other states.”

LaRita Jacobs of Seminole, Fla., who gets insurance through her husband’s job and has an annual family income of $70,000, says $7,500 a year in out-of-pocket costs kept her from dealing with an arthritis-related neck problem until it got so bad she couldn’t lift a fork. She finally got treatment in October, but she’s putting off shoulder surgery, opting for less expensive physical therapy and planning to “tough out the pain.”

“How did we get to this crazy life?” asks Jacobs, 54. “We’re struggling to pay our bills like we were struggling when we first got started.”

Why is this happening? Many patients and doctors blame corporate greed — a view insurers and business leaders reject. Some employers in turn blame the Affordable Care Act, saying it has forced them to pare down generous plans so they don’t have to pay a “Cadillac tax” on high-cost coverage in 2018.

Health care researchers point to a convergence of trends building for years: the steep rise in deductibles even as premiums stabilize, corporate belt-tightening and stagnant middle-class wages.

“It’s a case of companies trying to offer workers health insurance and still generate profit,” said Eric Wright, a professor of sociology and public health at Georgia State University. “But whenever costs go up for the consumers … it promotes a delay in care.”

Others disagree, saying that when people pay for their care, they shop more intelligently. Chris Riedl, Aetna’s head of product strategy for its national accounts, says Aetna’s research does not indicate that insured patients are showing up sick in emergency rooms with long-neglected illnesses — which to her means, “intuitively, they’re not avoiding care.”

Many doctors contend it’s only a matter of time before the middle class begins crowding ERs. They say putting off care can be dangerous, exponentially more costly and, if it continues, can threaten the nation’s health.

Monitor the trend

Praveen’s father, Mohana Arla, says being forced to pay so much out-of-pocket “is as good as not having insurance” in an era of ever-rising health care costs. Out-of-pocket maximums can easily exceed $10,000 a year for families, and median household income is about $53,000.

“Health expenses tend to come up unexpectedly, or if you have a chronic condition, they come up relentlessly,” says Karen Pollitz, a senior fellow at Kaiser. “People put off care or they split their pills. They do without.”

Research backs that up: Nearly 30 percent of privately insured, working-age Americans with deductibles of at least 5 percent of their income had a medical problem but didn’t go to the doctor, a 2014 survey by the Commonwealth Fund found. About the same percentage skipped medical tests, treatments or follow-ups.

Nearly half of middle-class workers skipped health care services or fell into financial hardship because of health expenses, according to a survey by the Associated Press and NORC Center for Public Affairs Research.

Patients often do a sort of medical and financial triage when they get sick. Jacobs says every time a doctor suggests a new test or medication for her arthritis, she asks herself, “Is it critical? You’re always playing the odds.”

Though all out-of-pocket expenses play a role in such decisions, experts say the driving factor is the deductible, which averages $2,000 or more for single coverage for nearly one in five workers and from $2,000 to $4,500 for families, depending on the type of plan. Companies may help fund health savings accounts to pay some of these costs.

“I can remember when $1,000 was considered a high-deductible plan. Now that’s become kind of the norm,” Pollitz says.

Obamacare to blame?

Since the ACA took effect, “there’s been an accelerated movement” to these types of plans, says Brian Marcotte, president of the Washington-based Business Group on Health.

Marcotte, whose group represents 400 large employers, says the looming Cadillac tax is a factor but acknowledges that managing health care costs is another.

DeAnn Friedholm of Consumers Union says she’s skeptical when employers point to the ACA. “This isn’t new,” she says. “Companies have been cutting back on benefits and cutting costs for decades.”

Pollitz says the ACA holds down the consumer burden by capping out-of-pocket expenses at $6,300 a person — which, although that amount is “more than most people have in the bank,” is better than no cap at all.

The ACA requires preventive care to be covered fully and exempt from deductibles. Jones said that requirement is beneficial.

“I think people are more inclined to go get their wellness exams now that it’s not going to cost them anything, and that’s a good thing,” he said.

Ugly side effects

When consumers skip care, they enter a downward spiral that imperils their physical and financial health, especially for problems that could have been caught early with an annual checkup.

“People with diabetes may go for several years and not know they have it because they don’t feel particularly bad,” Jones said. “Those first few years when they have it, that’s the best opportunity. It may be treated with dietary changes (if caught early). Where if you wait two or three years, you’re going to have to take some medicine.”

Insurers, employers and others say that high deductibles generally encourage people to seek the best value for their dollar.

Time heals all?

There are no signs high deductibles are going away. The Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services last month cited these plans as one of the reasons health care spending hit a record low in 2013.

Americans will need to take further steps to control their health costs.

At home in Louisiana, Jones, the CEO of Vantage, said the future may look a bit brighter.

“I think you’ll see in the next year or two that deductibles will get smaller in Louisiana,” he said. “We have a lot of options in Louisiana that they don’t have in some states.”

Read or Share this story: http://tnsne.ws/1BfDiHa