ARLINGTON, Va.--(BUSINESS WIRE)--Accenture (NYSE:ACN) has released version 7.1 of its Human Services Suite, with new features including automatic renewal of benefits, real-time identify verification and real-time insights on application status.

The updated Accenture software, including the Accenture Public Service Platform, Citizen Self-Service Portal and Benefits Management System, addresses public-sector agencies’ need for an integrated eligibility platform to deliver efficient benefit-eligibility application services while helping agencies control technology and management costs.

Version 7.1 features real-time data verification during online applications for Medicaid, including identity-proofing, making it more likely that errors will be caught upfront during data entry, thanks to additional interfaces to the Federal Data Services Hub. The upgraded version also reduces application processing times, benefitting citizens and case workers alike.

The upgrade also enables states to meet an Affordable Care Act requirement for passive renewal of Modified Adjusted Gross Income (MAGI) Medicaid benefits. This eliminates the need for citizens to submit recertification applications online, simplifies the overall recertification process and reduces manual work by case workers. As a result, applicants will be able to check their application status online, helping them stay better informed and reducing the likelihood of duplicate applications.

In addition, Version 7.1 includes a new portal that enables service providers to update government agencies on services and citizen cases and also enables case workers to refer citizens to appropriate service providers electronically.

“Our upgraded software brings greater efficiency to agencies and case workers, reduces citizen wait times and paper work, strengthens data accuracy, and helps states meet Federal compliance goals and guidelines,” said David McCurley, global managing director of Accenture’s public sector software business. “By closely tracking what states need and the difficulties they are facing with legacy systems, we are providing a cost-effective pathway to help governments address cost and operational pressures while improving citizen services.”

The Human Services Suite is designed to help agencies replace and modernize legacy eligibility systems. It can fully replace a legacy system or its components can be used to upgrade functionality in a phased manner. Health and human service agencies and organizations in Kansas, Idaho and Ohio are using Accenture Software to modernize benefit programs.

“Citizens increasingly expect better levels of service from governments,” said Adelaide O’Brien, research director for government IT transformation at IDC. “Ease of use is a requirement for beneficiaries as well as case workers. Enabling applicants to apply online, with passive renewal of MAGI Medicaid benefits allows citizens to receive near real-time eligibility determination. This automation frees caseworkers from working on processing applications and allows them to spend more time on helping beneficiaries.”

Learn more about the Accenture Human Services Suite and Delivering Public Service for the Future.

About Accenture

Accenture is a global management consulting, technology services and outsourcing company, with more than 336,000 people serving clients in more than 120 countries. Combining unparalleled experience, comprehensive capabilities across all industries and business functions, and extensive research on the world’s most successful companies, Accenture collaborates with clients to help them become high-performance businesses and governments. The company generated net revenues of US$30.0 billion for the fiscal year ended Aug. 31, 2014. Its home page is www.accenture.com.

Accenture Software combines deep technology acumen with industry knowledge to develop differentiated software products. It offers innovative software-based solutions to enable organizations to meet their business goals and achieve high performance. Its home page is www.accenture.com/software. The homepage for Accenture Health and Human Service Software is www.accenture.com/hhssoftware.