Local GOP congressmen defend government shutdown

In the meantime, thousands of federal workers in Central Florida — ranging from Internal Revenue Service employees in Maitland to engineers at Kennedy Space Center and immigration-court employees in Orlando — remain furloughed. And federal courts locally are about to run out of money to pay their 300 employees.

WASHINGTON — It's been 10 days since the start of the government shutdown, and resolution appears as distant as ever. Neither Republicans in Congress nor President Barack Obama has given an inch.

But to U.S. Rep. John Mica, R-Winter Park, the temporary pain is worth it.

He is one of three GOP House members from Central Florida — along with Daniel Webster of Winter Garden and Bill Posey of Rockledge — who Obama says are part of a conservative bloc that has taken the government "hostage" to demands that are amorphous and changeable.

Mica said the hardball tactics are necessary to win concessions from the Democrat-controlled Senate and White House on issues ranging from defunding the Affordable Care Act — a demand the Republicans have largely abandoned — to unspecified cuts in Social Security, Medicare and other spending.

"What [other] leverage do you have?" Mica asked.

Though he said Republicans likely overreached in trying to defund "Obamacare" — "maybe that was unrealistic," he says — the 11-term lawmaker dismissed Obama's suggestion that the two sides negotiate only after reopening federal offices and increasing the nation's debt limit, which is set to hit its cap next week.

"Ronald Reagan said, 'Trust but verify,'" Mica said. "Republicans would not have a chance [of getting what they wanted] once you get past next Wednesday or Thursday" — the debt-ceiling deadline.

But when asked what he wanted, Mica was unspecific — other than some measure "to bring spending under control."

"Right now, we have zero," he said. He added that he would "probably not" vote for an increase to the debt ceiling unless it included some cost-cutting measure, despite what economists and Wall Street have said is a potentially "catastrophic" risk to the U.S. economy if the government defaults on its debts.

"People sent us here for two reasons," he said: to cut spending and defund Obamacare.

Though that approach has infuriated many Democrats, none of Central Florida's three House Republicans acknowledges much pressure from constituents to concede.

Aides to all three said phone calls and emails to their offices have split about evenly between callers advocating a "stand your ground" position and others demanding an end to the shutdown.

Posey has been among the most resolute, demanding that any deal to reopen the government include a one-year delay in the Affordable Care Act's requirement that most Americans buy health insurance by Jan. 1. He argues that Obama gave a similar exemption to businesses.

Now with the debt-ceiling fight in the mix, Posey said he wants "another stab at passing a balanced-budget amendment," which would require the federal government to stay out of the red each year.