, Christian Post Reporter By Vincent Funaro Christian Post Reporter

(Photo: Facebook/Clenard Childress) The Rev. Clenard Childress uses controversial sign to protest NAACP's support for abortion that features a Confederate flag and an aborted baby at the organization's annual meeting held in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, in July 2015.

A black New Jersey pastor and pro-life activist protested the NAACP's support for abortion at the organization's convention held in Philadelphia last week, where he posted a sign that included both an aborted baby and a Confederate flag.

Rev. Clenard Childress, the president of the Life Education and Resource Network, the largest African-American pro-life group in the U.S., used this sign that read "Evil done to us" under the Confederate flag, and "Evil done by us," under the aborted baby to communicate his message.

Childress blasted the NAACP for supporting what he believes is "racist genocide." His website, BlackGenocide.org, equates abortion with genocide, features information on Planned Parenthood, and even provides shocking information about Margaret Sanger, the founder of organization.

Free Sign Up Newsletter!

"Blacks make up 35 percent of the abortions in America," reads the Planned Parenthood section on BlackGenocide.org. "Did you know that the founder of Planned Parenthood, Margaret Sanger, was a devout racist who created the Negro Project designed to sterilize unknowing black women and others she deemed as undesirables of society? The founder of Planned Parenthood said, 'Colored people are like human weeds and are to be exterminated.'"

Childress has also spoken out against President Obama for his support of un-regulated abortion and has called the commander-in-chief a "hypocrite" for being an advocate for Planned Parenthood, which receives over $500 million in taxpayer funding every year.

In 2013, Childress penned a blog for Eurweb.com titled "The Epitome of Hypocrisy… Obamacare" where he spoke out against the healthcare policy's funding of abortions.

"The Affordable Health Care Plan is not about health care but control; it is the [worst] thing to happen to America since slavery," wrote Childress in the blog. "The Affordable Health Care Act, by design, will increase the slaughter of the innocent and they will predominantly be African-American … also by design."

Childress also commented about the video released last week that showed a Planned Parenthood executive discussing the harvesting of aborted baby body parts.

"The recent sting involving Deborah Nucatola, Planned Parenthood's senior director of medical research should not surprise anyone," wrote Childress in a blog from July 17. "The good news also here is that this executive is just one of many who are seasoned and trained how to market body parts, thus increasing the profits of Planned Parenthood. This organization is only following its roots which are buried deeply in eugenics and entrenched is callous acts of the worst depravity: practices enacted for the sole purpose of profit."

Childress is currently campaigning to reverse the NAACP's 2004 decision to endorse abortion.

The Christian Post reached out to Childress for comment, but he did not respond by press time.

He is not alone among black leaders calling abortion a genocide of their race. Louisiana state Rep. Katrina Jackson, D-Monroe also believes abortion is plaguing the African-American community. Jackson spoke out against the practice during a House Health and Welfare Committee Meeting at the Louisiana capitol on March 19, 2014.

"The number one genocide in the African-American community, and why we're becoming a minority of minorities, is because most of our babies are dying in the womb from abortions," said Jackson during the committee meeting. which featured pro-choice advocates who said abortion was a benefit to the black community for pregnant women who could not afford to have children.

In an interview with CP, Jackson explained how she responded to some of these comments.

"The comments regarding African-American women were that abortion helped them make a choice when they couldn't take care of their child. And I told them that wasn't a cure. If you want to really cure the situation that's going on socioeconomically with everyone, you do that by supporting measures that give people and hand up, and not a handout," said Jackson to CP.

"I'm very passionate, especially when you're looking at the African-American community, because those in the pro-choice community have been attempting to sell us on abortion being a way out for women who can't afford to have their baby," added Jackson.