A glitch at the Washington Healthplanfinder website affected 13,000 consumers who saw an improper amount of money drawn from their bank accounts.

Customers who were mistakenly triple-charged for insurance they purchased from the Washington Healthplanfinder exchange should be getting the overcharged amount back Friday.

“I’ve been told the funds should be in folks’ accounts by tomorrow (Friday) morning,” said Bethany Frey, spokeswoman for the Washington Health Benefit Exchange, which manages Healthplanfinder.

Exchange officials said the process to repay consumers whose bank accounts were overcharged for the premium payments has been completed.

The problem stemmed from a glitch in the exchange’s payment system Tuesday that resulted in improper deductions from the accounts of 13,000 consumers who had arranged for autopayments. In many cases, payments three times as large as their monthly premiums were drawn from their bank accounts.

Some consumers say this latest glitch — one that reached into their bank accounts and inappropriately removed funds — has shaken their confidence in the health exchange.

“I don’t trust the system, period,” said a Kirkland resident who did not want to be identified. “I feel that I have to hawk-eye every step of this. It’s about faith in a system that is shaken on the most fundamental level.”

A Bellingham business consultant said the problems “absolutely” affect his trust in the exchange. “I personally wish the exchange would go away completely and let me buy health care directly from an insurance carrier under the rules of the Affordable Care Act or something similar,” he said.

Affected customers may have been assessed bank fees if their accounts were overdrawn as a result of the mistake, but exchange officials have indicated those consumers will be reimbursed. The exchange said consumers should check to see if their bank imposed any overdraft fees.

Consumers will receive an email from the exchange confirming the repayment and providing information for consumers to request reimbursement for overdraft fees.