Dallas police officer Jeff Ambrose died Saturday after a battle with brain cancer.

Ambrose, 44, joined the Dallas Police Department five years ago. Before his career in law enforcement, he served six years in the Army and spent about a decade in the computer industry in Silicon Valley.

Ambrose, who was divorced, is survived by two children, said Frederick Frazier, chair of the Assist the Officer Foundation in Dallas.

Frazier, who is also chair of the Dallas Police Association PAC, described Ambrose as a loyal and devoted officer. Even after his cancer diagnosis, Ambrose kept in touch with his colleagues and would not accept pity.

“From the moment I met him, he was a gentle warrior,” Frazier said. “He was so proud to be a Dallas police officer. He was so proud he had served his country. And he never wanted anyone to feel sorry for him.”

Ambrose was diagnosed with brain cancer in 2013 after he felt dizzy and numb at the police department’s rifle range. He was taken by ambulance to a hospital, where he got an MRI. Doctors found two brain tumors on the right side of his brain and diagnosed him with Stage 4 brain cancer.

During Ambrose’s battle with cancer, fellow officers rallied around him. They worked his shifts and helped raise money to pay his medical bills.

Frazier said the cancer treatment, including visits to M.D. Anderson Center Center in Houston, led to many medical bills. Ambrose’s cancer battle and financial challenges inspired the start of a catastrophic leave fund for officers, he said. Ambrose was the first recipient and two other officers have also benefited from it.

Funeral arrangements are pending, but they will likely be held in Oregon, Frazier said. Ambrose is an Oregon native and most of his family lives there.

The Dallas Police Department sent an email to officers to notify them about Ambrose’s death.

Donations to Ambrose’s family can be made through the Assist the Officer Foundation website or by phone at 214-747-6839.

Donations can also be mailed to:

Assist the Officer Fund

Attn: Jeffrey Ambrose

1412 East Griffin Street

Dallas, Texas 75215