They say politicians will say anything to get elected, but sometimes more worrisome (and then again so illustrative) is what they say after their election. For that reflects not only their actual sensibilities untethered by immediate electoral concerns, but also shows their lack of self-awareness.

This is particularly true with the modern day progressive and their search for government levers to pull. For example, a progressive may boast with pride about robbing Peter to pay Paul, not concerned with the truth that Peter’s prosperity actually begets Paul’s in a robust market economy. A private sector solution to a public problem? We can’t have any of that; no time for details.

The House Minority Leader, Nancy Pelosi, is Exhibit A to this phenomenon. With the air of someone happily rushing off the cliff of government expansion, she refuses to be deterred by her contradictions. One remembers her confident statement during the passage of the Affordable Care Act in 2010, declaring that the law must be passed in order for the voters (and even the legislators) to see what’s in it.

Where to begin. This haughtiness evidences a blind belief that government action — any government action, lest the initiative of the individual and private sector beat her to the punch — is a net good for the people, consequences be ignored. This leads to increasing regulation, supervision, and ultimately mission creep of the state’s purview on modern life.

Advertisement

And if the result ends up wrong? No matter, government will ride again to the rescue.

And while she is bustling her way between this and that government program to nurture, Congresswoman Pelosi found time on Tuesday to take in Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu’s speech before a joint session of Congress. The prime minister spoke passionately about the threat of Iran’s nuclear weapons program. Forceful and determined as he was, Mrs. Pelosi was unimpressed. In fact, this leader of progressive wisdom took the time to say, unblushed, that the speech was full of “condescension” and that she agonized in “near tears” at the perceived insulting tone.

Perhaps Mrs. Pelosi’s crocodile tears were from hearing a leader determined to speak unvarnished truth, unsympathetic to diplomatic niceties when war looms. Or she was perhaps insulted by someone who does not deal in vacillations when it comes to matter of such seriousness. For it is evident that Mr. Netanyahu simply doesn’t trust this administration in its negotiations with Iran.

That simple fact — the refusal to blindly follow, to question and think for oneself — is likely what truly offends Mrs. Pelosi. The modern progressives, with sweeping claims that they intend well, must as a condition of their success maintain an illusion so the citizenry believe in their good wishes and nothing more.

During their studies, all fledgling law students learn the phrase “Post hoc, ergo propter hoc” — after this, therefore because of this. It is an old Latin phrase and an example of a logical fallacy. It is taught to correct the notion that because B follows A, then A always causes B. It many times does not.

Mrs. Pelosi is not a lawyer, thankfully. But she still marches on unembarrassed, clinging to the lie that good outcomes always result from liberals’ good intentions.

Alan Loncar is an attorney and owner of Loncar Law PLLC in Shelby Township.