Melody-Catalpa hosts the curious for walkabout

Bees joined a group walk in Boulder today, and, perhaps sensing the visitors' friendly intentions, no one reported being stung.

Bee Safe Boulder, an organization dedicated to curbing the use of certain pesticides, hosted a a walkabout in the Melody-Catalpa neighborhood, in conjunction with Go Boulder.

Melody-Catalpa has won certification as a "bee safe" neighborhood, meaning that at least 75 residents on contiguous properties have agreed to stop using pesticides that harm bees.

Melody-Catalpa has been bee safe since early May, thanks largely to the efforts of David Wheeler, Anne Bliss and Molly Greacen, the founders of Bee Safe Boulder. More recently, the Kendall-Endicott neighborhood in Table Mesa has earned the same designation.

Bee Safe Boulder's goal is to eventually make all of Boulder County bee safe. The organization is fighting against the use of pesticides that contain neonicotinoids, neurotoxic chemicals that many see as linked to the global phenomenon of colony collapse.

Bee Safe Boulder recently received a $5,000 grant from Beyond Pesticides.

Bee Safe Boulder works with the Living Systems Institute in Golden, which is championing the cause of bee safe neighborhoods. David Braden, who works at the Living Systems Institute, came up with the concept of a bee safe neighborhood.

Melody-Catalpa resident Chris Allsopp, a beekeeper, estimated that there seven to nine bee hives in the neighborhood, many of which he has placed in various backyards.

"We had an allergic reaction to pesticides, and we got hives," joked Wheeler, also known as "Bee Safe David." He participated in the walkabout while wearing a bee costume — which he also sported while competing in the Bolder Boulder.

Some neighborhood residents wore tee shirts that said "Bee Safe Neighborhood. No Bees, No Food."

At one stop in the walkabout, participants viewed a bee hive while Wheeler and Allsopp explained bees' part in the ecosystem.

Wheeler said that even though there were a lot of bees buzzing around, nobody was getting stung because the bees were too busy.

But the advocates acknowledged not everyone wants to stop using pesticides.

"Some people are always going to want their pretty lawn," Wheeler said.

Since Melody-Catalpa has become bee safe, residents have noticed a lot more bees in the area.

"We're always trying to get people to stop using pesticides," said Rella Abernathy, Boulder's Integrated Pest Management Coordinator.

Gary Strohm, a local realtor, was impressed with the conscientiousness showed by those in the neighborhood.

"Things happen in Boulder that don't happen anywhere else," Strohm said.

Go Boulder led the walkabout as part of its Boulder Walks program, which, according to Boulder bike and pedestrian transportation planner Marni Ratzel, celebrates the community, social and health benefits of walking.

Participants in the walkabout, primarily residents of the Melody-Catalpa neighborhood, gave Go Boulder feedback on how to better the walking experience in the neighborhood.

"I think everyone on the walk learned something about their neighborhood," Ratzel said. More walkabouts are being planned for other Boulder neighborhoods, he said.