In its heyday, some of the top names in music passed through Caribou Ranch, a recording studio nestled in the foothills of the Rocky Mountains.

From Billy Joel and Michael Jackson to Tom Petty and U2, more than 150 artists recorded music there in the 1970s and ’80s. During that time, the studio released 45 Top 10 albums and 20 No. 1 hits.

For many, Caribou Ranch was an icon in the history of rock ‘n’ roll. And, on Saturday, people jumped at the chance to claim a piece of it.

Hundreds gathered for the Caribou Ranch auction, held at the Denver Design Center, where Leslie Hindman Auctioneers sold nearly 500 items from the ranch and recording studio.

Highlights included an antique mahogany Steinway & Sons grand piano used by Elton John and a 1985 Corvette with custom Caribou license plates.

“What was important for this sale was to paint the picture of Caribou Ranch,” said Annie McLagan, managing director for LHA’s Denver office. “We were expecting 300 to 350 people for this,” she added with a laugh, estimating that roughly 2,000 people participated in the live and online bidding combined.

Long before the auction began, the small conference room designated for bidding was overflowing with Caribou Ranch enthusiasts and music lovers.

To accommodate the crowds, speakers broadcast the action throughout the 8,000-square-foot exhibition area. When they ran out of plastic auction paddles, event organizers began handing out pieces of paper with numbers written in black marker.

Concetta Palmieri and her husband were among those listening to the bidding in the exhibition area, waiting for their lot number to draw closer before braving the auction room.

“It would be nice to have a piece of Colorado history and rock ‘n’ roll history all rolled into one,” said Palmieri, 39, hoping to snag a piece of furniture.

As the first few items sold — including several Caribou Ranch signs that went for about $2,000 apiece — Palmieri and her husband changed their minds. “Maybe we’re not getting anything,” she said, laughing.

Not long after, a Caribou Ranch ashtray and a book of matches sold for $800. A 1925 Wm. Knabe & Co. baby-grand piano brought in $52,500.

Russick Smith, 27, said he drove from Breckenridge to participate in the auction. An audio engineer, he was particularly interested in the equipment from the recording studio.

“Caribou Ranch is one of the strongest connections Colorado has to the recording industry,” Smith said. “I wish there was this much interest in the existing industry. It’s a shame there’s no similar facility in Colorado today.”

Five percent of the proceeds from the auction will be donated to the Colorado Music Hall of Fame, which is inducting Caribou Ranch this year.

“We felt it was time to share with the fans some of the memories and stories that remain from that magical time,” said James Guercio, Caribou’s original owner.

Guercio purchased the land — a 4,000-acre ranch near Nederland — in 1971, converting an old barn into the recording studio and furnishing cabins and a lodge for visiting musicians.

Some of the most distinctive albums of the ’70s and ’80s were recorded there, including three by Elton John and five by Chicago. The studio was a major destination until 1985, when a fire destroyed the control room.

After the fire, Guercio and his family began selling portions of the land to the city and county of Boulder. In 2014, the remaining 1,600 acres sold for $32.5 million to Indian Peaks Holdings LLC.

Anna Gauldin: 303-954-1666, agauldin@denverpost.com