Sioux Falls, SD

As the summer winds down, it's the final day of the 76th Sioux Empire Fair. Although official attendance statistics haven't been released yet, fair organizers say they've seen an increase in numbers from last year.



Mostly sunny and hot conditions have brought thousands of people to the fairgrounds, which has led to several vendors running out of food. Even though this means businesses may have to put up "Sold Out" signs, they're pleased with the shortages.



"It's a wonderful problem to have," Food Vendor Marilyn Konda said.

That's what concession owner Marilyn Konda says about running out of food at the Sioux Empire Fair - twice. Konda says in the first four days of the fair, her stand sold about 600 Spudsters, which are deep fried mashed potatoes. After re-stocking her supply on Thursday, Front Porch Concessions ran out again yesterday.

"This year we've really noticed an increase," Konda said. "Every night has just been phenomenal. Usually by 10:00 you start winding down, but it's been pretty much midnight every night this week."

DaVida Jaqua brought her three grandchildren to the fair and she says she's noticed an increase in attendance this year.

"Hadn't really considered the aspect of running out of food, but yeah, I was surprised to hear that some of the vendors had been running out of food," Jaqua said. "I hope they don't run out of what I want."

Marketing Director Brittany Will says food hasn't been the only thing in short supply at the fair this year.

"One night we actually had to call beer companies and have them bring in some more beer and stock everything up, so it's been great," Will said.

This year, the Sioux Empire Fair featured 55 food vendors, and about 65 commercial vendors in the Expo building.

Will says she hopes high attendance numbers will bring these merchants, and more, to the fair next year.

"If the attendance is low at a place, you're not going to want to go," Will said. "So it'll help a lot, and when they see a high attendance number, which we're hoping, we'll have to wait to get all that back, but then I'm sure it'll bring up the commercial vendors, the food vendors and everything."

A goal that the fair seems to be achieving. Konda says Front Porch Concessions plans on returning to the Sioux Empire Fair next year, with an ample supply of Spudsters.

"We are coming with nothing less than about 25 cases," Konda said.

Official attendance numbers for the fair will be released in the coming weeks.

News

General {{Title}} Remove Change News General Courts Web Only Crime Outdoors Events Center Non-Homepage Boredom Busters Pipeline Positively KELOLAND Technology Hunger Affordable Care Act Shops Flooding Remembering 9/11 Drought JazzFest Spring Storm Honor Flight Spencer Anniversary

DoApp Health News Business News Sports

Agriculture Markets Livestock Crops Politics

HealthBeat Cancer Children's Health Heart Health Wellness & Nutrition General Health Beat Women's Health RX Resources What's Going Around OTC Diabetes Recalls Dental Health Men's Health

Politics South Dakota Legislature Budget Congress Taxes General Local Campaign President US Senate New Laws US House Iowa Ballot Issues Local Races Minnesota Gubernatorial

Education Funding College Elementary High School Pre K School Supplies Middle School

Sports Professional College High School Sports Zone Headlines Summit League Tournament Olympics

Business Industry Your Money Matters Development Gas & Energy Legislation Economy/Stocks Employment General Health Care Technology Education Funding Tourism Banking/Finance Housing Transportation Insurance Meetings & Events Retail & Restaurants All Industries On The Move Shops Agriculture

Featured Stories Eye on KELOLAND Inside KELOLAND

Weather Snow Forecast Records Rain Flooding Drought WX Corner General

World News

Investigates GEAR UP

Sponsored Done

© 2016 KELOLAND TV. All Rights Reserved.