TRENTON — Meridian Health of Monmouth and Ocean Counties today acquired Raritan Bay Medical Center in Middlesex County, creating a hospital network that will reach roughly 1.5 million people, its leaders announced.

The deal means Raritan Bay Medical Center's hospitals in Perth Amboy and Old Bridge would be run by Meridian, extending the Jersey shore chain's reach into Middlesex County. Before that happens, the state Attorney General and the state Department of Health must approve the deal and verify that access to medical services will remain intact and the community will benefit from the merger.

Raritan Bay President and CEO Michael D'Agnes said he is confident the merger will be looked upon favorably because Meridian has a track record of improving the facilities and services when it acquired Bay Shore Medical Center in 2010.

"The Raritan Bay hospitals will retain their identity but be part of something much bigger and stronger," D'Agnes said.

The agreement signed today by the hospitals' board leaders and CEOs comes after a seven-month economic and legal review by both parties, said John K. Lloyd, Meridian's president.

It's been a busy year for Meridian, which Lloyd said is about a month away from finalizing a deal to merge with Hackensack University Health, uniting 11 acute care hospitals that serve seven counties from the New York border to the shore.

Hospitals in New Jersey and across the country have engaged in a merger and acquisition frenzy for several years since the Affordable Care Act, also known as Obamacare, was first proposed. The landmark law is largely funded by federal aid that would have gone to hospitals. The law also de-emphasizes more costly inpatient care and encourages hospitals to invest in outpatient services. Hospital consultants have encouraged CEOs to create bigger health care networks to buffer themselves from the rapidly changing marketplace.

The merger makes sense economically and geographically, Lloyd said. Meridian's "vast array of ambulatory services, with 100 (outpatient) centers," is the dominant health care provider for 1.2 million people in Monmouth and Ocean County.

"With the way things are changing in health care...we may be put at risk for reimbursement," Lloyd said. "We have to look at critical mass."

Meridian's holdings include Jersey Shore University Medical Center, Ocean Medical Center in Brick, Riverview Medical Center in Red Bank, Southern Ocean Medical Center in Manahawkin, and Bayshore Community Hospital in Holmdel.

Raritan Bay employees 2,000 people, including 1,700 full-time employees, D'Agnes said.

Lloyd said it was "a little premature" to talk about whether all of Raritan Bay's employees will be kept. "Once we get closer to final approval, we will take a look at it. We don't think there will be much in the way of reductions. Raritan Bay runs very efficiently."

Susan K. Livio may be reached at slivio@njadvancemedia.com. Follow her on Twitter @SusanKLivio. Find NJ.com Politics on Facebook.