LITTLE ROCK — Gov. Asa Hutchinson used his line-item veto power last week to save his Medicaid expansion plan from being denied funding during the current fiscal session, a move that some say set a dangerous precedent and other say was simply a way to reach a compromise.

Arkansas Works, the governor’s reworking of the Medicaid expansion program known as the private option, was easily approved during a special session earlier this month, but a bill to appropriate funding for Arkansas Works and other Medicaid programs faced a tougher battle in the fiscal session that began April 13. It needed a three-fourths majority in each chamber, or 27 votes in the 35-member Senate and 75 votes in the 100-member House.

Ten Republicans senators successfully blocked the bill the first time it was presented in the Senate, and one of the opponents, Sen. Bart Hester, R-Cave Springs, said he was willing to withhold funding from all Medicaid programs in the state if that was what it took to kill Arkansas Works.

The strategy that emerged to overcome the impasse was to add a provision to the bill that would require Arkansas’ Medicaid expansion program — the state’s alternative to the expansion of Medicaid rolls envisioned in the Affordable Care Act — to end Dec. 31 of this year, but with a veto of the provision promised by Hutchinson.

The theory, which proved correct after some initial resistance from Democrats, was that the strategy would win over some opponents by allowing them to vote, at least technically, to end the program. The bill passed 27-2 in the House and 76-12 in the House. Hester was among the opponents who ultimately voted for the bill.

Hutchinson vetoed the sunset provision Thursday and then signed the bill into law, approving another year of funding for the program that has provided government-subsidized private health insurance to more than 267,000 Arkansans since it began in 2013.

Setting a precedent?

Some legislators warned that a precedent was being established for allowing the governor to make an end-run around the constitutional requirement of a three-fourths majority for most appropriations.

Rep. Nate Bell, I-Mena, said on the House floor Thursday, “I hope that we won’t continue to weaken the legislative branch and to begin to become more and more of a one-branch system of government. That weakens the authority of every one of us, regardless of party.”

Sen. Alan Clark, R-Lonsdale, said in a committee meeting Tuesday, it is “historic that the Arkansas Legislature is giving as much power as they can to the executive branch, and you will regret it.”

“Whether you are a Republican or a Democrat, you will regret it,” he said. “Just as Adam and Eve, or Eve at the tree, their judgment was obscured for a moment; it will be very clear in years to come what you did.”

Clark has said he will seek a veto override this week, but it appears unlikely that a majority would support an override in either chamber.

Others have defended the veto strategy. Rep. Laurie Rushing, R-Hot Springs, who opposes Arkansas Works but voted for the Medicaid funding bill, said on the House floor Thursday that the strategy was “a political game” but told the members, “Most all of us in here are guilty of using some sort of political game.”

House Minority Leader Michael John Gray, D-Augusta, told reporters Thursday, “It’s right to worry a little bit about the precedent. But at the end of the day, it was in the light of day, there was no sinister move here, and I think that one thing to quell the fears of the precedent is that this can only be done if both sides are in agreement on it.

“So I don’t feel like Governor Hutchinson has a new tool to subvert the process. This was just a way to do it openly and honestly with everybody on the same page.”

Looking ahead

Will the strategy become the go-to method for maintaining funding for Medicaid expansion in the future? Hutchinson said Thursday he doesn’t believe it will.

“I don’t think anybody wants to retrace those steps next year,” he said. “And there’s going to be a couple things that happen: One, we’re going to go through local elections, we’re going to recognize what we’ve just been through. We’re also going to have a national election that’s going to tell us somewhat as to the direction nationally of the Affordable Care Act — whether it stays, whether it goes, whether it changes.”

Hutchinson said Arkansas Works is the best thing Arkansas can do in the present circumstances, but the state can adjust if federal policies change because of new political dynamics in Washington.

“I expect this to go much more routinely in the future in terms of next January,” he said.

Some legislators would like to see the veto strategy off the table in the future. Rep. Bob Ballinger, R-Hindsville, told reporters Tuesday the governor’s line-item veto power might not withstand a legal challenge.

“That must happen if we’re going to preserve the constitutional separation of powers that requires a supermajority to pass fiscal legislation,” he said. “It has to happen. To me that’s the only solution, to get the line-item veto abolished, thrown out. The governor should not have the authority to veto lines that completely change the policy of the appropriation.”

— Dale Ellis contributed to this report.