Newport News and several southeastern Virginia counties are part of a "hot spot" for colorectal cancer — the region's colorectal cancer rate is roughly 9 percent above the national rate — according to a new report from the American Cancer Society.

The study pointed to three "hot spots" across the country where a disproportionate number of preventable deaths occur: the Mississippi Delta, Central Appalachia (primarily Kentucky), and 37 counties straddling the Virginia/North Carolina coastal border, including James City, Isle of Wight, Charles City, New Kent, Southampton, Suffolk, Surry and Sussex.

The study likened the patterns in colorectal cancer death rates in these three high-risk areas to those in "economically transitioning countries with limited health resources, such as Romania, Russia and Mexico rather than the U.S."

The Virginia and Mississippi Delta "hot spots," identified in data from 2009 to 2011, tracked higher than the national rate of deaths from colorectal cancer. Both regions used to have better-than-average rates prior to the 1990s; they also mirror one another in recording a much higher incidence and mortality among African-American men than other groups.

"That has been known for years, that African-Americans in the inner city are typically diagnosed later. By the time it's symptomatic, it's usually advanced," said Brian Billings, a colorectal surgeon with Riverside in Newport News. The Mayo Clinic fellowship-trained physician added that improved chemotherapy has increased survival rates significantly even at later stages.

Deaths from colorectal cancer have dropped by half across the U.S. since 1970. Prevention measures including diet, exercise and screening colonoscopies for those age 50 and older have changed the disease's demographic from wealthy northeastern residents to the less educated and poor in rural pockets in the South.

"Unlike any other cancer, except cervical, you can prevent this disease through screenings. We're spreading the word about how important it is to have screenings — if not colonoscopies, then annual fecal occult blood tests which are very inexpensive and save almost as many lives," said Rebecca Siegel of the American Cancer Society, lead author of the study published Wednesday in the journal Cancer Epidemiology, Biomarkers & Prevention.

The study highlighted the effects of limited access to care. None of the hot spots received grant money for the initial Colorectal Cancer Control Program administered through the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Virginia applied unsuccessfully in 2010, but is optimistic that it will receive funds in the five-year cycle starting next month, said Christina Benton, cancer control supervisor for the state Department of Health.

Without a colorectal screening program in place, Virginia was not eligible to apply for funds for direct screenings. Instead it applied for money to work with health systems — including federally qualified health centers for low-income and uninsured patients, such as the Southeastern Virginia Health System, SEVHS — to improve screening rates through reminders, reducing barriers and providing feedback to providers.

In 12 of the states with "hot spots," half have not expanded Medicaid insurance to single adults up to 133 percent of the federal poverty level, as allowed by the Affordable Care Act. At the Newport News Free Clinic, 85 percent of patients live at or under 100 percent of the federal poverty level, or on $11,770 or less for an individual, said its founder, Golden Bethune-Hill. The clinic refers patients out for colonoscopies and to gastrointestinal specialists, as needed, sometimes as far away as Richmond. "We do everything we can," she said.

The same goes for uninsured and underinsured patients at the Lackey Free Clinic in Yorktown. "We do GI referrals to the Project Care network. It's very difficult to get them. It's not a service we have easy access to," said clinical coordinator Jennifer Yates, a registered nurse. This year, Riverside and Sentara surgeons have provided 32 colonoscopies through Project Care, according to spokeswoman Cheryl Quesenberry.

While the Affordable Care Act covers screenings for the insured at no out-of-pocket cost, if polyps are detected and removed during a colonoscopy (thereby significantly reducing the risk of developing cancer), then it's considered "diagnostic," and there's a cost involved, said Siegel, pointing out a loophole in the law.

In recent months, Billings has joined with Bethune-Hill to conduct outreach to the African-American community on the Peninsula by holding monthly clinician/patient forums at Riverside about what he dubs "a largely preventable disease."

"It's to make it more personal and patient-friendly, to connect more," said Billings.

Together with Hampton University and the Newport News chapter of Links, a service organization, they're also pursuing a federal grant to bring education and advocacy to those at higher risk through the churches and community centers. "A lot of people don't know that what you eat is important, tobacco use is important and that if you pick it up early enough, it can be treated," said Bethune-Hill.

For author Siegel, the message is simple. "Targeted screening interventions, targeting black men, spreading the word, using outreach, patient navigators and follow-up, can turn it around," she said, citing Delaware, where the state offered screenings and follow-up to low-income residents and eliminated the racial disparity in incidence and mortality in less than a decade.

Salasky can be reached by phone at 757-247-4784.

(Photo: Golden Bethune-Hill outside the Newport News Community Free Clinic she founded.)