School superintendents in Boulder County aren't happy with the Colorado Department of Education's recent decision to swap the ACT with the SAT for the state's pre-collegiate testing program.

The Department of Education last week announced that a selection committee chose The College Board, makers of the SAT, over the ACT testing company, which has been testing juniors in Colorado since 2001.

High school sophomores, meanwhile, will begin taking the PSAT. Under the testing legislation, sophomores and juniors no longer will take PARCC English and math tests, which debuted last spring.

State officials said the committee praised College Board resources available to students and liked the PSAT in part because it aligns with state academic standards in English and math.

The SAT and PSAT will be given each spring for the next five years.

St. Vrain Valley Superintendent Don Haddad called the decision to switch to the SAT disappointing.

"The ACT has been in place since 2001," he said Monday. "There's a good baseline of data. It's an exam that's highly respected and used by many colleges and universities around here and throughout the country."

All the state's colleges, including the University of Colorado, accept either the ACT or SAT.

Once, some elite schools on the East Coast preferred the SAT, though now that's no longer thought to be the case. Instead, more colleges are starting to move away from requiring an entrance exam at all.

Advertisement

Most Western states that include a college entrance exam in their testing systems use the ACT. Colorado and Illinois were the first two states to make taking the ACT mandatory for high school juniors.

Now, about 15 states require students to take the ACT, including Montana, Wyoming, Nevada and Utah.

Haddad said the switch to the SAT, especially so late in the school year, seems to be part of "a pattern of routine disruption" from the state.

"It's a shoot-from-the-hip approach rather than a well thought out, beneficial change," he said. "Is what we're doing in the best interest of the students and the system? When you ask that question, it's hard to answer yes."

Along with the timing and losing longitudinal performance data, both Haddad and Boulder Valley Superintendent Bruce Messinger said, another concern is how students and parents will react to the change.

After years of being expected to take the ACT, Messinger said, it's possible students will continue to take the ACT privately and opt out of the SAT, reducing participation rates.

Messinger said the ACT was the only test that garnered high participation at the high school level in Boulder Valley last school year, when many high school students refused to take the state's tests. More than 95 percent took the ACT.

"The challenge is our families, our systems, our students have gotten fairly aligned with the ACT," he said. "How and when we make that change matters. We've changed so much and here we go again."

There may be some flexibility with the test this spring, though the state has not provided any specifics.

"We realize this is a big shift for students and that this decision is coming later in the school year than any of us would like," Interim Education Commissioner Elliott Asp said in a statement. "We are committed to exploring options for flexibility that make sense for this year's juniors who need to use this spring's exam for their college applications."

The Denver Post contributed to this report.

Amy Bounds: 303-473-1341, boundsa@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/boundsa