Johnnie: Many states have a law that says "wipers on, headlights on." Do you know if this has ever been discussed or introduced in our state Legislature?

Please do not say this should be drivers common sense. Red light runners, no turn signals, people tailgating because they are late (leave earlier) and hit and runs should tell us something about drivers' common sense.

Going up to Lyons early on rainy, foggy mornings I see many people with no headlights and even passing on the double yellow. I really think this should be a safety related issue. I realize our Legislature is mostly dealing with marijuana issues anymore, but saving lives should move to the top of the agenda. — Don From Firestone

Drivers creep along eastbound U.S. 36 near the Church Ranch interchange as heavy rain caused traffic to come to a near standstill due to poor visibility and deep puddles in the road in July 2004. (Times-Call file)

Don from Firestone: I can't tell you if "wipers on, headlights on" has ever been discussed or introduced in the Colorado Legislature, but I can tell you that the law requires the use of headlights and the use of wipers when conditions call for it.

The following are excerpts from the Model Traffic Code.

"The windshield on every motor vehicle shall be equipped with a device for cleaning rain, snow, or other moisture from the windshield, which device shall be so constructed as to be controlled or operated by the driver of the vehicle.

"No vehicle shall be operated upon any highway unless the driver's vision through any required glass equipment is normal and unobstructed."

Also:

"Every vehicle upon a highway within this state, between sunset and sunrise and at any other time when, due to insufficient light or unfavorable atmospheric conditions, persons and vehicles on the highway are not clearly discernible at a distance of one thousand feet ahead, shall display lighted lamps and illuminating devices as required by this Code for different classes of vehicles, subject to exceptions with respect to parked vehicles."

Yes, Don, running red lights, not using turn signals, tailgating, passing on double yellow: All are illegal and, I have to say, run counter to sensible driving — as does driving in a downpour without your headlights on.

The only advice I would have for drivers out there who don't think they need to use their headlights in the rain — or fog, or at dawn or dusk — is that headlights do more than allow you to see where you're going; they allow others to see you.

Send questions to johnnie@times-call.com.