WASHINGTON (CBSDC) — The new year has brought in a new Congress as Republicans officially took control of both chambers for the first time since President Barack Obama has been in the White House.

Gridlock was a way of life the previous two years while Democrats controlled the Senate and Republicans had the house. Chris Akins, political strategist and founder of Akins Strategy, doesn’t think that will change despite Republicans controlling Congress.

“My bold prediction: there will be no major developments this year. Gridlock will keep anything major from happening, including immigration reform,” Akins told CBSDC. “Major changes will happen from challenges in the courts and citizen initiatives, including full legalization of gay marriage across the country and further marijuana legalization. Police and corrections reform will happen at the state level.”

Akins believes one big issue to look out for this year is the latest Supreme Court case involving subsidies related to the Affordable Care Act.

“The real wild card that will be a game-changer is the pending Supreme Court ruling on Obamacare subsidies which could effectively kill the program. It’ll come out in a 4-5 split regardless of the outcome,” Akins said.

Larry Sabato, director for the Center of Politics at the University of Virginia, believes that Obama and Republicans will be able to work together on legislation this year.

“Just because the president and Congress will clash on big-ticket items such as Obamacare and immigration doesn’t mean they can’t pass bipartisan legislation on trade, cybersecurity, and plenty of other matters,” Sabato told CBSDC.

States will see much less gridlock than the nation’s capital, however.

“Big things are much more likely to happen in the states than in Washington. Twenty-three states have all-GOP government, and seven states have all-Democratic government. There’s far less chance of gridlock in state capitals than in the nation’s capital,” Sabato told CBSDC.

The new year also brings us closer to 2016 and who will replace Obama in the White House. Several Republicans are rumored to be running – former Florida Gov. Jeb Bush, New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie, Sens. Rand Paul, Ted Cruz and Marco Rubio, among others. Democrats, on the other hand, are waiting to see what former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton does as many believe she will make a run for the White House again.

Sabato believes three big names, though, will not be stepping into the 2016 presidential ring.

“We’ll be inundated with candidacy announcements in 2015, but three oft-mentioned politicians won’t run for president: Mitt Romney, Paul Ryan, and Joe Biden,” Sabato told CBSDC.

Sabato stated that dark horse candidates will emerge when the primaries begin next year.

“Dark horses are more likely to emerge when the actual voting begins in February 2016. But polls are a roller coaster so inevitably, especially on the GOP side, somebody or somebodies will move to the fore to challenge the frontrunners.”

With Obama coming into his lame-duck years, CBS News political director John Dickerson told “CBS This Morning” that he will have to learn how to be a lame-duck president.

“Barack Obama, his aides will tell you, the way he cements his legacy is if a Democrat gets elected. If Hillary Clinton runs, she is the odds-on favorite, which means he will have to get up at some point and put on the lame-duck suit because he has to get out of her way,” Dickerson explained. “And he will have to do that of his own volition because he thinks that his legacy is cemented by her election. That’s a tricky thing for a president to have to do when you’re instinct is to struggle against it, but if he’s out there making news, at some point the news he makes detracts from her candidacy.”

Clinton has previously said she will announce this year whether she will run for president in 2016.