By Rob Nikolewski │ New Mexico Watchdog

SANTA FE, N.M. – Individual market premiums in New Mexico will increase 142 percent under the Affordable Care Act, a study by the Manhattan Institute for Policy Research says.

Only Nevada will see a higher increase.

Another study, by the Rand Corp released in late August, looked at different variables and concluded overall premiums for New Mexico would decrease over time.

The Manhattan Institute on Monday released its findings of 49 states and predicted that people looking for individual health care policies under Obamacare will see their premiums rise by 100 percent or more in Nevada (179 percent), Arkansas (138 percent), North Carolina (136 percent), Vermont (117 percent) and New Mexico.

“As we have long-expected, the steepest hikes will be imposed on the healthy, the young and the male,” said Avik Roy, a senior fellow at the fiscally conservative think tank and a contributor at Forbes.com, who co-produced the study. “And Obamacare’s taxpayer-funded subsidies will primarily benefit those nearing retirement — people who, unlike the young, have had their whole lives to save for their health-care needs.”

Conversely, the study predicted eight states will see premiums decrease under ACA — New York (40 percent), Colorado (22 percent), Ohio (21 percent), Massachusetts (20 percent), New Jersey (19 percent), New Hampshire (18 percent), Rhode Island (10 percent) and Indiana (3 percent).

Overall, the institute’s Obamacare Rate Map finds the average state will face underlying premium increases of 41 percent:

The Manhattan Institute looked at the five least-expensive plans in every county in a given state, according numbers available before the ACA became law. It then looked at the five least-expensive plans after the ACA was enacted. The study’s authors say they adjusted to account for people with pre-existing conditions and other health problems, and then made their comparisons.

But critics say those numbers are not comparable because the inexpensive pre-Obamacare plans didn’t have to meet the more robust standards that even the cheapest health care plans carry according to the ACA.

An author of the Manhattan Institute study defended the numbers.

“Let’s say tomorrow the government were to say you can only buy cars with a hybrid engine,” Yevgeniy Feyman told New Mexico Watchdog in a telephone interview from New York. “Hybrids are much more expensive than traditional vehicles and the cost of cars across the board would increase dramatically … Now if Congress said, ‘Well, you can’t call that an increase because you’re getting all these better benefits — the air is cleaner, it’s safer, etc.’ I’d say, ‘Yeah, but I still have to pay for it’ … You’re still making the insurance market more expensive.”

The Rand Corp. study showed premiums in New Mexico dropping, although one of its co-authors emphasized researchers looked at different statistics than the Manhattan Institute study.

“We weren’t looking at the changes from 2013 to 2014,” Christine Eibner said in a phone interview from Virginia. Instead, the Rand study tried to simulate what premiums would be like in 2016 with and without the Affordable Care Act, which requires more robust coverage than some bare-bones plans.

“You’re spending more but you’re also getting more,” Eibner said. “We wanted to control for that.”

Using that methodology, Rand predicted premiums in places such as New Mexico could fall as the ACA limits the revenue that insurance companies can keep and younger, healthier people sign up.

But Eibner did not criticize the Manhattan Institute study.

“I looked at it,” she said. “It looks fine. I don’t see any flaws. You could quibble about using the five lowest priced plans … For some people who want those (bare-bones) plans and are being forced to buy something more generous, that is an increase for them. But I think our study is looking at a different issue.”

In New Mexico, those seeking individual health care policies are directed to the troubled healthcare.gov website to enroll for coverage. Small business owners and their employees can bypass the federal site and go to the statewide exchange, run by the New Mexico Health Insurance Exchange at bewellnm.com.

Click here for the Manhattan Institute study and here for the Rand Corp. study.

The Manhattan Institute was unable to get data from Hawaii. Feyman said researchers will update the study when they get those numbers.

Contact Rob Nikolewski at rnikolewski@watchdog.org and follow him on Twitter @robnikolewski