Erwin Chemerinsky

Since its establishment in 1789, the Supreme Court has impacted the course of American history, deciding the legality of laws from the Missouri Compromise to the Affordable Care Act. However, throughout its roughly 225-year history, the Supreme Court has largely failed to uphold the Constitution and protect minorities from the injustices of majoritarian politics, according to Erwin Chemerinsky, professor and dean at the University of California-Irvine School of Law.

In his new book, " The Case Against the Supreme Court," Chemerinsky chronicles what he sees as the court's failures and suggests improvements to its structure to reverse the pattern of unjust decisions that he believes have already marred its legacy. Chemerinsky recently spoke with U.S. News to share lessons of the high court's past and to propose solutions for its future. Excerpts:

What inspired you to write this book?

I've been teaching, writing and litigating about constitutional law for 35 years now, and I realized that I had been making excuses for the Supreme Court. There are so many decisions that are deeply disturbing. I tried to present them to my students as if they were anomalies, and I came to realize that the pattern was much more concerning than I had realized.

What is the purpose of the Supreme Court?

The Supreme Court exists to enforce the Constitution. I think it's particularly important that the court enforce the Constitution against the majoritarian pressures of society, so I think it plays a special role in protecting minorities. [But] I think the court has largely failed throughout American history to do nearly enough to protect racial minorities.

[MORE: Cartoons about Congress]

Are there any examples of particularly effective courts or justices?

I think that the Warren Court in many ways lived up to what the Constitution should expect of the federal judiciary. I think its decisions with regard to voting equality have been tremendously important. I think that the Warren Court was very important in expanding the rights of criminal defendants, applying the Bill of Rights to the states.

What are some of the court's recent failures?

I would point in the race area to the Supreme Court's decision in June 2013 in Shelby County v. Holder, where the court struck down a key provision of the Voting Rights Act of 1965. This was the first time since the 19th century that the Supreme Court has declared unconstitutional a federal civil rights law. I would point to Holder v. Humanitarian Law Project from 2010, where the Supreme Court said that individuals could be criminally prosecuted for giving truthful [legal advice] to foreign groups that are designated as foreign terrorist organizations. I would point to Citizens United v. Federal Election Commission, which I think is going to have a devastating effect on our political system.

[SEE: Cartoons on President Obama]

Is the Supreme Court still necessary?

It is important for us to have an institution like the Supreme Court that's largely insulated from majoritarian politics to enforce the Constitution. If the limits of the Constitution are to have meaning, they must be enforced.

How can the Supreme Court be improved?

It begins with making clear that its preeminent function is to enforce the Constitution, to protect minorities, to make sure that, in times of crisis, we don't abandon our constitutional values. I recommend merit selection of Supreme Court justices, changes in the confirmation process and term limits for justices. I argue for changing the way in which the Supreme Court communicates with the American people, including by having cameras in the court, and that rules of ethics that apply to other federal judges should apply to the Supreme Court as well.

[SEE: Cartoons on the Budget and Deficit]

What do you see ahead for the court?

I think in the coming year, the Supreme Court is likely to deal with issues of abortion, affirmative action, the Affordable Care Act and marriage equality

What could today's justices take away from your book?

If they were to read my book, I hope they would come away with a sense of being humbled by how often the Supreme Court has failed in American history. Many of the examples I talk about, both liberals and conservatives would agree, in hindsight were failures.

[GALLERY: Cartoons on Energy Policy]

What do you hope other readers learn from your book?