A ground-breaking ceremony at the future home of the the Watchung Hills Wrestling Assocation will take place tonight at 6 p.m. at 100 Mountain Ave., on the corner of Mountain and Stirling Road – near Watchung Hills Regional High School.

The sign marking the new home facility site for the Watchung Hills Wrestling Association in Warren. (Photo: PHOTO COURTESY MARC HAYWARD ) Story Highlights 110 wrestlers from Green Brook, Long Hill, Watchung & Warren between five and 14 compete in 3 leagues

The building will cose between $350,000 to $375,000 to complete

The building will enable the Watchung Hills Wrestling Association to host meets

Watchung Hills Wrestling Association serves youngsters in Green Brook, Long Hill, Watchung Borough and Warren Township. Starting in the fall of 2015, they will be able to train and compete in their own building.

Young wrestlers from Green Brook, Long Hill, Watchung and Warren will soon have a year-round home for training and competition.

A ground breaking ceremony will be conducted at 6 p.m.tonight for the Watchung Hills Wrestling Association wrestling facility at 100 Mountain Ave., at Mountain and Stirling Road in Warren — near Watchung Hills Regional High School, where many of those youngsters hope to have a scholastic wrestling career.

The building is expected to be completed by the fall of 2015 and will include two bathrooms, a changing and storage area and gym space to hold two 40-by-40-foot wrestling mats, said Marc Hayward, who had been the organization’s president the past five years before becoming recording secretary. Wrestlers from kindergarten through eighth grade will be the beneficiaries of the new space, Hayward said.

Hayward said that the organization has already raised 60 percent of between the $350,000 to $375,000 that he estimates it will cost to complete the 110-by-60 square foot steel pole barn building. Because the building will be large enough room for spectators, the organization will be able to host dual, triangular and quad meets, he said.

“This will get us out of using the middle school (Warren Middle School) for home matches or having to pay the high school or having to wait after the high school practices to practice at night,” Hayward said.

Watchung Hills Wrestling Association athletes were very successful last season, competing in the Raritan Valley, Central Jersey Youth and New Jersey Grade School leagues.

“This is very, very rare (for middle school programs) to have their own building,” said Hayward, adding that 110 wrestlers were part of the program last winter. “The success that South Plainfield (high school) has had …this will give us more access for practice than the limited schedule we faced.”

The Warren Board of Education was given the property many years ago by Warren Township. The wrestling organization asked the Board of Education about a space where it could construct its building. The board sliced a small lot on the corner of Mountain Avenue and Stirling Road, then gave the property back to the township, so a leasing agreement between the wrestling group and Township could be completed, Hayward said. The Watchung Hills Wrestling Assocation met all of the engineering, site surveying and legal fee requirements in order to allow the property to be sub-divided at no cost to the taxpayers.

“We would not have been successful if we didn't have the strong commitment to youth sport and to the community from Warren Township and the Board of Education,” Hayward added.

Staff Writer Harry Frezza: hfrezza@mycentraljersey.com

Details

To learn more about the Watchung Hills Wrestling Association program, visit www.leaguelineup.com/whwa

Read or Share this story: http://mycj.co/1rLBFh4