General Electric Co.'s one-time chief labor negotiator sued his former employer over its decision to cancel supplemental health insurance benefits for tens of thousands of retirees.

In this Thursday, Jan. 16, 2014, photo, a General Electric logo is displayed on a kitchen appliances in a H.H. Gregg store in Cranberry Township, Pa.

Dennis Rocheleau, a 36-year GE employee who retired in 2004, filed the lawsuit today in Milwaukee federal court in an attempt to maintain coverage for former salaried workers who are set to lose access to company-sponsored Medicare benefit plans on Jan. 1. The move boosts the stakes in his battle with GE after Rocheleau lobbied top executives publicly and privately for more than a year.

"I see this as a gross departure from their traditional conduct," Rocheleau, 72, said in an interview. "What GE is doing is unjustified by the facts of their health-care costs and it is unjustified against the standards of what should be their proper behavior."

GE joined a growing list of large companies ending employer-sponsored health-care benefits for former workers in favor of private-market insurance as the Affordable Care Act accelerates a trend of shrinking retiree coverage. AT&T Inc. has said it would create a private exchange, following similar moves from companies such as International Business Machines Corp.

In an employer survey this year, about one-third of respondents said their Medicare-eligible retirees receive coverage through a private exchange and another 39 percent are considering moving to that model in the next two years, according to Towers Watson & Co., a New York-based benefits consultant that has advised GE.

GE sent notices last month to former salaried employees informing them that certain company-sponsored benefits, which supplement Medicare coverage and help pay other health-care costs, would end by the beginning of 2015. The company said in 2012 it would cancel eligibility for employees under 65.

Company Trends

In a Sept. 8 letter from Susan Peters, GE's senior vice president of human resources, the company said it would provide access to OneExchange, a private insurance marketplace owned by Towers Watson. GE will give participants a $1,000 reimbursement account and a "pharmacy assistance fund," the company said.

"The change in our program is consistent with trends among large companies," Seth Martin, a GE spokesman, said in an e- mailed statement. "It allows GE to offer greater choice in coverage while striking a balance among our obligations to employees, retirees and shareowners."

About 65,000 people could be affected under last month's change, Martin said, while declining to comment on the lawsuit.

Immelt Confrontation

The filing on behalf of Rocheleau and former GE employee Evelyn Kauffman claims the company violated federal retirement laws by ending the program without offering any explanation, and breached its fiduciary duty by terminating the benefits shortly after saying in a handbook that GE "expects and intends" to continue the plans indefinitely.

The plaintiffs acknowledge that GE also stated it "reserves the right to terminate, amend or replace the program" at any time and for any reason.

Rocheleau's clash with GE comes after a career at the Fairfield, Connecticut-based company that included more than a decade as the lead negotiator taking on unions. Rocheleau, a Harvard Law School alumnus, has sent letters to the board and confronted GE Chief Executive Officer Jeffrey Immelt at the annual meeting last year, saying the company "defaulted on its obligations."

Rocheleau said he expects his own costs to rise about $3,000 a year.