UPDATE: What started as an armed standoff in downtown Roseville Friday night became an hours-long negotiation, as police continued until after 4 a.m. Saturday talking a man down from the roof of a commercial building he had been throwing objects off of. The action took place on Vernon Street.

The man, later identified as 35-year-old Kenneth Charles Steele of Sacramento County, was booked into Placer County jail on charges of felony vandalism and resisting and delaying officers.

"Officers talked to him for hours, nothing seemed to work, so eventually they told him he didn't come down they were gonna' get him wet," said Dee Dee Gunther, public information officer for Roseville Police Department. "A fire engine responded to the scene at about 3 a.m. and sprayed water in an arch over him, pretty much soaking him ... They stopped, asked him if he'd like to come down... until about 4:30 a.m., when he walked down the fire ladder."

Steel had dismantled the building's air conditioning unit and hurled its pieces at officers during the six-hour ordeal.

Officer Jennifer Bland of Roseville Police Department said the incident started before 10 p.m. Friday when police received a 911 call from the business owners of Bertini’s German Motors of Roseville, reporting that someone had started spraying a hose off the roof onto the road and sidewalk below. She said he appeared to be under the influence of something, though she wouldn’t guess what.

“When we arrived, there was somebody actually using a hose, squirting water off the roof and throwing various parts off at the other officers that were coming on scene,” Bland said.

An officer from the assisting Citrus Heights Police Department said police had their guns drawn at first because the suspect was armed with a knife and claimed to have other weapons. He appeared to have climbed a fire escape ladder on the north side of the building

Bland said he was “very agitated” when officers attempted to contact him, brandishing the knife “several times while throwing different car parts, air conditioner parts, his clothes” at them, so they set up a perimeter. Around 11:30 p.m. she said the suspect had started to calm down, and officers had started to communicate with him. He wanted them to turn their lights off, but they declined for safety reasons.

Bland said several officers believed they recognized the suspect from past drug-related offenses and recognized tattoos of people’s names on his body, though she wouldn’t identify him or them. She also said he was not responding to his name, unless officers misidentified him.

The Press Tribune does not yet have details on previous contacts with Steel by either police department at the scene.

As of 12:30 a.m., no one had been injured, and the suspect told police he is 35 years old.

A Citrus Heights police dog at the scene hadn’t gotten close enough to smell anything, but an officer at the scene said the suspect was using a needle.

The Press Tribune will have further details as they become available.