“Safe, legal and rare.”

Such was the early rally cry of the pro-choice movement, but it is a mantra that is no longer emblematic of the progressive crusade, according to a conservative female lawmaker.

Rep. Diane Black (R-Tenn.) has consistently been a staunch opponent of abortion and its leading provider — Planned Parenthood. And when Planned Parenthood published a controversial tweet over the weekend, Black couldn’t sit back and let it go unnoticed.

“Imagine ‘life in a magical land where abortions and birth control are free and plentiful’ This place exists,” Planned Parenthood tweeted Sunday afternoon, including a link to a Fusion editorial that slammed the U.S. for not offering free and more accessible abortion services.

Imagine "life in a magical land where abortions and birth control are free and plentiful" This place exists. https://t.co/zdEYnLF0oT — Planned Parenthood (@PPact) December 13, 2015

In an interview with TheBlaze, Black slammed Planned Parenthood for the “unconscionable statement — a magical land where we just kill babies” and contended that the old pro-abortion mantra is not indicative of the movement anymore.

“‘Rare’ is the point I want to get back to. That’s not really what this is about. This is about abortion on demand,” she said. “Safe, legal and rare. The third word there is obviously not what they stand for.”

“‘Life in a magical land where abortion is rare and birth control is free and plentiful.’ If that’s really their mission, that’s what should have been in there,” Black, a former nurse, continued. “That’s what their message should be; we left a word out of here.

“With a single tweet, Planned Parenthood accidentally told us the truth. They effectively admitted that the abortion lobby’s mantra of ‘safe, legal and rare’ abortion is a lie and that the organization’s real mission is to encourage more elective abortions funded off the backs of taxpayers,” Black said.

The vivacious lawmaker also criticized Planned Parenthood President Cecile Richards who has largely argued that abortions are among the least of her organization’s services. Appearing before the House Oversight and Government Reform Committee in the wake of the contentious undercover videos released over the summer, Richards said that Planned Parenthood was all about “essential services” for women, such as breast exams, birth control and counseling for those with unplanned pregnancies.

“Is their message really about what they try to convince it is?” Black said. “So what are they? Are they a clinic, agency that really wants to provide preventative women’s services? To which we would all say, ‘Absolutely, we want to be able to fund that.’”

“When you look at Planned Parenthood and what they have said and what they do — I think there is real confusion in their message,” she continued.

And Black isn’t alone in questioning the motives of Planned Parenthood — specifically after the controversial tweet.

Republican presidential candidate Carly Fiorina told TheBlaze that she plans to end taxpayer funding of Planned Parenthood if elected — a sentiment her campaign has oft repeated.

“I will support those pregnancy centers and women’s health clinics around the country that are actually serving their communities,” Fiorina told TheBlaze.

“Planned Parenthood has showed their hand — they aren’t pro-choice but rather pro-abortion, and want to live in a world where life is so devalued that women don’t think twice about having an abortion,” Kristan Hawkins, president of Students for Life of America, told TheBlaze. “We would rather live in a world where abortion is unthinkable and women facing unplanned pregnancies have resources to help them in their times of need and not resort to walking through the doors of Planned Parenthood, where a dollar sign will be placed on them and their preborn baby.”

Earlier this month, the Senate passed a bill to reallocate taxpayer money from Planned Parenthood with a vote of 52-47. Only two Republicans did not vote for the measure, which also repeals the Affordable Care Act — commonly referred to as Obamacare. President Barack Obama, who championed the controversial health care law, has threatened to veto the measure.

Black asked if those who voted against the reallocating of funds bill would align their vote with Planned Parenthood’s tweet.

“The contrast between the pro-abortion and pro-life point of view has never been more clear. While Planned Parenthood invites its supporters to imagine a future of ‘free and plentiful’ abortion — because apparently the loss of more than 327,000 unborn babies a year just isn’t enough — we in the pro-life movement invite Americans to believe in a country where every life is cherished and where every child is given a chance to see the light of day,” she said.

“We must not stand for this barbarity,” Black said.

Planned Parenthood did not respond to a request for comment from TheBlaze. According to reproductive health nonprofit’s website, abortions make up three percent of Planned Parenthood’s health services.