This weeks Crowdfunding Mailbox is coming to you from Paris after attending the very successful European crowdfunding convention. My only regret is I am unable to spend a few more days to spend some more time speaking with some the innovative entrepreneurs who are driving the disruption of finance across Europe. La prochaine fois peut-etre.

I know I suffer from seasonal dysfunctional disorder. Or at least that is what I blame my ill-temper on during the long winter months. Living in the North has it benefits, but enduring months of drear and minimal sunlight takes its toll on my well-being (and those around me as well). Minus a quick trip to the south, Sunn is the next best thing and this is a device I could use about now. I would imagine the team created this device out of necessity because they are located in Ithaca, New York so I guarantee – they understand.

Sunn, crowdfunding on Kickstarter, is addressing the lack of natural sunlight by developing a smart LED light that mimics the natural rhythm of the sun while bathing you in a natural bright light. The smart part means the light adjusts its luminosity to match the natural cycle of the earth and your location (minus the clouds). I know of several countries that should require this light in every building and house. Hundreds of sun-deprived individuals have already backed this crowdfunding campaign having topped the $50,000 goal so it is a go.

The cool looking Tzoa is a wearable device that tracks air pollution and UV exposure wherever you are. Hook Tzoa to your shirt and you will start to appreciate the difference between clean air and bad. This wearable device sports an “optical air quality” sensor that monitors air “particulate matter”, including pollen. Do you want to know where the air is cleaner or places you should avoid? This is for you. Tzoa also incorporates a UV sensor to let you know when you have been enjoying too much of the sun. All the data, including humidity and temperature, connects to a slick iOS or Android app where you can monitor it all and maps it out in a crowdsourced map. The only down side to Tzoa is this crowdfunding campaign is falling short of its $110,000 goal with only 4 days to spare. Check it out now on Kickstarter.

Nanoplug is described as the worlds first invisible hearing aid. That may be a bit of hyperbole but it is pretty close. The Nanoplug is really, really tiny. Coming from engineering and design masters in Munich, Germany, they have packed some really cool tech into hardware smaller than a coffee bean. My only fear is it is so small if you drop one you would have a heck of a time finding it ever again. Now I fortunately do not need one of these things quite yet – but then you never know someday I might. If that was the case I would quickly sign up for a Nanoplug as opposed the bulky protruding pieces of plastic that are prevalent today. Crowdfunding now on Indiegogo and well past its goal.

__________

The Sunn Light | Bring the Sun Indoors – Kickstarter The Sunn Light promotes healthy living and creates vibrant spaces by continuously changing color and brightness in rhythm with the sun. The Sunn Light is a smart LED light fixture that continuously changes color and brightness in rhythm with the sun. Sunn automatically mimics what’s going on outside – down to the minute – to help your body tune in to rhythms found in nature. Sunn fills an entire room with high-quality, diffuse light and transforms it into a vibrant and healthy space.

TZOA Enviro-Tracker: Connect With Your Environment – Kickstarter Meet TZOA—The first wearable enviro-tracker that measures air quality and UV using the latest in sensor technology. Simply put, we connect you with your environment. By using TZOA you will be creating a crowdsourced map of environmental data in real-time. How is it possible that we have become so disconnected from the air we breathe? Clean air is even more essential to us than food or water, but we do far less to appreciate it, and don’t track how it affects our health. Our cities and homes are a patchwork of clean and dirty air that we can’t see and haven’t had the ability to discover. With something as vital as air, we shouldn’t be in the dark any longer. Right now, most cities are lucky to have a handful of expensive roof-top environmental monitors, recording data infrequently. The amount of information we are gathering is extremely limited; there needs to be hundreds of street-level monitors regularly monitoring to really know what is going on, so that we can identify how to improve and make a difference.

NANOPLUG: The World’s First Invisible Hearing Aid – Indiegogo 100% invisible, instant-fit, user programmable & affordable hearing aid. Better hearing can be cool. Nanoplug is a high-tech product adjustable in the privacy of your own home. Suitable for use with mobile phones, as well. Most importantly, affordable. A huge leap forward in design, eliminating embarrassment and social stigma.