Topics: Donald Trump, Election 2016, Hillary Clinton, women, Elections News, Politics News

Donald Trump claims that he “loves” women, “cherishes” women, and that as president he will be great for women.

But this obligatory campaign rhetoric does not seem to match his actual beliefs.

Trump’s genuine views about women are not difficult to discern. He reveals them in all sorts of ways as he rattles on and on. He can’t help it. His true beliefs seep out of him and become obvious.

This was on full display in his latest victory speech after he swept all five primaries on Tuesday.

Trump declared that Hillary Clinton does not possess the “strength” or the “stamina” to be a good president. And he repeated these two words, “strength” and “stamina.”

On what basis does Hillary lack strength or stamina? Well, of course, Trump offered no basis whatsoever. And this is because there is no basis. The truth is that Hillary has been a tireless public servant for many years and has demonstrated her extraordinary endurance, far more than has Trump.

In only her first three years as secretary of state, Hillary broke the record for the greatest amount of travel. She was on the road for 351 days, covered 850,000 miles, and visited at least 102 countries. On a single trip alone, Hillary completed an epic 13-day diplomatic journey of 27,000 miles, which exceeded the circumference of the earth. And at the end, she joked that she was ready for more.

She has been a veritable whirlwind in her career. She endured a prior full presidential campaign in 2008, she served as a U.S. senator from New York, and, of course, she relished all of her initiatives as first lady for eight years, including leading an enormous undertaking to reform the health care system, which blazed the trail for the eventual passage of Obamacare.

Just thinking about Hillary’s accomplishments alone is exhausting.

And yet Trump accuses her of lacking “strength” and “stamina.” In the absence of any basis in fact, the answer seems apparent. It must be because she is a woman. These are code words revealing Trump’s inner beliefs that women are not as strong and sturdy as men. So a woman is not equal to the task of being president.

Hillary “will not be good for the military,” Trump declared. “She will not be good for protecting our country.”