Former Secretary of State Madeleine Albright on Saturday said there was a "special place in hell" for women who backed Sen. Bernie Sanders over Hillary Clinton in Tuesday's primary. (snip)

Something about becoming secretary of state turns Democrats into wannabe spiritual authorities. Following fresh on the heels of John Kerry instructing Muslims on their faith, Madeleine Albright has told women that keys to the heavenly kingdom do not lie with a virtuous life or committed faith, but rather with voting for Hillary Clinton. If they feel the Bern, they’ll eventually feel the burn, in other words. Al Weaver in the Examiner :

The other thing Albright and Kerry have in common is relaxing sanctions and thereby handing over nuclear weapons to rogue states – North Korea and Iran—in exchange for promises that were immediately violated. Maybe the hell Albright has in mind is the nuclear Armageddon the mullahs in Tehran want to bring about ion earth to usherin the Twelfth Mahdi.

"A lot of the younger women don't think — that think it's been done. It's not done. And you have to help. Hillary Clinton will always be there for you," Albright said. "And just remember — there's a special place in hell for women who don't help each other."

"I see a lot of young women in this audience. And you that are here cheering understand this: There is some few I heard somewhere out there that don't understand the importance of why young women have to support Hillary Clinton," Albright told attendees. "The story is not over. They are going to want to push us back. Appointments to the Supreme Court make all the difference."

Something about becoming secretary of state turns Democrats into wannabe spiritual authorities. Following fresh on the heels of John Kerry instructing Muslims on their faith, Madeleine Albright has told women that keys to the heavenly kingdom do not lie with a virtuous life or committed faith, but rather with voting for Hillary Clinton. If they feel the Bern, they’ll eventually feel the burn, in other words. Al Weaver in the Examiner:

Former Secretary of State Madeleine Albright on Saturday said there was a "special place in hell" for women who backed Sen. Bernie Sanders over Hillary Clinton in Tuesday's primary. (snip) "I see a lot of young women in this audience. And you that are here cheering understand this: There is some few I heard somewhere out there that don't understand the importance of why young women have to support Hillary Clinton," Albright told attendees. "The story is not over. They are going to want to push us back. Appointments to the Supreme Court make all the difference." "A lot of the younger women don't think — that think it's been done. It's not done. And you have to help. Hillary Clinton will always be there for you," Albright said. "And just remember — there's a special place in hell for women who don't help each other."

The other thing Albright and Kerry have in common is relaxing sanctions and thereby handing over nuclear weapons to rogue states – North Korea and Iran—in exchange for promises that were immediately violated. Maybe the hell Albright has in mind is the nuclear Armageddon the mullahs in Tehran want to bring about ion earth to usherin the Twelfth Mahdi.

Hat tip: Mark J. Fitzgibbons