By Jerry Wisnieski, Nevada

1. I’m voting for a Republican because I understand that a labor participation rate of 62.6 percent with 27.7 million employed part-time and 16.4 unemployed or underemployed in a labor force of 157.8 million does not indicate a robust economy.

2. I’m voting for a Republican because I understand the importance of of legal immigration with the expectation assimilation. There are immigration laws on the books that are not being enforced that could eliminate much of the immigration crisis.

3. I’m voting for a Republican because I understand that fracking has given America the opportunity to be energy independent and not have to buy oil from people who want to destroy us. I understand that transporting oil using pipelines is much safer and less polluting than using trucks and railroad cars.

4. I’m voting for a Republican because Republicans never called Democrats the enemy, or said that Democrats are unpatriotic, or said that Democrats wanted to push granny off a cliff, etc. Why would anyone vote for a party whose members talk like this?

5. I’m voting for a Republican because I understand the difference between having health insurance and having health care. I understand that the Affordable Care Act was partisan bill that passed, according to Jonathan Gruber one of the major architects of the bill, due of the “stupidity” of the American voters and a lack of “transparency.” I understand that Obamacare has never had majority support.

6. I’m voting for a Republican because I believe that America is exceptional when there is personal responsibility, personal accountability and respect for others. Exceptionalism does not come from government mandates. Promising to provide every personal need for “free” is not mathematically possible and does little to develop personal responsibility and accountability.

7. I’m voting for a Republican because I believe that with all the contraceptive methods available and adoption as an alternative, there is little reason to abort more than one million babies per year with more than 325,000 by Planned Parenthood using taxpayer money.

8. I’m voting for a Republican because I understand that criminals and mentally ill people will not obey gun laws. I also understand that we are not allowed to determine that our personal interpretation of the Second Amendment is the one that must be followed.

9. I’m voting for a Republican because I believe that if the current administration had acted on the information provided by the Pentagon in 2012 and 2013, ISIS membership could have been greatly reduced in January 2014 as ISIS was crossing the border between Syria and Iraq. Thousands of lives might have been saved and millions of refugees might not be fleeing their homeland.

10. I’m voting Republican because I believe that electing a Republican candidates will provide the best opportunity for my grandchildren and great grandchildren to be able to live and prosper in an exceptional nation.