Eel elvers look like tiny, translucent spaghetti in the hand. They feel like gold: the tiny juveniles are worth $1,000 to $2,000 per pound. And the catch is disappearing.

Biologists are concerned enough to have limited the fishing in South Carolina to one river, the Cooper, and the permits to 10 people. That’s not likely to change, despite the recent rejection of Endangered Species status by U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service.

“We don’t expect any liberalization of fishing until such time as the eels bounce back,” said Allan Hazel, a S.C. Department of Natural Resources biologist who monitors the elver catch.

The wildlife service ruled that populations of eels are still widely distributed in rivers from the Southeast to Maine.

The limits are based on catch surveys by the Atlantic States Marine Fisheries Management Commission that suggest the eel population is depleted to its lowest levels historically. But the commission maintains the high price the catch now commands hasn’t depleted the population any father.

Overall, the catch has dropped from highs of 2.5 million to 3.6 million pounds to current lows ranging from 1.5 million to 700,000 pounds, according to the commission. In that time, the market for them exploded in Asia, where eel is considered a delicacy like lobster, and where the catch and farm stocks have been depleted by overfishing and a parasite.

In 2012, South Carolina and Maine — the only two Atlantic states where glass eel elvers can be legally harvested — the catch totaled 22,214 pounds, according to the commission. The value was $40 million — about $1,800 per pound, making it by far the most lucrative inshore catch in this state.

“What is known is that eel levels are historically low but stable since the 1970s,” said commission board member Malcom Rhodes of Charleston. “The commission felt that listing would not benefit rebuilding the stocks.”

Besides, catching elvers isn’t much different than panning for gold. The sliver-like young eels come in from the seaweed beds offshore, moving at night, masses of them in runs that last only a few, unpredictable nights on any one river.

The elvers that move ashore have not fed yet, and if they can be caught before they begin to feed, they can be sold to farms and given feed they otherwise would not eat.

In the 1970s, the elver fishery here was considered a wintertime subsistence catch. But the spots where the catch was good were fought over. Wildlife officers dealt with cases of guns being drawn and truck windows shot out, Hazel said. There were tales of spies, and elver anglers running decoy trucks to misdirect them.

In the 1990s, with prices jumping, the state responded to federal concerns by restricting licenses, assigned by lottery.

As existing license holders, the families who had fished elvers all along were grandfathered in. That fueled resentment among others who felt the permits should have been a lottery draw.

To catch them, trappers must set across of a narrows in the stream a fyke net that funnels them to the trap like a big windsock. It takes about 2,500 elvers to make a pound, and in the Cooper River 1,000 pounds is considered a banner night. A lot of years, the commercial catch here has been zero — a combination of low prices keeping anglers out of the water and the hit-or-miss nature of the catch.

“It’s almost a flip of the coin whether they’re going to hit or not,” Jimmy Livingston, a third-generation eel fisherman from Moncks Corner, said in an earlier story in The Post and Courier.

Today the fishery is the stuff of dreams, and in its benchmark 2012 study, the commission noted that “in 2011, anecdotal reports were received of (elver) eel prices exceeding $1,000 per pound and renewed fishing activity in South Carolina. The increased demand may also have contributed to an increase in illegal poaching in jurisdictions where glass eel fisheries are prohibited.”

Surveys have shown the eel to be depleted from peak catches in the early 1970s because of a combination of overfishing, habitat loss, food web alterations, predation, turbine mortality, environmental changes, toxins, contaminants and disease, according to the commission.

Endangered species listing, though, can limit efforts to restore stocks as much as it limits harvest because in part it protects habitat.

The commission did not support the listing, its board of directors saying there was no evidence the Asian demand was depleting the stock any further. In comments, board member Robert Beal noted that the commission was putting together its own management plan to bring back the stock.

Reach Bo Petersen at (843) 937-5744, @bopete on twitter or Bo Petersen Reporting on Facebook.