Welcome to Monday, the 166th day of 2015 and the sixth month since former Florida governor Jeb Bush announced on Twitter, Instagram, Facebook and possibly Tinder that he was actively exploring the possibility that he would run for the 2016 Republican nomination, his own famous surname (and lousy syntax) notwithstanding. In the opposite of a shocker, Bush will announce that he will hop off the imaginary fence and start running for president, for real, starting Monday. By waiting to declare his candidacy, Bush was able to rake in as much fundraising money as possible without being subject to stricter candidate campaign finance laws and reporting for official 2016 entrants. Here is your Three-Minute Briefing, all the News You Can Use in 180 seconds or less:

Save: The wait continues for a Supreme Court ruling to determine whether the Affordable Care Act remains the law of the land, or if the high court guts it on a technicality, throwing the health care system into chaos and putting Republicans into put-up or shut-up mode (see below). All eyes are on Justice Anthony Kennedy, a key swing vote on the matter. But Reuters reports that the smart money says Kennedy will vote to uphold the law, particularly if he views it in the context of federalism versus states' rights.

RELATED RELATED Jeb Bush, Outlaw Candidate Jeb Bush's official 2016 announcement doesn't make his previous denials any less absurd – or more legal.

Talk Soup: Pressed by Chris Wallace of "Fox News Sunday," Rep. Paul Ryan bobbed and weaved over why the GOP doesn't think Obamacare is working, and whether the party that's now in charge of Congress actually has a plan to fix it that doesn't involve screwing over people who have coverage and like the law. We have a plan, Ryan says, but we're not gonna share it with anyone until after the ruling.

Bad Blood Brothers: To say that Senate Majority Leader MItch McConnell, the top Republican in the Senate, and Sen. Chuck Schumer, the No. 3 Democrat and Minority Leader Harry Reid's hand-picked successor-in-waiting, have a bad relationship is to assume they have a relationship at all. The two longtime, powerful senators and master political strategists have crossed swords more than once in partisan battles. But with Reid's retirement next year – and a new president in the White House – how well McConnell and Schumer work together could determine whether gridlock continues in Congress or anything actually gets done.

Fake it Till You Make it: All the trappings were there for Hillary Clinton's first big campaign rally: American flags, an adoring crowd, a setting – New York's Roosevelt Park, named after the originator of the "bully pulpit" – designed to reinforce her desired image as a woman of the people. Never mind that that woman enjoys private travel, even private-er email and collects six-figure speech honoraria checks. Yet The Atlantic didn't buy what Madame Secretary was selling at the rally. They noted in her speech the absence of the ultimate class-warfare battle cry – higher taxes on the rich – and other wealth-inequality-fixing specifics that would keep it real for the hardcore lefties who are still giving her side-eye.

Total Recall: Since unofficially launching her re-run for the White House a year ago, Clinton has treated media interviews like a root canal, entertaining a relative handful of questions from campaign trail reporters. On Sunday, however, she did a one-on-one with the Des Moines (Iowa) Register editorial page. She declared voters get "amne n sia" about how Democrats like President Barack Obama and her husband, former President Bill Clinton, were elected to clean up disasters Republicans created. Yet she insisted her presidency wouldn't be an Obama third term.

Rick Santorum, Call Your Parish: Ahead of his fall visit to the U.S., Pope Francis this week is set to issue a highly-anticipated papal encyclical which will declare that climate change is a moral issue, and that all good Catholics have a responsibility to take care of the planet like Jesus said. The global-warming thing, however, has flummoxed the Republican Party – particularly the GOP's 2016 presidential field, which so far includes three Catholics who think climate change isn't real no matter what the Illest Papa says. And despite potentially turning off religious values voters, several of them are willing to contradict their own religious teachings, which declare the Pope is infallible.

Your Morning Video: "Sadly, torture is not just something that happens to Mel Gibson."

Stat of the Day: Portion of part-time faculty at U.S. colleges whose households receive government assistance: 1/4 (courtesy Harper's Index).

Duly Noted: On this date in 1775, the Second Continental Congress voted unanimously to appoint George Washington head of the Continental Army. In 1836, Arkansas became the 25th state. In 1864, Secretary of War Edwin M. Stanton signed an order establishing a military burial ground, which became Arlington National Cemetery in Virginia. In 1934, President Franklin D. Roosevelt signed an act making the National Guard part of the U.S. Army in the event of war or national emergency. In 1944, American forces began their successful invasion of Saipan during World War II. B-29 Superfortresses carried out their first raids on Japan. Ten years ago: The autopsy released on Terri Schiavo backed the contention of her husband, Michael, that she had been in a persistent vegetative state, finding she was severely and irreversibly brain-damaged and blind as well.