Did you noticed an uptick in the number of former NFL players tweeting about getting covered under Obamacare this weekend? That’s probably because the White House wrote the tweets for them.

According to the Washington Free Beacon, a White House staffer sent suggested language for pro-Obamacare tweets to a representative with the National Football League players’ union. That language, or variations of it, was then tweeted out by some former players on Super Bowl Sunday.

Kyle Lierman, youth liaison at the White House Office of Public Engagement, sent the email and told the union representative that the players were free to “put their own spin” on the tweets, according to the email obtained by the Free Beacon.

Brendon Ayanbadejo, a former Baltimore Ravens linebacker who is currently a free agent, sent out a series of tweets encouraging Americans to #GetCovered.

Football fans, hope you’re getting ready for Super Bowl XLVIII, don’t forget you can #getcovered at http://t.co/wZtRIv5Iw1 — Brendon Ayanbadejo (@brendon310) February 2, 2014

I know about getting injured and getting care. Football players need good healthcare more than anyone #getcovered — Brendon Ayanbadejo (@brendon310) February 2, 2014

Getting ready for Super Bowl XLVIII… Football fans don’t forget you can affordable healthcare at http://t.co/nS6HeQL927 #getcovered. — Brendon Ayanbadejo (@brendon310) February 2, 2014

Despite its missing word, Ayanbadejo’s third tweet was retweeted by the official White House account. In his email, Lierman had suggested that participating players send along their Twitter handles, so the White House could retweet their Affordable Care Act promotions.

Back in September, the Ravens franchise signed a contract — worth $130,000 — with Maryland Health Connection, agreeing to help push President Barack Obama’s signature health care law.

Former Ravens wide receiver Donte Stallworth and former Chicago Bears defensive end Adewale Ogunleye also tweeted out Obamacare promotion on Sunday.

Football fans, hope you’re getting ready for Super Bowl XLVIII, don’t forget you can #getcovered at http://t.co/op3vod6KAS — Adewale Ogunleye (@aotheprince93) February 2, 2014