Despite the Affordable Care Act's ambitious goal of insuring 48 million people, including 1.2 million in New Jersey, even the law's most ardent champions understood it would never reach everybody.

Immigrants living here illegally do not qualify. In New Jersey, that accounts for nearly 300,000 people, according to estimates from the Rutgers Center for State Health Policy. Legal immigrants, such as green card holders, are eligible, but not for Medicaid until they have lived in this country for five years, according to the law.

Some New Jerseyans will have valid reasons for not complying with the “individual mandate” to obtain health coverage next year. And there are others who would rather pay a fine at tax time than comply with the law.

An estimated 24 million nationwide are expected to qualify for a yearlong exemption, based on the lengthy list of “hardships,” according to the nonpartisan Congressional Budget Office.

View full size View full size

This number includes victims of natural or man-made disasters, such as those who lost their homes in Hurricane Sandy. People may get a pass if they can show they can’t buy both an insurance policy and pay for “food, shelter, clothing, or other necessities,” or if they had filed for bankruptcy in the prior six months, according to an Internal Revenue Service memo explaining the law.

The officials at the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services who will operate New Jersey’s health exchange — the online hub on which people will shop for coverage and seek subsidies to help them pay for it — “seem to have a lot of flexibility,” said Danielle Liss, spokeswoman for the U.S. Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services.

“They are really bending over backwards to not penalize people,” said Linda Schwimmer, vice president for the New Jersey Health Care Quality Institute, a research and consumer advocacy organization. “But then you leave people uninsured.”

Even with the new law, the Congressional Budget Office estimates that 31 million people will remain uninsured a decade from now.

The Obama administration expects there will be many people who would prefer not to sign up for insurance. In Massachusetts, which implemented its own insurance mandate in 2006, those who did not get insurance were predominately Asian or Hispanic men younger than 20 who did not speak fluent English, according to a national analysis cited by Rutgers in a 2011 report on the impact of the law.

The penalties for not having insurance next year start out relatively small: $95 per adult and $47.50 per child, or 1 percent of a household’s total income, whichever is greater. By 2016, adults pay as much as $695 and $347.50 per child for a $2,085 family maximum, or 2.5 percent of the household income.

In New Jersey and in every state, there is a relatively small but determined group of people whose sole mission is to convince the reluctant uninsured person that “Obamacare,” as the health care overhaul has been called, is worth the money and time. The new nonprofit group Enroll America has assigned a team of recruiters in New Jersey, to work with community groups and health care providers to explain the law and refer people to phone banks of multilingual staff if they need it.

“We are doing a great deal of outreach to the Latino population, the largest ethnic group that will have large numbers of uninsured and underinsured people,” said Justine Ceserano, director of Enroll America in New Jersey.

“It depends on how you approach them,” Ceserano said. “If you discuss how this offers coverage for pre-existing conditions, and there will be economic assistance to pay for premiums and a plan that fits into their budget, people are receptive.”

SORTING OUT THE SUBSIDIES

About 26 million Americans will be eligible for subsidies to help pay their premiums.The subsidies will be in the form of tax credits.

View full size View full size

Subsidies will be based on a sliding scale depending on taxable income. The lower your income, the larger the subsidy you will receive. Subsidies will only be available to those purchasing coverage through the health insurance exchanges.

Anyone can buy health insurance on the exchange but the subsidies are only for households with incomes up to 400 percent of the federal poverty level, and only available to people who do not have access to alternative insurance (such as Medicaid and affordable employer coverage). The subsidies will be paid directly from the federal government to the insurer.

The numbers in this chart are estimates and may vary from the final numbers depending on a person's age and family size. They may not reflect actual rates.

Subsidies will be based on the "silver" plan, which will be the second-cheapest plan available. Families may choose gold or platinum plans but they will be responsible for paying the difference. Families may also choose the bronze plan and keep the difference to lower out-of-pocket costs. Although you would pay less in premiums by enrolling in a bronze plan, you will face higher out-of-pocket costs than if you enrolled in a silver plan.

Note: If your family income isn't listed in this chart, use this handy calculator from the Kaiser Family Foundation.