MOBILE, Alabama – Republican Margie Wilcox cruised past Democrat Stephen Carr on Tuesday night in a special election for the Alabama House of Representatives, keeping the GOP’s 20-year winning streak alive in District 104.

According to complete but unofficial results, Wilcox won 90.5 percent of the vote, carrying all 15 precincts and the absentee ballots. The owner of Yellow Cab of Mobile and a pair of other transportation companies, Wilcox campaigned on making state laws more business-friendly and reforming homeowners insurance. She said she is looking forward to getting to work in House, which already is in session.

“We are thrilled. We’ve got a large crowd here,” she said. “I am just tickled.”

Carr, whose professional background is in disaster relief management, recently finished a stint in the Governor’s Office of Faith-Based & Volunteer Services helping victims of the 2011 Alabama tornadoes find housing. He said he wanted to offer a choice to voters who have had no Democratic alternative in recent elections.

“I think the main thing is I’m extremely disappointed in the turnout,” he said, referring to the fact that the special election drew only about 10 percent of the district’s registered voters. “It just confirms to me that the people who should be voting are not voting. (The results) didn’t look much different than the Republican primaries.”

Wilcox fought a hotly contested primary battle against Susan Hightower, besting her by 70 votes out of 3,380 cast. In a district that supported Republican Mitt Romney by a nearly 3-1 margin in the 2012 presidential election, Wilcox said she urged supporters to guard against complacency for today’s vote, which comes a week later than scheduled because of last week’s winter storm.

The general election matchup was a financial mismatch. Including the primary rounds, Wilcox reported raising nearly $75,000 – including heavy contributions from political action committees – and spending more than $52,000.

Carr, meanwhile, got no PAC money, raising just $2,551. Faced with a 29-1 fundraising disparity, Carr said he focused on running a grass-roots campaign. He said he would try to repeal the Alabama Accountability Act, which provides taxpayer money for students from “failing” schools to attend private schools. He said he also favored accepting federal funds under the Affordable Care Act to expand Alabama’s Medicaid program.

Wilcox said she intends to have a ceremonial swearing-in Wednesday morning at 9 in Tillman’s Conrer and then drive to Montgomery to take her official oath of office from House Speaker Mike Hubbard, R-Auburn. The district has not had representation since former Rep. Jim Barton resigned in August.



“This district needs a vote right away,” she said.

As currently constituted, District 104 stretches from the Dog River area and Interstate 65 in Mobile all the way to the Mississippi state line. By the time Wilcox runs for re-election in June, though, the district will be radically different thanks to redistricting.

The new District 104 will be more compact, with a western boundary of March Road between Old Pascagoula Road to the south and Ben Hamilton Road to the north.

Even as she prepares to take off mid-session, Wilcox must turn one eye toward the 2014 elections. Wilcox already has qualified to run in the Republican primary in June. Carr said he is considering running again. The qualifying deadline is Friday.