A time existed when an NFL pass rusher operated like a Tyrannosaurus Rex. He pursued the quarterback with carnivorous instincts and little concern of his path to the sack. Those are the days of the dinosaur. Watch the Broncos’ DeMarcus Ware, currently the top performer on the NFL’s top defense, and it’s easy to see how the much the game has evolved.

Ware, 33, boasts the best start of his career at an age when he should be considering broadcasting options. Pass rushers aren’t supposed to get better when they get older, especially one who finished with just one sack in the final seven games last season.

Part of what sets Ware apart is film study, a constant processing of information. He has turned the art of the sack into a blend of analytics and brute instincts.

“I look at tape week in and week out on one guy who I am going to be facing. It’s like a chess match. What would I do when this guy did that move? And I watch it 40 times, the same play over and over and over,” Ware said last week. “I then see how he handled different types of rushers. Then I go back to that play. It’s seared into my head once I go into the game.”

It’s third-and-7 in the Broncos’ season opener. The Baltimore Ravens face an obvious passing situation late in the first quarter. Ravens left tackle Eugene Monroe stands across from Ware. He assumes a passing stance that Ware detects from his film study, recalling how Monroe reacted to a specific move off the edge. He calculates how the Ravens’ offensive line will counter Von Miller rushing from the opposite side.

Ware decides on a power-punch move to create a short path to quarterback Joe Flacco rather than making a wide loop around Monroe. The hours of study produced the answer Ware sought. He broke free of Monroe and pulled Flacco down by his shoulder pads in a burst of brawn and brains.

“Once you get around the corner,” Ware said, “you already know it’s Christmastime now. I am thinking in my mind, ‘Don’t throw the ball, don’t throw the ball.’ Once Flacco started running, I knew from the film that he holds on to the ball the majority of the time in that situation. Once I get there, I still don’t know if he has the ball or not. I always turn around and look. That’s why you see me do that. I always come and I swipe and try to knock the ball out. I try to see if the ball is out or if he’s on the ground with the ball. Getting that sack, that’s the ultimate reward.”

Ware uncovers clues of his craft each week, burying his head into his iPad. He’s able to notice things that few in his own locker room can. A twitch, a head movement, a shoulder raise, the slightest inflection by the offensive tackle might tip him off.

“He does enough studying for about four or five of us. It definitely helps me, and not only me, but everybody in the meeting room,” Miller said. “He’ll watch film for like three or four plays and he’ll have a tendency right there. He’ll be like, ‘The quarterback is lifting his hands.’ He always has something just off one or two plays.”

Welcome to the film room

The evolution of Ware was not televised. It occurred during his third season with the Dallas Cowboys in front of a TV in a linebackers meeting room. Ware began his career terrorizing quarterbacks, collecting 19½ sacks in his first two seasons and Pro Bowl honors in 2006. In 2007, Ware changed his approach at the urging of teammate and fellow pass rusher Greg Ellis, a productive but aging veteran. He gave Ware invaluable advice. Ware was gifted athletically. Everyone realized this. Ellis told Ware what he did away from the practice field could make him better than what he did during workouts.

“He pulled me aside and showed me this and that on film. I remember looking at the screen and saying, ‘I don’t see anything,’ ” Ware said. “The more I did it, the more I understood. Now I go in the film room with guys like (Broncos outside linebacker) Lerentee (McCray) and he says, ‘I see it.’ I realized I would never see it without putting in long hours in the film room.”

Ware has become so adept at analyzing offensive sets that he has developed a code language with Miller. He will yell across to him using key words known only to them that tip off a protection scheme, or the right time to use a move they worked on in practice.

“It’s the language that he can speak with me that he can’t speak to rookies. It’s advanced when he starts speaking like Chinese,” Miller said.

Knowledge is power for Ware. He used to run by offensive tackles with alarming regularity, playing bigger than his 247 pounds. He long ago heeded the advice of Hall of Famer Michael Strahan, who told him to get lighter as he aged. He uses his hands as well as any pass rusher in the game, skills gleaned from countless sessions with mixed martial arts experts.

Back in Wade’s world

Statistics lay bare Ware’s success this season. He leads the AFC in sacks with 3½. He ranks first in quarterback hits with 11. Returning to a 3-4 defense with defensive coordinator Wade Phillips, who helped Ware average 16 sacks per season in their four years together at Dallas, accelerated his rebound.

“This defense is his baby,” Broncos inside linebacker Brandon Marshall said. “This is his home.”

That’s only partly correct. Ware’s residence is the backfield, via the film room. So confident was Ware in his revival, he bought a 1982 Red Bourdeaux — the year he was born. If successful the previous week, he savors a glass each Thursday.

“It tastes good,” Ware said with a big smile. “So good.”

The mystery of Ware, of how a player growing older appears to be getting younger, goes beyond his statistics. Watch the game, peel back the layers. Ware will set up the tackle, using a power move in a specific situation only to switch to a spin move when he needs it most in the fourth quarter. It’s the equivalent of Clayton Kershaw eschewing his curveball for a changeup to strike out a hitter with runners on base.

Ware’s September is a tribute to understanding the NFL’s nuances.

“If you really want to excel, you really start paying attention to the small things. That became film study for me,” Ware said. “Everybody has tendencies and little glitches. I have glitches. But when you understand what they are in an opponent, and you turn it into a sack on Sunday, it makes it all worth it.”

Sack is in the bag

Broncos star DeMarcus Ware is experiencing a renaissance at age 33. NFL reporter Troy E. Renck examines the art of the sack with Ware, by words and numbers:

• Ware’s favorite move is the “stab and swipe,” in which he gets his hands into the offensive tackle’s chest and then uses his hands to clear or swipe past the blocker.

• Ware’s favorite move he has seen used by someone else? The “side scissor” by fellow former Dallas Cowboys pass rusher Greg Ellis. “He swipes through their hands underneath,” Ware said, “and it works. I am like, ‘Why do they keep sticking their hands out?’ “

• Ware’s 3½ sacks this season lead the AFC. He was chosen the AFC defensive player of the month for September.

• Ware’s 11 quarterback hits lead the NFL, three ahead of Houston Texans star J.J. Watt.

• Ware’s 132½ career sacks rank 13th in NFL history, two behind Lawrence Taylor and Leslie O’Neal.