The sweet smell of freedom: A glimpse of Deborah Milke on first day out of jail

Deborah Milke's conviction was overturned in March



Christopher Milke was shot in the head three times by associates of Milke's

Detective who claims Milke confessed has a checkered history



No recording of the confession or any witnesses

An Arizona woman is getting her first taste of freedom in more than two decades after an appeals court overturned her murder conviction.

A photo was published on crimefilenews.com of Debra Milke who is reportedly staying in a Phoenix home provided by supporters.



She spent more than 20 years on death row for the death of her 4-year-old son.



The photo shows Milke wearing a colorful short-sleeved top and smelling a rose.



Free at last: After spending more than two decades on death row for the death of her 4-year-old son, Debra Milke is free and staying in a Phoenix home provided by supporters

Debra Milke walked out of the Maricopa County Sheriff's jail on Friday after supporters posted her $250,000 bond.

The 9th Circuit Court of Appeals overturned her conviction in March, ruling that prosecutors should have disclosed information that cast doubt on the credibility of a now-retired detective who said Milke confessed to being involved in the killing of her 4-year-old son, Christopher.

The 49-year-old Milke has not been exonerated, but a judge allowed her to could go free while she prepares for a new trial in a case that made her one of Arizona's most reviled inmates.

Milke was convicted in the death of her son who authorities believe was killed for a $5,000 insurance payout. Police said Milke dressed the boy in his favorite outfit in December 1989, telling him he was going to see Santa Claus at a mall before handing him over to two men who took the child into the desert and shot him. She had been imprisoned since 1990.

'Death Row Debbie': Debra Milke was released from prison on Friday as she awaits a new trial in the 1989 murder of her son, Christopher

Doubt: The 9th Circuit agreed that there is some doubt about damning testimony given by a detective who single-handedly put Milke on death row

Prosecutors declined to comment on Milke's possible release and have not appealed the bond order.

Milke, whose mother was a German who married a U.S. Air Force military policeman in Berlin in the early 1960s, has drawn strong support from citizens of that nation and Switzerland, neither of which has the death penalty.

Max Krucker, former president of the Swiss community where Milke's mother now lives, said Renate Janka was 'ecstatic' that her daughter had been released.



'She said, `Now I can finally hold my daughter in my arms again,'' he told The Associated Press in a telephone interview from her home.

For as long as Milke has been incarcerated, she and her mother have only met in situations where they were separated by glass.

'They were never able to touch,' Krucker said.

A dozen years ago, Krucker was among the organizers of an effort in the Swiss town of Emmetten to support Milke, including by establishing a bank account that collected donations to aid in her defense. The account eventually netted about 200,000 Swiss francs, or about $213,000 today. It's now nearly drained, he said.

Tragic: Christopher Milke, seen here with his mother Debra, was shot in the head three times. He was just 4 years old Doubts about Milke's guilt and deep suspicion about the reliability of the detective's testimony helped motivate Swiss supporters to donate, as did opposition to the death penalty. Many also had concerns that Milke didn't have access to the best defense because she had too little money, he said. Now supporters are excited about the prospect of her release, Krucker said, but also worried how she will manage to pay the bond. Janka, who is suffering from cancer, was already forced to sell her home to help cover her daughter's legal bills, he said. Supporters also run a website that requests donations through both German and Swiss accounts. Milke's ex-husband, whose name is Arizona Milke, believes his former wife is guilty and that supporters are fooled by the postings on the website.

Killers: Jim Styers and Roger Scott admitted to murdering Christopher, and both currently are on death row 'It's fed by propagandized lies,' he said on Friday. 'They write whatever they want and put it up there like it's true.' Her chance at freedom comes six months after a federal appeals court overturned Milke's conviction, ruling that the prosecution should have disclosed information about the truthfulness of the now-retired detective who testified that Milke confessed. Milke was a 25-year-old insurance company clerk when her son was killed. She has maintained her innocence, saying she had nothing to do with the slaying. The two men convicted in the case both remain on death row. Neither Roger Scott nor former Milke roommate James Styers testified at Milke's trial. Scott confessed during a police interrogation and led detectives to the boy's body. Maricopa County prosecutors are still seeking the death penalty against Milke at her retrial, tentatively set for Sept. 30, and her alleged confession is at the heart of the case against her. Police detective Armando Saldate Jr. testified that she confessed to him in a closed interrogation room. But the confession was not recorded.

'Confession': Detective Armando Saldate claims Milke confessed to her involvement in the murder - but it wasn't recorded and nobody witnessed it - other than Saldate At trial, Milke denied that she had confessed, but the jury believed the detective. Doubts about Saldate's honesty arose during Milke's appeals. The 9th Circuit concluded in March that prosecutors' failure to turn over evidence related to Saldate's credibility deprived Milke's attorneys of the chance to question his truthfulness before jurors. 'No civilized system of justice should have to depend on such flimsy evidence, quite possibly tainted by dishonesty or overzealousness, to decide whether to take someone's life or liberty,' Chief Judge Alex Kozinski wrote for the court.

Crime scene: This cross marks the spot in the Arizona desert where Christopher Milke was ruthlessly murdered

The court noted four cases in which judges threw out confessions or indictments because Saldate lied under oath and four instances in which cases were tossed out or confessions excluded because Saldate violated the suspect's constitutional rights.

He was also suspended for accepting sexual favors from a female motorist he stopped and then lying about the encounter, the court said.

Deputy County Attorney Vince Imbordino argued last week during a bond hearing that the purported confession is still admissible, but Judge Rosa Mroz of Maricopa County Superior Court said the undisclosed material concerning Saldate 'casts serious doubt' on its validity.