LEE NEWMAN: Twenty-two years ago when I did my M.B.A., raising the idea of emotions as a “key performance indicator” would have met with smirks and note-passing in the classroom. (Tweeting, you’ll remember, wasn’t possible then.)

The world has changed. Compelling research by leading positive psychologists like Barbara Fredrickson offers a new, and I think compelling message about the role that emotions play in the quality of our daily thinking and behavior.

Employees experience a mix of positive and negative emotions every day at work. Susan starts the day feeling proud of the presentation she gave to senior management, only later to become stressed and embarrassed after receiving an email from a client who has decided to move its account to a competitor. Welcome to being human in the modern workplace.

It turns out that you can measure this “daily dose” of positive and negative emotions, and the critical metric is their ratio. When this positivity ratio is high over a day–research shows that it enhances the quality of thinking and behavior. When we are feeling good, we have better memory for what’s been said in a client meeting, we find more common ground in negotiations, we see more possibilities for dealing with challenging situations, and we are better able to work towards common understandings with other people. In contrast, when negative emotions dominate, our thinking narrows, we spend more energy protecting our own interests, and we are more likely to have unfounded negative interpretations of what colleagues say and do.

I’ve been working with business professionals using a simple assessment that allows them to anonymously track their daily dosage of emotions. Now imagine rolling this up by unit, and across an entire organization.

As Sir Ken Robinson aptly said in his wonderful TED talk, the role of leadership is not command and control, but climate control. Science has spoken–the daily experience of positive and negative emotions is one critical aspect of the work climate and a driver of employee performance.

So let’s give executives this critical metric, and as well the tools they need to control it.

Lee Newman (@NewmanLee) is dean of social and behavioral sciences at IE University and dean of innovation and behavior at IE Business School in Madrid. His work focuses on applying behavioral science to business and leadership.

Read the latest Leadership Report.