The Democratic Debate in Flint Was Yet Another Embarrassment

Almost everyone, including many Republicans themselves, compares the Republican debates to a raucous bread and circuses straight out of the Roman gladiatorial contests. Trump insults Rubio and Cruz, references his private parts, and makes nasty comments about minorities and foreigners. Rubio and Cruz aren't much better, sneering back at Donald, calling him names and bringing Mitt Romney in for backup.

It's an embarrassing horror show humiliating America in the eyes of the world. The way things are going, when the Republicans next meet on March 10, they're likely to pull out Derringers and shoot each other Hamilton-Burr style.

But at least they're not boring. Not only are the Democratic debates boring, they're puerile and cliché-ridden non-events that could scarcely be called debates and are about as interesting as a four a.m. advertorial for cleanser on a cable channel -- softball games in extremis.

Part of the reason is that the media is so pathetically in the tank for the Democrats they don't dare ask them a tough, or even challenging, question. No Megyn Kellys here. Not by the proverbial country mile.

An example Sunday night was when Anderson Cooper finally brought up the touchy question of Clinton's emails, ever so gently asking Hillary how she would respond to Trump's promised attacks on the scandal that could emerge, after the FBI investigation, as one of the most serious political crimes in American history.

Rather than answer the question, Clinton quickly changed the subject to how she had more voters, so far, than Trump. The evasion was so obvious you could drive the whole Russian army through it and probably part of the Polish as well. But did Cooper follow up? He didn't even blink and moved on to Sanders, inviting him to attack Trump for calling the senator a communist. It was journalism at its most slavishly biased. Cooper was so far gone, so throughly corrupted, he probably didn't even realize what he did.

Of course, Sanders never broaches the subject of the emails himself, either out of cowardice or a seeming complete disinterest in the national security of the United States, an odd position for a presidential candidate.