The Broncos blew it all Sunday. They threw away a victory, dropped the ball and lost their grip on the No. 1 seed in the AFC playoffs. This loss ripped out around 76,000 hearts in the stadium. And that’s not the worst of it. This sad-beyond-belief, 15-12 defeat against the lowly Oakland Raiders was so damaging to Denver it could slowly tear the team apart.

That sound you heard at 5:21 p.m. Sunday, when quarterback Brock Osweiler went down for the last time under the weight of Oakland linebacker Khalil Mack, was the sound of Broncos Country screaming in frustration. You mad, bro? Well, so are the players on a team where the disparity between defensive greatness and offensive ineptitude is now a real threat to locker room unity.

PAIGE: Gary Kubiak’s Broncos offense pitiful again in loss to Raiders

“I’m hot, man. We’re not supposed to lose that game,” cornerback Chris Harris said.

Yes, the record says the Broncos are 10-3. But the offense stinks, and the resulting strain on the defense is beginning to show. Coach Gary Kubiak has turned back to the clock to 1985, in an apparent effort to see if he can devise a game plan more conservative than the most yawn-inducing schemes from the dustiest corners of Dan Reeves’ mind.

WATCH: Is friction starting to form in the Denver locker room?

What’s wrong goes far deeper than Denver’s ineptitude in the red zone. For the first time all season, I heard the type of grumbling from players that indicates a lack of trust in each other. Let the finger-pointing begin. In fact, it already has started, and the blame game is never pretty.

It seems to defy logic how Oakland could score the game’s only two touchdowns, despite producing only 126 yards of offense. But after Emmanuel Sanders fumbled a punt early in the fourth quarter, the Raiders were in business 11 short yards from the goal line, trailing only 12-9.

The Denver defense, put in impossible situations all season long by its quarterback, whether the man making mistakes has been Osweiler or Peyton Manning, was asked to make a stand yet again. And the Broncos did, until third down when tight end Mychal Rivera ran a route through the gut of the secondary, and was inexplicably lefft alone in the end zone, catching a touchdown pass so head-slapping easy it had Denver players cursing in disbelief.

RECAP: Raiders stun Broncos, shut out inept offense in second half

What happened? How could Rivera, who has never been mistaken for Rob Gronkowski, get so wide open?

“What’s the dude’s name?” said Harris, rolling his eyes, struggling to identify the street free agent playing in the absence of injured safeties T.J. Ward and David Bruton. “The new safety. He just didn’t play the coverage right. He’s a new guy and he didn’t play the coverage right.”

Shiloh Keo, who last held an NFL job in 2013, was the guy who blew the coverage against Rivera. He was not a member of the Broncos until approximately 100 hours before kickoff against Oakland. Let his blunder be a lesson to us all. Twitter is a good place to discover snark. But as a place to recruit an NFL safety? Well, to use the social media vernacular: LMAO.

“Didn’t want to pick me up, huh?” Keo had tweeted to Denver defensive coordinator Wade Phillips, when the Broncos were hurting for help in the secondary. Well, I guess the team violated Twitter Rule No. 1: Don’t feed the trolls.

Keo dressed alone in a corner after the loss. He pulled a shirt over his badly bruised torso, threw a backpack over his shoulder and offered me a handshake. “I made a mistake. And it costs us the game,” Keo said. “I wasn’t focused. I wasn’t doing my job on the coverage. It cost the team. You can put that on my back.”

This loss cracked open the door for Manning to be a hero. If he can get healthy, the 39-year-old quarterback might get one more shot at being the starting quarterback, because the Broncos cannot find a groove on offense.

REPORT CARD: Grade the Broncos’ performance against the Raiders

Against the Raiders, Osweiler got Macked up. The game tape of Oakland’s No. 52 will look like a horror movie. Mack made a mockery of the pass blocking of Michael Schofield on his way to five sacks, including a strip sack that resulted in a safety late in the third quarter and blew up any semblance of the Broncos’ mojo. “You can never point the finger at anybody,” said Osweiler, who led zero touchdown drives in 13 Denver possessions.

Here’s the thorny problem: At 17.3 points per game, the Broncos have the No. 1 defense in the league. But among the 15 NFL teams that have scored fewer points that Denver, only one has a winning record.

For a playoff contender, Kubiak is stuck with a squad that has zero margin of error, and week after week, it’s emotionally draining. It sometimes feels as if Denver cannot win unless the defense produces a pick-6. The Broncos are fighting the same negative feeling I’ve seen engulf the Colorado Rockies clubhouse, where talented hitters lose trust in awful pitchers, and unity swirls down the drain from a lack of trust.

“It definitely is what they call nut-crunching time,” said defensive end Antonio Smith, addressing the big pressure stakes he and his Denver teammates face.

Mark Kiszla: , mkiszla@denverpost.com or @markkiszla