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

In the past, the Republican party has supported more free trade with the rest of the world and fewer restrictions on American businesses who buy and sell goods to other nations. President Obama is supporting a trade pact that would promote free trade with eleven other countries. In theory, such an agreement would be a slam dunk between Congress and the President.

But as with most topics in Washington, nothing is ever as simple as it seems.

First, a little background on the Trans-Pacific Partnership. This agreement is intended to facilitate trade among nations that “rim” the Pacific Ocean, as seen below:

Nations in the Trans-Pacific Partnership

Image credit: © worldmapmaker.co

According to federal officials, the TPP would encompass a market size of 793 million consumers in countries which comprise 39% of the world’s GDP. The pact’s projected benefits include an additional $223 billion per year in global income by 2025, as well as a $77 billion bump in real U.S. income.

Machinery, crops, vehicles, oil, and plastics are some of the main products that are currently traded among these nations. President Obama is pushing for”fast-track authority” regarding the TPP, which would allow him to negotiate specific terms of the agreement without subjecting them to approval by Congress.

The TPP is facing stiff resistance from union-backed congressional Democrats, some of whom call it “NAFTA on steroids” and predict lower wages for U.S. workers as well as other assorted negative effects of globalization.

But even though the GOP will control the House and Senate in the next Congress, Tea Party-affiliated Republicans also oppose certain aspects of the pact that will increase U.S. spending – provisions that might appeal to Democrats who want to extract concessions in exchange for supporting the agreement.

And then there is the ongoing issue of trust between the legislative and executive branches. Given his flurry of executive actions and memoranda in matters such as immigration, U.S.-Cuba relations, and health care during his presidency, many Republicans are hesitant to cede any more power to Obama on any issue.

Moreover, lawmakers may not be confident that the President will follow through on whatever is agreed upon by Congress in exchange for fast-track authority. In fact, some conservatives are recalling the misinformation and deception regarding the Affordable Care Act, prompting them to refer to the TPP as “Obamatrade.” It doesn’t help that the terms of the TPP are negotiated in secret (though some documents have been leaked).

As Heritage Foundation free trade specialist Anthony Kim told the Washington Times:

“An increasing number of members see [trade promotion authority] as a way of giving more power to President Obama, and therefore the whole debate will be longer… After the November election, we knew that President Obama had limited political capital to spend. He basically wasted that.”

It’s possible for the trade agreement to pass without Obama getting fast-track authority, though the process may take longer to complete. But if the President isn’t granted this privilege by Congress, he may simply table the pact altogether in favor of other priorities.

If that were to happen, it would mark another failure in presidential/congressional relations regarding an issue on which the two sides theoretically agree. For that reason, the fate of the Trans-Pacific Partnership may serve as a bellwether for bipartisanship (or a lack thereof) in Washington over the next two years.