Staging a play in an active but bankrupt medical center in Brooklyn not only got the attention of locals, but of politicians as well, who say the play expresses the frustrations of disenfranchised residents. See more photos in out slideshow. Kate Lord for The Wall Street Journal

When Jonathan Solari, a 28-year-old theater director from Brooklyn's Bedford-Stuyvesant neighborhood, was fishing for a grand debut for his fledgling New Brooklyn Theater, he couldn't have anticipated the response it would draw.

Far from the flash of Broadway, or even off-Broadway, Mr. Solari has been directing Edward Albee's "The Death of Bessie Smith " to rave reviews from local residents as well as almost every politician that serves the area: City Council members Robert Cornegy Jr. and Laurie Cumbo, Public Advocate Letitia James, U.S. Rep. Hakeem Jeffries, councilman Stephen Levin, state senator Velmanette Montgomery, and state assembly members Walter Mosley and Annette Robinson.

Their attention is bittersweet. The play, written in 1959 and set in 1937 Memphis, is the story of a black blues singer who died from a car accident after being denied treatment at whites-only hospitals. Now, in 2014, the politicians and other local leaders have rallied around the play, which is being staged at Interfaith Medical Center in an unused room next to the cafeteria, as a symbol of what Harry Belafonte, a celebrity activist who attended a recent performance, called decadeslong "medical apartheid." "The play gives our frustrations a name," said Roland Purcell, president of Interfaith's medical staff.

"The worst part of denial of care, of disenfranchisement, of political leverage being used against you, is that it comes from everywhere and yet is so difficult to name," Dr. Purcell added. "It's helped immensely, immeasurably."

The play, which is one act, has taken on a second act of sorts: After each performance—tickets are free—the cast, members of the theater board and others engage in a kind of town hall meeting, taking questions from the audience.

Interfaith filed for bankruptcy in 2012 rather than merge with two Brooklyn hospitals, as the Cuomo administration suggested. Interfaith serves a federally recognized health-professional-shortage area.

ENLARGE Jamyl Dobson as Orderly and Jessica Afton as Nurse in 'The Death of Bessie Smith' at Interfaith Medical Center. Kate Lord for The Wall Street Journal

Performances have continued as staff protested against the chief executive for redirecting ambulances away from the hospital. As actors went through their lines, cheers were heard through the wall when a new acting CEO was chosen, and a nurse burst into the room to share the news. "Art and politics and activism are all towards the same hope," said James Patrick Nelson, who plays a white intern in the play.

It is perhaps the city's most dramatic blend of theater and health policy in nearly 30 years, since the off-Broadway debut of Larry Kramer's scorching AIDS lecture, "The Normal Heart," in 1985.

New Brooklyn's production, already operating on an extended contract, is set to end on Sunday. It had been the first staging of "Bessie Smith" in New York since 1968, said Jakob Holder, executive director of Mr. Albee's foundation, but coincidentally, he added, Hudson Guild Theatre Company had long ago scheduled a run of the play to start Feb. 14 at its West 26th Street location in Manhattan.

Meanwhile, Mr. Solari continues his rage against the dying of the light, but is already splitting his time between Brooklyn and Boston, where he is staging another controversial play, Dennis Kelly's "Osama the Hero," about terrorism and martyrdom. "Theater has a place to make a practical difference," Mr. Solari said. "We're at the community board meetings. We're active in the community. That's our job. I know this play is designed to agitate. But I know that solutions exist, I believe."

During the three-hour span of a recent "Bessie Smith" performance at Interfaith and the conversation that followed, the hospital treated a woman for chest pain, another woman was brought in by police for being drunk on the subway, a gay man was treated for assault, and four children were treated—two for fevers, one for asthma and one for bronchitis.

The hospital no longer has a ward for labor and delivery, so nobody has been born there for years. But Mr. Solari is hoping enough of the visiting politicians, many of whom come for the discussion but not the play, feel born-again by his efforts.

"That's what theater is," he said, "fresh eyes, opening."