Shawnee County Election Commissioner Andrew Howell predicted a lower than average voter turnout for Tuesday’s general election.

The average turnout for a spring general election without the Topeka mayor on the ballot is 16.20 percent, Howell said. The election commissioner is expecting about a 15 percent voter turnout for the general election.

Registered voters in Kansas can vote in Tuesday’s general election. Advance ballots can be cast from 8 a.m. to noon Monday at the election office, 911 S.W. 37th. Advance voting ends at noon, according to the secretary of state’s website.

Those who want to vote by mail must have their ballots returned to the election office before the polls close at 7 p.m. Tuesday.

“These ballots must be in the possession of the election office by the time the polls close on election day,” Howell said in a news release. “Hand delivery is acceptable. The election office cannot guarantee US Postal Service delivery times, so voters should be mindful of that when mailing ballots back to the office. Sometimes it takes a while, and we cannot accept any ballots after 7 p.m.”

Polling places, which will offer paper ballots or an electronic voting machine, will be open from 7 a.m. to 7 p.m. Tuesday.

There is a 30-percent chance for thunderstorms Tuesday. However, temperatures will be mild, with an expected high of 77 degrees.

While state law requires voters to show identification, those without ID have the option of casting a provisional ballot. Provisional ballots will be counted if a voter — prior to the April 13 county canvassers board meeting — brings proof of identification to the election office.

Howell warns voters that this is “Road Construction Season” and many projects are underway in Topeka and Shawnee County. Those projects may affect usual routes to polling places. Access is available to all Shawnee County voting places, but alternate routes/access may be necessary for some locations. For a listing of projects, visit www.snco.us/election.

This election includes races for school board members for all school districts, city governing body positions for Topeka, Auburn, Rossville, Silver Lake and Willard, certain drainage directors and a city of Topeka ballot question regarding the duties of the mayor.

Anyone with questions concerning their voter registration status may call the election office at (785) 251-5900, Howell said. Additional information is also available on the Shawnee County Election website at www.snco.us/election.