There’s already lots of snow in the Fraser Valley, where the first runs at Winter Park opened a week ago, and where Jim Houston at The Reserve at Ten Mile Creek wants to give you a whole new way of looking at Colorado’s ski experience, and how your family fits into it.

“To some Front Range families, skiing is just a lift line; they have no idea how good it can be,” says Houston, who has two resort condos at Ski Granby Ranch to show you, one at $179,000 – both about 20 minutes from Winter Park, four minutes from Granby Ranch’s own family-oriented ski mountain, set to open by the holidays.

Both new homes (they each sleep six, have slab-granite kitchens and engineered plank floors) can be ready for your tribe to spend the holidays – skiing either mountain, and then settling into the lodge’s tavern, or pool, or spa, while other Front Rangers are plowing back down to Denver. The Reserve at Ten Mile Creek will actually give you two Winter Park season passes with either condo; family passes for Ski Granby Ranch along with 16 extra day-passes for your cousins/guests are already included with your membership in Granby Ranch’s club.

“These amenities at Granby Ranch are such a win for families,” says Roger Brown with Adair Group, who launched Ten-Mile Creek at Granby Ranch six years ago, and is now seeing resort buyers returning to the market, often qualified to buy more expensive Winter Park properties, but opting for these modest prices at The Reserve instead. “Granby Ranch isn’t a-la-carte like Vail or Aspen. You buy into those places and the first thing you have to do is figure out how to join the pool, how to join the golf course,” he adds. “At Granby Ranch, our families are watching their kids ski, or they’re golfing or biking, and dad doesn’t have to pull his wallet out every five minutes.”

After strong sales last summer (these are the only two units left) Brown is making plans for his next building – but those homes are going to be priced well higher than this, he says; and they won’t be open in time to ski this year. “Why not start having all of that fun right now, for $50,000 less than you’d be paying then?” Houston asks.

Those two homes show lots of quality you’d expect from something much more expensive – fireplace, pendant lighting — ready for your move right away (Ten Mile Creek will throw in $5,000 toward custom touches to help you create a warm, inviting scene for holiday guests). That’s on top of Granby Ranch’s amenities: 5,000 acres of trails and back country, a fishing reserve on the Fraser River, the family hangout at Granby Ranch Grill; four foursomes on 18-hole Golf Granby Ranch, a the new ‘Ranch’ swim club. Houston (970-557-3022) will show you the mountain-modern styling of those roomy homes, 90 minutes west of Denver. Take I-70 west past Idaho Springs to U.S. 40 and continue west, past the town of Winter Park; another 15 miles to a right at Village Road; or visit Facebook/Lodgeat1OMileCreek or 10milecreek.com.

Reserve at Ten Mile Creek, Granby Ranch; two new 2-bed resort condos ready now, Ski Granby Ranch family-style ski mountain, other year-round amenities, golf, trails, spa, river fishing; two season passes Winter Park with each home. 150 Village Rd. Granby; take U.S. 40 over Berthoud Pass, past Winter Park, 15 more miles to Village Rd (entrance to Granby Ranch); right 1 blk.

Two 2-bedroom condos ready now from $179,000

Today & daily 10-5

970-557-3022

LodgeAt10MileCreek

Mark Samuelson writes on real estate and business; you can email him atmark@samuelsonassoc.com. You can see all of Mark Samuelson’s columns online at DenverPostHomes.com