The failed vice-presidential candidate and now Fox News shill and all-American reality TV star has been turning her forensic attention to detail on to the decision by ICANN to develop a new governance model for the internet. That’ll help.

OMG! Barack Obama just gave the internet to the enemies of freedom!!!!

Or least that’s what former Alaska Governor Sarah Palin tells me in her latest online outpouring.

Yup, the failed vice-presidential candidate and now Fox News shill and all-American reality TV star has been turning her forensic attention to detail on the decision by ICANN to develop a new governance model for the internet.

Now I’m prepared to bet you a whole super-sized moose burger with extra Freedom Fries on the side and a vat of that sugar-packed fizzy gloop that Palin loves so much that the former governor hadn’t even heard of ICANN until someone told her about it.

(I dare any interviewer who somehow gets past the minders to ask her what a domain name actually is!)

Just in case she hasn’t read her briefing notes, ICANN – the Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers – is the non-profit organization that’s been in charge of handing out domain names and Web addresses for the entire Internet since 1998.

Of course – as with so many politicians – lack of understanding isn’t going to stop her making her views known or seeking to make political capital. (See Blood Libel as classic Palin-ite example of this in practice.)

This is not for everyone?

What’s top of Palin’s outrage list this week is the thought that someone other than the United States will manage the internet, following the decision by the US National Telecommunications and Information Administration (NTIA) to let its contract with ICANN to operate key domain-name functions expire in September 2015 and requiring the organization to develop a new global internet governance model.

In the current post-NSA, rest-of-the-world-paranoid-about-US-control-of-the-net climate, you might think that this is actually a sound political and diplomatic move to reassure allied nations around the world that the US government really does want clean up its act.

In fact, according to Palin, the reality is that this is all about Obama handing a new weapon to America’s enemies:

“[This] is nothing more than a gift to authoritarian regimes who seek to stifle the freedom the Internet gives to voices around the world fighting for basic human rights. No amount of Obama/liberal media spin can justify this.”

Now i was kinda under the impression that the US government had been spying on its own citizens quite a bit and that Palin regarded this as authoritarian in the extreme, so I’m a bit confused as to why letting Washington hold on to control would be such a good thing.

Nevertheless she goes on:

“Evidently relinquishing America’s control of the Internet via our ICAAN control of domain names was what Obama meant when he led his adoring followers in those strange, kind of creepy chants of ‘Yes We Can.’”

Oh that’s most amusing. It’s ‘I can’ v “We can’, do you see? Gosh, that’s biting satire at its best. Step aside, Tina Fey!

Palin concludes her thesis:

“Surrendering our control of the Internet is a colossal foreign policy error with long term negative repercussions for freedom.”

Yeah, cos it’s just America’s internet, isn’t it Sarah?

Dear god, coming only weeks after Sir Tim Berners-Lee reminded us on the 25th anniversary of the World Wide Web that “This is for everyone”, this attention-seeking politico would be so much better advised to stick to convincing yet more financial backers that she’d actually have the attention-span to run for President.

(Will she, won’t she? Here’s the answer: no, she won’t. Too much like hard work. But there’s a lot of air time to be had in the meantime.)

Instead we get her contribution to some hysterical overreaction to what is a remarkably simple decision.

ICANN has been under fire for years due to what many – the good guys included, former governor Palin – have felt was an unhealthily close relationship with the US government.

Post-Snowden, that sentiment has been all the more vocally articulated. Everything has changed.

Not just a US issue

By the way, too close a relationship with any government would be problematic. This isn’t a US-only issue. But that’s been factored in.

ICANN’s contract with the NTIA to operate the Internet Assigned Numbers Authority (IANA) functions dates back to 1999, but as ICANN CEO and President Fadi Chehadé has emphasized this past week that the understanding has always been that the partnership would be temporary.

He added:

“This is historic, because it marks a point of maturity in ICANN, the ICANN community and the global Internet community. The decision of the United States government to do this at this point is truly a triumph of the multi-stakeholder model.”

Despite the claims of the armageddon pedlars and political carpet-baggers, the ground rules for a new global governance model have been laid down:

The transition away from the NTIA contract must have “broad community support” from Internet users, governments and companies.

It must “maintain the security, stability and resiliency of the Internet Domain Name System”.

It must also be built on openness and transparency.

Crucially the new governance structure must not be government-led or inter-government led – which I imagine is a pretty big downer for several forces in Brussels at the European Commission as they plot their own Euro-Internet.

Lawrence E. Strickling the Assistant Secretary for Communications and Information and NTIA Administrator, states explicitly:

“We have been clear throughout this process that any transition plan must meet the conditions of supporting the multi-stakeholder process and protecting the security, stability and resiliency of the Internet. “I have emphasized that we will not accept a proposal that replaces NTIA’s role with a government-led or an inter-governmental solution. “Until the community comes together on a proposal that meets these conditions, we will continue to perform our current stewardship role.”

Democrat Senator John Rockefeller, chairman of the Senate Commerce, Science and Transportation Committee, recognizes the move as an important step towards global governance, noting that since ICANN’s inception:

“The US has been committed to transitioning management of the Internet’s domain name system to an independent entity that reflects the broad diversity of the global Internet community.”

And now it’s delivering on a long-term commitment – which is more than a half-term quitter governor from Alaska can boast of.

Verdict

Let’s get real – there will be zero short-term impact on US business (or anyone’s business) from this decision. In fact, more damage has been done to US business overseas by the Snowden revelations of what the US was up to with its snooping program.

This is just a long term plan that’s coming to fruition at last because the changing nature of the internet and its global importance demands change.

Yes, the timing is undoubtedly politically opportune for the US despite protestations from Washington that this is unconnected with Mr Snowden and his antics.

It is a concession to the rest of the planet, but post-NSA, the US needs to be seen to be cleaning up its act online.

From the point of view of the rest of the planet that former governor Palin can’t see from her house – I know, I know, that was Tina Fey, but it’s stuck – this is a good move by the US and one that should be applauded.

Time to move on.

All eyes will now be on the ICANN meeting in Singapore next week – by which time the fickle tongue of Sarah Palin will no doubt have found some other soundbite to be up in arms about.

You betcha!