Business Roundup: LifePoint Health Enters South Carolina Hospital Market

Under LifePoint's deal finalized this month with Sisters of Charity Health System, Providence Hospitals will change its tax status to for-profit and will pay taxes, but will retain its Catholic affiliation, mission, and charity care mandates.

LifePoint Health has entered the South Carolina market with the recently finalized acquisition of Providence Hospitals, a two-hospital Catholic system in Columbia, SC.

Jeff Seraphine, Eastern Group director for LifePoint, says the timing seems right for the Nashville-based for-profit hospital chain to expand into a new state.



Jeff Seraphine

"South Carolina has an attractive operating environment and one in which we felt very comfortable about going in and being successful and being able to operate consistent with our mission to make communities healthier," Seraphine says.

"It really is similar to what we experienced looking at other states. We were not in North Carolina five years ago and today we operate nine hospitals in that state. It has become a fantastic partnership for us there, one in which we are excited that we decided to move into that state. We think we will look back in five years from now and say the same thing about South Carolina."

Under the deal finalized this month with Sisters of Charity Health System, Providence will change its tax status to for-profit and will pay taxes, but will retain its Catholic affiliation, mission, and charity care mandates.

Seraphine says many not-for-profit health systems are increasingly more open to negotiating with potential partners from the for-profit sector.

"We still experience what we consider some decades-old biases in some communities, sometimes perpetuated by other interests that aren't relevant in today's environment," he says.

"Our commitment to move forward with our quality agenda, with partnerships such as Duke LifePoint, the commitments that we make routinely as we've done in Providence, that we are going to maintain the existing charity care policy, and some of the accomplishments we've had with our healthcare engagement network and other quality accolades, the combination of those things has changed the conversation drastically."

"When we have the opportunity to talk about that with a potential partner, and they understand who we are and what we are trying to accomplish in our medical communities, we do not find it difficult to move past that conversation of 'do you pay taxes or not pay taxes?'"

South Carolina is one of 19 states that has refused to expand Medicaid under the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act. Seraphine says that was not a dealbreaker.

"We still believe that in some form or fashion, expansion will come to most of these states. It comes in different ways and at different times," he says. "We don't know what the near-term projections are for expansion in South Carolina. We understand the state and local politics of that decision but we favor expanded coverage and hope it will come to that state also, but we also feel comfortable that in the meantime we can be successful operating these hospitals and doing them in the right way."