A CARTA free trolley passes a bike corral on King Street at Blue Bicycle Books this month. A new Peninsula Mobility Report says two of the things Charleston needs to do is increase bike ridership by 70 percent in 10 years and restore its trolley system to relieve future traffic congestion.

You have to love a study that says there would be less congestion on the Charleston peninsula if there were fewer cars on the street.

No kidding. What did we pay for that insight?

Of course, the city thinks it can close one lane of the Ashley River Bridge to car traffic and not see increased congestion in West Ashley, so maybe it is best to spell everything out.

In fairness, the whole fewer-cars/less-congestion isn't exactly the major finding of the Peninsula Mobility Report commissioned by the city and the Historic Charleston Foundation - it's just a fact.

The traffic study, released last week, actually offers some ideas that are already happening, others that a lot of city leaders believe have merit, and a few that elicit groans.

More bikes, for instance.

But these trolleys are not a bad idea. They are historically accurate, they're just quaint enough to attract tourists and, well, anything would be better than more rickshaws.

Several City Council members are interested enough to hear more about this trolley proposal. But some of the ideas in the report are going nowhere fast.

Kind of like Spring Street traffic at 5:15 p.m.

File this under chamber pot

The most laughable idea floated in this report is closing the peninsula South of Broad to non-resident car traffic.

My colleague Frank Wooten was aghast that South of Broad folks think the solution to traffic problems is to close their roads to everyone but them.

Well, he's wrong. It could actually work - but only if the SOBs can't drive on our roads.

No worry, though - that idea is about as welcome at City Hall as a Yankee at the Secession Ball. South of Broad is the least congested part of the peninsula. The vast majority of the problem lies between Broad and the Crosstown.

Closing off South of Broad would pretty much turn it into Colonial Williamsburg. And if they want to argue that cars are not historically compatible with the neighborhood, fine. Neither are paved roads and indoor plumbing. How would they like a return to the days of chamber pots?

Bottom line, Mayor Joe Riley would not allow the city's most beautiful neighborhood to be turned into a gated community. As he says, this is a working, living city - not a planned unit development.

Councilman Aubry Alexander says the city has an interesting debate ahead of it. As usual, a lot of people who live downtown oppose a lot of the business (read: tourism) that keeps their property taxes low.

"At some point, you've got to pick your poison," he says.

He's absolutely right.

Cars are a pain downtown, at least in the central business district, but can you really stop them? The businesses probably will not like that idea, as it will cut into their nut.

After all, how much stuff can you haul off from Williams-Sonoma on a bike?

Rules of the road

Moving parking to the Neck Area and busing - or trolleying - in tourists is another idea city councilmen believe is worth further study.

As Councilman Keith Waring says, "We do need to improvise."

But the fact is, you already see a vast number of young people living around the Crosstown who don't even drive. They work downtown, bike or walk to work. It is working out pretty well.

A lot of cities would kill for that kind of neighborhood.

About the only point of contention in this Mobility Report is going to come down to bicycles. A lot of council members are still miffed about closing a lane of the Ashley River bridge to car traffic. As they should be.

So many council members are not inclined to do any more favors for the bicyclists - you know, the people who never stop for red lights, blow through stop signs and ride on the sidewalk when the mood strikes.

It might be a better idea for the city to make those folks learn the rules of the road before we invite 69 percent more of them downtown.

And it would be more realistic to continue to look for ways to improve automobile traffic flow instead of expecting everyone to start pedaling to work. In Charleston. In August.

Because, just like gating off South of Broad, that's not going to happen.