Presidential arrogance on steroids

ROGER PILON

Guest Columnist

“Obama said ‘so sue me.’ The House did, and Obama just lost.” That’s how the Wall Street Journal sub-heads its lead editorial this morning discussing the president’s latest court loss, nailing this most arrogant of presidents who believes he can rule “by pen and phone,” ignoring Congress in the process. With an unmatched record of losses before the Supreme Court, this onetime constitutional law instructor persists in ignoring the Constitution, even when the language is crystal clear.

Article I, section 9, clause 7 of the Constitution provides that “No Money shall be drawn from the Treasury but in Consequence of Appropriations made by Law.” Not much wiggle room there. So what did the president do? He committed billions of dollars from the Treasury without the approval of Congress. In her opinion Judge Rosemary Collyer noted, the Journal reports, “that Congress had expressly not appropriated money to reimburse health insurers under Section 1402 of the Affordable Care Act. The Administration spent money on those reimbursements anyway.”

George Washington Law’s Jonathan Turley, lead counsel for the House in this case, House v. Burwell, called the decision “a resounding victory not just for Congress but for our constitutional system as a whole. We remain a system based on the principle of the separation of powers and the guarantee that no branch or person can govern alone.”

But don’t expect the president to be any more chastened by this decision than by his many previous losses in the courts. Indeed, as he was smarting from the loss he was preparing, the Washington Post reports, to release a letter this morning “directing schools across the nation to provide transgender students with access to suitable facilities — including bathrooms and locker rooms — that match their chosen gender identity.” And where did he get his authority for that? Not from Congress. It’s based on his reading of Title IX of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 that for over half a century no one else has seen, doubtless because Title IX prohibits discrimination on the basis of sex, not chosen sex. Reading Title IX as we want it to be is of a piece with reading the Constitution that way too. Thus do objectivity and the rule of law fade into the rule of man.

Roger Pilon is the founding director of Cato’s Center for Constitutional Studies. This column originally appeared on the Cato @ Liberty blog.