ICD10Central.com screen shot

With less than two months to go before the healthcare providers must change over to diagnostic coding library ICD-10, RelayHealth on Monday released a web tool that tracks just how well healthcare providers are doing at managing their claims.

The site, ICD10Central.com, features key performance indicators including days to final bill, days to payment, denial rate and reimbursement rate for RelayHealth customers throughout the country.

The portal can track national trends, or break them down by major regions: Northeast, South, Midwest, West. The portal can also break out indicators for cardiology, OB/GYN, radiology and orthopedics, four clinical areas that the revenue cycle company says have problematic diagnosis and procedure codes that can lead to delayed reimbursements and denials.

[Also: CMS says it won't deny ICD-10 claims for a year]

For example, according to the site, RelayHealth customers have averaged 14.7 days to final bill over the past seven days, and an average of 41.7 days to payment in that same period. The denial rate is 1.3 percent and the reimbursement rate is 29 percent.

Compare that to cardiology, which stands at 11.2 days to final bill in the last seven days and has an average of 32.5 days to payment. The denial rate in that period is zero, while the reimbursement rate stands at 25.8 percent.

Obviously, those pre-ICD-10 numbers are expected to change after the code set takes effect on Oct. 1.

In addition to real time analytics, the site also includes ICD-10 coding guidance to help healthcare providers avoid coding mistakes that could delay claims, focusing on problem areas in cardiology, OB/GYN, radiology and orthopedics. The system flags possible generic codes that could lead to a denial and suggests more detailed codes.

Like Healthcare Finance on Facebook

The Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services has said it would not deny claims within the first year of the ICD-10 rollout as long as providers use the right ICD-10 family. However, coding issues could cause problems with claims filed to commercial insurers.

To help with that, RelayHealth's portal includes a section where commercial payers can share their own advice about claims and coding and explain their guidelines for ICD-10 claims. So far, CareFirst, Health Alliance and Meridian Health Plan are the only payers posting on the forum.

Twitter: @HenryPowderly