Gov. Snyder gives his inauguration speech in front of the state capitol in Lansing. (Jan. 1, 2015)





LANSING, Mich. (AP) — Gov. Rick Snyder took the oath of office for another four-year term Thursday, saying that he proved that many of Michigan’s biggest problems can be solved but pledged to not ease up because more “incredible” achievements are possible.

On a frigid and windy New Year’s Day, the 56-year-old Republican was sworn in just after noon on a platform over the Capitol steps facing downtown Lansing.

“We can do incredible things when we do them together,” Snyder told a crowd of more than 500 supporters in his inaugural address, pointing to Detroit’s recent emergence from bankruptcy. “Let’s keep that spirit going. Let’s show how we can do these special things.”

Snyder took office in 2011 as Michigan’s economy was starting to rebound from a decade-long slide.

“The second term, we have to look forward,” he told the crowd. “As I said, we have to deal huge problems. We were a broken state. We’re a state that’s a comeback state now. A state that’s growing, that’s thriving. But we have more to work to be done. Now is the time to focus in on innovation, to be forward-looking, to say in terms of supporting our citizens we can show true leadership throughout the nation.”

Snyder’s earliest second-term challenge will be selling a proposed 1 percentage-point sales tax increase tied to a legislative deal to pump an additional $1.3 billion a year into deteriorating roads and other transportation infrastructure. A statewide vote is scheduled for May.

He also said he wants to lead the nation in expanding technical education to fill open jobs in the skilled trades and make Michigan’s entrepreneurial climate tops in the country. He also plans to seek more transparency and accountability in local governments and schools and re-evaluate state government services, saying recipients are being split “into pieces” among an increasing number of programs instead of being treated as “real people.”

“How do we get you in the mainstream, the river of opportunity so that we can create a path of success for all Michiganders? We shouldn’t leave anyone behind,” Snyder said, noting that this inaugural was more rewarding while the first one was more exciting.

The festivities featured music by the Michigan National Guard 126th Army Band and a 19-gun cannon salute. Detroit Mayor Mike Duggan — the master of ceremonies — kept it “short and quick” given the 20-degree temperatures, which felt colder with a wind chill.

Snyder, a University of Michigan graduate whose three adult children led the Pledge of Allegiance, drew applause when he yelled “Go Green!” for Michigan State’s football team, which was about to kick off in the Cotton Bowl against Baylor.

Lt. Gov. Brian Calley, Attorney General Bill Schuette, Secretary of State Ruth Johnson — all Republicans — and other state officeholders also were sworn in. That list included new Supreme Court Justice Richard Bernstein, who is blind. The GOP will continue to dominate the Legislature and almost all of state government, as it has since 2011.

Lt. Gov. Brian Calley, Attorney General Bill Schuette, Secretary of State Ruth Johnson — all Republicans — and other state officeholders also were sworn in. That list included new Supreme Court Justice Richard Bernstein, who is blind. The GOP will continue to dominate the Legislature and almost all of state government, as it has since 2011.

Snyder’s first term was marked by an improved economy; Detroit’s filing for and exit from bankruptcy, which was aided by a bipartisan $195 million state bailout; and major billion-dollar tax overhauls that cut business taxes but raised them on individuals. He also signed a right-to-work law that made union fees optional and expanded Medicaid for a half-million low-income adults.

The state Democratic Party accused Snyder of “spinning a narrative thoroughly out of touch with reality for too many Michiganders,” citing potential state budget problems and deficit-ridden school districts.

Snyder, a former venture capitalist and computer company executive who had never held public office until 2011, is the sixth straight Michigan governor to serve a second term.

“I want to be measured on two things,” the governor told 24 Hour News 8 before the swearing in. “One is, did I do what I said I was going to do. Secondly, did I do it in way that it was never about Rick Snyder being governor, but it was about creating an environment of long-term success where better, smarter people could come build on a foundation that we built. And we’re doing that with everything from what’s going on with Detroit to Healthy Michigan to the job creation we’re seeing. But let’s go faster in the next term.”

Snyder cannot run again in 2018 because of term limits but has been mentioned as a potential 2016 presidential candidate — though he has remained noncommittal about a run for federal office in interviews.

“He has not been your typical politician. He’s done what he believes is right and will help the state,” First Lady Sue Snyder told The Associated Press in an interview.

She has been involved in his campaign and some of his initiatives.

“When I told him to run for governor, I never ever anticipated what my role would be,” she told 24 Hour News 8 before the swearing in. “But I love it. I love being able to lend my voice to causes that are so important to so many people.”

The governor said he plans to concentrate on struggling rural areas in his second turn and not just urban cores.

“Let’s put a focused effort on the places of greatest need, whether they be in a city or whether it’s out in the countryside,” he told the AP.

24 Hour News 8’s Rick Albin contributed to this report.

This slideshow requires JavaScript.

Share this: Email

Print

Facebook

Twitter

Google

Pinterest

More

LinkedIn

Tumblr



Reddit