What happens when an alliance of food-safety and environmental groups gets together to discuss genetically engineered salmon? The FDA gets sued over frankenfish approval, that’s what happens. The groups insist that the GMO fish is unsafe for human consumption and is possibly dangerous to the environment.

The coalition includes groups such as Food and Water Watch, Friends of the Earth and the Center for Food Safety (CFS). The suit, filed in federal court in California, names Sylvia Burwell (as the secretary of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services), the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service and the FDA as defendants.

The suit alleges that the approval of AquaBounty Technology, Inc.’s AquAdvantage salmon was a mistake. AquaBounty originally stated to the regulatory agencies that it would confine its efforts to two locations: Panama and Canada. According to the coalition, the company has been telling investors that it plans to expand well beyond the two FDA-approved facilities. This, the coalition says, puts the FDA on notice that there may be environmental risks that it chose not to investigate.

In a statement, the coalition said, “Since at least 2010, the company has been engaged in efforts to expand the production of GE salmon to facilities around the world … and to sell the salmon in other markets, including Canada, Argentina, Brazil and China. This [recent approval] constitutes merely the company’s effort to open the regulatory door.”

The groups further allege that the agency’s environmental assessment didn’t go far enough in light of the “significant and irreversible environmental, ecological and intertwined socioeconomic harms” that might result from such a large, yet understudied, project.

The salmon sounds like something that came out of a mad scientist’s lab: the Atlantic salmon’s genetic profile serves as the “base,” but genes from the Pacific Chinook salmon and the deep-water ocean eelpout are added to increase the speed of the fishes’ maturity (i.e., market readiness).

The FDA-approved plan, according to the suit, has the eggs grown in Canada and shipped to Panama where the fish will be raised and slaughtered.

The CFS raised the question of whether the FDA had adequately considered the potential negative environmental impact of the GMO salmon when the agency announced its approval in November 2014. The CFS, along with other consumer groups, including Japan-based consumer advocacy group the Seikatsu Club Consumers’ Co-operative Union of Japan, again spoke out against the FDA’s decision in December 2014. The Seikatsu Club and the CFS said the approval was “irresponsible.”

The FDA approval was made with certain conditions the agency said were based on AquaBounty’s information and peer-reviewed data, both of which showed that the GMO salmon is just as nutritious and safe as its non-GMO Atlantic salmon relative.

Source:

Join the Discussion