Nuns at loggerheads with ObamaCare as they claim U.S. is blind to contraceptive implications

Catholics challenging contraceptive mandate of Affordable Care Act



Say need for group health plans to provide contraception 'violates beliefs'



Government 'blind' to the full implications of the law, they argue



Administration rebut claims - and says groups are already excempt



Catholic groups are up in arms with ObamaCare, President Barack Obama's flagship healthcare program, claiming that the government is 'blind' to the full implications of the contraceptive mandate.

Catholic groups - led by the Little Sisters of the Poor - are currently challenging the contraceptive mandat e of the Affordable Care Act in the Supreme Court.



The groups say the ObamaCare requirement for group health plans to provide contraception violates their religious beliefs.

Claims: The Little Sisters of the Poor say the US government is 'blind' to the real implications of the contraceptive mandate (library image)

On New Year's Eve Justice Sonia Sotomayor granted a temporary injunction which meant the group - and others - can opt out while the challenge continues.



However, the government says the injunction should never have been granted as such groups are already exempt through an 'accommodation'.

Under an accommodation, religious non-profits sign a form which means contraception is administered - and paid for - through a third party organization.



The administration adds the Little Sisters are also part of the Christian Brothers Services - which also exempts them.



But Catholics argue they cannot sign away the responsibility to administer contraception to a third party - as they would then be sinning of their behalf.



Mark L. Rienzi, a lawyer for the Little Sisters, says the government is 'simply blind to the religious exercise at issue: the Little Sisters and other applicants cannot execute the form because they cannot deputize a third party to sin on their behalf.'

In court papers, he says the government’s 'causal dismissal' of that 'religiously forbidden act as a mere "stroke of their own pen" perpetuates their claim below that the Little Sisters are fighting an ‘invisible dragon.'

Another lawyer for the nuns, Kevin C. Walsh of the School of Law University of Richmond writes, 'The government’s incomplete characterization of the form is that it is a simple opt-out form that does nothing but signal that the organization is claiming an exemption.'

Refute: The government say Catholic groups are already exempt from administering - and paying for - contraception (library image)

However, Professor Michael C. Dorf of Cornell Law School says groups are wrong.

Speaking with ABC news, he claims the Little Sisters' emphasis on the form is misguided.



'I would say that even if the consequence of signing the paper were that the employees get contraceptive coverage, that still would not count as a substantial burden under the Religious Freedom Restoration Act.

'Suppose that a Quaker who is categorically opposed to war gets a draft notice. If the Little Sisters plaintiffs are right, then he is not only entitled to his exemption from the draft; he’s entitled to get his exemption without even signing the piece of paper saying he is entitled to his exemption. Why?



Because if he signs that piece of paper, then the government will draft the next person on the list and so he will be 'participating' in the war effort to which he is religiously opposed.'