The last available ticket was sold Wednesday, and seemingly everybody showed up Saturday. Peter Barton Lacrosse Stadium continues to be a Mile High City hot spot when the University of Denver men’s lacrosse team is on display.

In the 27th consecutive home sellout dating to the 2014 season, the defending NCAA champions and No. 1-ranked Pioneers treated their fans to a 15-6 victory over Ohio State amid a stiff, cold wind. Denver, which outscored the Buckeyes 8-1 in the fourth quarter, extended its winning streaks to 20 overall and 19 at home.

Coach Bill Tierney is now 46-6 at Barton Stadium, which seats 2,000 spectators. The Pioneers (7-0) were playing at home after winning consecutive overtime games at perennial national powers North Carolina and Notre Dame.

“It was not one of those games where the score was indicative of the game. That was a tough lacrosse game,” said Tierney, whose team trailed 2-1 after the first quarter but outscored the Buckeyes (5-4) 4-0 in the second. “I’m really proud of the guys, really proud of how they came through. It didn’t start out well. Second quarter was really good — and the fourth, obviously.

“I’m just proud of these guys for fighting through and some of the older guys for carrying some of these younger guys that we’re putting out on the field every game as we continue to get better.”

Attackmen Jack Bobzien and Connor Cannizzaro each had a hat trick and Cannizzaro also had an assist for a team-high four points. Midfielder Zach Miller had two goals and an assist and freshman Colton Jackson of Highlands Ranch had two goals in his first career start at midfield.

Faceoff specialist Trevor Baptiste won 15-of-23 draws and defenseman Pat Karole had five groundballs. Off the bench, freshman Nate Marano and sophomore Brendan Bomberry combined for five points.

DU took a 7-5 lead into the fourth quater after Cannizzaro scored off a Miller pass late in the third. Miller then assisted on Bobzien’s goal early in the fourth quarter as the Pioneers rolled. DU scored the game’s final six goals between the 8:34 and 1:33 mark of the final frame, many with reserves.

“We talked about all week, when we get up to not let up like we have in the past couple games against Notre Dame and UNC,” Cannizzaro said. “So when we got to the fourth quarter we really focused on stepping on them and not letting them back in the game. When our twos and threes got in the game we were really excited to see how well they played.”

Denver plays Penn State in Dallas next weekend before visiting Georgetown and Villanova in Big East Conference play.

Mike Chambers: mchambers@denverpost.com or @mikechambers