The worst of Colorado’s latest extreme storm — tornadoes, blizzards, slides and floods all at the same time — swept away from the Front Range and into the northern Great Plains on Sunday.

But Colorado prairie towns still face rising rivers.

The National Weather Service has forecast moderate to severe flooding in northeastern Colorado through Wednesday along the South Platte River.

Sunday night, low land in Weld and Morgan counties was flooding. Water was expected to cover Colorado 144 and railroad tracks to the east near Good rich on Monday.

The Antelope, Kiowa and Bijou creeks that cross under Interstate 76 as they flow toward the main stem of the South Platte were rising with higher water flowing toward the highway.

Morgan County authorities issued pre-evacuation alerts, notifying residents of Orchard and Goodrich to be ready to run.

“It has not crested yet in our area,” Undersheriff Dave Martin said. “The ground is saturated now – not absorbing much because it is saturated.”

The Arkansas River in southern Colorado was flowing at near flood levels, too, according to weather bulletins. And until noon Monday, meteorologists said, they also saw a potential for flooding along the Cache La Poudre River near Greeley as well as low land in several eastern counties.

“What we know is a lot of the county roads are under water. We’ve got flooding water that will be slowly moving down the Platte over the next 24 hours,” Weather Service forecaster Scott Entrekin said.

The South Platte level was expected to peak at 11.2 feet near the town of Weldona on Monday — less than the 19.2 feet during the 2013 floods, Entrekin said.

Meanwhile, metro Denver and other northern Front Range residents — who on Sunday navigated slushy roads and dealt with tree branches torn from snow-laden trees — likely will see calmer conditions.

Temperatures were expected to drop below freezing Sunday night but should warm to the 50s Monday along the Front Range, weather service meteorologist Jim Kalina said. Possible fog Monday morning likely will lift, leading to cloudy and partly cloudy conditions Monday afternoon. “We’re not going to see any additional rainfall or snowfall,” Kalina said.

The question remains whether the unusual storm that hit Saturday was a blip — or a sign of the increased extreme weather some climate change models predict in the future.

Widespread flooding in northern Colorado in September 2013 has piqued concerns among Colorado city, county and state officials, who are trying to build resilience.

“We’ve had times where we had tornadoes, blizzards and floods at the same time,” Kalina said, referring to the 1980s.

“But it’s pretty uncommon to get everything at once. Sign of things to come? Hard to say. Here in Colorado, you always get unusual weather and this has happened in the past. It is probably going to happen in the future.”

Power outages affected about 43,350 Xcel Energy customers in metro Denver before it was restored. The Colorado State Patrol reported no fatalities or major accidents due to weather.

The floodwaters east of metro Denver swamped and tipped over an ambulance in Morgan County. A patient and paramedics escaped.

On Sunday evening, Pueblo firefighters rushed to rescue a 15-year-old stranded in the Arkansas River, where the water surged too high as the boy was fishing with a friend. The firefighters formed a chain and waded into the raging waters to pull him out of the river.

“It’s really high and it’s still going up,” Pueblo police Sgt. Dustin Dodge said. “It’s running way too high to go wading.”

Bruce Finley: 303-954-1700, bfinley@denverpost.com or twitter.com/finleybruce