Conservatives float an alternative to Obamacare just two weeks before the health insurance overhaul takes full effect, as the law's unpopularity hits new highs

Plan would completely replace Obamacare with tax deductions of up to $20,000

Republicans' aim is to cut bureaucrats out of the process and give taxpayers 'all the choices and none of the grief'

Obama administration has criticized the GOP for seeking a repeal without proposing its own solution to America's health insurance gap

Polls show the president's signature health care overhaul law is wildly unpopular as its first hard deadline approaches on Oct. 1



Republicans hope to eliminate the roughly 20,000 pages of regulations that the federal government has published under the Obamacare law. House Speaker John Boehner reportedly favors a 'repeal and replace' approach

A group that represents more than 190 conservative Republicans in the House of Representatives will unveil a plan on Wednesday to replace the Affordable Care Act with a radically different approach to eliminating America's health care gap.

The Republican Study Committee (RSC), an informal caucus that provides research and writes legislation for conservative partisans, plans to offer a 200-page bill that would repeal President Obama's 900-page health care overhaul and its 20,000 pages of related federal regulations.

But right-wingers will undoubtedly hit a roadblock with Democrats when they learn that the bill would ban the use of federal tax dollars for funding abortions.

Sponsored by Louisiana Republican Rep. Steve Scalise, The American Health Care Reform Act would repeal the Obamacare law and offer taxpayers direct subsidies so they can choose their own insurance plans on the open market.

The tax deductions, valued at $7,500 for individuals and $20,000 for families, would be portable from job to job. Americans would be permitted to pocket whatever portion of the subsidies they don't spend, and insurance plan purchases would be permitted across state lines on a nationwide basis for the first time.

More attractively for conservative Republicans, the proposal would cut federal bureaucrats out of the health care-buying process, giving Americans full authority to decide what kind of insurance suits them.

'This is about giving Americans all the choices and none of the grief,' a Republican House staffer to an RSC member told MailOnline. 'Basically, we've had it up to here with voters telling us to kill Obamacare before it kills them.'



A billboard in New York City promotes a plan to defund Obamacare. The conservative Heritage Foudnation sponsored the ad Louisiana Rep. Steve Scalise (L) and Tennessee Rep. Phil Roe (R) lead the Republican Study Committee and promoted their bill Wednesday on Capitol HIll

'We think people are smart enough and will find the best plan for their family,' Scalise told The Daily Caller, which first reported the details of the RSC's plan.

Scalise stressed Republicans' belief that Americans should have a wider berth when choosing their health insurance, and said the RSC's bill would provide options 'if sex change operations are not something you want ... if you want a bare-bones policy, [or] if you want a Cadillac plan.'

'By allowing people to buy health insurance across state lines and pool together so small businesses and families can get the same buying power as large corporations,' he said Wednesday in a press release, 'we can lower costs and increase choices while removing Washington bureaucrats from your health care decisions.'



According to a bill summary provided to MailOnline, the proposal would provide for a 10-year $25 'high risk pool' fund, intended to offset the health care costs of Americans suffering from pre-existing conditions that could otherwise make them ineligible for some private insurance plans.

The law would also prohibit the spending of federal health care dollars to provide abortion services.



The Obama administration has made hay in recent months over Republicans' reluctance to offer an alternative to the Obamacare law while simultaneously complaining that it represents a government takeover of one-seventh of America's private-sector economy.

While House GOP leaders have held more than 40 separate votes to repeal the law, they nave failed to rally around a single replacement proposal.

President Obama has taken public victory laps this year on his health care law, but his hand-picked press conference companions don't reflect the country's mood, polls show

The cheerleader: Health and Human Services secretary Kathleen Sebelius addressed health care providers on Monday in Florida, as part of a tour to quell concerns before the Obamacare law's October 1 enrollment deadline

'They offer no hope of a better situation when it comes to healthcare for all those millions of Americans,' White House Press Secretary Jay Carney said on Monday.

'They say, "Sorry, we’re going to take away those refunds, we’re going to take away the benefits that you’ve already enjoyed," all in the name of an ideological agenda.

The president engaged Republicans directly on Monday, saying that he is 'more than willing to work with them where they've got specific suggestions that they can show will make our health care system work better.'

But he, too, insisted that the GOP had not proferred a workable alternative.

'Remember,' he said, 'initially this was like "repeal and replace," and the replace thing has kind of gone off to the wayside. Now it's just "repeal."'

The White House has not commented Wednesday on the RSC's reported proposal. But the liberal Slate website called it an impractical 'health care unicorn.'

Tea party-affiliated conservatives rallied in Washington on Sept. 10, demanding the kind of Obamacare exemptions for all taxpayers that members of Congress and their staffers have already won from the White House

President Obama has also complained this week about reports that the GOP plans to use the Obamacare law as a bargaining chip in an upcoming federal budget fight.

President Barack Obama is sticking to his guns as the October 1 Obamacare deadline approaches for individual taxpayers

During a Wednesday speech to the Business Roundtable, he blamed GOP partisanship for holding the federal budget, and a planned increase in the federal debt ceiling, hostage to a health care law repeal.

'This town, Washington, is locked up,' Obama said, blaming a 'small faction' of Republicans intent on derailing 'progress' on various issues.

Congressional Republicans, he claimed, are 'extort[ing]' the White House with threats of a debt default.

'What we now have,' said Obama, 'is a ideological fight that's been mounted in the House of Representatives that says, we're not going to pass a budget and we will threaten a government shutdown unless we repeal the Affordable Care Act.'

'We have not seen this in the past, that a budget is contingent on us eliminating a program that was voted on, passed by both chambers of Congress, ruled constitutional by the Supreme Court, is two weeks from being fully implemented, and that helps 30 million people finally get health care coverage.'



Sen. Chuck Schumer, an outspoken New York Democrat, predicted an electoral disaster last week for Republicans who go to the mat for an Obamacare repeal.

'What’s going on here – and I’ve never seen anything quite like this – is, this small few who represent maybe five percent of the electorate dictate what’s going on, hold the country by the neck and paralyze things,' Schumer said.



'The good news is, we do have elections. And if they succeed in their platform, they will fail the way Mitt Romney failed.'



Seventy-four GOP representatives – far more than five percent but not enough to form a House majority – have signed on to a plan that ties a budget 'continuing resolution' to the repeal or defunding of the Affordable Care Act, Obama's signature legislative achievement, even at the risk of shutting down the government in a stalemate.

Republican moderates have resisted, citing fears that Americans would hold the Republican Party responsible for any government shutdown.

A consensus is slowly building among House moderates, however, for a plan that would call for a one-year moratorium on Obamacare enforcement.



Anti-Obamacare protesters may have the pulse of America after all, judging from the latest polling data to emerge about the Affordable Care Act

'I think you’re seeing more of us in the House gravitating toward a one-year delay,' Scalise told The Daily Caller, 'as the most – right now, the most – likely way to get relief from Obamacare and to keep this fight going.'

THE ANTI-OBAMACARE PROPOSAL

According to the Republican Study Committee, its American Health Care Reform Act would:



Fully repeal President Obama's health care law



Allow Americans to purchase health insurance across state lines and enable small businesses to pool together and get the same buying power as large corporations

Reform medical malpractice laws to limit trial lawyer fees and non-economic lawsuit damages

Give taxpayers a standard tax deduction for health insurance

Expand access to Health Savings Accounts

Provide a $25 billion 'high risk pool' to protect people with pre-existing conditions from discrimination

Prohibit federal government funding of abortions

The first hard deadlines attached to the law are just two weeks away, but the White House has already announced a one-year delay before insurance coverage mandates will be enforced against employers.

Rep. Phil Roe, a Tennessee Republican who is a medical doctor, told a gaggle of reporters Wednesday morning that delaying implementation for individual taxpayers as well would 'allow people to find out what a pig in the poke they bought.'

Roe said another year of breathing room would give taxpayers 'some clarity for the rule-making. It'll also give us the chance to go out and define clearly what they have now with the current law, and what they could have.'

He held a copy of the Republican Study Committee's plan in his right hand as he spoke.

'Unfortunately, during the Obamacare debate no one asked me or any of the other Republican doctors what we thought, despite requesting several meetings with the president because I saw this train wreck coming,' he said Wednesday in a statement.

'We know the president’s health care law is unworkable and that is exactly why Chairman Scalise asked me to help draft a replacement bill. Our bill will not increase taxes, does not rely on mandates, expands coverage and lowers costs.'



The Affordable Care Act is reaching new lows in popularity among ordinary taxpayers.

A Pew Research Center/USA Today poll released this week found that 53 per cent of Americans disapprove of the health care law, a number that matches the highest the poll has measured since the law passed in Congress.