Just when the Rockies righted their pitching ship, the tide turned again Sunday. Right-hander Jordan Lyles lasted just 2 innings against the division-leading Los Angeles Dodgers. And now Colorado’s rotation is off its orbit.

“It was unacceptable,” Lyles said.

Lyle’s sideways start started a week of rejiggering. Jorge De La Rosa, who was set to start Monday, instead was bumped to Tuesday because of stomach flu, the team said.

Chad Bettis will instead start Monday on normal rest. But that was manager Walt Weiss’ third option.

“We’re talking about bumping him back a couple days,” Weiss said before Sunday’s game, a 12-10 loss to the Dodgers. “That was one of the scenarios. We have a Plan B we’ll kick around.”

Plan A was to move De La Rosa to Wednesday, let long-reliever Chris Rusin pitch Monday and keep Bettis on his regularly scheduled Tuesday.

Rockies Mailbag: Pose a question for Patrick Saunders

But Rusin was called into duty Sunday in relief of Lyles. And De La Rosa remained too ill to pitch Monday, Weiss’ Plan B.

Estevez’s debut. In his big-league debut Saturday, 23-year-old right-hander Carlos Estevez blew through the Dodgers for two hitless innings. But he stopped long enough to savor the scene.

“After my last warm-up pitch, I walked around the mound, looked up everywhere. And I took a deep breath and said: ‘This is it. Here’s where I wanted to be,’ Estevez said.

“It was really exciting to play in front of so many people.”

Estevez said he was surprised the Rockies called him up so soon this season, but he was prepared. And at 6-foot-4, 210 pounds, Estevez fills the need for a hard-throwing reliever.

CarGo cares. Carlos Gonzalez dived into the stands down the right-field line Sunday chasing a flyball. But when he tumbled over the wall, his spikes clipped a young girl. The last he saw of her, she was bleeding from the head.

“I called the trainers over to her,” Gonzalez said. “They said she is fine. I’ll try to give her a little present.”

Footnotes. Charlie Blackmon (turf toe) ran the bases in spikes for the first time Sunday. “Best-case scenario is we’ll see him in Arizona,” Weiss said of the Rockies’ next road trip, starting April 29. … Catcher Nick Hundley (concussion) played seven innings in a Triple-A rehab game in Las Vegas and had an RBI single. He’s likely to be activated Monday. Nick Groke, The Denver Post

Looking Ahead

Pirates LHP Jeff Locke (0-2, 7.24 ERA) at Rockies RHP Chad Bettis (2-0, 3.33), 6:40 p.m. Monday, ROOT; 850 AM

Bettis, the Rockies’ best pitcher so far this season, has thrown the most innings (24 ) and has the lowest ERA and WHIP (1.027 walks and hits per inning). In his last outing, a six-inning loss at Cincinnati, he got through six innings without a walk. Bettis was scheduled to start Tuesday, with an extra day of rest after a team day off last week. But the Rockies moved him up to help Jorge De La Rosa (stomach flu).

Tuesday: Pirates RHP Gerrit Cole (1-2, 2.70 ERA) at Rockies LHP Jorge De La Rosa (1-2, 9.87), 6:40 p.m., ROOT

Wednesday: Pirates LHP Jon Niese (3-0, 4.24) at Rockies Jon Gray (0-0, 9.00), 6:40 p.m., ROOT

Thursday: Pirates RHP Juan Nicasio (2-2, 4.50) at Rockies RHP Tyler Chatwood (2-2, 3.47), 1:10 p.m., ROOT