Despite terrible weather in Pensacola, turnout for Ben Carson’s book signing event was huge. Roughly close to 2,000 people showed up, many of them supporters who wanted to meet Carson and get a copy of his book “A More Perfect Union: What We the People Can Do to Reclaim Our Constitutional Liberties.”

“He’s not your typical politician. He’s a doctor. And I think he’s speaking for the American people,” said Abbey Cole, Pensacola.

“I think in every interview that I have seen him in he doesn’t get super excited but I don’t know I kind of like it,” said Sarah Deshauteurs, Gautier, MS.

“We’re tired of the corruption and would love someone that is an equal represent the rest of us,” said Cliff Routley Pace, FL.

His visit comes as national polls show Carson neck and neck with Donald Trump, who had been leading for several months as the top Republican contender. Carson has now pulled ahead in Iowa, leading by double digits.

“I’d like to win all of the states, all 50 states,” said Carson.

That excitement isn’t only showing in polls but in donations. Carson recently raised $20 million this last quarter. That places him third behind Hillary Clinton, who raised $30 million.

“Over 800,000 donations. You know my campaign is not about me. It’s about we the people and about time we put the people back on the forefront,” said Carson.

Carson is pro-life, he’s campaigning to balance the budget, reform Obamacare, as well as funding for education. But we also asked him about his concerns over the Voter ID issue in Alabama.

“Go ahead and get whatever is necessary to vote and do it now, don’t do it now don’t wait till three weeks before the time so that you can make it into a big issue so that people can come in and say everybody is racist. This is craziness. Every country I’ve been to and I’ve been to 57 countries requires voter identification are we the only ones that are racist? It doesn’t make any sense,” said Carson.

He reiterated he wanted this job. And even as the polls show he is coming out on top — he says it’s a marathon, not a sprint, and he will stay committed.

We also checked to see if Carson would be making any stops in Mobile, and his business manager told us at this point they are still looking into it. He’ll continue his book signing tour through November, with the last stop in Boca Raton, Florida.