Photo

The mayor who faced a multitude of excited New York City workers in Manhattan on Monday morning was not Bill de Blasio.

Instead, it was the mayor of Buffalo, Byron Brown, who listened patiently as a contingent of fast-food restaurant employees pleaded for an increase in their minimum wage to $15 an hour, cheered on by an auditorium filled with their colleagues and sympathizers.

As chairman of a three-member board appointed by Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo in May, Mr. Brown strode onto Mr. de Blasio’s turf for a public hearing about whether the minimum wage for the state’s 180,000 fast-food workers should be raised above New York’s statewide minimum of $8.75 an hour.

With just one exception, the first 30 people to testify at the hearing at New York University stated a common demand: They want $15 an hour, and they want it now. Many of them wore black shirts bearing the slogan “Fight for $15,” a rallying cry that sprang from protests in New York City and spread across the country.

New York, once the standard-bearer for liberal ideas, now lags behind several areas of the country in mandating better pay for low-wage workers. Los Angeles, San Francisco and Seattle have all approved minimum wages of $15 an hour, or more.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Mr. de Blasio and Mr. Cuomo, both Democrats, have pressed for higher minimum wages for the city and the state, but those desires have been thwarted by legislators in Albany. To circumvent the Legislature, the governor called for the creation of the wage board, which is scheduled to hold a series of public hearings and decide, by next month, how much the industry’s minimum wage should be raised, if at all.

An increase would present the prospect of having a much higher minimum wage for workers at a McDonald’s than at a Gap store across the street, though any increase is likely to be put into effect in steps. But economists say a mandatory increase for such a large swath of low-wage workers would create pressure on other employers to match it.

Mr. Cuomo has not said what he thinks the minimum wage for fast-food workers should be. But he has appeared at several rallies alongside those demanding $15 an hour.

On Monday, organizers of the “Fight for $15” campaign turned out a large and vocal crowd that included pizza makers, cashiers, unionized graduate students, economists, a venture capitalist from Seattle and at least one rabbi.

With near unanimity, they took turns telling Mr. Brown and Mike Fishman, a fellow board member who is a union official, that they cannot support themselves or their families on the wages they receive, in some cases as low as $6.40 an hour.

Jason Rice, 31, who lives in Jamaica, Queens, said he holds three part-time jobs, including delivering pizzas for a Domino’s in the Bedford-Stuyvesant section of Brooklyn. He said that he was paying $600 a month to rent a room and that his hours were so irregular it was difficult to set a budget and pay bills.

An increase to $15 is “not something that we can really afford to wait for five years for it to be phased in,” Mr. Rice said.

“We can’t even afford to wait three years,” he continued.

Rebecca Cornick, 60, said she took a job at Wendy’s nine years ago and was still making just $9 an hour. She said she earned only two-thirds of what she needed to pay her rent, so she wound up “in rent court year after year, month after month.”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Ms. Cornick said she supported her 24-year-old granddaughter but could not qualify for social services because, she has repeatedly been told, she made too much money. “This is an abomination,” she said.

Two professors of economics testified that one of the benefits of a higher minimum wage would be to reduce the dependence of fast-food workers on subsidies from the government.

Stephanie Luce, a professor of labor studies at the City University of New York, said higher wages cut down on employee turnover and spur higher productivity. She said some large companies in the fast-food industry had the power to set wages for the industry. “They set them low not because they have to, but because they can,” she said.

In the first three hours of the hearing, one man stepped forward to speak against a sharp rise in the minimum wage for food-service workers.

Howard Nielsen, who said he owned two Sticky Lips barbecue restaurants in the Rochester area, said raising the cost of labor significantly would cut into profits and lead to layoffs, and could possibly drive some establishments out of business.

Mr. Nielsen said a series of government programs and policies, including the Affordable Care Act, would cost his businesses an additional $400,000 a year. He said it was not feasible for restaurants like his to suddenly pay workers so much more, “unless the American public doesn’t mind spending 40 to 60 percent more” when they eat out.

Nick Hanauer, a venture capitalist from Seattle, where the minimum wage has already risen to $11, said that city’s restaurant industry was thriving. He said it had more restaurants per capita than New York or any other city in the country, save one. And that one is not some “low-wage paradise,” he said, but San Francisco, the only city where restaurant workers make a minimum wage of $12.25 an hour.