Oregonians who've transferred – or tried to transfer - a child from one public school district to another are likely to have thrown something at some point in the process. A pencil, a cellphone, a Volkswagen, whatever: To say that the state's multipronged transfer system is a little baffling is like saying Stephen Hawking is a little smart. Parents should beware, however, of those who point to the system's complexity as an argument to simplify it in a way that will erode choice. Stay tuned for the 2016 legislative session.

Most students who transfer to public schools outside of their home districts do so in one of three ways: They attend a charter school, they use Oregon's standard inter-district transfer process or they use the state's relatively new "open enrollment" law. Parents can expect a serious push next year to rejigger the latter two, one potential end result being a system that's easier to use – but much less useful.

Editorial Agenda 2015

Make Portland a city that works Get pot right Smart choices for education Help rural Oregon Keep people and goods moving Foster small business growth Track health reforms

_______________________________ Read more about the editorial board's priorities for Oregon.

Under the traditional transfer process, participating districts announce each year how many students from other districts they're willing to accept and how many of their own students they're willing to surrender. Thus has the Portland school district determined that it will accept up to 300 students (and their state funding) from other districts during the coming school year and allow up to 50 Portland students (and their state funding) to go elsewhere.

The standard process does allow a certain degree of student choice, but districts aren't required to participate and they may limit the exodus of their own students, who are thus held captive even though they might be better served by a neighboring district that's more than happy to have them.

The Legislature addressed the captive-student problem in 2011 by creating an open-enrollment process. Participating districts announce each year how many students from elsewhere they're willing to accept, and students may transfer without the approval of their home districts. As with the standard transfer process, districts participate only if they want to. Among those that do is Lake Oswego, which also allows transfers through the standard process. The Portland school district, which gained a net 429 students last year through interdistrict transfer generally, lost 114 through open enrollment, 26 of them to Lake Oswego.

Unfortunately, the open-enrollment mechanism that allowed a couple of dozen Portland students to attend Lake Oswego schools at no cost last year – and 28 to attend North Clackamas, 24 to attend David Douglas and 15 to attend Corbett, and so on – is not permanent. The law, created by House Bill 3681, sunsets in 2017, and there are those who don't consider family-driven school choice (as opposed to district-governed "choice") such a hot thing. A bill that would have removed the sunset date died in committee this session, setting the stage for a debate next year.

Even as the Democratic-controlled Legislature ignored legislation preserving open enrollment this year, it debated and passed a bill tweaking the standard process for inter-district transfers. While the heavily amended version of Senate Bill 709 that emerged from the Legislature made a number of fairly minor changes, the bill as introduced was much more ambitious. Sponsored by Sen. Sara Gelser, D-Corvallis, it grew out of a work group set up by school boards and administrators who are less than enamored of the complex status quo. The bill initially would have nudged the standard process a little bit closer to the open enrollment mode, requiring participating districts, for instance, to surrender as many students every year as they accept. While this bill did not change the open-enrollment process – a point lawmakers and others made several times during testimony – softening up the standard process was part of a larger strategy identified by Senate Education Committee Chair Arnie Roblan, D-Coos Bay, during a March 31 public hearing. If the change works, Roblan said, "there are people who would say, 'Maybe we don't need to extend the sunset.'"

Though the open enrollment vs. standard enrollment debate fizzled this session, it will by necessity happen in 2016. There's something to be said for creating a simpler and more streamlined student-transfer process. But simplicity achieved by eliminating the defining feature of the open enrollment law – the ability of students to transfer even without the approval of their home districts – will not be worth it. Oregonians should remain on guard, and those who believe they can best decide where their children attend school should tell their senators and representatives to remove the open-enrollment sunset date.