Maya Stein, below, and Amy Tingle pose with a typewriter much like the two they'll take on a journey from Boulder to Wisconsin on a tandem bike. ( Bella Cirovic/Courtesy photo )

If you go What: Little Free Library installation with Boulder councilwoman Lisa Morzel When: 10 a.m. Sunday Where: Community Cycles, 2805 Wilderness Place, Suite 1000, Boulder Cost: Free More info: facebook.com/typerider2

In a fast-paced world where bite-sized information is king, Maya Stein and Amy Tingle hope to slow down with help from two vintage typewriters and a tandem bike.

Stein and Tingle will leave Boulder on Tuesday on a tandem bike, pulling two vintage typewriters behind them on a trailer as they make their way across the Midwest promoting poetry, reading, storytelling and community.

Along their 1,400-mile journey to Beloit, Wisconsin, the two plan to build roughly 25 new Little Free Libraries in Midwestern towns, many of which now don't have libraries. While riding 40 to 50 miles each day, the two plan to write spontaneous poetry for interested passersby on their orange Olympia Traveler and yellow Montgomery Ward typewriters.

"It's the tactile nature; it's also the speed with which you use both of those items," Tingle said. "With the typewriter, you have to be so deliberate when you're typing. There's something about that, about the slowdown, and similar to the bicycle. It's different than riding in a car or flying in an airplane. It's a deliberate pace. There's more time to look around and observe the world around you."

Advertisement

The trip is a continuation of a trip Stein took by herself in June 2012. They raised close to $30,000 this spring for the second trip, which they call "Type-Rider II: The Tandem Poetry Tour," on Kickstarter.

They decided to ride a tandem bike because it's a symbolic representation of collaboration, which Stein said is also necessary for making the new Little Free Libraries a success.

The "mini boxes of books" have been spreading around the country since 2009, when nonprofit Little Free Libraries was founded. According to the organization, roughly 11,000 towns in the United States don't have public libraries.

Once installed, neighbors can stop by and pick up a book, or add their own book to share.

"We're inviting communities to collaborate in the success of these libraries in donating the books, getting everyone involved," Stein said.

The trip will take them from Boulder, through northern Colorado, across Nebraska and Iowa, and into Wisconsin, where the Little Free Libraries movement was born.

Stein and Tingle said they want to highlight small communities in the Midwest.

"The Midwest is a part of the country that is sort of underestimated," Stein said. "It's states people pass over when they fly. They don't necessarily take the time to explore and dive into these communities. One of our hopes is to really highlight these towns as we go, the people that we meet and to establish connections between these towns also."