Tom Whitehurst Columnist SHARE ART/EDITORIAL/COLOR-Mug of Realtor/Talkshow host Berney Seal. 3/4/98 David Adame

The late real estate agent/radio talk show host Berney Seal, God rest his mirthful soul, liked to say whenever he recommended or performed an act of kindness or forgiveness that it was "the Christian thing to do."

Berney, who was Jewish ? that was the punch line ? was a gregarious sort who could take over just about any room he entered. But he might have felt out of place at the recent Texas Faith and Family Day Forum. One of the honored guests, Lt. Gov. Dan Patrick, urged Texans to be an army for Christ in defense of the Constitution against liberalism.

Now, admittedly, that's quite a mouthful of paraphrasing, and sometimes the so-called agenda-driven so-called-liberal media chooses its paraphrasing with ulterior motives. So, to be fair and safe, how about we let Patrick speak for Patrick: "We can be the leader in education, we can be the leader in creating jobs, we can be the leader in all that stuff, but we really need to be the leader for Christ. That's the answer. That's the hope that this state and country must look to. We need you as an army behind us, to stand for life, to stand for marriage, to stand just for the Constitution."

Was there any room at this inn for House Speaker Joe Straus, who in addition to providing capable, astute, conservative political leadership, is Jewish?

Patrick's slight to non-Christians didn't escape the attention of retired Rabbi Kenneth Roseman, who wrote in a letter to the editor last week: "How very gracious it was for Lt. Gov. Dan Patrick to revoke my status as a full-fledged American citizen."

Roseman graciously noted that the document Patrick wants to defend behind a wall of Christian soldiers was framed to discourage "mixing religion and statecraft."

Probably Jesus inspired The Framers to do that. He did say something about rendering unto Caesar what was Caesar's.

But if we were to mix just a little bit of Jesus with statecraft, the results might be interesting ? not religion and statecraft, Jesus and statecraft. Note the distinction between historic, love-thy-neighbor, judge-not-lest-ye-be-judged Jesus and modern dogma. Berney would have understood.

In this mix of Jesus and statecraft, there'd be no need for Obamacare ? not because our health care system before Obamacare was better policy, but because Jesus would heal the sick.

Now, let's set aside What Jesus Would Do and contemplate what he would say about contemporary policy. What would his opinion be of Texas leaders' refusal to expand Medicaid under Obamacare, thus denying coverage to a million of Texas' working poor?

It also would be interesting to know Jesus' opinion about the featured event at the forum ? the cutting of two wedding-style cakes in celebration of 10 years of Texas explicitly outlawing gay marriage. It's why Patrick said the words "to stand for marriage."

Maybe the Framers had a Christian ulterior motive for separating government from religion ? it could spare government officials from getting crosswise with Jesus. Patrick and other forum attendees also favor open carry of firearms but they don't invoke Jesus on that issue. And the Bible-thumping state officials who said no to the Medicaid expansion didn't mention him when they did that. They include Jesus when it's convenient and ignore him when it's not.

It's neither presumptuous nor blasphemous to point out that Jesus would have been as out of place as Berney Seal and Joe Straus at that hate-cake-cutting event in Austin. One of the cutters was state Rep. Cecil Bell, R-Magnolia ? so honored for having the divine inspiration to file a bill to withhold the pay of county clerks and other government employees if they issue marriage licenses to same-sex couples.

"My family's been in Texas since 1852," Bell said. "What has always been normal for us, we're suddenly being told it's not normal, that those things that are our traditional values, somehow they are wrong."

He has a point. The odds pretty much dictate that there have been a few gay Bells since 1852. Zero gay Bells in all of that time would be abnormal of the Bell family.

Rep. Bell's gay ancestors, being traditionalists, most likely kept to themselves or lived a lie in unfulfilling heterosexual unions. It was the traditional gay way of avoiding ostracism, beatings, imprisonment or worse in those simpler, pre-reparative therapy days.

Texas would be better off if the lieutenant governor would stop at "We can be the leader in education, we can be the leader in creating jobs." When it comes to governing, "all that stuff" is God's work.

Contact Tom Whitehurst Jr. at whitehurstt@caller.com or 361-886-3619. Join him on Twitter @WhitehurstJr.