Brookings, SD

North Dakota State controlled the line of scrimmage and the clock, defeating South Dakota State, 28-7, in the Missouri Valley Football Conference opener for both teams before a record crowd Saturday night at Coughlin-Alumni Stadium.



The Bison, ranked second in the Football Championship Subdivision coaches’ poll and third in the STATS media poll, improved to 3-1 overall. SDSU, ranked fifth in the STATS media poll and seventh by the FCS coaches, dropped to 3-1. A total of 17,348 fans attended the Dakota Marker game, breaking the previous stadium record of 16,498 in a 2013 game against NDSU.



NDSU won the battle for field position throughout the evening and grabbed a 7-0 lead on its opening drive of the game. The Bison converted twice on third-and-3 before King Frazier found paydirt from two yards out to cap a 10-play, 69-yard drive.



The Bison bridged a scoring drive between the end of the first period and start of the second, marching 68 yards on nine plays as Chase Morlock scored from three yards out with 13:47 to play in the first half.



NDSU converted on third down three times on a scoring drive late in the first half. The last of the three conversions came on third-and-6 as Carson Wentz connected with Luke Albers for a 16-yard gain. The pair hooked up again two plays later for a 2-yard touchdown with 20 seconds remaining.



After the Jackrabbit defense stopped NDSU on the opening drive of the second half, the Bison needed only one play on their next possession to push the margin to 28-0 as Wentz weaved his way for a 27-yard touchdown run on a quarterback keeper. The drive was set up by a 13-yard punt return by Eric Perkins after the Bison had pinned SDSU at its own 1 with a punt of its own.



The SDSU offense began to find a rhythm later in the third quarter and the Jackrabbits appeared to be on the verge of cracking the scoring column following a 36-yard pass from Zach Lujan to Cam Jones and 10-yard run by Isaac Wallace, the latter of which set up first and goal from the Bison 3. Wallace was stuffed on fourth and goal from the 1 three plays later, keeping the shutout intact at least temporarily.



After Je Ryan Butler forced the first of two second-half fumbles, the Jackrabbits converted on fourth down on their next possession for their lone score of the night. Dallas Goedert made a leaping catch of a pass from Zach Lujan and rambled 26 yards for a touchdown. Goedert ended the night with four catches for 63 yards. Fellow tight end Cam Jones added four receptions for 69 yards, while Brady Mengarelli recorded a team-high fie catches for 40 yards.



Lujan ended the night 19-of-38 passing for 242 yards.



The Jackrabbits, however, were unable to generate much of anything on the ground, finishing with minus-4 yards rushing on 15 carries. NDSU, meanwhile, tallied 202 yards on the ground and held a 39:19 to 20-41 advantage in time of possession. Wentz led the Bison with 54 yards on seven carries and completed 19-of-27 passes for 183 yards. Zach Vraa was his favorite target, collecing seven catches for 51 yards.



Jesse Bobbit led all players with 13 tackles for the Jackrabbits, adding a forced fumble and pass breakup. Nick Mears contributed 11 tackles.



NDSU was led defensively by Tre Dempsey with six tackles. Greg Menard added four tackles, including all three of the team’s sacks.



The Jackrabbits close out their four-game homestand Oct. 10, hosting Indiana State. Kickoff for the Hall of Fame and Military Appreciation game is set for 6 p.m.



NOTES: NDSU leads the all-time series, 59-40-5, and has won the last eight contests … the Bison lead the Dakota Marker series, 8-4, since the traveling trophy was introduced in 2004 … the Jackrabbits dropped to 20-35 against ranked opponents since joining the FCS in 2004 … SDSU’s leading receiver, Jake Wieneke, was held to three receptions for 39 yards, but recorded his 100th career reception in the game and also moved into fifth place in career receiving yards at SDSU with 1,971, passing Rusty Lenners (1,942 yards from 1993-96) … the Jackrabbits were flagged 10 times for 89 times, with NDSU drawing six penalties for 63 yards … the Bison finished with a 385-283 advantage in total offense … NDSU was 11-of-16 on third-down attempts, while SDSU converted only 2-of-15 third-down tries





Jason Hove

Assistant AD-Sports Information

South Dakota State University

College {{Title}} Remove Change News General Courts Web Only Crime Outdoors Events Center Non-Homepage Boredom Busters Pipeline Positively KELOLAND Technology Hunger Affordable Care Act Shops Flooding Remembering 9/11 Drought JazzFest Spring Storm Honor Flight Spencer Anniversary

DoApp Health News Business News Sports

Agriculture Markets Livestock Crops Politics

HealthBeat Cancer Children's Health Heart Health Wellness & Nutrition General Health Beat Women's Health RX Resources What's Going Around OTC Diabetes Recalls Dental Health Men's Health

Politics South Dakota Legislature Budget Congress Taxes General Local Campaign President US Senate New Laws US House Iowa Ballot Issues Local Races Minnesota Gubernatorial

Education Funding College Elementary High School Pre K School Supplies Middle School

Sports Professional College High School Sports Zone Headlines Summit League Tournament Olympics

Business Industry Your Money Matters Development Gas & Energy Legislation Economy/Stocks Employment General Health Care Technology Education Funding Tourism Banking/Finance Housing Transportation Insurance Meetings & Events Retail & Restaurants All Industries On The Move Shops Agriculture

Featured Stories Eye on KELOLAND Inside KELOLAND

Weather Snow Forecast Records Rain Flooding Drought WX Corner General

World News

Investigates GEAR UP

Sponsored Done

© 2016 Associated Press. All Rights Reserved. Material may not be redistributed.