Editor’s Note: The following is a column from the editorial staff.

Freedom is very inconvenient.

It requires sacrifice, selflessness and a thick skin. Very rarely does freedom ask how one feels. Rather it asks what is right.

Freedom is also fragile.

“I believe there are more instances of the abridgement of freedom of the people by gradual and silent encroachments by those in power than by violent and sudden usurpations,” James Madison once said.

Protecting against these “encroachments” is one of the central purposes of the Constitution of the United States.

Of course, history remembers those violent “usurpations” Madison mentions but rarely acknowledges the “gradual and silent encroachments” of power. Why? These encroachments are exactly as Madison might have called it today: convenient and popular.

These convenient and popular encroachments are more evident as laws and regulations continue catering to the feelings of people, rather than the values and principles America was founded upon.

Resisting the impulse to make others feel comfortable with their loss of liberty and standards is difficult. Those who resist this urge are often accused of being uncompassionate and close-minded. This persecution only increases when such commitment comes from inside the government itself.

Senator Ted Cruz is one of those people who has stood against continual corruption of American values.

In 2015, Cruz worked to revoke taxpayer dollars from Planned Parenthood, a government-funded organization that provides, among other services, abortions and sell fetal tissues, according to National Public Radio.

In 2014, Cruz sought to end political targeting by the IRS, according to The Wall Street Journal. This action was opposed by every Democratic senator in Washington, those same senators who have taken an oath to preserve and protect the Constitution and the freedom it provides.

Within his first few days in office as a U.S. senator, Cruz introduced legislation calling for the full repeal of the Affordable Care Act, commonly referred to as ObamaCare, according to Fox News.

These are just a few of Cruz’s notable achievements. In each of these instances, Cruz’s actions were not convenient or popular, but preserved freedom.

But Cruz’s work to preserve freedom continues on the campaign trail. While campaigning, Cruz has pushed to maintain states rights in gay marriage decisions and gun control laws.

He’s also advocated for increased national security by tightening immigration laws.

The promise of America can be found in the first lines of the Declaration of Independence.

“We hold these truths to be self-evident, that all men are created equal, that they are endowed by their creator with certain unalienable rights, that among these are life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness,” the Declaration of Independence reads.

We need a president that is committed to the American dream and will fight day after day to preserve liberty and freedom.

We need a president that will ask what’s right, instead of what feels good.

Ted Cruz is that president.