The underarm area is about the size of a Post-it note, but our individual notions about what keeps it dry and decent smelling are as impassioned as if it were a more substantial patch of skin.

Most of us swear by solid sticks. Others reach for roll-ons, clear gels or creams. Natural types evangelize “the rock,” rubbing an alum stone directly on their armpits.

One format Americans rarely rhapsodize about is sprays. They make up only 2 to 5 percent of the market here, according to industry sources.

Aerosol underarm protection fell out of favor in the United States in the 1970s and ’80s when it became clear that the chlorofluorocarbons in the propellants were bad for the environment, and despite occasional appearances in seventh-grade gym lockers or on your French friend’s bathroom shelf, they mostly disappeared.

But now, like other totems of that time — bangs and baby-doll dresses, say — they are starting to reappear, a resurgence spurred by their popularity in the rest of the world. In Europe and Latin America, sprays make up more than 60 percent of the market.

In December, Unilever introduced antiperspirant sprays for five of its brands: Dove Women, Dove Men + Care, Degree Men, Degree Women and Axe. They are nearly identical to those the company sells internationally, but comply with federal regulations.

“Lots of people will still like their stick,” said Matthew McCarthy, senior marketing director for antiperspirants and deodorants for Unilever. “But a couple of years ago, we said, ‘What does the future look like?’ We didn’t need to look further than the format that’s our No. 1 elsewhere in the world. It hasn’t been rocket science.”

Antiperspirants, by the way, stop sweating, while deodorants keep funky smells at bay, usually with essential oils that zap bacteria but don’t stop sweating itself.

Smaller companies, like Weleda from Switzerland and Aesop from Australia, are also promoting their non-aerosol sprays here. Kate Hudson and Carolyn Murphy use Weleda Wild Rose natural deodorant spray, and Aesop is advertising its lemongrass- and-clove spray deodorant with a black-and-white photo of woman deeply inhaling a man’s underarm.

“The benefit of having the product in a spray in a water and alcohol mixture is that it all evaporates quickly, and you’re left with essential oils,” said Kate Forbes, head of products and research and development for Aesop.

The main draw of sprays, aficionados agree, is that they dry as soon as you spray them on, so there is no flapping your arms up and down before putting on your shirt. And they don’t leave excess goop or white crumbles under your arms. Will swapping your morning swipe for a spray make you smell better or sweat less?

David Pariser, a past president of the American Academy of Dermatology, said that with antiperspirants, which use aluminum- based compounds to plug the sweat glands, the format doesn’t have anything to do with how dry it will keep you.

“The effectiveness is based on the active ingredients, not whether it’s delivered in a solid and spray,” he said.

Another advantage of a spray is that it can be used on areas like hands, where people tend to sweat a lot.

“You’re not going to want to put a solid on your hands,” Pariser said. “It’s all goopy. That’s a technical term.”

For some people, though, sprays can be irritating, depending on the ingredients.

“If it has alcohol in it, or some ingredient that would cause it to dry quickly, they may end up causing more irritation than sticks or roll-ons,” Pariser said