New York state is seeking to extend a contract with Computer Sciences Corp. to run its Medicaid computer system because a deal for Xerox Corp. to take over the program is stalled.

The length of the extension is still being negotiated, though it will reflect the time needed for Xerox’s five-year, $500 million contract to be finished, Jeffrey Hammond, a state Health Department spokesman, said by e-mail. More than nine months after it was awarded, the Xerox accord is awaiting approval from Comptroller Thomas DiNapoli.

Xerox will have as long as 18 months to build the new operating system, which will help New York’s $52 billion Medicaid program shift to a managed-care approach, according to the request for proposals. New York is making the change in the health-care program for the poor to align with the goals of President Barack Obama’s Affordable Care Act.

“The new system is expected to be more quickly and easily configurable to state and federal policy changes,” Hammond said. Meanwhile, the state is working with CSC to implement the managed-care expansion, he said.

Carol Meyers, a spokeswoman for Falls Church, Virginia-based CSC, said the state requested a 13-month extension, which the company is willing to do. Hammond declined to comment further.

Jeff Baum, a spokesman for Norwalk, Connecticut-based Xerox, declined to comment. Kate Gurnett, a spokeswoman for DiNapoli, said the office doesn’t discuss contracts under review.

Protests Filed

DiNapoli received the Xerox accord in December after it was approved by Attorney General Eric Schneiderman. Both CSC, which didn’t bid on the new deal, and Hewlett-Packard Co., which did, have filed protests against the agreement with Xerox. In its protest, CSC said it didn’t believe the new Medicaid program could be implemented in 18 months.

CSC was 33 months late when it finished the current eMedNY system in 2005 and 47 percent over budget, according to a 2010 report by DiNapoli. It’s been cited for losing more than $500 million through fraud, waste and abuse, in audits by the comptroller and the attorney general.

Since 2000, CSC has received almost $1.2 billion on its contract with New York, according to state records. The contract was last extended in February 2014 for about $211 million and expires in February 2016, records show.

Last year, Texas canceled its Medicaid contract with Xerox, citing funds lost to fraud. Xerox was five years late implementing a contract in New Hampshire, and the California state auditor warned of delays there in a report last month.

The New York contract will be different, in part because the company has already started hiring its team and is working with state officials, Ursula Burns, Xerox’s chief executive officer, told investors in a November conference call.

The company wants “to make sure that when we sign, when we actually start the project, that we are ahead of the game,” Burns said.