In a time where comic book heroes are ruling the box office, fanboys’ and girls’ should rejoice that DC plans to take over the television with a new, live-action Teen Titans‘ series. Renamed Titans, the series will focus on the young lives of some of DC’s most iconic heroes from the comic series. Fox’s new series Gotham has not premiered yet and already Warner Bros. is gearing up to deliver another show that takes place within the DC universe mythos. It is about time that DC got on the comic book hero-phenomena that is taking over pop-culture and focused on the heroes that some readers may overlook. Courtesy of Warner Bros., the series is in development and set to make its debut on TNT networks nationwide.

Although still very much in development, it seems like Warner Bros. is trying to capitalize on the younger audience of a new generation. According to The Hollywood Reporter, the series will remain very true to the source material and focus on the lives of the core members from the comic book series. The story of a band of sidekicks who want to find their own identity as new heroes will begin with the character Robin, also known as Dick Grayson, as the leader. The series will follow Robin as he searches out to find and recruit young crime fighters to band together and become heroes and close friends. Specific details about the show are still very limited to find, but Akiva Goldsman (The Fringe and I,Robot) and Marc Haimes are tacked on as co-executive producers’ and writers’.

This will be the first time that the Titans have premiered to the masses in live-action, but not the first time they have been portrayed on the small screen. Since their conception decades ago, the Teen Titans‘ roster has continually changed and moved from comic book pages to animated short on television. One of the most well-known and well received versions of the animated Titans was the Cartoon Network 2003 series of the same name. Featuring characters Robin, Raven, Beast Boy, Starfire, and Cyborg, the show became one of the network’s biggest primetime hits and saw the band of crime fighters fight against evildoers for over 65 episodes and 5 seasons. The show was later revived and rebooted as a chibi-version comedy series in 2012, under the new name Teen Titans Go!. Cartoon Network made a similar attempt to capitalize on the teenage heroes by developing the short-lived series Young Justice in 2010. The action-drama featured characters Robin, Aqualad, Kid Flash, Miss Martian, Superboy, Zatanna, Red Arrow, Rocket, and Artemis. Although the series only lasted for two seasons, it depicted the young heroes in a more mature light and showed the diversity across the DC Universe as more members from different nationalities and backgrounds joined the roster.

The Teen Titans have not had much luck when it comes to longevity on the small screen. The comic book series may still be in print since its debut in 1964, the ability to stay on the air is a different issue. There is still a lot to be found out about the series and the exact date the pilot will premiere on the network. Considering that the script for the pilot was just penned, more details should arise once the Teen Titans goes into full development. For now, fanboys’ and girls’ can rejoice in the fact that they will soon see a live-action version of some of their favorite heroes weekly on TNT.

By Tyler Cole

Sources:

IGN

The Hollywood Reporter

Screenrant

Share this: Print

LinkedIn

Pinterest

Pocket

Reddit

Email

Twitter

Google

Facebook

Tumblr