LITTLE ROCK — State Insurance Commissioner Allen Kerr said Monday he has issued a cease-and-desist order against a Florida-based company over allegations it has used deceptive practices to try to sell short-term health insurance plans in Arkansas.

Kerr also released a list of tips for avoiding falling prey to dishonest telemarketers trying to sell health insurance plans.

The cease-and-desist order directs Health Plan Intermediaries Holdings, doing business as Health Insurance Innovations, to stop immediately the sale, solicitation or advertising of any insurance plans using unlicensed agents and to stop intentionally misrepresenting the terms of contracts or applications.

Kerr said in a news release that in a phone call with Insurance Department investigators, a Health Insurance Innovations employee offered insurance plans and gave price quotes despite admitting he was not a licensed insurance agent. Also, several company representatives falsely told investigators that two short-term plans, HealtheFlex and Principal Advantage Plan, were in compliance with the federal Affordable Care Act, according to Kerr.

Any Arkansan who has received a sales call from the company or purchased one of its short-term plans is encouraged to call the Insurance Department at (800) 852-5494, Kerr said.

A call to Health Insurance Innovations on Monday was answered by a recording stating the company’s mailbox was full.

Kerr released the following tips for consumers who receive a call from anyone attempting to sell insurance:

— The open enrollment period for the 2016 health insurance marketplace under the Affordable Care Act ended Jan. 31. The next open enrollment period will run Nov. 1 of this year through Jan. 31 of next year. There is no special “state enrollment period” for individual health insurance. Anyone offering insurance plans through an “enrollment period” outside of open enrollment is not selling an ACA-compliant policy.

—No one offering ACA-compliant health care coverage will ask if you have a pre-existing condition.

—Be wary of telemarketers from the “national enrollment center,” “national healthcare center,” or other official-sounding name. The federal government will not call you to sell you health insurance.

—Do not provide anyone your bank account or health information or agree to any request to send money over the phone. If you are being pressured to provide this information, hang up.

—Purchase insurance only from a licensed agent. Do not be afraid to ask agents for their license number. If they refuse, hang up.

—If you receive a sales call from someone selling health insurance, ask the caller to email or send you information about the policy, including premiums. If they refuse, hang up.