Nick Lindblad will get a day pass from his lengthy hospital stay Sunday to attend a children's musical performed in his honor. The proceeds will help his family pay medical bills.

Nick, 13, has been at Lurie Children's Hospital of Chicago waiting for a heart transplant. Doctors say it is the only option left for Nick, who has been treated for hypoplastic left heart syndrome since shortly after he was born, according to the family. He also needs a liver transplant, but the need for the heart transplant is more urgent.

Sunday's musical is being performed at Lockport Township High School by 55 children, most from near Lockport, through the StagePlay musical theater program.

Director Monica Minogue, who runs the program through several local park districts, including Oak Lawn and Palos Park, said her son has known Nick since they were Cub Scouts together at age 6.

"(Nick's) had so many struggles throughout his life, physically. And I know the financial burden on his family," Minogue said. "I really wanted to be able to do whatever I could do to help ease that burden."

She said Nick's stepmother, Cathy Lindblad, makes costumes for the children in the musicals, and staging the musical as a fundraiser was also her way to help pay Cathy back.

"My husband and I were touched," Cathy Lindblad said of the fundraiser. "That was something we were not expecting."

Medical bills have been adding up for the working-class family, which is living paycheck to paycheck, according to the openyourheart4nick.net website.

Lindblad said some of her family's major financial woes began a few years ago when her husband changed jobs and was without health insurance for six months.

"This was before Obamacare ... and we thought we had insurance (during that time), but the reality was we didn't," she said.

Lindblad said the community has since been "very supportive" of her family, donating money from three fundraisers.

She said Nick also was at a White Sox game, throwing out the ceremonial first pitch; and was "signed" by the Cubs at the team's fantasy camp.

"He's the sweetest little boy," Lindblad said of Nick.

She said she longs for the day when Nick can take part in simple children's activities, such as riding a bicycle, playing ball with his dad, Dan Lindblad, or even running — activities he can't take part in because of his heart condition. Hypoplastic left heart syndrome is a birth defect that affects normal blood flow through the heart, according to the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.

"I'm so looking forward to meeting post-transplant Nick because Nick has never known what it's like to have a healthy heart," Lindblad said.

She said it could be days or even months before a heart becomes available. Lindblad said Nick will remain in the hospital until then, but if a transplant is successful and a heart isn't rejected, then his prognosis for a long and healthy life is good.

Sunday's musical is called "Alice@Wonderland" and pays homage to the classic tale but with a modern twist. Alice, for example, owns a cellphone but loses her Wi-Fi connection after falling down the rabbit hole.

Tickets are $10 and are available at the door at Lockport, 1333 E. 7th St., or by visiting facebook.com/pages/stageplay-musical-theater-for-kids.

The performance begins at 3 p.m. The teen band Hypno A.M.A. will perform at 2:30.

The Lindblads have a website for Nick at openyourheart4nick.net and accept donations at any BMO Harris Bank under the name of Open Your Heart.

Frank Vaisvilas is a freelance reporter for the Daily Southtown.