8/14/2014: Dozens of State police have joined forces with Chicago police officers in a new program aimed at catching fugitives. NBC 5’s Regina Waldroup reports. (Published Thursday, Aug. 14, 2014)

Up to 40 Illinois State troopers were dispatched to Chicago on Thursday in a 30-day trial to help the city's police department combat street violence.

An Illinois State Police spokeswoman confirmed that several officers took part in a closed briefing Wednesday to prepare for the deployment.

Anti-Violence Group Launched in Hadiya Pendleton's Honor

When the honor student was killed last year, her parents made a commitment to fight Chicago's street violence. NBC Chicago's Michelle Relerford reports for the NBC 5 NEWS at NOON on June 13, 2014. (Published Friday, June 13, 2014)

Mayor Rahm Emanuel and Gov. Pat Quinn announced last week that the troopers would be assigned to the police department's Fugitive Unit. They're tasked with helping apprehend wanted suspects with known violent criminal histories.

The Chicago Sun-Times reported that 65 FBI agents would be working with the Chicago Police Department, assigned to gang suppression.

"Private" Summit to Tackle Chicago Gang Violence

Federal and local officials and faith-based leaders will take part in a private meeting to discuss what can be done about the shootings in Chicago. NBC Chicago's Lauren Petty reports for the NBC 5 NEWS TODAY on July 21, 2014. (Published Monday, July 21, 2014)

Citing an FBI spokesman, the Sun-Times reported the agency plans to develop intelligence and conduct surveillance on street-corner drug dealers with the expectation that it will lead to arrests and the seizure of guns.

Police Superintendent Garry McCarthy last year rejected the idea of joining forces with the state police, but in the mayor's news release, he welcomed the extra help.

The police department already is combating the typical summer surge in crime by dispatching hundreds of officers working overtime to the city's most troubled neighborhoods.