The latest school shooting has local students and lawmakers questioning whether guns should be allowed on campus.

On Thursday, nine were killed and another nine were injured after a man opened fire on Oregon's Umpqua Community College.

Concealed carry is allowed on campus at state universities in Kansas, just not inside buildings. Starting July, 2017 campus buildings will no longer be exempt from this law. Wichita State students are divided about the decision.

"While I enjoy the fact that it will provide some level of protection against shooters, I also don't like there being any guns on campus period," said WSU senior Ryan Doughty.

"It makes me think it could happen anywhere, especially in Kansas when anyone can be carrying at any time that really scares me," said WSU senior Maeghan Perkins.

Back in 2013, Kansas lawmakers made concealed carry legal in public buildings, with exemptions for state-owned colleges. That exemption expires in less than two years. Some lawmakers are ready to put up another fight.

"It's a ridiculous law," said House representative Jim Ward. "There are three places where guns don't belong ever: schools, churches and courthouses, and it's not an infringement on my 2nd amendment right, it's a protection of my safety."

Others including former House representative and current Sedgwick County commissioner Jim Howell say allowing people to conceal and carry protects them.

"If they have a lawful right to own a firearm, they don't have a history of mental illness, they are 21 years old then yes," said Howell. "I think that our society is safer to take that personal responsibility to themselves."

"This was very frustrating because everyone of the Board of Regents schools, all the junior colleges, all the technical colleges, all of them said please don't pass this law," added Ward.

Both lawmakers say this will be a hot button issue in the upcoming legislative session. Howell believes the decision to eventually allow concealed guns in campus buildings will stand.

"There's not going to be any chance that goes down, let me just tell you, this law passed with really huge numbers, the political make up of the house and the senate has not changes dramatically since the day this passed."

Under current law. starting July 2017, colleges will still be able to post against open carry inside their buildings, but not concealed carry.