Topics: christina hendricks, gods pocket, john slattery, Journalism, Movies, Philip Seymour Hoffman, red carpet, sundance 2014, Entertainment News

Members of the press began to shuffle into the Eccles Center at Park City’s Eccles High School at 2 PM, an hour and a half ahead of the Sundance premiere of John Slattery’s directorial debut film, “God’s Pocket.” Eventually at least 100 people toting cameras, backpacks, heavy sweaters, coats, extension cords, recording devices and note pads would be crammed in between the wall and a rope that sectioned them off from the five or ten celebrities who’d walk through later.

Unbeknownst to me — but well-known to every other reporter who has done this before — there is a hierarchy in this line based on what medium you work for. Print (online is considered “print”) is in the back. Video, even for smallish web sites, is king, and people with huge cameras and tripods get the prime real estate at the beginning of the line.

A publicist taped 8.5’’ by 11’’ printer paper on the floor with the names of our outlets, where we were to stand for the next hour or so. There must have been at least 40 pieces of paper on the floor, each about an inch or two apart — bad news for anyone who was more than 11’’ wide.

But, like summer camp bunkmates, red carpet reporters have long figured out that the whole process is smoother if you’re friendly with the people around you. (Also, please have good breath!). Small talk transforms from a necessary evil to a necessary necessity; it’s impossible and weird to not talk to someone whose nose hairs are brushing the top of your head.

Sure, there are characters (one woman told me she was famous for her interviewing abilities, while another man yelled at a reporter who asked a celeb an extra question), and people reveal their quirks almost immediately due to the inherent weirdness of the situation they’re placed in. But when I mentioned this was my first time covering a red carpet event, one woman next to me talked over her questions and then reviewed mine with me, giving me pointers and asking for feedback from me.