After years of involvement in many zoning and open space skirmishes, in recent years it seems that the public has become used to — even numbed to — mayors and city council members who seem to have become uncompromising cheerleaders for powerful development interests.

One vivid example of the reason for the public’s perception can be found in the Denver City Council’s adherence to a 30-year-old, unethical tradition called “courtesy zoning.” All zoning decisions are quasi-judicial matters, and should be decided based upon the merits of each case. The vast majority of all zonings are instead decided according to the wishes of the council member of the affected district.

At the end of each public hearing, a district councilman clearly states his or her preference, and their wishes are granted by the rest of council.

The most notorious example of the dangers of courtesy zoning is displayed in the Lowry Vista rezoning in 2009. Eighty-seven percent of the speakers, including every registered neighborhood organization in Southeast Denver, spoke against the plan and stayed at City Hall until 2 a.m. to hear the outcome. Despite the fact that the site was an unmitigated toxic waste dump and citizen testimony was overwhelmingly against the plan, the council obediently followed (by a vote of 12-1) the recommendation of Councilwoman Marcia Johnson to pass the 400,000-square-foot development, which remains vacant today. All that was necessary were the magic words uttered by one council member and the votes fell into place.

The other reason for citizens to fear new developments is the carte blanche given to developers in Denver’s new zoning code adopted in 2010. The code was publicized as a “simplification” of the old one, but is at least three times larger and more complicated. Powers have been taken away from elected officials (the council) and given to the unelected managers of the city agencies.

The 2010 code instituted a revised category of general development plan (GDP) for use in large developments. The idea for GDP rules came into favor under Peter Park, planning manager for then-Mayor John Hickenlooper. Before 2010, the planning office used the GDP process to help developers plan infrastructure, open space and building heights so that city agencies could assess the impact on the city’s roads, sewers, water, schools and parks. In the new zoning code, the decisions regarding GDPs, density and open space are determined in an agreement with the developers and approved by the planning office without a vote of council.

Another complication is the city’s interpretation of the new code’s open space requirement for large developments, which says, “A minimum of 10 percent of the total GDP area shall be included in the GDP as open space.” That sounds clear enough, but over the past few years city planners allowed some developers to deduct right-of-ways from the total area and use a net area calculation. With this approach, the more streets, streetscapes and sidewalks a developer puts in, the less open space there is. Developments can end up with practically no open space.

A clear example of this is an application for a massive new development for the St. Anthony’s Hospital land near Sloan’s Lake. The land sales company applying for a GDP is being allowed to use the 10 percent of net area for open space for eight- to 20-story buildings in the middle of a single family neighborhood. It has 44 percent right-of-ways and only 5 percent of total area open space.

Now Mayor Michael Hancock has just requested that the council permanently change the zoning code to allow developers to give less open space, calculating 10 percent of net area instead of 10 percent of total area. The council should reject the mayor’s request. The people of Denver want more open space in their city, not less.

The Planning Board should not approve any GDP until the council makes its decision. They should restore ultimate power over GDPs to the council so citizens have a clear voice in the final decision-making process.

Larry Ambrose is vice president of Sloan’s Lake Neighborhood Association and president of Inter-Neighborhood Cooperation.