Only 17 criminals from the EU have been sent back to their home countries to finish their sentence in the last two years

Just 17 EU prisoners have been sent home to serve remaining jail term

Only 18 out of 28 EU member states have signed up to the transfer deal

Almost 800 Irish prisoners excluded costing taxpayer £27 million a year

Ten British inmates have been returned from EU jails

Just 17 prisoners from EU countries have been sent home to serve their remaining sentences in their native countries despite a two-year old transfer deal among European nations.



There are currently an estimated 10,000 foreign prisoners serving jail terms in England and Wales costing the taxpayer £400 million a year.



The EU Prisoner Transfer Agreement signed in 2011 allowed for the compulsory transfer of prisoners between EU states.



Shadow justice secretary Sadiq Khan MP (pictured) discovered just 17 EU prisoners out of 4,016 had been sent home to serve the remainder of the sentences

According to Mr Khan, David Cameron pledged in 2010 to 'personally intervene' to send home 'thousands of foreign prisoners'

It is estimated that there are 10,000 foreign inmates being detained in prisons across England and Wales such as HMP Pentonville (pictured)

However, according to a parliamentary question on the matter lodged by Labour's shadow justice secretary Sadiq Khan MP, only 17 prisoners have been returned home.



A total of ten prisoners have returned from EU prisons to serve their remaining sentences - one of which is more than 15 years.



Mr Khan said the government was failing the British taxpayer by failing to act on this issue.

'Back in 2010 David Cameron said he'd personally intervene to make sure thousands of foreign criminals would be sent back to their home countries to serve their prison sentences.



'Yet, four years on and still only a handful have been repatriated. Because of this broken promise, the taxpayer is still left with a £400 million a year tab to keep the 10,000 foreign prisoners behind bars, an enormous drain on stretched budgets.'

Prisons minister Jeremy Wright (right) told the House of Commons that just 17 EU prisoners had been sent home with ten UK prisoners returning

According to official figures, almost 800 prisoners from the Republic of Ireland are not included in the repatriation deal costing the British taxpayer an estimated £27 million a year.



So far, 18 out of 27 EU states have signed the 2011 agreement allowing nations to send prisoners back to their native home.



Worse still for Mr Cameron, a plan to send home 773 Jamaicans held in British jails failed after the Kingston government refused the British request.



There are almost 800 prisoners from the Irish Republic being detained in England and Wales who are not subject to transfer at a cost to the taxpayer of £27 million a year

Prisons minster Jeremy Wright MP confirmed that there were 4,106 prisoners from EU countries being held in England and Wales. Of that, 2,307 were from one of the 18 nations subject to the EU deal, with 1,422 having received a sentence.



In a written reply to the parliament, Mr Wright said: 'To date 18 member states (including the United Kingdom) have implemented the agreement. The European Court of Justice will have jurisdiction over the measure from December 1, 2014 and member states may face infraction proceedings if they have not implemented the agreement by then.



'The use of the EU PTA is at an early stage and the number of prisoners transferred remains low. However, we expect to see a significant increase in the number of prisoners transferred once the Agreement has been implemented by all member states.



'To date 17 prisoners have been transferred to other jurisdictions.'



The European Court of Justice in Luxembourg (pictured) assumes responsibility for policing the EU Prisoner Transfer Agreement on December 1, 2014

Mr Wright claimed the number of foreign nationals jailed in England and Wales had almost doubled between 1997 and 2010.



He added: 'All foreign national offenders (FNOs) sentenced to custody are referred to the Home Office to consider them for deportation at the earliest possible opportunity.



'The prisoner transfer process is just one mechanism for removing FNOs. The number of FNOs deported under the Early Removal Scheme (ERS) has increased under this government. In 2013, we removed nearly 2,000 FNOs.'



WHO ARE THE 17 PRISONERS AND HOW LONG DO THEY HAVE TO SERVE?

Belgian serving eight years for wounding with intent with 1,016 days remaining.

Belgian serving five years and five months for facilitating illegal entry with 634 days in prison remaining.

Belgian serving nine years for drugs offences with 1,135 days remaining.

Latvian serving ten years for causing death by dangerous driving with 882 days remaining.

Maltese serving six years for sexual offences with 576 days remaining. Dutch serving seven years for drugs with 1,043 days remaining.

Dutch serving 15 years for drugs offences with 2,098 days remaining.

Dutch serving ten years for drugs offences with 1,189 days remaining.

Dutch serving six years for drugs offences with 544 days remaining.

Dutch serving five years and three months for sex offences with 437 days remaining.

Dutch serving six years and six months for drugs offences with 793 days remaining.

Dutch serving five years and six months for drugs offences with 608 days remaining.

Dutch serving five years and six months for drugs with 638 days remaining.

Dutch sex offender serving an indeterminate sentence for public protection.

Dutch serving four years and eight months for drugs offences with 355 days remaining.

Dutch serving seven years for drugs offences with 705 days remaining.

Dutch serving four years for drugs offences with 388 days remaining.