Report: Nevada Shows Huge Gain in Insuring Hispanic Children



Nevada has seen a big drop in the percentage of Hispanic children who are uninsured, thanks to Medicaid expansion and outreach events across the state. (Ramirez Group) Nevada has seen a big drop in the percentage of Hispanic children who are uninsured, thanks to Medicaid expansion and outreach events across the state. (Ramirez Group)

February 4, 2016

CARSON CITY, Nev. – Nevada has the best record in the country when it comes to reducing the percentage of uninsured Hispanic children, according to a new report.



The study, called Historic Gains in Health Coverage for Hispanic Children in the Affordable Care Act's First Year, is from the Georgetown Center for Children and Families and the National Council of La Raza.



It shows the rate of Nevada's Hispanic children without health insurance fell by 33 percent from 2013 to 2014, the largest percentage point decline in the nation.



Denise Tanata, executive director of the Children's Advocacy Alliance, credits Nevada's expansion of Medicaid, which covered many of those children's parents.



"There was this assumption that if we had more adults who were enrolling in Medicaid that they then would enroll their children as well, and the numbers that we're seeing now are actually playing that out," she states.



Tanata also credits the enormous bilingual outreach efforts launched in the state to enroll Hispanic families in Medicaid after the passage of the Affordable Care Act.



However, Sonya Schwartz, a spokeswoman with the Georgetown University Center for Children and Families, notes that as of 2014, 36,000 Hispanic children in Nevada remained uninsured.



"Nevada still has a long way to go,” she emphasizes. “That state still has the ninth largest number of uninsured Hispanic kids, but if it keeps going at this pace, it's going to make a significant dent again next year."



Nationally, the report found the number of uninsured Hispanic children dropped by approximately 300,000 children, from approximately 2 million in 2013 to 1.7 million in 2014.









Suzanne Potter, Public News Service - NV