TV and Radio

Two of the girls take the bottom two spots after the Legends live performances, with a shock elimination the result.

X Factor recap

Cat Vas ... The X Factor

It's elimination time again and after the votes are counted, it's down to Cat Vas (surprise!) and Joelle (less so!).

Cat Vas - High and Dry, Radiohead

Yep, Radiohead. Big call!

Joelle ... The X Factor

Simple staging of course. Cat holding her mic and she looks more relaxed and confident than we've seen her.

Advertisement

In fact this is a genuinely excellent performance. Lots of lilting top notes. Lots of strength in the voice. Dannii is standing from halfway.

Rating: 9/10 - Brilliant sing for her life

THIRD D3GREE ... The X Factor

No comments from the judges so we go straight to ...

Joelle - Give Me Love, Ed Sheeran

Sheeran would be another not-a-legend-yet but the theme is clearly over.

Dami Im ... The X Factor

Hard to hear Joelle at first over the screaming audience. A good sign surely.

Joelle isn't as strong. It's a solid performance but she seems to be lacking the fight that Cat demonstrated.

Rating: 8/10 - good but not nearly as good as Cat

Taylor Henderson ... The X Factor

There's clearly a lot of crowd support for Joelle in the room, but then again, clearly there wasn't in the last 24 hours as she was in the bottom two.

Ronan is the first to choose and he wasn't expecting either of these two in the bottom. He was surprised by both of their song decisions, notes that Cat was unwell, but goes with his feeling from auditions and votes to send home Cat. I bet it's because she didn't give him that guitar.

Foo and Dannii both support their performers. Dannii said they were both powerful and sensitive.

Competition: The X Factor judges, from left, Ronan Keating, Natalie Bassingthwaighte, Dannii Minogue and Redfoo.

Nat has the power and recalls Cat's audition that she loved and now says she's seen that quality again in her performance tonight. She clearly thinks Joelle was right to be in the bottom two as she rewatched the show last night and really didn't like it as the fight was missing, though it has returned tonight.

"Take it to deadlock" shouts random audience member but Nat decides instead to vote to send Cat home as well.

Which means Cat Vas is eliminated.

How did that all happen? Catch up on Sunday night's show below.

SUNDAY LIVE SHOW RECAP

Welcome to Legends Week on The X Factor where the contestants sing popular songs by famous artists, as opposed to most other weeks when they sing famous songs by popular artists.

Vive la difference!

Luke asks the mentors what “legend” means to them. Ronan says time is the key, while Redfoo understands legend to mean musicians of the people, which would eliminate many very famous bands really. Unless shagging groupies counts.

On a separate note Dannii has been ill this week and warns us that she will be playing the role of Drag Queen Minogue ... and I'm just leaving that alone.

To the performances ...

JTR – Can't Get You Out of My Head, Kylie Minogue

They will “do it the JTR way,” promises Nat, which sounds in rehearsal like it means the drowned cat way.

We get to the performance and welcome to the Tetris set. The boys are standing on three separate boxes with images of cubes behind them, and they look a bit lost. Between the podiums are dancers wearing a variant on straitjackets, presumably to prevent them putting their fingers in their ears.

Because it's hard to tell when it's a pitchy performance and when it's the discordant harmonies that are too ambitious, but between the two factors, this doesn't sound good. Particularly in the falsetto sections where those cats return.

Seriously, what is Nat doing with her acts?

Rating: 6/10 – A little bit tepid really.

Dannii liked some bits, but says the falsetto was all over the place. Also it was a bit awkward at the start, she says. The boys were standing too far apart for too long according to Redfoo, who suggests Nat stage them together. Ronan says they look like pop stars but it was too slow and he wanted more energy to start the show, on the other hand “you're the best thing we've seen tonight so far”. The comedy stylings of Ronan Keating ladies and gentlemen!

Joelle – Rude Boy, Rihanna

A little bit more out there than I usually am. Redfoo wants her to be powerful but she's determined to be shy, which isn't at all contradicted by her choice to be on a national television talent contest. The big issue is the top note that she isn't sure she can hit, but Redfoo is.

Staging tonight is brought to you by cabaret, as a series of semi-naked but well-inked male dancers dance around Joelle sitting in a black cafe chair.

Oh and she's singing. At first it's pitchy but she finds her confidence, and she's definitely putting her vocal style on it, which starts to take hold. That is until we get to the note and frankly she wimps out on it.

Rating: 7/10 – Warmed up.

Ronan calls Redfoo on his artist choice as he questions whether Rihanna qualifies as a legend. Fair call really, he set out his stall earlier that time is a factor in legend status. Redfoo argues that chart success makes her a legend, and also a Pringle. Ronan then says Joelle is a superstar. Nat agrees she has star quality. Dannii calls her on shying away from the big note.

Cat Vas – Can't Take My Eyes Off Of You, Frankie Valli and the Four Seasons

Dannii has decided to strip it back this week after last week's circus act, and then Cat says there's nothing to hide behind and Dannii says she'll be exposed. By the time Redfoo says it's going to be just her and the song I'm waiting for a Lady Godiva set.

But no. Cat is in a white pantsuit, on a small white disc podium, with a white stand mic and a white guitar and she's good.

She starts soft, then when we get to the traditional big brass chorus she gets bigger vocally while maintaining the intimacy.

There's even a key change, and she nails it.

Rating: 8/10 – The first song tonight that you'd want to listen to again.

Redfoo loved the performance, and plays with the lyrics by saying he couldn't take his eyes off of her. Ronan says this is more Cat, more natural and she has a beautiful voice. He wants her guitar too. Nat says she looked more confident last week, but more natural this week. Dannii says she nailed it.

Omar Dean – Roxanne, The Police

Big song choice after Ricky Martin recreated the Moulin Rouge version of this song so well on The Voice this year.

As the performance begins, with the cabaret theme returning – this time with lingerie-clad girls in chairs, and an entirely red-lit stage – it sounds for a moment that Omar is also doing the Moulin Rouge version but it soon turns far more Police, and far better.

In fact once this gets going it's a good performance, though Omar is a bit dwarfed by the massive staging.

Rating: 8/10 – A really strong and new version of a classic song.

Redfoo and Ronan are standing as Omar finishes and Nat and Dannii both gush in their comments. Redfoo says that was 100 per cent and Ronan is happy he got Redfoo out of his seat.

Jiordan – Thriller, Michael Jackson

Well, this certainly counts as a legend. Redfoo admits Michael Jackson and Jiordan go together like monkeys and bubbles. Jiordan looks overwhelmed by the song choice but it seems everyone is playing that card this week. It's legends week people.

Redfoo may be the only mentor who could get away with suggesting Jiordan turn to Michael Jackson for help. “Channel him, he's available,” he says. Damn it's easy to like Redfoo.

The performance is definitely a cover version, as Jiordan stands stock still in a green, smoke-filled stage singing the song in a near Tori Amos fashion with a simple piano accompaniment.

She is pitch perfect and ultimately gets the job done, but it's going to be interesting to see how people respond as it's going to come down to how you like this song being done this way.

Rating: 8/10 – Anything that is wrong with this isn't her fault. An elegant performance.

All four judges give a standing ovation. Ronan has discovered new lyrics in the song, though didn't adore the stage. Nat feared she was going to see a zombie dance disaster but says the song was captivating. Dannii loved it too. Redfoo describes it as the “definition of beautiful darkness”.

Jai Waetford – I Want To Hold Your Hand, The Beatles

“I'd love to get a standing ovation every week,” says Jai, who is the first performer tonight not to be overwhelmed by his legend, mostly because everything he knows about The Beatles can be summed up as “four, yeah four people”.

Jai is on stage on a stool flanked by two guitar-playing, stool-mounted musos. Then he steps forward and sings to a few of the older women (so like 15, 16) standing at the front.

His confidence is sky high and even when he misses notes, which he does a fair bit, he's smiling and easy to like.

Rating: 7/10 – Nothing overly special but easy to watch and listen to.

Nat is stunned to discover Jai's connection with the girls in the audience, which demonstrates an odd lack of awareness of recent pop-star trends. Dannii wishes there'd been backing singers, Redfoo admires how chilled Jai is.

Barry Southgate – Freedom, George Michael

Ronan admits George Michael is one of his heroes and he is scared of this performance.

Barry comes out with way more energy and commitment than last Sunday. He has a stand mic with a built-in blue fluorescent tube and has fun dancing with it before he comes forward for the chorus.

It's a bit pitchy in the chorus, but this is a much better performance, as he looks like he cares.

Rating: 7/10 – Fun but flawed, but the fun is dominant.

The audience in the room are very happy, screaming and cheering and refusing to let Redfoo talk. When he finally gets a chance he says it's “night and day” compared to last week, with Barry admitting he felt fearless. Ronan wants him to learn to breathe, which would explain the fade in singing quality at the end. Everyone is impressed.

Taylor Henderson – Run to You, Bryan Adams

Taylor tells us that the first live show was “very different to singing in your room”. Profound. He then says Bryan Adams is more his dad's style of music which wins him some points. Then we witness Ronan force him to play an electric guitar for the first time which means we'll spend the entire song staring at his fingers.

Sure enough with Taylor on a podium and videos of himself running projected distractingly on the wall around him, it is his complete discomfort with the guitar that catches the eye and the ear.

All up it's a bit flat. He's clearly not rock and roll enough for Bryan Adams, which isn't a sentence you ever think you're going to type.

Rating: 6/10 - OK without being overly impressive. Run to You was frankly pedestrian.

Nat loves it, saying he attacked it well but then points out that the running video was a bit half-hearted. Dannii thought the guitar playing was a bit absent at times and the song didn't really work for Taylor. Redfoo also watched the running video more than the song too. He feels Taylor is at 70 per cent compared to how he performs backstage.

Ellie Lovegrove – Satisfaction, The Rolling Stones

The pre-performance video focuses on last week not being up to scratch. Ronan says she needs to find her inner Mick Jagger this week. Does everyone have one of those? Is it a psychological condition?

In a bizarre staging decision, Ellie begins the song sitting on a red quasi-catwalk and there is just zero energy. Once she stands, she's surrounded by six male dancers and it's tightly choreographed and very stiff. She also looks uncomfortable in big heels on a thin catwalk.

The pitching is good and once standing, Ellie starts to give power to the song and bring more life to this at the end, but the staging has harpooned this.

Rating: 7/10 – Ellie was confidence trapped in a staging mistake.

Ronan plugs his film Goddess to compare Ellie to Magda Szubanski, and she does have a similar hairstyle to Magda in Goddess. Nat and Dannii loved it and were shocked at the power she delivered. Dannii points out the fact she looked uncomfortable in the heels but now seems fine in them. “Now that's what I'm talking about,” says Redfoo.

Third D3gree – Till the World Ends, Britney Spears

The edit uses Cypress Hill as the soundtrack while Nat tells the group they have Britney and I'm wishing it was the other way around.

Standing on a faux brick wall the trio are trying to make Britney edgy and for the most part it works. This is electric, heavy on the rapping and very, very light on the Britney.

Rating: 8/10 – The energy dominates the singing, but it works.

Dannii says they smashed it. Redfoo calls it spectacular. Ronan says a group could win X Factor this year.

Dami Im – Purple Rain, Prince

Dami has her own big shoes to fill and has been losing her voice this week so the pressure is on.

Channelling Jiordan, Dami stands alone on a smoke-filled stage, though this time it is purple not green.

Oh and she is amazing. Again. No piano. No flying around the stage. Just Dami and her voice and it's great.

Rating: 9/10 – Dami reigns.

Prediction

The night started slowly and JTR and Joelle could be the two singing off on Monday, though Taylor should probably go find his acoustic guitar and prepare a little something as well.