The health care revolution will take a while, so shoppers should be patient and careful about the details.

If you want to be treated at a Baylor hospital, for instance, be warned that just 1 in 3 plans on the health exchange include Baylor in their networks.

After last week’s launch of the exchanges, it’s clear that Obamacare faces growing pains everywhere, including close to home.

JPS Health Network, which treats the poor in Tarrant County, hasn’t received federal approval to train certified application counselors. Those in-house advisers help patients navigate the exchange, an important aid for those who haven’t bought health insurance in the past.

Other hospital systems in North Texas, including Parkland and Methodist, received federal approval for this relatively simple process. They’ve already trained more than 100 counselors combined, while JPS remains on the sideline.

“We applied in mid-August and we’ve been watching and waiting,” said David Salsberry, chief financial officer at JPS. “But we have day jobs, too.”

JPS hasn’t received an explanation for the delay from federal regulators, he said, and has had trouble reaching the right officials.

Doctors waiting, too

Many doctors are in the dark, too. They’re often a go-to source when patients want advice on insurance, but most are reluctant to offer recommendations on the exchange. That’s largely because they don’t know whether their practices are included in the health plans’ networks.

“It is not likely physicians will know in which exchange plans they have been placed by insurers,” Dr. Stephen Brotherton, president of the Texas Medical Association, wrote in an email.

The group has been unable to find a simple way for patients to confirm network information, he added.

The Dallas County Medical Society said that most of its member doctors don’t know which plans include them, either. Enrollment in the exchanges continues for six months, with coverage starting on Jan. 1.

Some customers will pay more for a health plan whose network includes their preferred doctors and hospitals. Others will choose a lower-cost plan, even if it forces them to pick new providers.

Much of the business on the exchanges is expected to be driven by price. Insurers often create lower-priced plans by narrowing the network of doctors and hospitals. But if patients go outside the network, their out-of-pocket costs can soar.

In a recent survey, 69 percent of insurers reported narrow-network contracts.

“Insurers passed over major medical centers in Chicago, Indiana, Kentucky, Los Angeles, Tennessee and elsewhere in an effort to tamp down hospital and medical costs,” according to the report by the Health Research Institute of PricewaterhouseCoopers.

Some patients with complex conditions could be squeezed out of specialty hospitals, the report said.

Baylor Health Care System, one of the largest in North Texas, is included in the networks for just 11 of 36 plans offered in Dallas County, Baylor officials said. Another two plans in Collin County also exclude Baylor.

Evaluating plans

Trade-offs of this sort have been a part of private insurance for years. About half of Americans get health coverage through their employer, and they may be accustomed to reviewing networks during open enrollment.

Doing the same analysis with the exchanges could be difficult, because it’s not one-stop shopping. At Blue Cross Blue Shield of Texas, the state’s largest insurer, you have to select a plan and then plug that program into the website’s doctor search.

My longtime family doctor is part of the network in one bronze plan but not others. It would cost 30 percent more, $113 extra per month, to continue that relationship with an individual policy.

That’s one of the easier decisions in choosing insurance on the exchange. Evaluating co-pays, deductibles and monthly premiums requires a close look backward and forward. Subsidies and tax breaks are part of the calculation, too.

Those who have bought health insurance can probably handle this alone. But newcomers can turn to counselors and others trained to assist in the process. Unlike insurance brokers, they’re prohibited from recommending a specific health plan, but they can explain the trade-offs.

Parkland and Methodist trained dozens of counselors, in part because they serve so many uninsured patients. JPS wants to get in the swing, too, while the exchanges are top of mind.

The federal program doesn’t have rigorous requirements. Organizations can be approved for training if they provide social services, help people with health care issues and ensure that counselors protect patients’ privacy. That’s a slam dunk for JPS.

The hospital expects to be approved soon, Salsberry said, and it plans to train about 65 staff members. They can be certified after completing a five-hour course online, and he may do everybody on a single Saturday.

“Maybe we’ve been too passive,” he said.