HUNTINGTON BEACH, Calif.--(BUSINESS WIRE)--Cost-U-Less Insurance, part of Confie Seguros, the largest, privately-held insurance broker in the United States and one of the top 20 global insurance brokers in the world, announced today a new service offering from its sister company, Freeway Insurance.

In step with the Affordable Care Act (ACA), commonly referred to as Obamacare health insurance, the Company is expanding its product offerings to include health insurance. The new offering will help individuals and families comply with the ACA, which requires most Americans to have health insurance or pay a penalty for not having health insurance.

The goal is to facilitate the enrollment process and increase access to bilingual enrollment experts and health educators throughout California. Focusing on the Hispanic community, residents will be able to interact with licensed bilingual agents at 30 Freeway Insurance locations throughout the state, where they will receive one-on-one assistance and free health insurance quotes.

“As a long-standing community member, we are proud to offer our services free of charge to all consumers. Many consumers find the choice between the types of health insurance confusing, and don’t understand the differences between an HMO and a PPO, or how to qualify for subsidized no-cost or low-cost health insurance. We are very gratified knowing that we can have a tangible impact on the health of the communities we serve,” said Valeria Rico, Chief Executive Officer of Confie Seguros.

About Cost-U-Less Insurance

Cost-U-Less has been providing inexpensive car insurance for California drivers since 1989 and is part of the Confie Seguros family of companies. With 540 offices throughout the United States, Confie Seguros is the largest, privately-held insurance broker in the United States and one of the top 20 global insurance brokers in the world, according to A.M. Best. From our beginnings in Sacramento, Cost-U-Less Insurance has expanded across Northern, Southern and Central California. While much of our original growth happened in Northern and Central California, we are now pleased to provide low cost insurance options for Southern California drivers, Our more than 80 convenient office locations throughout California help drivers get the best rates on auto insurance.

About Confie Seguros

Established in 2008, Confie Seguros, a national insurance distribution company with headquarters in California, operates offices in a national presence, except in Massachusetts, and is primarily focused on the insurance needs of Hispanic consumers. The experienced Confie Seguros management team, led by CEO Valeria Rico, continues to build Confie Seguros' portfolio of regional auto insurance brokerages, and today it has annual revenue approaching $300 million with approximately 540 retail locations. The company has leading market positions in California, Arizona, Texas, Florida, Washington, Oregon, New York, New Jersey, Nevada, Illinois, Alabama, Kansas, Wisconsin, South Carolina, Missouri, Louisiana, and Indiana and expects to continue its expansion in those and other states, including Georgia, Virginia and North Carolina. Confie Seguros is a portfolio company of ABRY Partners. For more information about Confie Seguros, please visit www.confieseguros.com.

About Freeway Insurance

Freeway Insurance, Inc., established in 1987, is one of the largest privately-owned insurance agencies in the United States. As one of the fastest-growing nationwide insurance distribution companies, Freeway offers insurance policies that provide coverage throughout the United States. The Company is constantly researching, growing and diversifying product offerings to stay responsive to the ever-evolving insurance market. Freeway offers a wide range of plans, from the most basic to premium plans, in auto, truck, commercial vehicle, fire, flood, homeowners, renters, small commercial, motorcycle and recreational vehicle insurance products. In 2008, Freeway Insurance partnered with Confie Seguros. Today, Freeway Insurance services customers through 77 offices. Freeway consumers access Freeway Insurance through neighborhood Freeway offices as well as by visiting www.freewayinsurance.com or calling (800) 300-0227.