Medicare Sequestration Cuts Extended, Veteran Benefits Restored

By Christine Kern, contributing writer

750,000 military retirees see pension increases restored

Modern Healthcare reports that legislation reversing cuts to pension benefits for veterans under the age of 62 was passed by the Senate by a 95-3 vote. CNN further reports the House has also passed a bill that pays for restoring a $6 billion cut to military pensions by extending sequestration by one year to 2024.

The measure passed in the House by a 326-90 vote margin. House Republicans had previously linked the pension proposal to an extension of the debt ceiling, but the chamber passed the pension bill separately after House Speaker John Boehner opted to move forward with a clean debt ceiling bill.

The legislation also creates a transitional fund for sustainable growth rate reform. Every year since 2003, Congress has enacted a short-term legislative patch to delay double-digit cuts to physicians' Medicare reimbursement rates under the SGR. Last week, Becker’s Hospital Review reports House and Senate leaders introduced a bipartisan bill that would permanently fix the SGR problem by repealing and replacing the formula.

The extension of sequestration cuts was fought vehemently, albeit ultimately unsuccessfully, by hospitals. In a letter from the American Hospital Association, the Federation of American Hospitals, and seven other organizations, sent to legislators arguing, “Medicare is meant to assure seniors access to needed medical care, not serve as a piggybank for other programs. It is bad policy to further extend Medicare sequester cuts that could undermine care for seniors.”

The coalition was spearheaded by the American Hospital Association. Part of hospitals' argument is that their reimbursements have been cut by $113 billion since 2010, in addition to $320 billion under ObamaCare.

The cuts to veterans’ pensions were passed by Congress in January, cutting the cost-of-living adjustment for veterans under the age of 62 by 1 percent—a total reduction of $6 billion. These cuts raised a backlash, leading to this week’s restoration of the cuts by extending other reductions.

The bill now heads to President Obama, who is expected to sign it.