Inland lawmakers found different reasons to support or oppose the $1.1 trillion omnibus spending package passed by the House of Representatives late Thursday by a 219-206 margin.

The bill, which is seen as likely to pass the Senate, keeps most of the federal government funded through September 2015. It overcame opposition from liberals who said the legislation would roll back Wall Street regulations and conservatives who wanted Republicans to stymie President Barack Obama’s executive action on immigration.

Campaign finance watchdogs warned the bill allows wealthy donors to write much larger checks to political parties.

Fifty-seven Democrats and 162 Republicans supported the bill, including Rep. Raul Ruiz, D-Palm Desert and Rep. Ken Calvert, R-Corona.

In a statement, Ruiz said the bill “will avoid a catastrophic government shutdown and ensure our veterans receive the benefits they have earned and deserve, protect seniors in the Coachella Valley from Medicare fraud, and mitigate the Salton Sea and severe drought across California.

“The bill also provides our military with the resources necessary to continue operations against the terrorist group ISIS and guarantees a pay increase for our troops, among other critical priorities.”

“Like any bipartisan agreement, it required all sides to find some common ground and accept that no one party will be completely satisfied. There are provisions in this agreement that I would not support in a stand-alone bill, and I will continue to fight to roll these back in the future. To breakthrough the crushing gridlock of Washington, we must continue to work to find pragmatic solutions to our nations most pressing issues.”

Ruiz, who was re-elected in November, has split from Democrats before, having voted for GOP bills pertaining to Obamacare. Republicans hold a slight edge in his district's voter registration.

Calvert focused on how the bill only funds. Homeland Security and immigration enforcement funding through the end of February.

“The bill approved by the House today prevents a government shutdown and sets the stage for Republicans to confront President Obama’s unilateral executive action on illegal immigration,” Calvert said in a news release. “Meanwhile, as I have done in the past, I will be urging my colleagues to enact legislation that strengthens the security of our border and makes the use of E-Verify (an employment status verification program) mandatory. With the majority in the House and Senate next Congress, Republicans will directly challenge President Obama’s unilateral approach to immigration reform.”

Rep. Mark Takano, D-Riverside, voted no.

“The process by which the continuing resolution/omnibus legislation was presented and passed signals that House Republicans are not serious about governing and negotiating in good faith,” he said in a statement issued after the vote. “This final text of this legislation, which is 1,600 pages long and was released just two days ago, contains riders that amount to special interest giveaways and petty partisan quarrels.”

“While I take issue with many portions of the legislation, I am particularly opposed to the provisions that rollback Wall Street regulations and increase the influence that big money donors have on our elections, as they will, respectively, put taxpayers on the hook for future bailouts and further corrupt our democracy. These provisions and others, which are buried deep inside the bill, have no place in legislation that is a last ditch effort to prevent a government shutdown and I do not support its passage.”

Reps. Paul Cook, R-Yucca Valley and Duncan Hunter, R-Alpine supported the bill. Not voting were reps. Gary Miller, R-Rancho Cucamonga and Gloria Negrete McLeod, D-Chino; both are leaving Congress next month.