Thursday evening in Warsaw, more than 300 of the Fourth Congressional District’s most enthusiastic supporters of Vermont Sen. Bernie Sanders and former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton will meet to select delegates to the Democratic National Convention.

Gordon Christensen, a Columbia physician who hopes to defeat incumbent U.S. Rep. Vicky Hartzler, said Wednesday that he also hopes to harness that enthusiasm for his underdog effort. The best thing the national party could do to help, Christensen said, would be to nominate Clinton for president and Sanders as her vice presidential running mate.

You must login to view the full content on this page. Screen Name or Email Password Forgot? Remember me on this computer Login Screen Name or Email Now I remember! Or, use your facebook account: facebook Need an account? Create one now.

“Together they ought to be a fantastic team,” Christensen said. “You have a person who has vision and a person who knows how to get it done.”

The meeting will involve little drama as Democrats select three delegates for Sanders and two for Clinton based on the results of the March 15 primary, district Chairman J.C. Owsley of Cross Timbers said. With active Democrats from across the 24-county district gathered in one place, it will be a prime opportunity for Christensen to network, he said.

Owsley said he is impressed with Christensen and has not met his primary opponent, Jack Truman of Lamar. Truman, who ran twice for the Seventh District seat, has not responded to messages from the Tribune since joining the race in March.

“I would just desperately love to see Gordon Christensen in Congress,” Owsley said. “He has the temperament, the drive, the intelligence and the integrity to be a good congressman.”

Christensen is a retired professor at the University of Missouri School of Medicine and was chief of staff at MU Hospitals in 2008 and 2009. He is best known as a whistleblower who exposed attempts in the 1990s to cover up suspicious patient deaths while assistant chief of staff at Truman Memorial Veterans’ Hospital.

In 1992, 50 patients died in a three-month period while under the care of a single nurse. Christensen, an epidemiologist, analyzed the deaths and found that statistically the nurse had to be responsible. His findings were suppressed until 1995, when he used the Freedom of Information Act to make his work public.

Christensen said he is making support for veterans, the Affordable Care Act and abortion rights the major themes of his campaign. The U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs needs more money and stronger oversight from Congress, he said.

“I am disheartened by the number of homeless veterans and veterans who are incarcerated,” he said. “I obviously have deep concerns regarding the culture of some VA leaders, given my experiences.”

Since entering the race, Christensen has raised $84,845, including a $20,000 loan to his own campaign, and had $10,077 in the bank as of March 31. Hartzler, a Cassville Republican seeking her fourth term, has raised $588,860 since the 2014 election and had $679,860 in the bank on March 31.

John Webb of Cleveland, Mo., is challenging Hartzler for the second time in the Republican primary. Officials with Hartzler’s campaign did not respond to a message seeking comment.

Christensen’s campaign in January commissioned a poll that showed more voters — 44 percent of those polled — have a negative view of Hartzler than those who view her favorably — 38 percent. The poll of 952 voters also showed that nearly three-fourths of respondents had no opinion of Christensen.

Voters are dissatisfied because Hartzler has voted to cut benefits for veterans and active military and is “on that witch hunt committee on the issue of abortion” that is targeting Planned Parenthood, Owsley said.

“The people of the Fourth District need a candidate that is supportive of women’s right to choose, the right to health care and decent wages for working people,” Owsley said.

Hartzler won on an anti-incumbent surge in 2010 and now is vulnerable to the same anger, Christensen said.