Even with its interludes of balmy temperatures, this has been a spectacular winter for ice.

Consider the circumstances of Monday, Jan. 5. By the middle of that warmish day, an abundance of accumulated snow had been transformed into water and slush. And then a cold night set in. The next morning, Boulder presented itself as one massive skating rink.

When I left my house and started on my very cautious walk to the university, a tow truck turned onto my block and slid — toward me — from one side of the street to the other. While I was happy to see the driver get control of his big truck before it could squish me, I took this to be a clear message that I was headed into a world I could not trust.

Here, it is important to recognize the deficits and deficiencies that can be a lasting burden to a person born and raised in Southern California. In my formative years, I grew accustomed to a world where ice stayed in refrigerators and did not even try to take over roads. After 12 years in New England and 30 years in Colorado, there is evidence that I am still a Southern Californian at heart.

But this slippery winter has led me to a new line of thought. Walking on an ordinary day with trustworthy traction presents problems of its own. My thoughts often wander through a disturbing mental landscape, sketched out by the morning’s news: the brutal chains of events involving Ukraine, Syria, the Islamic State, and Boko Haram; the intractable tensions between Israelis and Palestinians; our nation’s apparently hopeless state of political polarization and stalemate; the mystery of why so many young people today are susceptible to depression and anxiety; our failure to provide veterans with proper medical and psychiatric care; the fiscal troubles bearing down on higher education and the difficulty of encouraging resilience and flexibility in the academic world.

In other words, without distraction, I can worry myself silly.

But an icy sidewalk changes everything. Contemplating the slippery surface ahead of me instantly organizes and prioritizes my worries and fears. Thousands of hazards and dangers disappear from my mind, and the only thing I dread is my next slippery step.

In contrast to contemplating all the troubles of the world, this can almost feel restful.

And then there is the problem posed by risks we never saw coming. On a recent morning, in the safety of our basement exercise room, as I carelessly lowered a dumbbell to the floor, I felt a little popping sensation. Three or four days later, the muscles in my lower back finally relented and stopped tormenting me.

Fixating on the dangers of slippery sidewalks, I should have been living in terror of the weights, in my basement, masquerading as harmless devices for my improvement. Taking advantage of my inattention, reality took the opportunity to remind me of its own slipperiness and its inclination to spring surprises and defy expectation.

In the last few years, I have had the good fortune to find myself in the company of the professionals who study risk perception and who try to help us examine, reflect on and, with luck, improve the strategies we use to organize our terror and give order to our fear. Thus, I imagine myself under the guidance of one of those professionals, going for a walk on an icy day and returning from that walk as a person of measurably enhanced good sense.

In the meantime, as this season edges toward spring, icy sidewalks have earned their status as my favorite fear. They do not hide their danger. They cultivate nimbleness and improve balance. And they focus and concentrate the mind, relieving the misery of cataloging and reviewing all the world’s troubles.

Patty Limerick is faculty director and chair of the Center of the American West at the University of Colorado.

To send a letter to the editor about this article, submit online or check out our guidelines for how to submit by e-mail or mail.