Topics: Books, Hilary Mantel, Historical Fiction, History, Television, The Tudors, TV, wolf hall, Entertainment News

There wasn’t much all-family appointment television during my ’70s childhood, but two low-budget BBC miniseries shown by “Masterpiece Theater” always brought everyone to the living room: “The Six Wives of Henry VIII” and “Elizabeth R.” Shot on video and directed with undeniable staginess, these shows were nevertheless crammed with excellent actors, particularly the incandescent Glenda Jackson as Elizabeth I. (You can stream “Elizabeth R” on Hulu. It holds up.) This was “quality television” in the most old-fashioned, PBS sense of the term. Our parents considered it educational, and our teachers scheduled their Shakespeare segments to coincide with the broadcasts.

It’s hard to imagine any classroom endorsing “The Tudors,” a glossy, softcore Showtime production featuring Jonathan Rhys Meyers as Henry VIII, leering at a series of lingerie models as their linen smocks slide sensuously to the flagstones. Then there’s the CW’s stupendously moronic “Reign,” very, very loosely based on the early adult life of Mary, Queen of Scots — a Stuart, granted, but still a major player in the Tudor story. That show is chiefly an occasion for minor-league starlets to stand around in fancy dresses, simpering at cute guys and speaking without contractions. The royal dynasty whose doings were once the subject of prestige television has, in our time, become a vehicle for thinly veiled trash.

This weekend, however, the highbrows will attempt to regain the field with the BBC dramatization of Hilary Mantel’s Booker Prize-winning novel “Wolf Hall.” Can it be done? Mantel certainly seems to have achieved it in the kingdom of print. One thing you can count on if you tune into “Masterpiece” this weekend, is an absence of courtly cheesecake and lines like, “But the people love her, majesty.”

The book world has experienced its own version of the pulpification of the Tudor saga; a thriving subgenre of historical fiction — call them princess novels — that involves describing events of the Middle Ages and Renaissance from the perspective of young British and European noblewomen. Anne Boleyn — daughter of a scheming, arriviste clan — is the ur-model for the heroines of such novels, but that ground has been trod so often that authors have had to turn to peripheral figures from the notoriously confusing Wars of the Roses in their quest for fresher material. Still, apart from Eleanor of Aquitaine, who has always enjoyed a fan base all her own, and perhaps the tragic Lady Jane Grey, these ancillary aristocrats owe their fictional resurrection to the readerly hunger awakened by novels about Anne Boleyn.

The doyenne of this genre is Philippa Gregory, whose novel narrated by Anne’s sister, Mary, “The Other Boleyn Girl,” was made into a 2008 film starring Natalie Portman and Scarlett Johansson. If not quite a queen of the bestseller list, Gregory is surely one of its duchesses. She has produced, among other books, a six-volume series on the Tudor court and another on the Plantagenets, approximate a novel per year, to great success. That, however, is nothing to the track record of her extraordinary forerunner, Eleanor Hibbert, who wrote princess novels under the name Jean Plaidy, as well as gothic novels as Victoria Holt and historical sagas as Philippa Carr, among other pseudonyms, to the tune of several books per year.

Plaidy’s princess novels, although relatively staid and exhibiting all the sloppiness you’d expect considering the rate she churned the things out, remain popular. The circulating branch of my library has almost a whole bookshelf of Plaidy’s works; by contrast, the historical novelist Thomas Costain — a big influence on George R.R Martin — is entirely unrepresented. Today’s most prominent male historical novelists, writers like Bernard Cornwell, show a marked lack of interest in the Tudors, preferring to chronicle the adventures of soldiers, wandering knights and other men of action, mostly set in earlier, wilder centuries. To paraphrase the Fonz (I hope you’re appreciating my antiquated TV references), the Tudors, like Elvis, are a chick thing.

Why? Well, the reign of Henry VIII was one of the few periods in history when momentous affairs of state hung on the aspects of life that women tend to view as their purview: sex, love, marriage and childbearing. You could say (as many have) that Anne Boleyn’s expertly played game of hard-to-get changed the course of a nation by causing Henry to split from the Catholic Church. In reality, most monarchs of Henry’s day and the centuries leading up to it were chronically hard-up for cash. They were always seeking funds to prosecute the endless warring that substantiated their feudal glory. As the historian Barbara Tuchman wrote of the 14th century, “the status of nobility derived from birth and ancestry, but had to be confirmed by ‘living nobly’ — that is, by the sword. … The one certain criterion was function — namely, the practice of arms.” But wars, even more than lavish habits, are expensive, and Henry coveted the Church’s English holdings. It was not just for love that he broke with Rome.

Finance, however, is not typically the stuff of exciting fiction, and it’s so much more fun to look at the Tudor court as a hothouse where people’s intimate lives trumped everything else. To best understand the allure of princess novels, compare, say, the first chapters of “The Other Boleyn Girl” with the beginning of the YA novel “Gossip Girl.” It is, essentially, the same story. The characters are teenagers obsessed with fashion, with who’s in and who’s out as well as who’s hooking up with who. As the novel opens, they brace themselves for the return of a long-absent peer. She’s beautiful, with an enviable sense of style (you really can’t underestimate the role that costume description plays in princess novels), and she promises to shake up the existing social hierarchy by seducing the most desired male. Anne Boleyn is the new girl at school who steals the quarterback away from the head cheerleader.