Apple CEO Tim Cook delivers the keynote address during Apple WWDC on June 8, 2015 in San Francisco. Justin Sullivan/Getty Images

Good morning. Apple Inc., once dismissive of corporate computing, is courting businesses like never before. On Monday, Apple and Cisco Systems Inc. announced a partnership that will facilitate the ways in which Apple’s iPads and iPhones communicate on corporate networks, the WSJ’s Don Clark and Daisuke Wakabayashi report. The two companies also plan to jointly work on technology to help workers with Apple devices better exploit Cisco’s collaboration products, including its video- and Web-conferencing services, the WSJ says.

The partnership, which follows a joint effort between Apple and International Business Machines Corp., reflects Apple’s need to develop new sources of revenue as the sale of iPads slows. It also reflects how partners such as IBM and Cisco are taking a more mobile-centric view of computing.

Will the workplace ever be the same? Perhaps not, and that’s the point. The changes underway in business computing suggest an evolution in the way people think about work itself. “It became clear to me that partnering with Cisco would yield the results that would enable us to transform work,” Mr. Cook said in an interview. Is your approach to work changing? Tell us how.

CIOs landing board seats as more companies seek tech insight. As companies continue to rely on technology to invent new business models and remake old ones, CIOs are being sought out for director seats. Such a seat can advance a CIO’s career, but getting one can involve months of vetting. “You’re both looking for shared values and integrity and people who are willing to commit the time and energy to help an organization grow,” Curt Garner, CIO of Starbucks Corp., tells CIO Journal.

Michael Giresi joins Royal Caribbean as CIO. Mr. Giresi, CIO at fashion brand Tory Burch LLC since 2011, tells CIO Journal that he expects e-commerce issues at the cruise line to have a more immediate impact on customers: “It’s one thing to order something on a website and be told two days later that it’s going to be late. But being on a vessel and being told your meal that night is going to be late, that’s a different matter.” Mr. Giresi replaces outgoing CIO Bill Martin, who retired at the end of May.

What CIOs need to know about the FTC cybersecurity ruling. Now that the courts have affirmed the U.S. Federal Trade Commission’s authority investigating company breaches, CIOs must be sure to mitigate the company’s exposure to claims by government regulators, Guest Contributors Richard Raysman and Francesca Morris write.

SECURITY AND PRIVACY

Bloomberg News

Malware stole 225,000 Apple account logins. A newly discovered malware family known as KeyRaider, which preys on jailbroken iPhones, has collected login credentials for more more than 225,000 Apple accounts, ArsTechnica writes. It’s one of the largest Apple account compromises to be caused by malware.

US weighs sanctioning Russia along with China. The United States is considering sanctions against both Russian and Chinese individuals and companies for cyberattacks against U.S. commercial targets, several U.S. officials told Reuters. The Washington Post first reported the Obama administration was weighing sanctions against Chinese targets.

MORE TECHNOLOGY NEWS

Russia’s fist just clenched the Web a little tighter. Global Internet firms operating in Russia woke up under a new era of Kremlin regulation, Bloomberg reports. A new law going into effect Tuesday requires tech firms with Russian customers use local servers to handle Russian personal data. Some tech firms, however, are getting extra time to comply. The Journal reports that Russian regul a more mobile-centric view of computing.

Google and Sanofi team up on diabetes tng a more mobile-centric view of computing. The search giant said its health-care research unit agreed to partner with pharmaceutical company Sanofi SA on new ways to monitor and treat diabetes, writes the Journal’s Alistair Barr. Sanofi is a leading maker of diabetes medication, while Google Inc.‘s Life Sciences division is working on connected medical devices to continuously collect diabetes-related data.

Samsung takes smartwatch fight to Apple. Samsung Electronics Co. said it would introduce a new round-faced smartwatch Thursday as the tech giant squares off against the Apple Watch. The Journal’s Jonathan Cheng reports that the new watch will come in two versions, a sporty Gear S2 smartwatch and the more understated Gear S2 Classic. Both come with a variant equipped with 3G connectivity, which means they can also work as a standalone phone.

Service providers see gold in startup shares. A growing class of service providers are looking to profit on the soaring valuations of young startups by taking payments in stock instead of cash, the Journal’s Telis Demos and Liz Hoffman report. While shares-for-service swaps give some companies a shot at big profits, they’re also on the line for big losses if the startups fail.

Apple eyes move into original programming. Apple has held preliminary conversations with Hollywood executives to suss out their interest in spearheading efforts to create original entertainment content, Variety reports.

Yahoo chief expecting twins. Yahoo Inc. CEO Marissa Mayer said in a blog post Tuesday she is pregnant with identical twin girls, Reuters reports. “Since this is a unique time in Yahoo’s transformation, I plan to approach the pregnancy and delivery as I did with my son three years ago, taking limited time away and working throughout,” she said in the post.

European firms team up to target Google. Already facing antitrust charges from EU competition authorities, Google now may be a target of a series of civil suits, The New York Times writes. Hausfeld, a law firm with connections to companies affected by Google’s activities in Europe, and Avisa, a European public affairs company that has represented complainants in the antitrust case, plan to announce Tuesday they have created an online platform to help companies sue Google for financial damages in European courts.

VMworld recap. Couldn’t make it to VMware Inc.’s conference this year? VentureBeat rounds up all the big announcements.

The Morning Download comes from the editors of CIO Journal and cues up the most important news in business technology every weekday morning. Send us your tips, compliments and complaints. You can get The Morning Download emailed to you each weekday morning by clicking http://on.wsj.com/TheMorningDownloadSignup.