With the traditional attack points on the Affordable Care Act having faded away--most enrollees were already insured (wrong), millions of people lost their coverage and couldn't replace it (wrong), etc.--Obamacare's critics have been looking for new ones.

An up-and-coming star of this firmament is the notion that Americans are "gaming" the system by waiting until they're sick to enroll in an individual policy, then dropping it as soon as they're cured.

This theory has been around for a while, but it got a jolt of life last month when UnitedHealth Group appeared to blame such a strategy for losses that were leading it to consider withdrawing from the individual insurance exchange market as soon as 2017.

The idea that there's huge amount of strategizing is la-la land. — Peter V. Lee, executive director of Covered California

United CEO Stephen Hemsley said in a Nov. 19 conference call that over the last year the company had seen "a meaningful portion of membership move out, and new membership move in...outside the enrollment period. Those have been strong users of services." A few days earlier, Aetna CFO Shawn Guertin told an investor conference that his firm had seen "a lot more people coming in and out of the system," using services, and then leaving.

These remarks set the hearts of some members of the Obamacare deathwatch aflutter. Bloomberg's Megan McArdle speculated that on the possibility of gaming by customers, though she later owned up via Twitter to being "sort of skeptical" that such strategies were widespread.

Cato Institute's Michael Cannon, however, declared in Forbes that such "free-riding," which poses "a serious threat to Obamacare's future," has now been established as "a real problem."

Indeed, because I had questioned Cannon's assertion in April 2014 that the ACA actually creates "incentives...for healthy people to drop their coverage, save their money, and wait until they get sick to re-enroll," he called me out to demand an explanation. (I could tell because his new Forbes piece is subtitled, "Revisiting My Debate With Michael Hiltzik.")

Well, Mr. Cannon, you asked for it.

Let's start with some definitions. Under the ACA, most people can sign up for coverage only during annual open enrollment periods. For coverage beginning next Jan. 1, open enrollment runs Nov. 1 through Dec. 15, though one can enroll through Jan. 15 for a plan beginning Feb. 1, and through Jan. 31 for a plan taking effect March 1.

Outside that time frame, you're out of luck for 2016 coverage unless you qualify for a special enrollment period. These typically are triggered by a "life event" such as getting married or having a baby. Since the ACA is a federal law imposing rules on health plans operating at the state and local levels, it added several other triggers, including the loss of one's job and therefore employer-paid coverage, a change in income that might qualify someone for Obamacare subsidies, or a relocation from one state to another.

The question is whether people who avoid signing up for coverage during open enrollment are starting to exploit these triggers to sign up after they get sick or injured. This would seriously undermine the insurance pool by allowing healthy people to stay out of it until they need treatment, removing the cross-subsidization of users by non-users that's the essence of all insurance policies. (Accident-free drivers subsidize those in collisions, and so on.)

Cannon thinks this has now been shown to be "a real problem." Is that so?

Even a casual reader of the United and Aetna statements might notice what's missing from them: data. United's Hemsley said only that "a meaningful portion" of members were moving in and out during special enrollment. What's "meaningful"? Who knows?--his firm declined to provide actual figures. Aetna's Guertin said there's "a lot more people coming in and out of the system" this year than last, which doesn't quite rank as a concrete number.

Neither company suggested that this trend reflected a deliberate gaming strategy by members, as opposed to possible opportunism; people can drop ACA coverage for many reasons--for example, they can find jobs with health benefits, age into Medicare, or pass away. The companies did say that the special-period enrollees tended to require more medical services than the general membership, but that's hardly surprising. For one thing, some life events are tied to the need for more services--marriage is often followed by pregnancy, followed by having a baby, followed by vaccinations and pediatric visits even for infants in the pink of health.

Also, some people who cared so little about insurance that they skipped open enrollment might not enroll even after experiencing a qualifying life event--unless they're sick or hurt. In their case, special enrollment is a gift. But that's much different from saying that people are actually counting on conjuring up a life event to cover them if they have an accident, which is what Cannon suggests is happening.

One insurer has provided numbers. Iowa's Wellmark says 135 members signed up, got treatments, and then dropped their coverage after running up sizable bills. But they were about one-tenth of one percent of an individual insurance pool that appears to be about 150,000 members. (It might help to know that Wellmark issued this figure to help support its application for a rate increase of up to 13.3%.)