FILE Anti-union cards were placed on tabletops in the breakroom at Boeing Co.’s 787 Dreamliner campus in the weeks leading up to last year’s canceled union vote.

The percentage of South Carolina workers who were members of a labor union in 2015 dropped to its lowest level in at least a decade, and the Palmetto State now ranks last in the nation for employees represented by organized labor.

Unions represented 2.1 percent of the state’s salaried and hourly wage workers last year, the federal Bureau of Labor Statistics said in a new report Thursday.

That is down from 2.2 percent in 2014.

Union membership in North Carolina — which, at 1.9 percent, had the lowest total in 2014 — grew last year to 3 percent, now the second-lowest in the nation.

There were 41,000 union members in South Carolina last year.

The Carolinas are among 25 states that have right-to-work laws prohibiting mandatory union membership. In South Carolina, for example, collective bargaining agreements apply to all of a company’s eligible workers, not just those who are dues-paying members of a union.

Such laws have led to declining union membership, particularly in the South.

Union membership in South Carolina hit a peak of 5.1 percent in 2001 and — apart from a slight increase during the Great Recession — has fallen since then.

One of the state’s biggest union battles is expected to heat up again this year as the International Association of Machinists attempts to organize workers at Boeing Co.’s production facilities in North Charleston, including the 787 Dreamliner campus.

A union vote last year was canceled days before it was to take place. The IAM has said it plans to call for another election as early as this year.

The Charleston region has had one of the state’s biggest drops in union membership, according to separate data compiled by Georgia State University. In 2014, the latest data available at the metro level, union members in the three-county Charleston region made up 0.8 percent of the workforce. That compares with 4.7 percent in 2000.

Nationally, 11.1 percent of workers were members of a union in 2015, unchanged from the previous year, according to the federal report.

Roughly half of the 14.8 million union members in the U.S. lived in just seven states — California, New York, Illinois, Pennsylvania, Michigan, Ohio and New Jersey — although those states accounted for only about one-third of employment nationally.

The federal statistics show union members in 2015 had higher median weekly earnings than workers who were not union members — $980 per week compared to $776 per week.

Men had slightly higher rates of union membership — 11.5 percent — than women, at 10.6 percent.

Reach David Wren at 843-937-5550 or on Twitter at @David_Wren_