Q&A with Commissioner John Koskinen

IRS Commissioner John Koskinen, right, answers questions from USA TODAY's editorial writer George Hager last month. (Photo: Jack Gruber, USA TODAY)

As taxpayers prepare their 2014 returns, the Internal Revenue Service is wrestling with congressionally mandated budget cuts, outmoded technology, Obamacare enforcement, attacks from identity thieves and hackers, and an absurdly complex tax code. IRS Commissioner John Koskinen met recently with the USA TODAY Editorial Board to discuss these and other challenges facing the agency that Americans love to hate. (Questions and answers have been edited for length and clarity.)

Q. How is this tax season shaping up?

A. Every filing season is a challenge for us. So far, we are off to a strong start. We'll process about 150 million individual tax returns this year, and we drive what I call a Model T in our IT system. We have applications that have been running since John F. Kennedy was president.

Q. What kind of service can taxpayers expect?

A. Our taxpayer service level, certainly on the phones, is not going to be very good this year. And it wasn't particularly good last year. The challenge with yet another budget cut this year is that we'll struggle to get close to the same crummy level of service we had last year.

Q. Will the budget cuts save money?

A. On the enforcement side, we have 5,000 fewer revenue agents/officers and criminal investigators. We estimate that will cost the government over $2 billion this year for the loss of those people alone. It really makes no sense at all to continue to underfund the agency that collects $3 trillion a year and funds the government.

Q. What about compliance?

A. The more information people know we have, the better they are at compliance. Years ago, you'd just put down the number of dependents. And then someone decided it would be very useful to have the Social Security number of the child included on the return. The year that went into effect, we lost almost 7 million children — a terrible plague.

Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share IRS Commissioner John Koskinen talks about budget cuts hurting the agency, new online developments and tax code simplification during an interview with USA TODAY editorial writer George Hager.

Q. What's the fastest way to get my refund?

A. If you file electronically and there's no issue with your return, your refund will get processed automatically. If you file on paper, that by definition has to be handled by people. We have fewer of those people, so there's where refunds will be delayed and take longer.

Q. How big a problem is identity thieves stealing people's refunds?

A. It exploded in 2010-12 and overwhelmed law enforcement and overwhelmed us. We've thrown a couple thousand people in jail. The prosecution rate has gone up significantly. We've gotten a lot of what I call the amateurs off the streets. Now we're dealing with organized crime syndicates, here and particularly around the world. And they are very sophisticated. They're not operating Model Ts, and they're not filing returns one or two at a time. They're filing them 100, 500 at a time, and reverse-engineering our filters.

Q. How much are they stealing?

A. In fiscal 2014, we stopped about $16 billion of false refund returns. We estimate that we're still losing $3 billion to $5 billion a year. The number of taxpayers affected is declining, but it is still far too large. Even if we get it down to 50,000 taxpayers a year, that's a lot of people who have a traumatic experience.

Q. Is the IRS safe from hackers?

A. The best response is never to think you're safe. We're getting people from around the world trying to figure out how to get in, because if you could get into the IRS, it's a great place to get data. We have fire walls, anything that's state of the art, we have. That's something we've spent money on, something we're focused on. Thus far, we haven't had a significant breach, but are literally always under attack.

Q. Is the IRS still throwing lavish conventions, like the one in Anaheim in 2010?

A. We now have almost no conventions going on. Any expense over $50,000 comes through my office and goes to Treasury for review. We've cut our conference spending by about 90%.

Q. What about the targeting of Tea Party groups seeking tax-exempt status?

A. I think it was a bad mistake that was made. We should do whatever we can to make sure it never happens again. We don't have a political ax to grind.

Q. How will the IRS enforce compliance with the Affordable Care Act?

A. Over 80% of people are just going to check a box that says, "I've got coverage." So for the vast majority of filers, the ACA is a check mark. We expect about 4.5 million out of 150 million returns will be people who have gotten subsidized health insurance policies. So it's a relatively small percentage of people working their way through those forms, and a chunk of them will be using software that will help them.

Q. Who does your tax returns?

A. CohnReznick (accounting firm). It costs me a few thousand dollars to get my return filed. I am a firm believer that the code ought to be simple enough that you could file your own. As Congressman Dave Camp has said, the tax code is 10 times the size of the Bible with none of the good news.

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1E5t9we