Although Washington was shocked that House Majority Leader Eric Cantor lost his primary to economics professor David Brat, the results offer election analysts yet another reminder of both how strong the anti-incumbent sentiment in the country has been lately and how potent it can be in certain contests.

While National Journal's Scott Bland is accurate in saying that this widespread antipathy towards Congress won't affect the vast majority of incumbents, it's not right to assume that no one will be impacted by it. Case in point: Cantor isn't the only incumbent to lose his party's support this cycle. Along with Rep. Ralph Hall's runoff loss and Lt. Governor David Dewhurst's ousting, Sen. Thad Cochran put up a poor showing and is now scrambling to keep his party's nomination.

[READ: Who Gets Credit for the Cantor Takedown?]

It's also not right to characterize this race as being primarily about Cantor's stance on immigration reform. As Politico's Seung Min Kim has pointed out, recent poll data show that 70 percent of the Republicans registered in Cantor's district support the main planks of the immigration reform proposals that having been floating around Congress.

Cantor's loss was not so much about ideology (as Harry Enten explained, Cantor voted with his party 95 percent of the time) as it was about what happens when an incumbent loses touch with his district and comes to represent all of the things about Washington that Americans can't stand (e.g., special interests, campaign money, and insider politicking). Understanding the political dynamics, on the trail David Brat cleverly described his fight as "David vs. Rome." No doubt for many the nation's capital has become the new Versailles.

Still, this race wasn't just about what Cantor didn't do. It was about what Brat and his team, led by Zachary Werrell, did do. And they did grassroots. And clearly, given the turnout, lots of it.

[READ: All Bets Are Off]

While most people will look at the numbers of voters who turned out – about 65,000 in the Republican primary out of about 500,000 registered in the district – and conclude that it was a paltry showing. But when you look to some past primary elections, it becomes evident that this was extraordinary.

For instance, as the New York Times noted this morning, the total was "nearly 18,000 more than in 2012, when Mr. Cantor won by nearly 60 points." Further, by winning 36,110 votes, Brat in 2014 garnered only about 1,200 fewer votes than what Cantor did in 2012 (37,369). In essence, Brat pulled out a presidential year electorate in a midterm year.

Equally impressive, if you look back to the 2010 midterm cycle at current Rep. Scott Rigell's and Rep. Robert Hurt's first Republican primaries, the total number of ballots cast in each contest was less than 39,000. And while both ran in multi-candidate primary races in 2010, each managed to amass only about half the number (14,396 for Rigell and 17,120 for Hurt) of Cantor's losing vote total from yesterday (28,898).

[MORE: Cartoons about Congress]

Looking across the aisle at former Lt. Gov. Donald Beyer's win in the Democratic primary in Virginia's 8th Congressional District yesterday, again, the total vote was under 39,000, and Beyer's take was just 17,780 votes.

If Cantor's internal polling and campaign turnout goals were wrong, it was probably because he and his team never imagined that 65,000 voters would turn out to vote in a congressional primary.