By Chris Butler | Tennessee Watchdog

NASHVILLE — Tennessee officials can boast all day about states rights and all they’re doing to keep the federal government at bay.

Ironically, according to a new report, Tennessee ranks third on a list of states most dependent on federal dollars, behind only Mississippi and Louisiana.

The author of the study, Joe Luppino-Esposito of State Budget Solutions, a Virginia-based nonpartisan think tank, released his report this week, which cites U.S. Census Bureau data.

Money from the federal government, according to the study, made up 39.5 percent of Tennessee’s general revenue in 2013.

Until this month, when state legislators killed Medicaid expansion under Obamacare, Tennessee’s ranking had the potential to go even higher, Luppino-Esposito said.

Medicaid, as it already exists, takes up a big portion of the state’s reliance on the feds, he said.

In general, states that lean conservative struggle with these issues, which liberal Democrats might call hypocritical, Luppino-Esposito said, adding federal dollars “come with many strings attached.”

“In a way, every state accepts federal money and gives up some measure of independence,” Luppino-Esposito said.

“The more a state relies on federal money, the more independence they are giving up because the feds will dictate what they want.”

Money from the federal government accounts for at least 30 percent of general revenue in the majority of states, according to the report.

Reliance on federal government revenue by the states was down slightly in 2013 from 2012, from 31.6 percent to 30 percent, the report said.

With the federal government trillions of dollars in debt,current levels of aid to states may not last, and state governments need to prepare, the report said..

Luppino-Esposito told Tennessee Watchdog on Thursday that Utah officials already are addressing the problem through a program called “Financial Ready,” which calls for agencies to prepare for cuts, whether large or small.

“In any state, when there’s a shortfall in the state budget usually the governor comes out and says ‘Look, we need to cut 10 percent across the board’ or he’ll say ‘10 percent across the board for everybody except education.’ What a terrible way to run government,” Luppino-Esposito said.

“What you really ought to do is prepare and hammer down what the core functions of state government should be.”

Tennessee Tax Revolt President Ben Cunningham said it’s time for states to wean itself away from the feds and develop their own independent, state-based sources of revenue.

“I hope we will move toward a block-grant solution to federal programs so that states have more control over this money and the money is not used as a way to force states to become proxies of the federal government,” Cunningham said after seeing the State Budget Solutions report.

That would make state politicians more accountable to taxpayers, he said.

“If the state is spending the money and controlling the programs then the state ought to be taxing its citizens directly to get the money,” Cunningham said.

Officials with the Nashville-based Beacon Center of Tennessee, a free-market think tank, used previous data from State Budget Solutions to convince state lawmakers to kill expanded Medicaid under Obamacare, said Beacon spokesman Mark Cunningham.

Mark Cunningham and Ben Cunningham are not related.

“The opponents were saying it’s free federal money so we should take it but we’re already taking a ton of free federal money as it is,” Mark Cunningham said, adding he takes issue with people describing incoming federal dollars as “free.”

“This is money that the federal government is actually borrowing from other countries to give to these states,” he said.

But not everybody agrees with previous interpretations of the study.

State Sen. Jeff Yarbro, D-Nashville, told Tennessee Watchdog in an email Thursday that the State Budget Solutions study is more a reflection of flat state revenue than anything else.

“I haven’t examined the numbers closely, but I don’t think the state would rank that high in terms of total federal dollars received or even federal dollars per capita,” Yarbro said. “Another likely factor is that not enough Tennesseans are part of the national economic recovery.”

More investment in Tennessee, Yarbro said, would help.

“It’s obvious to us that investing in education, job creation, and fighting income inequality would improve our ability to be on sounder financial footing,” he said.

According to the State Budget Solutions report, only nine states can claim to have 25 percent or less of general revenue paid from the federal government’s coffers. Only one state, North Dakota, has less than 20 percent.

Contact Christopher Butler at chris@tennesseewatchdog.org

Follow Tennessee Watchdog and receive regular updates through Facebook and Twitter

Like Watchdog.org? Click HERE to get breaking news alerts in YOUR state!