Nurse Practitioner Sandy Perdek, left, and Physician’s Assistant Tatiana Mazur in the examination room within the Quickcare clinic at Price Chopper in Malta. The clinic is part of Ellis Medical Group. ED BURKE — THE SARATOGIAN

malta >> Price Chopper, QuickCare and Ellis Medicine have partnered to open in-store clinics at the supermarket chain’s Malta and Latham locations.

The three organizations created this first-of-its-kind collaboration in the Capital Region to offer residents access to more efficient healthcare. QuickCare centers, staffed by an Ellis Medicine nurse practitioner, physician or physician’s assistant, are walk-in health clinics that offer patients immediate help for common illnesses and provide some well-care and screening services.

The healthcare centers are adjacent to the pharmacy departments in the Malta and Latham Price Choppers. No appointments are necessary to be seen by a healthcare provider.

“Helping people get access to health care in a place close to them and a part of their regular routines just makes sense in this new age of healthcare delivery,” wrote Dr. David Liebers, medical director of QuickCare, in a press release.

Advertisement

Illnesses and ailments that can be diagnosed and treated at QuickCare include allergies, congestion, coughs, earaches, flu-like symptoms, muscle aches and pains, motion sickness, pink eye or styes, respiratory and sinus infections, sore or strep throat and urinary tract infections. QuickCare also offers sports physicals. Both centers will be open daily from 10 a.m. to 6 p.m.

“The convenient hours and location next to full-service pharmacies make these QuickCare centers tremendously accessible for people who are already in our stores shopping for orange juice, cold medicine or chicken soup. We’re very pleased to be offering our customers another convenience that will help them live healthier lives,” Price Chopper Executive Chairman of the Board Neil Golub wrote.

After seeing a healthcare professional at the clinic, patients who need a prescription filled are only steps away from Price Chopper’s full-service pharmacy.

“QuickCare fits with the vision of the Affordable Care Act to break down barriers to health care by moving that care into communities — making it more accessible,” wrote Ellis President and CEO James W. Connolly. “These centers will help meet the increased number of patients seeking healthcare resources.”

QuickCare currently accepts CDPHP insurance; co-pays are based on the member’s plan. For patients who are not CDPHP members, a payment of $40 is due at time of service.