Topics: Caretaking, Death, Editor's Picks, End-of-life Doula, HIV/AIDS, Hopsice, Life stories, nursing home, Life News

I’ve always had a terror of death. When I was 5, I’d wake up in the middle of night and run to my parents’ room in horror. I saw life as claustrophobic. I was stuck inside of life. It was a tight box. I didn’t like that there was only one way out – death – and that I had no choice in this grand exit.

As I grew older, I tried to see the positive aspects of my fear. Maybe life cannot be appreciated if its temporary nature is not contemplated. No joy without pain! No yum without yuck! Plus, dying off is the respectable and courteous thing to do, you know? How else would there be enough room?

I quickly found that rationalizing was junk. I could not get myself to think better of dying. Death sucked and was scary and contemplating that airtight ending – that closing of the curtains – made me batshit crazy.

So when I was 27, I decided to explore this fear a little more – if possible, demystify it in order to try to free myself. I researched and discovered a volunteer position called an end-of-life doula. An end-of-life doula is someone who is trained to comfort and support someone who is dying. In other words, just as a birth doula accompanies a baby into this world, an end-of-life doula accompanies a person out of this world. I wanted to become one. I’d supply someone with much-needed companionship while he’d allow me to witness his decline, his soul letting go, his journey into nothingness. I’d see there was nothing to be frightened of, after all. It’d be mutually beneficial.

I was accepted into the program, attended an eight-week course, and prepared to meet an elderly man who read Herman Wouk books and spoke of Nietzsche. Instead, in autumn of 2009, I got Jethro.

* * *

Jethro lived at a long-term care facility for people who have been diagnosed with HIV/AIDS. The nursing home is a nondescript red-brick building that gets lost among the flashy boutiques and hip bistros of New York’s Lower East Side. While 20-somethings sat at sidewalk tables sipping cold beers, not even 100 feet away through glass doors there were nurses doling out Dixie cups filled with pills; residents with distended stomachs that pulled taut their T-shirts; people bleary-eyed and restless, donning fireproof bibs in the cramped Plexiglas smoking room.

I spotted Jethro as he propelled himself toward me in a wheelchair. The first thing I noticed was his age – about 50 – and that it was not what I thought of as a Dying Age. The second thing I noticed was his nose; it was a nose that said, “hi” before the rest of him had a chance. He wore old jeans, a blue faded shirt and a skeptical look. “Why you smiling?” he said, coming to a stop by my feet.

“That’s a good question,” I said. I hadn’t even realized I was smiling. “I guess I’m trying to be friendly.” I squatted down so that we were face to face. “Did it work?”

He wasn’t what one would call especially welcoming, but I was immediately attracted to his raw curiosity. “Why you nodding?” he continued, smacking his lips.

I also had not realized I was nodding. I was nervous. My body must have been trying to deliver all sorts of diplomatic messages on my behalf. “I guess I’m trying to be agreeable,” I said. “Did it work?”

That first day, I stood next to him in the hall for an hour. We watched the nurses run around – change diapers, give showers and deliver food. Meanwhile, I was getting myself ready for the intense stuff, the end-of-life-talk stuff. I told myself I was prepared for him to flip his shit. I could be calm and hold space for him as he shouted “Why? Why? Why?” into the sky and threw his can of Ensure against the wall. I’d read Kubler-Ross’ “On Death and Dying.” I’d read “How We Die” by Sherwin Nuland. I knew how it was supposed to go.

He turned to me, finally ready to talk. OK, here goes. I leaned in. I waited. Finally, he opened his mouth: “You’re a white girl, you can get money whenever you want.”

Not exactly the heart-to-heart I was expecting.

“That’s not true,” I said.

“Yes it is.” Then he rolled himself back into his room.

During the next couple of visits, we stared at the nurses’ station, the TV, and at each other without much to say. I wanted to say to him, “Seriously, tick tock dude. It’s about time we get all Tuesdays-with-Morrie up in here,” but I wasn’t going to be pushy. Per end-of-life doula protocol, I let him lead.

I still didn’t know much about him, but it was clear that he enjoyed giving me a hard time. He often told me I was getting fat and that my hair was messy. “Why don’t you do your hair?” he said. “When you leave the house, you’re supposed to do your hair.”

My hair was in a conventional bun. “What’s wrong with a bun?”

“Didn’t you hear me?” he said. “It’s messy.”

I refused to change my hair, even though I was concerned about the guilt I might feel if mine was the last hairdo he saw and one that he’d retain, etched into the back of his eyelids, for all of eternity.

Then one day, about three months in, he told me that he was leaving. He said he was going to pack up and get his own apartment. “The next time you come, I’ll be gone,” he said.

I wondered if that was code: “I’m leaving,” as in, “I’m checking out of my earthly body. Laters, my human brethren!” In my doula class, I had learned from my teacher Amy, a veteran hospice social worker, that people who are about to die often speak about traveling somewhere. She’d recounted umpteen examples: There was the guy who wouldn’t stop talking about packing his suitcases, the woman who worried there wouldn’t be a parking spot, the old man who wanted to make sure he was the only one on the bus, the woman who kept asking about departure times and on and on and on.

So I braced myself for his death.

It was happening sooner than I expected, but you just never know with this stuff.

The next time I came to visit, I was anxious. We still hadn’t made sense of his impending end. I walked slowly down the hall, hoping his name would still be on the placard near his room number. When I reached it, I peeked around the doorframe to see if he was still there. And there he was with the TV roaring. “They won’t let me leave,” he said, calmly.

I’d read the signs wrong. By leave, he’d actually meant what he’d said: He wanted to get the hell out of that nursing home.

Over and over again in the coming months, I braced myself for his death, but he still didn’t die. Braced myself. He still didn’t die. I found out he had cancer, too. And he still didn’t die.

To break the monotony, one day I brought a deck of cards. I dealt a hand and we started playing blackjack. It didn’t matter who won, I realized what he really loved was the trash talk. “I’m going to beat your ass, Jethro.” He seriously couldn’t get enough. “You’re crazy,” he said. “CRAZY! You think you gonna win!?” His favorite was when I called him a jerk. “Asshole” put him into laughing convulsions. I saw that partly we sustain who we are from the feedback we get from those around us, it validates our identities. Apparently, he loved being seen as feisty and mischievous, which is something that’s hard to maintain as a wheelchair-bound patient. I was able to give him back a piece of himself and little did I realize at the time, he was also introducing me to a new side of myself. Each visit onward, I made an effort to slip in a “jerk” at least once.

Meanwhile, several more months passed and we still didn’t speak about The Issue, but he’d slowly opened up and we’d started talking about other things. I learned that he was from the South and came to New York as a small boy. He had a daughter. He didn’t know her age. He didn’t know his own age. His illness had given him early onset dementia. He hadn’t been in touch with any of his family for years. His favorite job was when he was a sanitation worker in the Bronx. He loved to play basketball. He wished he could walk again, go to the movies and have popcorn on his lap again, have an apartment he could call his own again. He went to jail several times. He got into brawls and had scars, making those memories tangible on his arms. He did drugs. He didn’t tell me which kind. Each time I visited, we watched “All My Children” from his hospital bed or from his wheelchair. He had a crush on Erica Kane, better known as Susan Lucci and for being such a loyal viewer, he was incongruously unperturbed when the show went off the air. We filled the void with Wendy Williams.

When I told people that I was an end-of-life doula, that I visited Jethro, they’d say, “Wow, you’re such a good person.” And I wondered if I actually was or if it was just pleasurable to be seen that way. After all, part of doing this was an experiment for my own benefit. My intentions weren’t pure and saintly. Yet going there to see him made me feel like a good person and I thought, maybe that’s beneficial too. Maybe it helps if we can see ourselves as good people – maybe that makes us better people. It feels good to be good. It’s like how sometimes just smiling, despite a bad mood, can make you feel happier.