Topics: Antonin Scalia, aol_on, Editor's Picks, Gary May, Holder v Shelby County, Justice Scalia, Race, Voting Rights Acr, Business News, News, Politics News

It’s certainly appropriate to mourn the passing of Justice Antonin Scalia and remember his passion and wit. But let’s also remember that his view of the Constitution hurt millions of Americans excluded from his theory of constitutional originalism.

Take for example his view of the Voting Rights Act. For Justice Scalia, the Voting Rights Act—gutted by Scalia and his conservative colleagues in 2013’s Shelby County v. Holder, was a “racial entitlement,” a form of “racial preferment” which affected only African Americans while ignoring the white population.

Such statements indicate that Justice Scalia was woefully ignorant of the Voting Rights Act’s history. Because of our nation’s painful history of racial injustice, the Voting Rights Act has often been used to safeguard black voters specifically—but its protections extend to all Americans regardless of their skin color, as the Act’s early years vividly demonstrate.

In May 1966, thanks to the enactment of the Voting Rights Act the previous August which also led to the abolition of the poll tax, African Americans were able to vote freely for the first time in an off-year primary election. Across the South, many sought a host of elected offices from county sheriffs to seats in their state legislatures. In Alabama, a Democratic candidate for governor, Attorney General Richmond Flowers, was vigorously campaigning for black votes. If elected, he promised to appoint blacks to positions in his administration—men and women active in the civil rights movement, he assured them, not “just a few Uncle Toms.”

The favorite to win in Alabama, however, was not Flowers. It was his opponent, Lurleen Wallace, a stand-in for her husband George, the gubernatorial incumbent who was ineligible to run again because of term limits. A vote for the Wallace ticket would be a vote for segregation; George Wallace had been the scourge of the civil rights movement in Alabama, and a politician who had actively incited racial hatred in order to obtain the support of white voters.

On election day, the turnout was extraordinary. In Selma, the polls opened at 8 a.m., but black voters started to line up hours before. In Birmingham a blistering sun caused one older man to faint, but when an ambulance arrived, he refused to go to the hospital until he voted. “This is the first time I’m voting,” he said. “It might be my last.” Voting continued far into the night. In Montgomery the polls were supposed to close at 6 p.m., but at 8:30 p.m., 1,100 African Americans were still waiting at the polls and refused to leave until they had voted. At that same hour in Birmingham, 700 waited patiently for more than five hours before they were able to vote. “It made me think I was sort of somebody,” said Willie Bolden, eighty-one, the grandson of slaves.