An Asbury Park company is offering free rides between the business district and the beach.

Buy Photo One of the three free mini-buses is driven along the the streets of Asbury Park, Sunday, June 15, 2014. Photo by Jason Towlen (Photo: Jason Towlen/Staff Photographer, Jason Towlen/Staff Photographer)Buy Photo

A new service is offering free rides to people in Asbury Park, and all anyone has to do to get a lift is wave to the driver.

Jersey Shore Free Ride opened in the city after Memorial Day, and its billboard-sided electric cars can be seen driving around Kingsley Street, Cookman and Ocean avenues.

Paid for through corporate sponsorships, the six-passenger cars are sided in colorful advertising promoting everything from local eateries to national brands.

“It helps us bring awareness to the central business district,” said John LiDestri, who owns Jersey Shore Free Ride with partner Kristina Bannon. Another Free Ride service based in the Hamptons owns a small share in their service.

A Jersey Shore Free Ride car cruised down Ocean Avenue about noon on Sunday, where 61-year-old Tom Sanford jumped in to catch a ride to Cookman Avenue.

“It’s a great idea,” said Sandford, who lives in Asbury Park and would have otherwise walked the roughly half mile from the beach to the downtown section of the city for lunch.

Both LiDestri, 44, and Bannon, 35, live in the city themselves, and see the Free Ride service as a way to promote all Asbury Park has to offer. Inside the open-air cab, a mounted iPad cycles through advertisements for local businesses. On either side are folded brochures about the city.

Before launching the company, LiDestri sampled a Free Ride Service in West Palm Beach, Florida. Another Free Ride exists in Santa Monica, California, LiDestri said.

Since Asbury’s Free Ride is still new and somewhat unknown, much of Free Ride’s existing advertising promotes other businesses owned by LiDestri and Bannon. LiDestri’s family is involved in the food and alcohol industry, and Bannon owns two boardwalk eateries.

Asbury’s oceanfront re-developer iStar Residential is also on board with the project, sponsors the service, and welcomes Free Ride’s three electric cars to park outside iStar’s Waterfront Information Center on Cookman Avenue.

“For us, it made a lot of sense,” said Brian Cheripka, vice president of land for iStar Residential. “One of our main goals was to connect the central business district and the shops… to the waterfront.”

Each Free Ride electric car can travel about 15 miles — depending on traffic conditions and the weight carried — before it needs to be recharged. The service operates seven days a week between 11 a.m. and 8 p.m., weather permitting. Each car has no windows, so LiDestri and Bannon are considering moving the company to Austin, Texas, for the winter and operating in Asbury Park only during the warmer months.

So far, Free Ride has no designated stops or schedule. Bannon says the service can’t be “called” for a pickup like other fee-based transportation services.

For the most part, the cars stick to shuttling visitors and residents between Cookman Avenue’s restaurant and shopping district and the beach and boardwalk area.

“It’s a feel-good project,” Bannon said. “We’re not trying to be millionaires from this... It’s just a bunch of little people trying to pitch in and help the community.”

Amanda Oglesby: 732-557-5701; aoglesby@app.com

Read or Share this story: http://www.app.com/story/news/local/2014/06/15/asbury-park-free-ride/10557587/