GRAND RAPIDS, Mich. (WOOD) — More and more people are choosing to skip a doctor’s appointment and instead get their flu vaccination at a pharmacy.

Pharmacies won’t replace the need to go to a doctor, but for some routine things like the flu shot, many people — one in five adults nationally — are choosing to go to their local pharmacy.

Erin Anderson took her 10-year-old son Aidan to a local Walgreens to get the shot. He wasn’t thrilled about the idea, but it was over almost before he could get too nervous.

“It was quick and easy; could come right in when it was my schedule,” Erin Anderson said.

That’s the attraction and the sales pitch: There is no appointment necessary and many pharmacies have convenient locations.

“I think we’re more accessible to the patients,” Walgreens pharmacist Sally Ngo said. “It’s again in terms of how many times we see the patients. I think we see the patients more than the doctors do.”

Ngo pointed out she and her staff see patients sometimes weekly or monthly, and it’s convenient to point out if a vaccine is recommended for a person’s age group or medical condition.

Many pharmacies like Walgreens have been doing immunizations for years. The preventative primary care is expected to only increase at pharmacies.

When asked, Ngo said she thought the role of a pharmacy would probably continue to expand.

“Because there’s so many people who are going to become 65 and older,” she said — meaning they’re especially encouraged to get the flu shot.

Ngo also said the Affordable Care Act has also made it easier for people to get their flu shot. More people can get vaccines because it’s preventative care that may not have been covered before, but now is. Ngo said it’s also easier as a pharmacy to bill medical insurance directly for services provided at the pharmacy.

Other states like California already have laws in place for pharmacists to get a special designation to prescribe certain medicines and order tests without a doctor’s input.

Health officials recommend the flu shot, particularly for high-risk people like children and older adults, every year. This season, the vaccination is one way to help curb Ebola virus scares. The illnesses initially present with many of the same symptoms, so fewer flu cases means there will be fewer cases of people with Ebola-like symptoms.

—–

Online:

Kent County Health Department on the flu

Michigan Department of Community Health on the flu

Share this: Email

Print

Facebook

Twitter

Google

Pinterest

More

LinkedIn

Tumblr



Reddit