If you go What: "Meet the Spirits," a joint fundraiser for Historic Boulder Inc. and Boulder Parks and Recreation When: Noon-5 p.m. Oct. 12 Where: Columbia Cemetery, Ninth and Pleasant streets, Boulder Tickets: $12 for Historic Boulder members, $15 for non-members, $5 for children/students under 16 Info: 303-444-5192 or https://t.e2ma.net/message/qwq2g/6kk6rg

Nannie Baird had been married only a few months and was just getting used to her new Pine Street home in Boulder when she was found dead at age 36. A coroner's inquest concluded that she had been poisoned by her husband, but the facts surrounding the case remain a mystery.

On Sunday, Oct. 12, historians and others will gather in a "Meet the Spirits" reenactment in Columbia Cemetery to portray 28 of the graveyard's deceased individuals. Nannie's story, new this year, will be told by Boulder County Coroner Emma Hall.

Statements in old newspaper articles reveal that on Oct. 15, 1902, at 10 p.m., Nannie went to bed in good health. By midnight, she was unconscious. Her husband, Rudolph, a self-proclaimed doctor who specialized in diseases of women and children, called in additional medical assistance, but Nannie died the following day.

A Camera reporter called her an "esteemed lady" with "hosts of friends." Nannie's funeral was held in her home.

In the following weeks, officials turned up conflicting evidence. Four physicians performed an autopsy and did not find any reason for Nannie's death. They removed her stomach, but a newspaper reporter noted that the district attorney did not authorize it to be analyzed because he was too busy with a murder trial.

Two weeks later, a coroner's inquest charged Rudolph, "or someone within his knowledge," with poisoning his wife with felonious intent. Then news leaked out that the decision had been based on the mistaken belief that a drug clerk had testified that Rudolph gave his wife a third of a grain of strychnine when he meant, instead, a 30th.

Nannie Baird's large gravestone is located in Boulder's Columbia Cemetery, near Ninth Street. (Courtesy photo)

Whether the contents of Nannie's stomach ever were analyzed is not known, but there was enough evidence for Nannie's sister Dr. Lulu Burrus (yet another medical doctor) to file an affidavit that resulted in Rudolph's arrest for murder.

Nannie had been Rudolph's third wife. During his arraignment, Rudolph's second wife came forward and testified that she had divorced him on the grounds of "extreme and repeated acts of cruelty." It also was learned that Rudolph's first wife, like Nannie, had died under suspicious circumstances.

Statements also revealed that Rudolph had previously owned a drugstore, where he passed himself off as a pharmacist while using two different aliases. He never had any medical training at all. Also, he had taken out two different insurance policies on Nannie's life.

Hearings in Boulder District Court dragged on and on. Finally, in April 1904, Rudolph's attorney and Boulder's assistant district attorney became adversarial. The Camera noted that any chances for a guilty verdict had been thwarted, adding, "The lawyers will get their fee for saving 'Old Doc Baird's' neck."

Although Rudolph left a trail of suspicion, he eventually was acquitted of his wife's murder. He died at 53 and is buried in Denver's Fairmount Cemetery. Nannie, along with her sister Dr. Lulu Burrus, is buried near Ninth Street in Columbia Cemetery.

Silvia Pettem and Carol Taylor write about history for the Daily Camera. Email Silvia at pettem@earthlink.net, Carol at boulderhistorylibrarian@gmail.com or write to the Daily Camera, 5450 Western Ave., Boulder 80301.