Two burning questions that occupy the minds of most Americans nowadays are “what has happened to our government and what will it take to fix it?”

Neither question has an easy answer because any solution must, by design, involve politics and politics as practiced in America puts party above patriotism and personal interest above what is best for a nation.

Finger pointing abounds and there is, of course, plenty of blame to go around but solutions cannot be found until those involved in our leadership stop thinking of themselves first as Democrats or Republicans, conservatives or liberals or left-wing or right.

Which means, sadly, that solutions will most likely remain impossible to find because those involved in leadership cannot step away from their party labels and affiliation long enough to function first and foremost as Americans.

Each side in the endless stalemate remains wedded to hard-core positions. For Democrats, that means no delays or changes in Obamacare, no massive cuts in spending. For Republicans, it means no return to pre-sequestration spending levels and, of course, at least cuts in or outright elimination of Obamacare.

The fringes want their tidbits as well: elimination of federal funding for abortion is one example.

Lost in all of this is the simple need to pass a continuing resolution without add-ons and an increase in the debt limit to allow the government to pay its bills.

The rest can, and should, be argued at another time and in proper legislative procedure.

America’s government today is a process of inaction, delay and stonewalling. Progress is not considered because it is not, under our current system, considered a viable political alternative.

What we have instead are two legislative bodies of misfits using misappropriation and misapplication of both power and process to bring matters to a screeching halt and leave our government in constant crisis and misdirection.

This, sadly, is what happens in system where publicity-seeking, spotlight-grabbing egomaniacs get the attention and dominate the headlines.

A time might have existed when America’s system of government had the envy of other nations of the world but that time has long since passed. Today, we are — rightfully so — a laughing stock around the globe — a nation that cannot function and one controlled by radicals on both sides of the political aisle.

Speaker of the House John Boehner is a drunken, pitiful excuse of a leader in that body but Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid is no better. He’s a former bag man for casino bosses who can’t make a decision on his own without someone paying him off.

This could be a vacuum where a strong President could step in and take charge but Barack Obama is neither strong nor Presidential in this mess. His only goal seems to be to protect what little is left of his tattered Presidential record.

What remains is an America crying out for a leader to save the day.

If such a leader exists, he or she won’t be a Democrat or a Republican.

It will have to be an American — if any exist in what is left in what once was a great country.

Share this: Facebook

Twitter

LinkedIn

Email

Print

Google