Tragedy as boy, 10, shot dead by ruthless thugs during brazen Miami nail salon robbery

Police in Miami are on the hunt of two thugs who shot dead a 10-year-old boy and wounded his father during a nail salon robbery.

The victim, Aaron Vu, was at his parents’ business, Hong Kong Nail Salon at 14832 Northwest 7th Avenue with his father, 42-year-old Hai Nam Vu, at around 7.30pm Friday when two armed men burst through the front door and opened fire.

The intruders were caught on a surveillance camera entering the business with their guns drawn and then fleeing, but not before spraying the inside of the store with bullets.



Scroll down for video

Tragic loss: Aaron Vu (right), 10, was shot dead during a robbery inside his parents' Miami nail salon, while his father, 42-year-old Hai Vu, was left wounded

Aaron and his father were flown to Jackson Memorial Hospital, where the 10-year-old was pronounced dead from his injuries a short time later, the station WSVN reported.

According to investigators, the unidentified gunmen, one of whom was wearing a mask, got away with customers' purses, cell phones and an unspecified sum of cash.

They took off in an unknown direction in a black Dodge Ram pick-up truck, police told NBC Miami.

Aaron Vu's fifth-grade classmate, Paul Namphy, said his friend was outgoing and loved making everyone laugh, including his teachers.



Deadly heist: The Friday night robbery happened at the popular Hong Kong Nail Salon at 14832 Northwest 7th Avenue

Heartless thugs: A surveillance cameras captured the moment two men burst through the front door of the business with their guns drawn and opened fire



Manhunt: The gunmen, one of them masked, got away with purses, cell phones and an unspecified sum of cash, and fled in a Dodge Ram pickup truck

Namphy was speaking outside the shuttered nail salon Saturday, where a makeshift memorial made up of bouquets of flowers and a Teddy bear has sprung up.

Police investigating the deadly heist distributed fliers today to the owners of nearby businesses and released the surveillance video showing the pair of suspects.

‘I hope the people in the community are as outraged as we are,’ Lt. Jim Tietz, of the Miami-Dade Police told CBS Miami. ‘These people need to be caught. They need to be taken off the street if they’ve done it once they’ll do it again and anybody could be a victim.’

Small tribute: A makeshift memorial has sprung up in front of the salon in honor of the slain little boy who was described as funny and outgoing

Police are offering a $3,000 reward for information leading to the men's arrest.

Salon employees and customers told Miami Herald Hai and Lynn Vu, Aaron’s parents, have been running the popular business for at least five years.