JOLIET – Program reductions and layoffs are on the horizon at Joliet’s Spanish Community Center following news of Gov. Bruce Rauner’s recent suspension of state grants for Illinois’ 10 immigrant welcoming centers.

Designated just last summer as an Illinois Welcoming Center, the Spanish Community Center, 309 N. Eastern Ave. in Joliet, won’t receive the more than $70,000 in grant funding owed through this fiscal year, which ends June 30, according to center Executive Director Elizabeth Nevarez.

The money was included in the budget fix legislation approved and signed by Rauner last month. Then, on April 3, Nevarez and other welcome center officials were notified the funding would instead be suspended, effective immediately.

“There is an inconsistency here,” Nevarez said.

Immigration has made the United States a great country, Rauner spokeswoman Catherine Kelly said in an emailed statement Friday. But the previous administration enacted a budget with a $1.6 billion budget hole that needs closure.

“The bipartisan legislation passed by the General Assembly is not a complete solution, and the administration’s ability to manage the budget is restricted by the legislation as well as the time it took to pass,” Kelly said. “Part of the solution to solving the inherited $1.6 billion budget hole without raising taxes or increasing borrowing is to continue to evaluate the current fiscal year’s budget.”

The drastic state budget reductions also mean the city’s growing Hispanic population – and others – will have a harder time successfully integrating into Illinois through services offered at the Joliet center, which is already strapped for cash, Nevarez said.

Welcoming centers help immigrant and refugee individuals as well as families assimilate in Illinois, offering services and information they need.

The centers are meant to eliminate barriers people from out of state encounter when accessing those services.

Nevarez said she may need to layoff two of her five staff members next month because she can’t afford salaries. Services may also have to be cut.

“The other impact is on the people we serve. That’s the bottom line. These are services that we are providing to the residents in the community they could otherwise not access with the language barrier,” Nevarez said.

The center enrolled about 1,000 people last year in health care coverage under the Affordable Care Act.

The center also helps people gain access to employment counseling, unemployment insurance, Medicaid, food stamps and health screenings.

While the Spanish Community Center serves everyone, most of its clientele is Latino. About 70 percent of the center’s clientele is Latino, 25 percent black and 5 percent white, according to the center.