For nearly two decades Dr Ben Carson was famous for being the neurosurgeon who successfully separated twins who had been joined at the head, even though many experts had warned that it was impossible.

Now, two years after retiring from the operating theatre, the world-renowned surgeon from Johns Hopkins Hospital is attempting another improbable feat that most experts in the field also agree cannot be done – he wants to become the next president of the United States.

His candidacy would be a joke, were it not for the fact that over the last year Dr Carson has been filling venues all across America, selling stacks of books and attracting millions of grassroots dollars to a presidential campaign that has not yet even been officially declared.

As he walked out on stage this week in the small, Bible Belt town of Somerset, Kentucky, the mood in the audience was a cross between a political rally and an old-fashioned Christian tent revival meeting.

Dr Carson, an African-American who grew up dirt-poor in the Detroit suburbs in the 1950s but went on to study at Yale, is softly spoken, but his message to the conservative faithful borders on the apocalyptic.

America is dying, he says, strangled by regulation, drowned in debt, crippled by political correctness and riddled with liberal orthodoxies. It doesn't take long before his audience-come-congregation is voicing its assent. "Yes sir!" calls out one man; "Oh yes!" agrees another; "He's right!" says a third.



Dr. Ben Carson is interviewed during a live streaming Web-A-Thon with Wake Up America (Laura Segall/Getty Images)

The monologue is a reprise of the speech that brought Dr Carson to overnight political stardom last year when he spoke at a televised White House prayer breakfast, decrying America's fiscal and moral decay while President Barack Obama looked on, fuming and humiliated.

America, the "pinnacle nation", risks going the way of the Roman Empire, warned Dr Carson. "Moral decay, fiscal irresponsibility … They [the Romans] destroyed themselves. If you don't think that can happen to America, you get out your books and you start reading."

Dr Carson was already no stranger to attention – George Bush had awarded him the Presidential Medal of Honour, America's highest civilian award, and his life was made into a 2009 TV movie called "Gifted Hands" – but nothing could have prepared him for the instantaneous explosion of interest.

"I expected a reaction, but nothing like what actually happened," he told The Telegraph before his Somerset speech. "I thought when I retired I was going to learn to play the organ and get good at golf, but then came the prayer breakfast and it all changed."

The 26-minute speech launched a conservative media phenomenon that shows little signs of fading 18 months after it began. Even the usually sober Wall Street Journal was prompted to write an ecstatic editorial titled: "Ben Carson for President."

Dr Carson remains the longest of long-shots, but until the race begins, the question of whether he could really be president is moot. By getting out ahead of the Republican field, he now has a chance to impact significantly how the GOP nomination fight plays out in 2016.

"He's a smart guy and he's got star quality," says Jeffrey Lord, a former Reagan aide and Republican Party historian and commentator. "He can really attract crowds and get them going in a way that others can't manage. That's a very important quality to have – Barack Obama certainly once had it."

Even for conservatives it is a big stretch to compare Mr Carson's political acumen to that of America's current president, but it is also true that like with then-Senator Obama back in 2007, the Carson phenomenon has a demonstrated ability to attract interest from outside the political mainstream.

At a recent event in Iowa, the state whose caucuses will fire the starting gun on 2016 nomination fight, local operatives were reportedly "floored" recently by the turnout for Carson – not because of the numbers, but because of the number of unfamiliar faces.

Already the 63-year-old is running in second place in recent Iowa polls behind only Mitt Romney, a testament to the name recognition generated by the prayer breakfast, his punditry work on the conservative Fox News network and his incessant rounds of public appearances.

He has promised to declare formally his candidacy by May, and after Republicans stormed the midterm elections last month he says the Lord appears to be pushing him firmly away from golf and organ lessons and towards a bid to save the nation.

"To see the children out with their signs saying 'you gotta save our future'," Dr Carson says with a shake of the head, his voice suddenly loaded with sadness. "You recognise that sometimes you just have to do what you're called upon to do."

The Carson backstory – a boy with a semi-literate mother who made it to Yale and became a neurosurgeon through sheer hard work and determination – plays straight into the conservative ideals of an America where everyone is left free to pull themselves up by their bootstraps.

Like America itself, he is a mass of contradictions: a scientist who does not accept evolution, a rhetorical pyrotechnician who hardly ever raises his voice and a black man from a poor upbringing who espouses conservative ideology.

His campaign prospects are given weight by the National Draft Ben Carson for President Committee, a promotional group similar to the Ready for Hillary organisation that is paving the way for Mrs Clinton's putative 2016 run. Astonishingly, the pro-Carson group out-raised the pro-Clinton one last quarter.

If the enthusiasm continues and the cash keeps rolling in, Carson has the potential to upset the form book on the Republican right, reckons Mr Lord, stealing votes from other Tea Party favourites like Senators Ted Cruz and Rand Paul and setting up a duel with an establishment candidate.

"Somebody – Ben Carson, Donald Trump, Ted Cruz – is going to emerge as the 'outsider' candidate to go up against the perceived 'insider', a Chris Christie or a Jeb Bush," he adds. "There is this vast pool of sentiment out there that is actively hostile to Washington DC and its insiders and he's tapping into it."

Beltway pundits have queued up to write off Dr Carson as just another 'book-tour Republican' who will run simply to boost his profile and sell more copies his latest tome, although his title "One Nation: What We Can All Do To Save America's Future" is already a New York Times bestseller.

He has been castigated on the left for a series of politically incorrect "gaffes" that included describing the ObamaCare reforms as "the worst thing that has happened in this nation since slavery" and arguing that contemporary America is "very much like Nazi Germany".

He also implicitly compared homosexuality to bestiality when weighing in on the gay marriage debate and most recently blamed the Ferguson riots on the "women's lib" movement of the 1970s for creating so many broken homes.

Such outbursts may scandalise the left and are even too strong for many establishment Republicans, but back among the crowd in Somerset – mostly white and intensely religious – that is the kind of straight-shooting they would like to see in the Oval Office.

"He doesn't have to flower his words," enthuse Darrell and Christy Bartley, a couple who bought a table at the fundraising dinner just for the chance to see Dr Carson. "I hope he runs for president because he tells it like it is."

Dr Carson appears to know this, conceding in a rare moment of candour during our interview that comparing ObamaCare to slavery might have been injudicious, but was also necessary to attract attention and make his point. "They're not going to understand it if you make it all powder-puff," he says with a smile.

Back up on stage, game face on, he introduces his talk with a gleeful disclaimer that he is "not politically correct", warning that he may even "offend some people" with his truth-telling, before going on to tell his audience exactly the kind of truth it wants to hear.

In a talk sprinkled with one-liners, he declares America's $18 trillion national debt to be "immoral", laments falling education standards and welfare dependency, and castigates Mr Obama's failures – from his "unconstitutional" health care reforms to the rise of Islamic State.

"It's simple," Mr Carson says of the threat posed by the Isil militants, "I would make 'I-sis' into 'I-was'". It may not amount to a foreign policy position, but it draws roars of laughter from the audience.

Washington's political cognoscenti laugh at Dr Carson too, although no one out in the conservative heartlands cares – they are too busy dreaming that come November 2016 a Republican candidate – perhaps even one like Dr Carson – may yet have the last laugh.