LETTERS: Stenehjem, Poolman deserve bipartisan support in North Dakota

As current and former chairs of the Republican Party, we know the special responsibility that comes with selecting our party's nominees.

The Republican Party is dominant in North Dakota because our party reflects the conservative values shared by most residents. Our electoral success obliges a higher degree of responsibility when selecting candidates.

An ideal candidate has proven conservative credentials and an awareness of governing, and enjoys widespread public support.

With this responsibility in mind, our party endorsed Wayne Stenehjem for governor and Nicole Poolman for lieutenant governor.

Stenehjem is a tested leader who has effectively served the citizens of our state. As attorney general, Stenehjem has fought against Obamacare and federal overreach at every turn. He has an encyclopedic knowledge of North Dakota and its people. His relationships with other leaders inside and outside of government will produce a broad coalition of support that will be ready to govern on Day One.

Poolman is a mother and teacher as well as a dynamic leader in our Legislature. She has been an advocate for children and families and a guardian of sound fiscal policies. She represents the positive, conservative future of our state.

The Stenehjem-Poolman ticket offers a record of conservative values and integrity that has won endorsements from across the political spectrum. That's why an overwhelming majority of our state's elected officials have voiced unequivocal support for the candidates and why so many from outside our party support their election.

We urge those inside and outside our party to support Stenehjem for governor and Poolman for lieutenant governor in the Republican primary election.

Kelly Armstrong

Stan Stein

Ken Karls

Dan Traynor

Curly Haugland

Layton Freborg

Bismarck

Armstrong is chairman of the North Dakota Republican Party. Stein, Karls, Traynor, Haugland and Freborg are former chairmen of the party.