The NFL finds itself mired in multiple scandals as of late, and sponsors aren’t having it.

Anheuser-Busch, maker of Budweiser and one of the league’s biggest sponsors, made waves Wednesday when the company said it was “disappointed and increasingly concerned by the recent incidents that have overshadowed this NFL season.” While it didn’t specify, the company was presumably referring to the controversies surrounding players Ray Rice and Adrian Peterson. "We are not yet satisfied with the league's handling of behaviors that so clearly go against our own company culture and moral code," Anheuser-Busch wrote in a statement.

But other brands are approaching their criticism more cautiously. Campbell Soup said in a statement, “We expect the NFL to take appropriate action." “Domestic violence is completely unacceptable,” said PepsiCo, referring to the charge against Ray Rice for knocking out his now-wife. But the company, differing wildly from Anheuser-Busch, then praised the NFL for its handling of the situation. “We are encouraged to see the NFL is now treating this with the seriousness it deserves,” the company said.

[READ: The Tragic Cycle of Child Abuse]

Yahoo! Sports Eric Edholm said the NFL will start to realize the magnitude of its problems once “the dollars grow wings.” Edholm wrote, “We're not there yet with all the major sponsors, but when the beer folks start issuing stern statements … it's a shot across the league's bow.”

Some say the beer giant’s statement wasn’t “stern” at all. Anheuser-Busch “is not actually doing anything, or even threatening to do anything, or even hinting at the possibility of considering maybe doing anything,” wrote Deadspin’s Barry Petchesky. However, he added, "even this milquetoast statement, which doubtlessly required many fraught committee meetings to see the light of day, is still a pretty big deal."

Some NFL team sponsors have reacted more aggressively. Radisson hotels announced Monday it had suspended its Minnesota Vikings team sponsorship following allegations that Peterson beat his son with a switch. "Radisson takes this matter very seriously particularly in light of our long-standing commitment to the protection of children," the company said in a statement. Nike also suspended its endorsement of Peterson on Wednesday, just as the Vikings reversed course and booted the football star from their lineup, placing him on an exempt list.

[GALLERY: Cartoons on the Economy]

Ultimately, no one looks good when it comes to the recent scandals, wrote Mashable’s Sam Laird: