Topics: 2016 Elections, 2016 GOP primary, 2016 Republican primary, Affordable Care Act, aol_on, Barack Obama, Comprehensive Immigration Reform, gang of eight, Immigration Reform, Marco Rubio, Obamacare, Ted Cruz, Politics News

With two young, first-term senators from minority backgrounds running for the Republican presidential nomination, it was inevitable that they would face comparisons to President Obama and his own audacious political rise. Most politicians would happily allow themselves to be lumped in with a president who defied odds and expectations and comfortably won two terms in the White House, but for Marco Rubio and Ted Cruz, there is a certain amount of danger in those comparisons. The Republican Party and the conservative movement have spent the better part of the past eight years loudly complaining about what happens when you elect an “inexperienced,” “untested,” and “rookie” president who wasn’t “ready on day one.” The party’s voters have been taught to believe that first-term senators make bad presidents.

Both Cruz and Rubio have tried to defuse these comparisons. Earlier this year, Cruz defiantly insisted that he’s spent his short Senate career “leading the fight on conservative principles,” unlike Sen. Obama, who was a non-entity who “did not engage in a whole lot of issues of consequence.” The argument didn’t make a ton of sense, given that first-term senators are all backbenchers and Cruz’s “leadership” consisted mainly of grandstanding and obstructionism, but he nonetheless insisted that his “experience” was infinitely superior to Obama’s at the time.

Now Rubio is fielding questions from voters who want to know what makes him so different from the last first-term senator elected president. And, like Cruz, Rubio is trying to make the case that he has far more experience than Obama did. Here’s NBC News’ report on Rubio’s campaign swing through South Carolina:

One question hung over the senator all day — the question of his youth and inexperience, which echo President Obama’s at the time he was elected. At both town halls on Saturday, Rubio was asked by a crowd member to explain how he’d do better than Obama, with a similar amount of experience, but Rubio dispatched the question with ease. In Anderson, he argued he, unlike Obama, had done something in office, pointing to his effort to undermine Obamacare by effectively defunding the law’s risk corridors.