NEW BRUNSWICK — After more than 150 years of training Christian ministers on a rise over the Raritan River, New Brunswick Theological Seminary is coming down off "Holy Hill."

In a complex deal that will transform part of downtown New Brunswick, the nation’s oldest Protestant seminary is selling most of its hilltop campus to neighboring Rutgers University. The seminary is using the cash to build a new state-of-the-art building at the base of the hill on the corner of College Avenue.

New Brunswick Theological Seminary officials say the radical decision to sell and demolish 10 buildings on one of New Jersey’s most historic campuses is an answer to their prayers. The $30 million deal will help stabilize the seminary’s shaky finances and provide a fresh start for one of the nation’s oldest education institutions, said Gregg Mast, the seminary’s president.

"It just became clear to a number of us that our greatest asset was our property and one of our greatest challenges was maintaining this property," Mast said. "We’re creating a far more intimate and a far nicer campus because it’s basically going to be two buildings — the library and the new building — with a courtyard between the two."

Mast said few alumni or students at the 200-student school expressed concerns about selling off most of the historic campus. Few New Brunswick Theological Seminary graduates were sentimental about any of the aging campus buildings — except the beloved Gardner A. Sage Library, built in 1875 with a cathedral-like Victorian reading room and towering stained-glass windows.

"The first question was always, ‘What will you do with the library?’ As soon as I could assure them the library would remain, then people were very excited about this development," Mast said.

The deal will also mean big changes for Rutgers students. The state university plans to build a massive new honors college and a sprawling arts and science building on the five acres it is purchasing from the seminary.

The construction is part of a larger $300 million plan — overseen by the nonprofit New Brunswick Development Corp., or Devco — to build a series of new buildings along College Avenue using university funds, private developers and state tax credits.

"It’s truly transformational," said Christopher Paladino, Devco’s president and one of the architects of the deal. "Rutgers is going to be different forever because of this."

Rutgers and New Brunswick Theological Seminary have a long, entwined history.

Founded in 1784, the seminary got its start in New York City as a place to train Protestant ministers for what is now the Reformed Church in America. In 1810, the school moved to New Brunswick to share the Old Queens building with Queens College, which would later become Rutgers.

The two schools shared buildings and resources for decades until New Brunswick Theological Seminary moved to its campus on what students dubbed "Holy Hill."

Over the years, Rutgers officials coveted the 7½-acre property that became home to men studying to be ministers. The parcel — bound by College Avenue, George Street, Seminary Place and Bishop Place — was surrounded by Rutgers-owned land.

Rutgers officials tried for years to reach an agreement to buy all or part of the seminary’s campus. But the deals always fizzled.

A deal at last

"They’ve owned the big hole in the doughnut on the Rutgers campus going back to the 1800s," Paladino said. "The university had years and years of negotiations with the seminary that hadn’t gone anywhere."

Last year, the two sides finally came together with Paladino’s help. Rutgers agreed to purchase a portion of the seminary property for $30 million, so the money could be used to build the seminary’s new 30,000-square-foot building debt free. The seminary will also purchase a 100-spot parking lot from Rutgers.

The seminary’s brick-and-glass building is set to open next fall and will include conference and meeting facilities for local churches.

"People are excited to see it’s actually happening," said Lateya Foxx, 29, a student in the masters of divinity program who serves as president of the Student Society of Inquiry, the seminary’s student association.

Foxx, who grew up in New Brunswick, said many in the city are surprised to hear the city has a historic theological school.

"It’s great they are coming off the hill. A lot of people don’t know about New Brunswick Theological Seminary," Foxx said.

John Coakley, a professor of church history who has taught at the seminary for nearly 30 years, said the changes are part of a larger transformation at the school. The seminary had long been a traditional institution, filled with young white men who lived on campus with their families while they trained full time to be ministers.

Then, in the 1970s, the seminary began an evening program for commuter students. Eventually, that program became the school’s main focus. Most New Brunswick Theological Seminary students are now part-time, working students who want to become ministers as a second career.

Last year, the graduates ranged in age from 25 to 75, seminary officials said. More than half the students are women and more than 70 percent are minorities or foreign born. They represent more than 20 religious denominations.

Coakley said the physical changes on campus paired with the evolution of the student body bode well for a seminary that began training ministers before George Washington was president.

"I’m hopeful for the future of the school," Coakley said.

RELATED COVERAGE

• 10 N.J. colleges and trade schools receive low marks in federal 'financial responsibility' test

• Rutgers University's iconic grease trucks to bid farewell to College Avenue lot



• Get the truck out of here! Rutgers' famous grease trucks forced by university board to relocate

• Rutgers $295M makeover hits tax credit snag