Recently, a letter writer stated his reasoning for supporting Sen. Bernie Sanders ("Sanders represents a true reset," March 29). Like the Sanders' campaign itself, I felt the writer's reasoning was "platonic." The way I see it, Megan Beller correctly points out in her commentary that Hillary Clinton has produced and has "doable" policies and proposals for carrying them out ("I'm a radical, and I support Hillary Clinton," March 31). I support Ms. Clinton for president.

I support a single-payer health care system. But in a nation where health care is big business, and more importantly in my mind, where most people, even without the Affordable Care Act, have health care, the likelihood that a single-payer system is politically actionable is small. So I agree with Ms. Clinton that we need to improve our current health care system, including the ACA.

Free education through community college is laudable, but Senator Sanders will have to explain how he would pay for it in the face of withering Republican "tax and spend" charges. Again, Ms. Clinton has a more measured approach to this issue. I can just hear the Republicans: "How are you going to pay for it all, Bernie?" Has a certain "ring" to it that makes it a quite effective campaign slogan.

Increased minimum wage? Again very laudable. (I view this as a "who is on top" issue — the business owner or the employee. Especially for smaller businesses, where if I pay you more, there is less for me. My wife is a tax expert and I have seen some of the "cute" stuff that can be done to an employee.) But I don't see a $15 minimum wage being enacted at the national level. Certainly not in one fell swoop. Again, I agree with Ms. Clinton's more measured approach on this issue.

As for breaking up the big banks, who is Mr. Sanders kidding? And what does he mean by this and what would be the unintended consequences? This is real "pie-in-the-sky" stuff to me. Andrew Jackson broke up the central bank of his time, arguing like Mr. Sanders today, that its value only accrued to northern fat cats and it was prone to favoritism and misdeeds. There followed a major economic down turn that lasted years. As if 50 state banks wouldn't play to fat cats and be corrupt. Like the savings-and-loan blow-up. Just more Sanders rhetoric that will lead to nothing or catastrophe. The cause of our great recession was lax implementation of existing financial safeguards and poor oversight. Not big-ness in itself.

And finally, there's trade where I really disagree with Mr. Sanders. I agree that there can be job displacement due to free trade. But the solution is not less free trade but rather more effective job retraining and displacement services. Free trade results in overall job creation, cheaper and better domestically manufactured as well as imported products, and a safer world. That is why at the turn of the 19th to 20th century, Republicans Theodore Roosevelt and William Howard Taft turned against long time Republican orthodoxy of high protective tariffs. Again, what would be the consequences of Senator Sanders' rhetorical proposals regarding trade if they could come to fruition? More or fewer jobs? Certainly, higher prices, inferior products and increased international tensions.

Mr. Sanders is the George McGovern and William Jennings Bryan of our time. Both were losing Democratic presidential candidates because they were too "radical" for America. I will not vote for him "if" he is the Democrat nominee because in light of the above, I believe he is ignorant or a fraud — a more appealing version of Donald Trump. By the way, I see the same thing happening in the Maryland Democrat primary for U.S. Senate. In that race, I will only vote for Rep. Chris Van Hollen.

Joseph Costa, Baltimore