WASHINGTON -- Several members of the Senate Finance Committee vented their frustrations last week about the troubles that have beset the Affordable Care Act's (ACA's) health insurance co-ops.

"Taxpayers have been forced to foot the bill for the co-op experiment, to the tune of $2.4 billion in federal loans for 23 co-ops around the country," said committee chair Orrin Hatch (R-Utah). "And, to date, more than half of the co-ops have failed, while the vast majority of the others are in poor financial shape. As a result, hundreds of thousands of Americans have lost or will lose their health insurance and taxpayers are still on the hook."

Hatch blamed the co-op program's problems largely on CMS, which, he said, "apparently encouraged the co-ops to cook their books with some creative accounting."

"Last year, the agency issued guidance allowing co-ops to apply surplus notes to program start-up loans, which essentially allowed the co-ops to record loans as assets in their financial filings," he continued. "Quite honestly, I think I'm being generous when I call that kind of accounting creative. Yet, it is, as far as we know, now the standard of practice among Obamacare co-ops."

The committee's ranking member, Sen. Ron Wyden (D-Ore.), on the other hand, defended the Obama administration. "Even though the Supreme Court has upheld the ACA multiple times, the political battles have continued, and co-ops are one of the big targets," he said.

"Right out of the gate, co-op funding was cut by two-thirds. Their financial flexibility was the next thing to go. Congress denied the ability to move resources that would help new co-ops weathering growing pains to continue serving consumers. So from very early on, these private insurance plans have been facing extraordinarily stiff headwinds."

The hearing's lone witness, Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) acting administrator Andy Slavitt, said his focus was on getting better supervision for the co-ops. "My principal focus with the co-op program has been to ensure we have the best possible oversight practices and personnel as we move to a new stage of the program," he said. "One of first things I did was hire an independent firm to do a review of all these companies." Poor oversight of the co-ops was a focus of a House committee hearing held in November.

"In 2015, we had 27 financial and operational reviews, 16 in-person visits, and 43 informal communications, not to mention hundreds of phone calls," Slavitt said. "And we've kept the states up to speed on every action."

Slavitt said his agency has learned several lessons from the co-ops' first few years in operation. "We need to make it easier for co-ops to attract outside capital or a merger partner if their board chooses; we need to level the playing field and lengthen the runway for these small businesses. That's why shortly we'll be releasing guidance and exploring further steps to ease that path for co-ops and investors."

Second, "states should take prudent and conservative action to protect consumers," he continued. "Sometimes this does mean putting in place enrollment freezes and sometimes it means making the difficult decision not to certify a plan for coming enrollment."

And finally, "the single biggest factor in the future success of the co-ops will come from the actions of the companies themselves," he concluded. "They need to rapidly mature the fundamentals of their operations ... They need to tighten their operating discipline and core processes, and hold their vendors accountable in this and other areas in the year ahead."

Sen. Rob Portman (R-Ohio) criticized the Obama administration's actions with regard to co-op loans. "You could have protected taxpayers better, you could have protected these patients better," he said. "Instead of canceling loans or reducing loans ... HHS [the Department of Health and Human Services] accelerated solvency loan payments for these failing co-ops."

Slavitt fought back. "They were very extensive [loan] applications -- they required third-party review, they required in-depth evaluation, and while it wasn't the largest portion of funds that went out, it was at a time when solvency needs were really driven by the [small] size of the business," he said. "This was obviously before even a full year of financials and [we had] a very limited amount of claims information to work from. Decisions were made with the best information folks had. It wasn't until the first and second quarter of 2015 that we had really good indications [of profitability]."

But Portman was having none of it. "There was no good information; it was all negative. I think HHS blew it," he said.

Despite all the partisan back-and-forth, Wyden tried to end the hearing on a conciliatory note. "The popular wisdom is you can't do major issues in an election year. I don't buy that," he said. "I know [Hatch] very much wants this committee to work in a bipartisan way ... My hope is that we can tackle the big questions."