Buy Photo U.S. Sen. Ted Cruz, R-Texas, addressed the crowd from the stage at the Des Moines Register soapbox at the Iowa State Fair on Saturday, Aug. 9, 2014. (Photo: Bill Neibergall/The Register)Buy Photo

NAME: U.S. Sen. Ted Cruz

OFFICE SOUGHT:Cruz, 43, who was elected to the U.S. Senate from Texas in 2012, is viewed as a prospective candidate for the 2016 Republican presidential nomination. He's made several previous trips to leadoff presidential caucus state, and he clearly has admirers among conservative Iowans.

NOTABLE:President Barack Obama's administration has brought a return to the failed policies of Democratic President Jimmy Carter from the late 1970s that brought economic misery at home and disrespect for America around the globe, Cruz told an Iowa State Fair crowd on Saturday.

"We need to champion jobs and growth and opportunity. We are trapped in the great stagnation," he said.

SCHEDULE: Find out when politicians will be at the Register Soapbox

MORE COVERAGE: See what other politicians said

Over the past five years, America has receded from its position of leadership in the world, and countries that don't support the best interests of the United States have stepped into the vacuum, he said. He suggested the president needs to use his bully pulpit and be a "clarion voice for freedom." He also called for the U.S. to stand with the nation of Israel.

But Cruz said he is hopeful, suggesting many Americans long for a return to the common-sense principles the nation was founded on. Just as Ronald Reagan's presidency in the 1980s saw a return to economic prosperity and the fall of the Berlin Wall, America can again be restored to prominence, he said.

Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share Texas Republican Sen. Ted Cruz spoke at the Iowa State Fair Saturday, and fired at President Obama's policies, comparing him to Jimmy Carter. Charlie Litchfield/The Register

CROWD: More than 300 people, with the audience spilling onto the nearby street. About a dozen media representatives covered his speech.

OTHER ISSUES: Cruz said he strongly opposed so-called "Common Core" educational standards, a national initiative that details what students should know in English language arts and mathematics by the end of each grade. 'We need to repeal every word of common core. Education is too important for it to be dictated by unelected bureaucrats in Washington," he said.

He also predicted that in 2016, after Republicans gain control of the U.S. Senate, "We are going to repeal every single word of Obamacare."

QUOTE:" We are seeing a humanitarian crisis playing out (on the U.S-Mexican border), but it is a crisis of President Obama's own creation. It is a direct consequence of the president's lawlessness."

REACTION:Most of the reaction was polite and enthusiastic, with lots of applause, plus some cheers and whistles. Cruz was heckled three times by people at the back of the crowd, including one man who shouted, "Go back to Texas." Cruz appeared unflappable, telling one protester, "God bless you, sir." He took a question from the crowd, something only a handful of Soapbox speakers have done this year. He also worked the crowd afterward for 20 minutes, longer than any other Soapbox speaker this year, shaking hands and posing for pictures with well wishers.

Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share U.S. Sen. Ted Cruz, R-Texas, spoke Aug. 9 at the 2014 Des Moines Register Political Soapbox at the Iowa State Fair. Charlie Litchfield/The Register

Read or Share this story: http://dmreg.co/1olTz8E