After a recent game-morning skate, Avalanche assistant coach Andre Tourigny summoned defenseman Jan Hejda to the dry-erase board at the end of the dressing room. For a minute or so, they went over bits of on-ice strategy.

Tourigny is French-Canadian. French is his first language. Hejda is Czech. During this session, they spoke English. It was their common ground.

Fourteen of the 25 Avs are English-speaking-first Americans or Canadians. Most have minimal or no knowledge of French — or any language other than their own.

Colorado’s seven French-Canadian players all are conversant in English. Team captain Gabe Landeskog, a native Swede, is so proficient in English he could pass for being raised in Kansas. Hejda, 35, picked up English after arriving in North America at age 28. Russian goalie Semyon Varlamov, at times uneasy communicating in English, is getting better at it as time passes. And the Avalanche added another language — Finnish — when goalie Sami Aittokallio, who speaks English well, was recalled Friday from the Lake Erie Monsters.

For reasons of practicality, English is the team language in discussing everything from strategy to itineraries. Yes, that’s the case even though coach Patrick Roy and several members of his staff are French-Canadian.

“Of course, sometimes I’m going to talk French, if it’s a one-on-one,” Roy said. “As much as possible, when I talk to the team, it’s always in English. … English is the one most of the team is comfortable in.”

Roy stepped up his study of English after he was traded from Montreal to Colorado in December 1995.

“It’s still not that good,” Roy said.

He noted that after each of his post- practice news conferences, Avs official Jean Martineau “is giving me a lesson. I guess I’m still a student.” He recalled taking English in school when he was 13 in Quebec City in a class that included Martineau’s future wife, Brigitte. Roy said he “cheated … and I should not have done that. I might have been better today.”

He said Brigitte gave him foot signals, signifying each multiple-choice answer.

“I was missing three or four just to make sure I didn’t have the same score she had,” he said. “I was happy with 70 percent.”

In the past, the Avs have had players of many other nationalities and languages.

Landeskog, 21, made sure it was clear he was joking, but he said that sometimes he wished players didn’t speak French with each other in the dressing room.

“All of us English-speaking guys try to let them know to speak English, so we can all understand,” he said. “But they’re all good in English and speak it very well. The language is absolutely English.”

Landeskog studied English intensively in school, beginning in the third grade, and also came over to Canada at age 16 to play major junior hockey.

“Already at that point I was fairly determined to learn the language, and my goal was to play in the NHL,” he said. “I knew if I could speak the language fairly well, it would make it so much easier for me.”

Varlamov came to the U.S. in 2008 at age 20.

“I definitely think English is the toughest language in the world,” he said. “I was pretty lazy on English my first three years because I had five Russian players on my team at Washington, and I would always speak Russian when I was hanging out with the Russian guys.

“When I came to Denver, I started picking up more words, and I am more comfortable in English now, for sure.”

Varlamov doesn’t have any Russian teammates here, but Hejda played three seasons in Russia.

“Learning English was hard for me, even more so because I spent those years in Russia and I speak Russian, also,” Hejda said. “I had just basic English, and at first over here when someone asked me a question, my first response in my head was in the Russian language and then I would tell myself I must use English. It was a tough few years, but I learned it the same as the Russian language. I learned it in the locker room. This is the first year I do not have any Czechs with me.”

Goalie Jean-Sebastien Giguere, from Montreal, didn’t begin learning English in earnest until he joined major junior’s Halifax Mooseheads at age 17.

“That was my first experience in English, and I lived with an English family,” he said. “It was the only way to communicate.”

Giguere’s wife, Kristen, is from Nova Scotia and speaks English and French. The Avalanche is Giguere’s fifth NHL team. He said English “has to be” the language of team communication, adding: “It’s the international language of business, and if we all need to know what’s going on, we need to communicate all in one language. Everybody communicates in English very well. The communication on the ice is usually very simple, one word or two words so you don’t get confused in what you’re saying, so everything is in English. It’s just easier that way.”

Terry Frei: tfrei@denverpost.com

Avs’ first languages

ENGLISH

Tim Army (assistant coach), Tyson Barrie, Matt Duchene, Adam Foote (defense consultant), Nate Guenin, Nick Holden, Erik Johnson, Nathan MacKinnon, Jamie McGinn, Cody McLeod, John Mitchell, Ryan O’Reilly, Cory Sarich, Paul Stastny, David Van Der Gulik and Ryan Wilson.

FRENCH

Francois Allaire (goaltending coach), Andre Benoit, Patrick Bordeleau, Marc-Andre Cliche, Mario Duhamel (video coach), Jean-Sebastien Giguere, P.A. Parenteau, Patrick Roy (head coach), Maxime Talbot, Alex Tanguay, Andre Tourigny (assistant coach).

SWEDISH

Gabe Landeskog

CZECH

Jan Hejda

RUSSIAN

Semyon Varlamov

FINNISH

Sami Aittokallio