Republican presidential candidate Donald Trump addresses ecstatic supporters following his win in the New Hampshire primary. (Reuters)

The voting is underway in New Hampshire, and the polls show Donald Trump with a comfortable lead. If Trump does manage to win, he will have done so in spite of taking a heretical (for conservatives) position: He refused to state outright that he would do away with the Medicaid expansion, which is a big issue in the state.

Politico has a fun story today about how Trump actually cost himself the support of several local Republican politicians, who wanted him to declare flatly that he opposed the Medicaid expansion, which the state undertook, thanks to Democratic governor Maggie Hassan. Governor Hassan has called on lawmakers to renew the Medicaid expansion, again making it an issue in the state.

[Trump explains American politics in a single sentence]

Here’s what happened with Trump and the Medicaid expansion, per Politico:

The group, which included state Reps. Eric Eastman and Max Abramson, was eager for Trump to earn their support by going on the record against the Medicaid expansion, an issue that comes before the New Hampshire Legislature this week. Conversations with the campaigns of Trump’s rivals had paid dividends: Marco Rubio and Ted Cruz delivered detailed, on-video condemnations of state Medicaid expansion in response to questions at local events. Trump’s state chair, Andrew Hemingway, said he thought he could get his boss to weigh in at a rally Thursday in Portsmouth, according to a person at the meeting. But the next night, Trump took a pass. “I want to get rid of Obamacare and get you something great,” Trump vaguely offered. “We have some people that won’t be able to live. We have to help people. Don’t we have to help? What are we going to do, let them die in the street?”

Politico notes that after Trump failed to do what those local pols had hoped for, they went with Ted Cruz (who, along with Marco Rubio, did denounce the expansion) instead. As Joshua Green noted, it’s amusing that Trump’s refusal to declare opposition to the Medicaid expansion on the grounds that “we have to help people” may have cost him that support.

Now, for all I know, Trump has somewhere said in specific terms that he would get rid of the Medicaid expansion everywhere, as part of his continuing claim that he will get rid of Obamacare. But, judging by Trump’s own rhetoric in New Hampshire, he seems unwilling to say that the law’s beneficiaries should lose health coverage, which presumably means that, if and when President Trump does replace Obamacare with “something really great,” it will cover those who would lose coverage.

Yes, it’s absurd to try to extract actual policy meaning from Trump’s stream of nonsense. But it’s worth noting that a fair amount of GOP “repeal and replace” rhetoric is as nonsensical as anything Trump has said on the topic.

[The gaping hole at the heart of Hillary Clinton’s campaign]

And by the way, one reason conservatives dislike Trump so much is that they suspect he really does envision a robust government role in expanding health coverage to those who lack it, making this yet another way that Trump has scrambled traditional ideological alignments in Republican politics. An anti-Trump pamphlet distributed in Iowa pointed to his previous statements of support for the idea of single payer to buttress the case that Trump is really a Big Government Liberal at heart.

And as I’ve argued, broadly speaking, conservatives understandably see Trump as a threat to conservatism, in part precisely because Trump’s voters (who tend to be non-ideological) seem to believe government should be able to play a constructive role in making the economy work for them. Trump is not arguing that government is the problem; he’s arguing that stupid and/or corrupt government is the problem, because it’s not working for you and is instead working for illegals and major corporations and China.

Obviously we don’t have any idea what Trump would actually replace Obamacare with, if anything. But it would be an intriguing outcome if he were to win New Hampshire while refusing to be as emphatic as his rivals in promising specifically to undo the Medicaid expansion, which is a big issue for Republican politicians in the state.