The last of autumn’s brilliant leaves are likely to be casualties of a windy snowstorm expected to reach the Front Range by Monday night.

Not much snow is expected in Denver, but a predicted high temperature of 35 on Tuesday is a dramatic departure from temperatures near 70 along the Front Range on Sunday.

The National Weather Service said Colorado’s warm weekend will come to an end Sunday night as a cold front moves across the northern half of the state above Interstate 70.

Southwest winds with gusts from 30 to 50 mph could strip many trees of their remaining foliage as the Pacific storm system scatters snowfall from the mountains to the plains Monday, forecasters said.

Snow chances will linger until Tuesday night, but not much accumulation is expected in the Denver area.

The mountains, however, could get up to 8 inches, and the northeast plains could see up to 4 inches, according to the forecast.

Denver could top out at 47 degrees Monday, before temperatures sink to overnight lows in the 20s on Tuesday and Wednesday, according to the Weather Service.

Clear skies over the city and a slow warm-up begin Wednesday with a high of 45, then 53 on Thursday and near 60s by the weekend.

Average temperatures for Denver this week range from 58 to 55 degrees.

The mountains should see ample snow from the storm this week, as tourism shifts from the fall leaf change to the early ski-slope openings.

Three resorts — Arapahoe Basin, Copper and Loveland — are open, and 12 others will open in November.

Wolf Creek is scheduled to open Friday, and Winter Park opens Nov. 13.

Forecasters expected Steamboat Springs to pick up about 2 inches Sunday night, an inch Monday and up to 4 inches Monday night. However, the slopes there don’t open until Nov. 27.

Aspen could get about 7 inches, and Telluride could pick up 8 inches, according to the Weather Service.

Colorado has enjoyed an extended fall foliage season, which normally peaks between Oct. 5 and Oct. 14, according to the Farmer’s Almanac.

Joey Bunch: 303-954-1174, jbunch@denverpost.com or twitter.com/joeybunch