Health and Medicine



University of Toledo may partner with hospitals

Trustees approve drafting of a plan, for review next month

by WKSU's KABIR BHATIA



Reporter

Kabir Bhatia The University of Toledo's plan could be similar to the arrangements at University Hospitals and the Cleveland Clinic Courtesy of University of Toledo In The Region:

The University of Toledo may create a non-profit through which it would partner with local hospitals. WKSU’s Kabir Bhatia reports. Listen: University of Toledo may partner with hospitals Other options:

Windows Media / MP3 Download (0:47)



Other options:

The new entity would be called University of Toledo Health. The Toledo Blade reports that several university board members want the school's trustees to have oversight of any new corporation.



J.B. Silvers, a healthcare finance Professor at Case Western Reserve University, says similar partnerships usually involve the hospital providing funding and knowledge to the school.



“Teaching hospitals basically give to the teaching process; they don’t get. They get the prestige, obviously, of being a teaching hospital. They get the manpower because they have some folks there that can do services for the patient; often at a lower rate. And it’s part of the mission.”



Silvers says the plan could be a simple contract with a teaching hospital. Beyond that, it might have to legally be separate from the university.



“If they’re engaged in a joint venture where they’re going to make investments -- and there’s something more to it than that -- then there are regulations at the state level about how much a state institution can do with private institutions. There clearly are partnerships but they have to follow the rules.”



Silvers notes that Northeast Ohio has several teaching hospitals, including University and Metro Hospitals in Cleveland, plus Akron Children’s Hospital. University trustees will review the plan next month. It could be similar to other hospital partnerships around the nation, created in response to a push to reduce hospital costs.