Voters have rejected executive sessions before; leaders think muni push changes things

Behind the ballot The Daily Camera looked at the projects Issue 2A would fund last week and will examine Issue 2C, to give the city the authority to create a broadband network, next week. See our full Voter Guide 2014 inside or online.

Boulder's city charter requires that all meetings be open to the public, and that same public has rejected previous efforts to give the Boulder City Council the executive session authority allowed under state law.

Boulder City Council members hope voters will see the issue differently if the only reason they can enter closed session is to receive legal advice related to municipalization.

Boulder Issue 2B would allow the City Council to meet privately to receive legal advice related to municipalization and discuss negotiation strategy. Entering executive session would require a two-thirds vote of the council, and any two members could immediately suspend the session if the discussion strayed into other areas. The authority would expire at the end of 2017.

Boulder is engaged in a multi-front legal battle with Xcel Energy over the formation of the utility, and City Council members believe they are at a disadvantage because they cannot meet as a group to discuss legal issues.

"There is so much at stake that I hope the voters will give us a break for a few years," Boulder Mayor Matt Appelbaum said.

Current rules don't permit 'most deliberative process'

State law allows local governments to meet in executive session to discuss legal matters, personnel issues and real estate transactions. A 2008 charter amendment that would have granted that broader executive session authority to the City Council was rejected by 61 percent of the voters.

This charter amendment is much more limited in scope. It would allow closed sessions "for the purpose of obtaining and discussing legal advice, including negotiation strategy, with respect to Boulder's electric utility."

Currently, the city's attorneys communicate around legal issues by confidential memo or through meeting with two council members at a time to brief them.

"We have conversations with (City Attorney) Tom Carr that are protected by attorney-client privilege," Councilman Andrew Shoemaker said. "If I ask a question that presses him, others cannot hear that and follow up on it. There's no way to know if we agreed with the legal strategy or not. The City Council is not making the decisions."

Shoemaker said executive session authority won't make any conversations that are currently public private, but it will allow a fuller discussion around negotiation strategy.

"Municipalization is highly complex and the citizens deserve the best and most thoughtful process with respect to this very important decision for the city," he said. "Right now, the process that is set up does not deliver the most deliberative process. It's true that (the public) is not hearing that deliberation, but they are not hearing it now anyway."

In accordance with state law, the meetings will be recorded. If someone believes the executive session was illegal, they can make a challenge and a judge will listen to the recording and release it if he agrees with the challenge.

The City Council could also voluntarily release the recordings with a unanimous vote.

Also in accordance with state law, the City Council cannot vote in executive session.

Peg Perl, staff counsel for Colorado Ethics Watch, said the way the City Council votes after leaving a closed session and returning to an open one is one indicator of whether elected officials are abiding by rules against deliberating on matters of policy behind closed doors.

"Sometimes they will come out, and someone will make a motion, and they'll vote with no discussion," Perl said. "That gives the public a reasonable basis to say, 'Wait a minute. Did you just deliberate and discuss policy in there?'

"The final action has to be taken in public session, and that does not mean a rubber stamp on something they deliberated in private," she said. "It would be a big red flag if they came out of closed session and just voted on something with no discussion."

Perl said the municipalization issue is one where policy and legal matters overlap, and that could make it more challenging to draw bright lines. Typically, when elected bodies are discussing litigation, they are discussing liability around past actions. Boulder's City Council will be discussing possible future actions.

She said the ordinance language describing the reasons the council can enter closed session sounds "a little broad."

If members of the public think the council doesn't have a good reason to close the session, they can speak up at the time, putting their objection on the record and forcing city officials to be more specific about the purpose of the session, Perl said. Having those reasons on the record helps judges weigh whether elected bodies followed the law when they listen to recordings.

"The biggest problem is that once they're in there, they're just talking and it's easy to get off track," she said.

Litigation termed 'small part' of muni project

Deputy City Attorney David Gehr said most discussions around municipalization still will be public.

"Pretty much everything that they hear right now, we're still going to have those conversations in public," he said. "Almost everything we are doing is public. The litigation part of the municipalization project, when you look at it as a whole, is a relatively small part."

The conversations that take place in private will involve updating council members on new developments and discussing pros and cons of certain strategies or settlement offers, he said.

Gehr said the ordinance gives council members "an affirmative obligation" to stay on topic.

Perl said the provision allowing council members to end the executive session if they feel it is not legal is a good one.

"There are some safeguards there," she said. "It's the people in the room who know what is going on."

The Boulder County chapter of the American Civil Liberties Union decided to neither oppose nor endorse the measure, though in the past it has opposed executive session authority. The Boulder Chamber of Commerce declined to take a position on Issue 2B because its board was divided.

Spence Havlick, a professor emeritus at the University of Colorado and a former City Council member, said Boulder has dealt with many complex, controversial issues — including legal and real estate issues — in public, and he sees no need for executive session authority now.

"We've had it work effectively in the past for very difficult decisions," said Havlick, who is also a member of the Camera's editorial advisory board. "I feel comfortable with the process they have now. Once you get comfortable allowing executive session, that opens the door for future executive sessions that might not be quite as critical or sensitive."

Appelbaum said there is less transparency now, without executive session, because the public doesn't even know council members are talking to the attorney and important decisions are left to staff, not elected officials.

"If this doesn't pass, we'll make do," he said. "We'll continue to have these two by twos and the staff will continue to make decisions. The staff ends up making the decision, when it should be the City Council. They don't get the advantage and neither do we of a full discussion."

Contact Camera Staff Writer Erica Meltzer at 303-473-1355 or meltzere@dailycamera.com