Initiative could go before voters in 2016

Courtesy Image

If you go What: ColoradoCare information meeting and signature gathering event. When: 5 p.m. Wednesday Where: Shepherd of the Hills Lutheran Church, 801 N. Sheridan More info: Those who have questions about the meeting may call 285-8980. For information on ColoradoCare, visit http://coloradocareyes.co.

A Colorado based health-care system aimed to replace Obamacare that would cover all Coloradans and would be financed through ColoradoCare, could go before voters in 2016.

Proponents of the initiative invite the community to an information meeting and signature gathering event at 5 p.m. Wednesday at Shepherd of the Hills Lutheran Church, 801 N. Sheridan. Tom Faudree, regional organizer for ColoradoCareYES, will give a presentation about the proposal.

The Affordable Care Act's opt-out clause gives states an opportunity to use a waiver if they can meet or exceed ACA standards to design their own health care financing system by Medicaid waivers and by a Health Care Premium Tax on payroll and non-payroll income collected by the Department of Revenue (http://bit.ly/1NqA1L8).

Advertisement

New York Times bestselling author T.R. Reid, a spokesperson for ColoradoCareYES, said his group is dedicated to the proposition that "a decent, ethical democracy should provide health care for everybody."

"Even with the Obamacare expansion, the U.S. is going to have 31 million people uninsured in 2020 — that's the Congressional Budget Office estimate — about 370,000 people in Colorado today don't have health insurance, 30,000 of them are kids under the age of 16," he said during a phone interview with the Daily Record on Friday. "We think that's wrong — we think that everybody in Colorado should have access to a doctor when she needs it, and our initiative would provide that at low cost."

Reid is the author of "The Healing of America, A Global Quest for Better, Cheaper, and Fairer Health Care," a documentary filmmaker, and a former reporter with the Washington Post. "The Healing of America" and his 2008 documentary, "Sick Around the World," both examine how other developed countries in the world provide high-quality universal health coverage for everyone at a fraction of the cost that Americans pay ( http://bit.ly/1Oouw0i).

Reid said he is confident the initiative will garner the required 99,000 valid signatures by Oct. 23 to be placed on the 2016 ballot.

"It gives Coloradans the choice between ColoradoCare or Obamacare," he said. "If you vote against ColoradoCare, you are voting to stay with Obamacare, which we have now."

ColoradoCare is expected to save almost every family and every business money, he said.

"Most families are going to pay less for health insurance than they do now, the only exception is very wealthy people," Reid said. "People with an income above about $225,000 a year are going to pay more, but most people and businesses will pay less, and the coverage will be better."

Through ColoradoCare, there would be no network because every doctor, chiropractor and hospital would be covered, Reid said.

"Under ColoradoCare, you choose the doctor, you choose the hospital, and insurance will pay," he said. "In the current system, insurance company chooses the doctors you can see."

Those who have questions about Wednesday's meeting may call 285-8980. For more information on ColoradoCare, visit http://coloradocareyes.co.

Carie Canterbury: 719-276-7643, canterburyc@canoncitydailyrecord.com