The Jameis Winston sexual assault investigation has taken another turn, but this time it’s FSU that is being investigated.

In a related report by The Inquisitr, when AJ McCarron’s mother made a “racist tweet” over Jameis Winston, Katherine Webb also got into trouble for favoriting it.

The alleged sexual assault by Winston took place in December of 2012 in Tallahassee, Florida. But the woman in the case did not know the identity of her alleged assaulter and the Jameis Winston investigation was put on hold and listed as inactive. There were also reports of the woman being drunk at the time but blood samples proved she was not intoxicated.

Eventually, it’s claimed she recognized the famous FSU QB and the case took a new turn when Winston’s DNA was found in the accuser’s underwear. But this apparently solid case became confused when DNA evidence from a second male, reportedly the accuser’s boyfriend, was found as well. Eventually, the case was dropped since the prosecution did not feel they could get a conviction and Winston’s attorney claim the two had consensual sex.

While Winston got away with no charges of any kind, his two teammates, Chris Casher and Ronald Darby, were charged with five violations of the university’s code of conduct. The pair claimed they walked into the room where Winston was having sex in order “to see if the female would agree to allow Casher to participate in the sex acts that were occurring.” Upon being denied he recorded the sex acts on his smartphone but he told investigators the video was deleted. FSU has charged them both with “conduct of a sexual nature that creates an intimidating, hostile, or offensive environment for another person” and “acts that invade the privacy of another person” and “recording of images without consent.” The university may go so far as to expel them depending on the hearing results.

The investigation was also apparently confused because the Tallahassee Police Department allegedly warned the accuser that Tallahassee is a “big football town, and the victim needs to think long and hard before proceeding against [Winston] because she will be raked over the coals and her life will be made miserable.” As it turns out, the 19-year-old woman had to withdraw from FSU because of the incident and her lawyer released this statement:

“The victim in this case had the courage to immediately report her rape to the police and she relied upon them to seek justice. The victim has grave concerns that her experience, as it unfolded in the public eye and through social media, will discourage other victims of rape from coming forward and reporting.”

And it’s for this precise reason that the Jameis Winston investigation has been re-opened, although the QB is apparently safe from any charges. The woman filed a complaint with the U.S. Department of Education Office for Civil Rights, which believes FSU may have violated the anti-discrimination law in the manner in which it responded to the sexual violence complaint. The law requires that FSU immediately investigate complaints over sexual assault, even if criminal charges have not been filed, and FSU is alleged to have dropped the ball. The worst case scenario is that it is possible that FSU may lose its federal funding over the incident.