AL.com Opinion About the writer

John Archibald is a columnist for the Alabama Media Group. His work appears in the newspaper on Sundays, Wednesdays and Fridays, and online here all the time. Please comment below, but don't threaten, hate, or commit crimes against good manners that you wouldn't want your mama to read. Reach John at jarchibald@al.com.

John Archibald is a columnist for the Alabama Media Group. His work appears in the newspaper on Sundays, Wednesdays and Fridays, and online here all the time. Please comment below, but don't threaten, hate, or commit crimes against good manners that you wouldn't want your mama to read. Reach John at jarchibald@al.com. Read more

The complete archive of John Archibald's previous columns

Spencer Bachus is not running for office. Oh no. Not anymore.

That's clear from the beard he sprouted (and finally shaved) after leaving Congress last year. It's clear from the jeans he sports in Birmingham these days, and the black leather jacket where he still keeps his trusty flip phone. But it's clearest of all from what the guy says.

America criminalizes too many people, making prisoners of those who need treatment and incarcerating many who should have just been fined in the first place, he said.

Spencer Bachus? Dang.

Bachus, in an extended interview with Madison Underwood and myself, said Gov. Robert Bentley should find a way to expand Medicaid, for the good of the people who need him. He said gerrymandering threatens the Republic, that President Obama, with all his faults, is smart and personable, and that Obamacare - while still "pretty bad'' - is not as bad as it's cracked up to be. (Because nothing is ever that bad).

Dang and dang and dang. It's like Bachus was stolen by Martians. Who is this guy, a Republican who served for 22 years in the 6th Congressional district, which is tied for the most conservative district in America?

"I'm still a conservative," Bachus said. But now he talks more about compassion than ideological passion. He wants people to remember him as someone who has "a heart for people less fortunate," and argues that his party could use more of that sentiment.

He talks about people.

"Our incarceration rate in the United States is three times that of South Africa during apartheid, and what they were doing during apartheid is throwing a lot of people in jail," he said. We do the same thing, he added, throwing young black men in jail.

It's true. The U.S. has the highest incarceration rate in the world and Alabama, according to the Bureau of Justice Statistics, has the fourth highest rate in America. Bachus would not come out and say decriminalization of drugs is an answer, but ...

"I don't know. I don't feel like I have the wisdom to decide," he said. "I can tell you that we're sentencing non-violent criminals to very long terms."





The criminal justice system is "failing to rehabilitate people," he said. "It's making hardened criminals."

Bachus says we have "gerrymandered the country" in a way that ensures congressional dysfunction. And that is true. Single party districts have turned governance into unwinnable arguments between extremists.

They turn compromise into a dirty word, bi-partisanship into concession, and reasonability into defeat.

Bachus says now that Bentley should try to find a way to expand Medicaid like Republican governors Mike Pence and Rick Scott did. He doesn't have to embrace Obamacare or sacrifice principle. It's simply too much money that could do too many Alabamians good.

Bachus is no fan of the law himself, he said. "But in this case two wrongs don't make a right."

It is too bad Bachus, while in office, did not speak louder about the things he now seems passionate about.

But politics, as he put it, makes that " tough, tough."

It is hard to talk of criminalizing too many people without being labeled soft on crime.

It is hard to talk about expanding Medicaid as a Republican without being labeled an Obamacare lover.

It is hard, in the end, to sound reasonable, when we have built a political process that penalizes reasonableness on all sides.

Yeah, I wish he'd said it sooner. But I'm glad he said it now.