Secretary of Health and Human Services Kathleen Sebelius (D)--or some lackey--tweeted the following heartless Valentine ditty to their seemingly unbeloved victims.

The millions who were dropped from their health plan even though they liked it; the millions who can't keep their doctors even though they liked them; the millions who are now paying heart stopping higher health insurance premiums if they can get insurance at all did not appreciate the government's heartbreaking mockery.



And so they fired back. Below are a sampling of some of the responses--modified to fit a family publication. Have a hearty chuckle.



Feel free to add your own on this Presidents' Day week end; a holiday for many government workers.

Communists are red,

President Barack Hussein Obama (D) is black.

Impeach him--and his hacks--

To get freedom--and our health care--back.



Tom Cruz'n ‏@TinPotDickTator

Roses are red,

Violets are blue,

More folk have lost their health care insurance

Than have enrolled under you!

Gateway Pundit readers had their own reactions.

Roses are red

Violets are blue

Obama's a liar

And so are you. Roses are red

Violets are blue

Obamacare will leave

America black 'n blue Roses are red,

Violets are blue,

5.5+ million have LOST their health plan

and THAT is what's TRUE!

(Yes, that is very true.)

Roses are red, Violets are blue, The uninsured may get healthcare, But their health care will be paid for by me and you.

(Oh, how true. Even the cold hearted New York Times was forced to admit:

"About four-fifths of those choosing health plans to date qualified for financial assistance to help pay their premiums, administration officials said.")

Roses are stinky

as they start to rot

I once had insurance

and now I do not. Roses are red.

Violets are blue.

What's it gonna take

To get rid of you?

As the New York Times further noted,

Senator Mitch McConnell of Kentucky, the Republican leader, said Wednesday that many of "the new enrollees in Obamacare exchange plans are actually folks who were already insured" or eligible for Medicaid. (snip) Opinion polls show that people who are uninsured disapprove of the health care law at roughly the same rate as people who have insurance. Still attired in his black and blood red plaid pajamas and busy drinking his Valentine and Presidents' Day hot chocolate, Pajama Boy thankfully was finally unable to "talk about getting health insurance."