PUEBLO — For all the grinding CSU-Pueblo did in its NCAA Division II semifinal game against West Georgia on Saturday, coach John Wristen knew it would take a little flash to play for a championship.

Suffocated on offense for much of the game, CSU-Pueblo finally broke loose and scored on a brilliantly called 38-yard reverse touchdown pass play midway through the fourth quarter, then held on for a 10-7 victory at the DeRose ThunderBowl.

The ThunderWolves advanced to next Saturday’s championship game at Sporting Park in Kansas City, Kan., against Minnesota State Mankato (14-0), a 47-13 winner in the other semifinal against Concord University.

In the fourth quarter, CSU-Pueblo running back Cameron McDondle finally started to make cracks in a West Georgia defense that had stonewalled him all day. He started a drive, with CSU-Pueblo trailing 7-3, with consecutive runs of 13 and 14 yards.

But on the championship play, the CSU-Pueblo running back and former Columbine star was merely a decoy.

McDondle took the snap out of the wildcat formation and handed the ball to his brother, Bernard McDondle. Bernard then flipped the ball to quarterback Chris Bonner, who had lined up on the outside as a receiver.

All Bonner had to do was loft the ball to tight end Zach Boyd, who didn’t have anyone within 20 yards of him.

Touchdown, CSU-Pueblo.

Still, there was much work to be done for a CSU-Pueblo defense that answered the bell time and time again. West Georgia drove quickly down the field behind the quick feet of quarterback Dallas Dickey, the visitors faced a third-and-4 at the CSU-Pueblo 12-yard line with 4:50 left.

Dickey scrambled, then threw for the end zone, where senior Levon Floyd picked the ball off for CSU-Pueblo’s Division II-best 29th interception of the season.

West Georgia quickly forced a punt — CSU-Pueblo’s ninth of the game — and got the ball back at its own 33-yard line with 2:28 left.

After West Georgia quickly moved to the CSU-Pueblo 39, linebacker Seth Brown sacked Dickey for an 11-yard loss. Then, Joe Rosenbrock sacked Dickey on the next play.

Two more desperation passes for West Georgia couldn’t gained back the massive yards lost, and the players flooded the field in celebration of the first trip to a championship in school history.

CSU-Pueblo senior defensive end Darius Allen was often a one-man wrecking crew. In the first half alone, Allen had seven tackles — three for loss — and two sacks. When West Georgia moved an extra blocker over to help slow the speedy pass rusher, it opened lanes for others to reach Dickey.

West Georgia put the clamps on McDondle, who entered the game fourth in the nation with 1,825 yards rushing.

McDondle gained just 22 yards on nine carries in the first half. He finished with 76 yards, breaking a string of 10 straight 100-yard rushing games.

Nick Kosmider: nkosmider@denverpost.com or twitter.com/nickkosmider