Eye on Augusta: Politicians Campaign on Welfare Reform as Poverty Skyrockets House Speaker Mark Eves (D-North Berwick) and Senate Minority Leader Justin Alfond (D-Portland) unveil the Democrats’ “Welfare that Works” plan. (Photo by Andi Parkinson)



“Mainers, we’re listening. You’re right. Our welfare system is broken,” House Speaker Mark Eves announced at a March 10 press conference, flanked by fellow Democrats. “It’s not helping lift Mainers out of poverty and it’s too susceptible to fraud and abuse.”



The proposal would block recipients from using Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (TANF) cash benefits to purchase goods and services like tattoos, lottery tickets, guns, pornography, bail, vacations and liquor. The bill would also identify recipients who pay more than 50 percent of their monthly income to housing costs and convert a portion of their cash assistance to housing vouchers that would be paid directly to landlords. In the press conference, Senate Democratic Leader Justin Alfond (Portland) said that by taking cash out of the equation, the measure would ensure welfare money is being used appropriately.



“I think that when Mainers see that you can go in and use your cash benefits to buy cigarettes and alcohol, they’re disgusted and we’re disgusted and this needs to stop,” said Alfond. “Mainers are willing to help those who are willing to help themselves.”



The plan would also set up a “Citizen Oversight Board” to act as a watchdog to ensure that state welfare programs “effectively lift families out of poverty.” It would also establish protocols for helping TANF recipients into transitional jobs, training and education.



There are currently 5,273 Maine families with 8,783 children receiving TANF.



In response to the proposal, Gov. LePage questioned why the bill was coming so late in the session. Two years ago during his 2014 re-election campaign, LePage put in similar proposals.



“Where have these same liberal politicians been for years as Governor LePage and other legislators have pushed for these common sense reforms?” wrote LePage’s office. “If liberals in Augusta are serious about welfare reform, Governor LePage is willing to have a serious conversation about reigning in fraud and abuse, and tightening up the purchase ban on these items. However, it is an election year, and this appears to be an attempt of out-of-touch liberal politicians to get a win because they know Mainers want welfare reform.”



Eliminating Good Cause Exemptions for TANF



The governor is currently focusing his anti-welfare efforts on a measure to eliminate “good cause” exemptions, with the exception of domestic violence, from TANF work requirements. The Maine Department of Health and Human Services says the bill LD 1631 is necessary because the state is facing financial penalties for failing to meet federal TANF work requirements for years between 2007 and 2013. Last year the federal government said it will be withholding $1.7 million in TANF block grants due to Maine’s failure to meet the requirements, although the LePage administration insists it faces up to $29 million in penalties. It’s the third time LePage has attempted to get rid of good cause exemptions.



“The Legislature once again has the chance to correct a situation that is detrimental to both the people on the program and the Maine taxpayers,” said LePage in a statement. “It is time to hold accountable those who refuse to work because of baseless excuses.”



By law, TANF recipients are required to participate in work and training programs through the state’s Additional Support for People in Retraining and Employment (ASPIRE) program. However, state law allows recipients to claim exemptions from the requirements for a good reason, such as a disability, caring for a disabled child, bad weather or lack of child care or transportation. The bill would also reduce the amount of time TANF recipients can spend in college while still collecting benefits. Under the Parents as Scholars (PaS) program, TANF recipients can attend school for up to two years, but the LePage plan would require the students to work at least 20 to 30 hours a week while attending school after the first year.



Testifying against the measure, 25-year-old single mother and USM student Samantha Watson of Parsonsfield said that the governor’s proposal would prevent her from being able to complete her program in a timely manner, decrease the amount of time she could see her daughter and extend the amount of time she would be on state assistance.



“If I am required to find a job around my course schedule that changes every four months, I will have to find a workplace that is willing to accommodate my limited availability,” said Watson. “I will then need to find an additional child care provider that offers child care later in the evenings and on weekends since my current provider closes at 5 p.m. and is not open on the weekends. My daughter is already enrolled in full-time child care that the state assists me in paying, so if had to pay the additional cost out of pocket for someone else to watch my daughter, I would barely be making any income from those 20 hours a week worked. My food supplement benefits and monthly TANF benefits would decrease because I have supplemental income, while the cost of child care and travel expenses would rise.”



It’s a sure sign that campaign season is upon us when lawmakers start rolling out end-of-session welfare proposals. Last Thursday, Maine Democrats unveiled their “Welfare that Works” package, which aims to tackle the purported problem of “fraud and abuse” in what’s left of the state’s safety net for low-income families.“Mainers, we’re listening. You’re right. Our welfare system is broken,” House Speaker Mark Eves announced at a March 10 press conference, flanked by fellow Democrats. “It’s not helping lift Mainers out of poverty and it’s too susceptible to fraud and abuse.”The proposal would block recipients from using Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (TANF) cash benefits to purchase goods and services like tattoos, lottery tickets, guns, pornography, bail, vacations and liquor. The bill would also identify recipients who pay more than 50 percent of their monthly income to housing costs and convert a portion of their cash assistance to housing vouchers that would be paid directly to landlords. In the press conference, Senate Democratic Leader Justin Alfond (Portland) said that by taking cash out of the equation, the measure would ensure welfare money is being used appropriately.“I think that when Mainers see that you can go in and use your cash benefits to buy cigarettes and alcohol, they’re disgusted and we’re disgusted and this needs to stop,” said Alfond. “Mainers are willing to help those who are willing to help themselves.”The plan would also set up a “Citizen Oversight Board” to act as a watchdog to ensure that state welfare programs “effectively lift families out of poverty.” It would also establish protocols for helping TANF recipients into transitional jobs, training and education.There are currently 5,273 Maine families with 8,783 children receiving TANF.In response to the proposal, Gov. LePage questioned why the bill was coming so late in the session. Two years ago during his 2014 re-election campaign, LePage put in similar proposals.“Where have these same liberal politicians been for years as Governor LePage and other legislators have pushed for these common sense reforms?” wrote LePage’s office. “If liberals in Augusta are serious about welfare reform, Governor LePage is willing to have a serious conversation about reigning in fraud and abuse, and tightening up the purchase ban on these items. However, it is an election year, and this appears to be an attempt of out-of-touch liberal politicians to get a win because they know Mainers want welfare reform.”The governor is currently focusing his anti-welfare efforts on a measure to eliminate “good cause” exemptions, with the exception of domestic violence, from TANF work requirements. The Maine Department of Health and Human Services says the bill LD 1631 is necessary because the state is facing financial penalties for failing to meet federal TANF work requirements for years between 2007 and 2013. Last year the federal government said it will be withholding $1.7 million in TANF block grants due to Maine’s failure to meet the requirements, although the LePage administration insists it faces up to $29 million in penalties. It’s the third time LePage has attempted to get rid of good cause exemptions.“The Legislature once again has the chance to correct a situation that is detrimental to both the people on the program and the Maine taxpayers,” said LePage in a statement. “It is time to hold accountable those who refuse to work because of baseless excuses.”By law, TANF recipients are required to participate in work and training programs through the state’s Additional Support for People in Retraining and Employment (ASPIRE) program. However, state law allows recipients to claim exemptions from the requirements for a good reason, such as a disability, caring for a disabled child, bad weather or lack of child care or transportation. The bill would also reduce the amount of time TANF recipients can spend in college while still collecting benefits. Under the Parents as Scholars (PaS) program, TANF recipients can attend school for up to two years, but the LePage plan would require the students to work at least 20 to 30 hours a week while attending school after the first year.Testifying against the measure, 25-year-old single mother and USM student Samantha Watson of Parsonsfield said that the governor’s proposal would prevent her from being able to complete her program in a timely manner, decrease the amount of time she could see her daughter and extend the amount of time she would be on state assistance.“If I am required to find a job around my course schedule that changes every four months, I will have to find a workplace that is willing to accommodate my limited availability,” said Watson. “I will then need to find an additional child care provider that offers child care later in the evenings and on weekends since my current provider closes at 5 p.m. and is not open on the weekends. My daughter is already enrolled in full-time child care that the state assists me in paying, so if had to pay the additional cost out of pocket for someone else to watch my daughter, I would barely be making any income from those 20 hours a week worked. My food supplement benefits and monthly TANF benefits would decrease because I have supplemental income, while the cost of child care and travel expenses would rise.”



Christine Hastedt of the low-income advocacy group Maine Equal Justice Partners argued that the legislation is unnecessary because the state is finally meeting the federal work requirements.



“Such a policy would make Maine an extreme outlier among other states with respect to these protections,” said Hastedt. “We argue that such a change also violates federal law which contemplates reasonable protections against inappropriate sanction.”



Hastedt added that Maine doesn’t use all of its federal TANF block grant, so it could take the $1.7 million reduction and it wouldn’t affect families receiving benefits. Representing the 70 unionized HHS caseworkers who handle the ASPIRE caseload, Maine Service Employees International Union lobbyist MaryAnn Turowski noted that the LePage administration is also planning to privatize the program and outsource it to an outside contractor, effectively eliminating the state jobs. She implied that LD 1631 could be a potential windfall to the company taking over ASPIRE.



“The State of Maine’s current responsibility is to serve all, not some,” said Turowski. “Instituting these policy changes allows the vendor to dump the least profitable parents immediately — arguably those parents most in need of consistent support and resources in order to lift their families out of poverty. Instituting these changes only solves Maine’s participation rates on paper. It does nothing to change the poverty rates of these parents and their children.”



Poverty Dramatically Rising in Maine



Although welfare reform still remains popular with voters, several years of state cutbacks have already whittled away the safety net to a shadow of its former self. The result has been a 50-percent increase in the number of Maine children living in extreme poverty ($10,000 a year or less for a family of three) between 2010 and 2014, according to a new report authored by University of Maine School of Social Work Professor Sandra Butler and sociology Professor Luisa Deprez of the University of Southern Maine. The two researchers conclude that Maine has seen the sharpest rise in extreme poverty in the United States during that four-year period, which they attribute to cuts in welfare spending.



Butler and Deprez estimate that the percentage of eligible families who receive TANF dropped from 60 percent in 2010 to 31 percent in 2014 due to strict time limits and other restrictions. The researchers also estimate that 6,000 children have lost TANF and “tens of thousands” of people have lost their food supplement benefits as the result of policies that restrict access to the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP). Maine children are now 15 percent more likely than other children nationwide to experience food insecurity at some point during the year.



“Many of those cut off experienced homelessness and hunger, often leading to family separations,” wrote Butler and Deprez. “Maine currently ranks in the worst third among all U.S. states in the proportion of children living apart from their families.”



The authors also report that every state in the country except Maine has seen an increase in the percentage of people with health insurance coverage since the passage of the Affordable Care Act of 2010, as Maine has cut 40,000 MaineCare recipients from the rolls and is the only state in New England to refuse federal funding to expand Medicaid.



Meanwhile, a new report by Pew Charitable Trusts estimates that the median income in every Maine county except Cumberland and Washington has dropped since the year 2000. The counties with the steepest drops in incomes were Oxford (-14.4%) and Penobscot (-14%), which have suffered losses in manufacturing jobs over the past several years. Knox (-4.3%) and Waldo (-3.4%) counties experienced the lowest drops in income, while Lincoln County saw the fifth biggest drop at -11.7%.



In testimony before the HHS committee last week, Maine Affordable Housing Coalition director Greg Payne noted that income inequality is a major factor in the rental housing crunch facing Maine and much of the country. He said that there are currently 11 million extremely low-income renter households in the country and only 4 million homes available to them, which is contributing to a rise in homelessness.



Payne, who is also an affordable housing developer with Avesta Housing in Portland, said his office received 3,300 calls in 2015, but could only help 1 in 9 households seeking housing assistance. He said his office receives calls from TANF families who are subletting and living in a friend’s basement, couch surfing and fleeing abusive situations, but can’t find a home because the rents are too high. He said parents often struggle to keep their children in school systems from “two or more couches ago,” as they’re continually moving to find homes close to where the jobs are.



“There’s such a wide range of experiences that come to us, but the tragedy is just that it’s growing and so severe that it impacts everything else that’s happening in their lives,” said Payne. “It’s almost like people are doggy paddling, trying desperately to stay afloat, and once people have the stability of a decent home where they can be at night and come back to every day, they can start moving the ball forward.”



Christine Hastedt of the low-income advocacy group Maine Equal Justice Partners argued that the legislation is unnecessary because the state is finally meeting the federal work requirements.“Such a policy would make Maine an extreme outlier among other states with respect to these protections,” said Hastedt. “We argue that such a change also violates federal law which contemplates reasonable protections against inappropriate sanction.”Hastedt added that Maine doesn’t use all of its federal TANF block grant, so it could take the $1.7 million reduction and it wouldn’t affect families receiving benefits. Representing the 70 unionized HHS caseworkers who handle the ASPIRE caseload, Maine Service Employees International Union lobbyist MaryAnn Turowski noted that the LePage administration is also planning to privatize the program and outsource it to an outside contractor, effectively eliminating the state jobs. She implied that LD 1631 could be a potential windfall to the company taking over ASPIRE.“The State of Maine’s current responsibility is to serve all, not some,” said Turowski. “Instituting these policy changes allows the vendor to dump the least profitable parents immediately — arguably those parents most in need of consistent support and resources in order to lift their families out of poverty. Instituting these changes only solves Maine’s participation rates on paper. It does nothing to change the poverty rates of these parents and their children.”Although welfare reform still remains popular with voters, several years of state cutbacks have already whittled away the safety net to a shadow of its former self. The result has been a 50-percent increase in the number of Maine children living in extreme poverty ($10,000 a year or less for a family of three) between 2010 and 2014, according to a new report authored by University of Maine School of Social Work Professor Sandra Butler and sociology Professor Luisa Deprez of the University of Southern Maine. The two researchers conclude that Maine has seen the sharpest rise in extreme poverty in the United States during that four-year period, which they attribute to cuts in welfare spending.Butler and Deprez estimate that the percentage of eligible families who receive TANF dropped from 60 percent in 2010 to 31 percent in 2014 due to strict time limits and other restrictions. The researchers also estimate that 6,000 children have lost TANF and “tens of thousands” of people have lost their food supplement benefits as the result of policies that restrict access to the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP). Maine children are now 15 percent more likely than other children nationwide to experience food insecurity at some point during the year.“Many of those cut off experienced homelessness and hunger, often leading to family separations,” wrote Butler and Deprez. “Maine currently ranks in the worst third among all U.S. states in the proportion of children living apart from their families.”The authors also report that every state in the country except Maine has seen an increase in the percentage of people with health insurance coverage since the passage of the Affordable Care Act of 2010, as Maine has cut 40,000 MaineCare recipients from the rolls and is the only state in New England to refuse federal funding to expand Medicaid.Meanwhile, a new report by Pew Charitable Trusts estimates that the median income in every Maine county except Cumberland and Washington has dropped since the year 2000. The counties with the steepest drops in incomes were Oxford (-14.4%) and Penobscot (-14%), which have suffered losses in manufacturing jobs over the past several years. Knox (-4.3%) and Waldo (-3.4%) counties experienced the lowest drops in income, while Lincoln County saw the fifth biggest drop at -11.7%.In testimony before the HHS committee last week, Maine Affordable Housing Coalition director Greg Payne noted that income inequality is a major factor in the rental housing crunch facing Maine and much of the country. He said that there are currently 11 million extremely low-income renter households in the country and only 4 million homes available to them, which is contributing to a rise in homelessness.Payne, who is also an affordable housing developer with Avesta Housing in Portland, said his office received 3,300 calls in 2015, but could only help 1 in 9 households seeking housing assistance. He said his office receives calls from TANF families who are subletting and living in a friend’s basement, couch surfing and fleeing abusive situations, but can’t find a home because the rents are too high. He said parents often struggle to keep their children in school systems from “two or more couches ago,” as they’re continually moving to find homes close to where the jobs are.“There’s such a wide range of experiences that come to us, but the tragedy is just that it’s growing and so severe that it impacts everything else that’s happening in their lives,” said Payne. “It’s almost like people are doggy paddling, trying desperately to stay afloat, and once people have the stability of a decent home where they can be at night and come back to every day, they can start moving the ball forward.”