What if you could avoid the chaos of Black Friday, and still cross off your holiday gift list? Local business owners hope that's exactly what pulls shoppers to their stores on November 28 for Small Business Saturday.

The movement to shop locally on the Saturday after Black Friday started several years ago as a way to make an impact on the local economy, and support stores that can't necessarily compete with retail giants.

Small business owners in Southwest Florida are optimistic about what this year's day will bring. American shoppers spent an estimated $14.3 billion at small independent businesses on Small Business Saturday in 2014, according to a survey from American Express.

"Today, they might be out shopping Black Friday deals in the malls, but tomorrow is very specifically designed to find those small niche markets," business owner Karen Allegretti said.

Allegretti owns Market Earth on First St. She said Small Business Saturday is huge for shops like hers.

"We've seen a serious increase in our business specifically on Small Business Saturday."

The idea is still catching on - some shoppers ABC7 spoke with had never heard of the campaign. But it's an idea that most people seem to quickly get behind.

"We did a little bit of the craziness at the big stores and it was fun and wild," shopper Theresa Ayers said. "But it's also, I think, really important to give back to our community, be part of our community."

Experts say shopping small can have a big impact in Florida. A collaborative report released by the University of West Florida's Center for Economic Research and Opportunity and Florida's Small Business Development Center found that the more than 2 million small businesses in the state make up 98.9% of all Florida employers.

The business owners say buying from small businesses is the gift that really does keep on giving. Allegretti said shopping small can have an impact beyond the store.

"Come down, have a little lunch at one of the restaurants, and really get a chance to see what your small businesses have around here," she said.

Several of the shops ABC7 spoke with say they are running promotions for Small Business Saturday. Small businesses typically don't have a lot of resources to promote their deals. Experts say it's best to seek them out ahead of time online - either on social media or a company website.

For more information about Small Business Saturday and businesses in your area, visit this link or check out #SmallBizSat #ShopSmall on Twitter and Facebook.