Topics: Christmas, Hannukah, Holidays, Kwanzaa, Scientific American, shopping, Life News

This article was originally published by Scientific American

One of the best gifts I ever received was from my long-distance friend Kelly. When my second daughter arrived and life was thrown into that special brand of chaos that only parents with a toddler plus a newborn can know, a huge box arrived at the door. It wasn’t a care package of cashmere onesies or a hand-knitted baby blanket. It was a Styrofoam cooler brimming with everything we needed for three or four meals’ worth of Portillo’s Chicago-style hot dogs: the tomatoes, the onions, the dill pickles, even the celery salt and the soft, seeded buns. For a ravenous breastfeeding mom and her sleep-deprived, Chicago-native husband, there was nothing we could have wanted more.

After looking into the research around gifting (and there’s plenty of it), the reasons that cooler was such a home run are clear. Want to become that good a giver? Follow these three evidence-based rules for giving good presents—just in time for the holidays!

#1 Simple and practical is good. A 2009 study in the Journal of Experimental Social Psychology found that although givers tend to think a fancier, expensive gift will be appreciated more, receivers are actually happier with cheaper, more practical presents. In the experiment, friends gave one another a new pen (the pairs were students, for whom pens are always at a premium). The givers thought their friends would prefer a heavy, fancy, special-occasion pen, but the getters in fact preferred the cheaper, lighter, portable one. “You think that things like price and the effort you put into a gift will matter, but the person you’re giving it to doesn’t see the work that went into it or the price tag—they just have the actual thing to focus on and how it will fit into their life,” says Nathan Novemsky, a professor of marketing at Yale University who has done quite a bit of research on gift giving himself.

In one of Novemsky’s recent studies, participants filled out a survey in which they imagined either giving or getting a gift certificate to a restaurant. Givers thought people would like a voucher for a five-star place a few towns over—but receivers preferred gift cards for a restaurant that was middle of the road but right around the corner. Both men and women tended to prefer the practical choice.