WESTMINSTER, Colo.--(BUSINESS WIRE)--With a rapidly changing business environment, more employers are actively managing employee absence as a way to improve operations and drive better results. Reed Group, a leading provider of innovative absence and health solutions, today announced plans to expand, hiring hundreds of employees, including nurses, IT specialists and customer service representatives, to serve growing demand for their products.

“Our exclusive market offerings in this specialized area are clearly resonating with employers,” said David Roberts, CEO of Reed Group. “The economy is growing quickly, and the business climate is getting more complex. With an aging workforce and new government regulations like ADA (Americans with Disabilities Act) and ACA (Affordable Care Act), more employers are seeking the benefits of our expertise and solutions.”

Reed Group is a provider of products and services that offer organizations new ways to manage employee leaves and reduce the impact of employee absence on their operations. Reed Group’s online content, software and outsourced services – in any combination - are tailored to suit the specific needs of each customer, giving employers the ability to both help employees return to work faster and lower absence and healthcare costs.

To accommodate the growing interest in Reed Group products and services and to attract and retain talent in a strong Denver-Boulder economy, Reed Group is expanding their headquarters in Westminster to a new space to serve new and existing customers and accommodate hundreds of new employees.

“Reed Group has become an increasingly desirable workplace for individuals in the healthcare, technology and customer service sectors, and we expect that to continue as we recruit new employees,” said Roberts. “Our employees are making a difference to organizations and to individuals, and it’s a rewarding job. They are supporting people during the most challenging times of their lives – a significant absence from work – and they are making people’s lives a little easier,” he added.

Reed Group is moving to larger offices at 10355 Westmoor Drive in Westminster, Colorado. The location in the Westmoor Technology Park is just off of US-36, a short commute from both Denver and Boulder.

“There are only a handful of companies looking for blocks of space this large in the Northwest 36 corridor,” said Todd Papazian of CBRE, who represented Reed Group along with Ted Uzelac of Fischer. “The size of the space alone is indicative of a rapidly growing and successful organization.”

To learn more about Reed Group, visit http://www.reedgroup.com.

About Reed Group

Reed Group, Ltd., a wholly owned subsidiary of the Guardian Life Insurance Company of America, is the recognized leader in helping organizations reduce the cost, compliance risk and complexity of employee absence. Our products and services address FMLA, ADA, state and other leave laws, workers' compensation, and short- and long-term disability programs. Headquartered in Westminster, Colorado, Reed Group has been a trusted partner to employers, insurers, TPAs, government organizations, attorneys, and health care providers for over 35 years. Reed Group's world-class team of clinical and absence management experts help organizations deploy Reed Group products and services to improve employee health and productivity. For more information, visit www.reedgroup.com.