Topics: Detroit, Grist, Katrina, water systems, Politics News

Low-income communities have long had complicated relationships with their government-regulated water systems. As Grist’s Brentin Mock reported last month, city governments’ denial of public swimming sites to black residents resulted in dozens of drownings every summer in New Orleans, Washington, D.C., and other segregated neighborhoods nationwide during the mid-20th century. In 2010, the Root’s Katti Gray noted that, of the 1.6 million Americans currently living without access to complete indoor plumbing and/or clean running water, “more than 1 percent of blacks in Mississippi, Louisiana, Georgia, South Carolina and Virginia […] The urban poor in substandard housing also lack water.” And we needn’t look too far into our nation’s history to recall the bodies floating atop the Hurricane Katrina floodwaters in 2005. Of the more than 1,400 who perished, two-thirds drowned or died while trapped by surrounding water– a crisis that could have been avoided entirely if the flood walls and levees first reported as compromised in 1965 had been properly repaired.

Historically, the denial of access to water and the lack of protection from it have spelled calamity and fatality for communities of color, especially those where poverty is disproportionately high.

This week, as Detroit’s months-long water cutoffs to thousands of residents become national news, we are once again confronted with a public health and safety hazard that could have potentially deadly results for black, brown and low-income families.

According to the Detroit Water and Sewerage Department, residential and commercial customers who are in arrears on their water bills owe about $118 million. The department has been cutting off water to 3,000 delinquent accounts per week since March 2014. When the cutoffs are completed, an estimated 150,806 residences and businesses will be left without water, just under half of the department’s 323,900 total accounts.

The Detroit Free Press reports that struggling low-income families account for some of the delinquencies, and Mia Cupp of the Wayne Metropolitan Community Action Agency told the Press, “There are families that have gone months and months without water.” Though Detroit area unemployment has decreased since last year, it’s still higher than the national average at 9.7 percent. The cost of water bills in Detroit is also higher. Nationally, the average water bill is about $40. Residents are currently expected to pay $75 per month and will soon be responsible for paying an 8.7 percent increase.

What’s worse is the city’s reason for the drastic spike: an outsize, aging water system in desperate need of repair.