Good morning Austin:

Welcome to First Reading, Saturday edition.

When I was growing up, an aspiring politician in New York City was under some obligation to visit the "three I's" - Israel, Ireland and Italy - in preparing for a campaign.

This week, Gov. Rick Perry, who still aspires to be president and is only recently returned from visits to England and Israel, headed to Iowa to speak at a Polk County Republican fundraising event.

As the AP reported from Des Moines, "This time, there were no satellite TV trucks, media throngs or fawning Republicans awaiting his arrival. But Texas Gov. Rick Perry's return to Iowa, where he left last year a defeated Republican presidential candidate, sounded very much like a potential candidate reintroducing himself and appealing for a second chance."

Some more from the AP report:

As he weighs whether to run for president again, Perry returned Thursday to this leadoff presidential caucus state for the first time since his flameout during his first White House bid last year. His arrival was much more muted than before.



xxxxxxx The stakes are high, given how far and fast Perry fell before.



"Making a first impression a second time is hard, very hard," said David Carney, Perry's chief strategist as governor and in his 2012 presidential campaign.



Perry's speech wasn't new, but its closing was lofty and serious. He also seized on America's contempt for Washington, especially in light of the partial federal shutdown last month. "We've got to turn away from Washington to find the answers."



A full year before those caucuses, rumors spread about a possible Perry campaign as Republicans looked for an alternative to front-runner Mitt Romney.



With folksy charm and an outsider's pitch, the conservative Perry didn't get into the race until the summer of 2011. During his first Iowa visit that August just after announcing his candidacy, he was smothered by media and photo-grabbing GOP activists as he moved from table to table at a Republican banquet in northern Iowa.



It was a relatively late arrival into the campaign that hindered his ability to simultaneously raise money, build an organization and prepare for looming national debates.



He ended up introducing himself nationally with shaky debate performances and infamous "Oops" moment when he couldn't recall one of the three federal agencies he had promised to eliminate as president.



On Thursday, after accusing federal officials of forgetting how to lead, he laughed at the now-famous gaffe.



"And believe me, I know something about forgetting," he said.



Perry finished fifth in the leadoff Iowa caucuses last year and quit the race two weeks later.





Now, let us pause here to recall, via Double Down, the very engaging new book on the 2012 campaign by Mark Halperin and John Heilemann, just how large Perry loomed the first time around.

Rick Perry’s pulchritude was beyond dispute, but it accounted for only part of of the Republican fascination with him. Born in the West Texas town of Paint Creek, rasied in a house without indoor plumbing, he was folksy and swaggering at sixty-one, a natural populist who boasted about packing “a Ruger .380 with laser sights and loaded with hollow-point bullets” and once using it to fell a coyote that crossed his path. Lone Star State liberals mocked Perry as a nimrod; the late columnist Molly Ivins dubbd him Governor Goodhair. But since 1984, he had stood in ten contested elections – for state representative, agriculture commissioner, lieutenant governor, and governor – and won them all. Having secured this third statehouse term in 2010, Perry was the longest-serving governor in the country and in Texas history. (note: Rick Perry's Pulchritude would be an excellent name for a band.)

Halperin and Heilemann write about how, on the eve of the first "toe-to-toe" debate between Perry and the man he had, at least temporarily, supplanted as the front-runner, former Massachusetts Gov. Mitt Romney, at the Ronald Reagan Library, Perry had succeeded in getting into Romney's head.

Here, for example, an exchange between Romney and top adviser, Stuart Stevens. (For Stevens review of Double Down, and another book on the campaign, The Gamble, at The Daily Beast, go here.)

Don’t let him psych you out, Stevens said. You’re so much better that he is. You’re gonna kill him. Don’t tell me that, Romney snapped. He’s a natural. He was great at the Iowa State Fair. Give me a break, Stevens said, his voice rising. He’s an agriculture commissioner who went to an ag fair! He's an accidental governor! Just go out there and be the hunter! You keep telling me this race is all about jobs and the economy, Romney retorted. He’s got a great jobs record in Texas He’s got a great narrative. Don’t underestimate him! He’s the guy George Bush thinks is an idiot! Stevens said, now shouting.

Romney, the authors write, came out of his debate in Simi Valley feeling more confident about his ability to defeat Perry.

But for Romney’s strategist, the memory that stuck from the evening wasn’t what took place on television. It was something Stevens said he’d witnessed on-site before the debate. Perry, clearly in pain, requiring help from two members of his security detail to get up a short flight of steps. “There’s something wrong with him,” Stevens told Romney. “What do you think?” asked Mitt. “I don’t know,” Stevens said. “but I’m glad it’s not me.”

Double Down lends strong credence to the view that it was Perry's very painful and difficult recovery from back surgery - which left him unable to sleep well or to maintain his essential jogging regimen - that did him in.

Reporting on a crucial debate in Orlando, they write:

The morning of the debate, September 22, Perry’s team learned he hadn’t caught a wink the night before. In the holding room, (Dave) Carney and (Rob) Johnson girded for trouble. What they got was a disaster.

It was the debate in which Perry defended in-state tuition for students who were not in the country legally.

Perry had been copiously prepared for this attack, which had come up in Tampa, too. And the start of his answer, touting this commitment to border security, was uncontroversial. But then Perry went further, blurting out a sentiment that none of his aides had ever heard him enunciate before. “If you say that we should not educate children who have come into our state for no other reason than they’ve been brought there by no fault of their own,” he said. “I don’t think you have a heart.” For Perry’s advisers, the debate was now effectively over. Providing in-state tuition to the kids of undocumented workers was a defensible position, if not popular one among Republican primary votes. But calling those who disagreed heartless was an act of political suicide. Perry wasn’t quite finished committing verbal seppuku, however.

Seppuku is a form of Japanese ritual suicide by disembowelment.

Now back to Rick Perry in Iowa 2013.

From one of several reports in the Des Moines Register. (There is also a gorgeous photo of Perry and his newish glasses accompanying this story. I know I've been making a big fuss about how much the glasses in every way enhance the governor's look, but that's because I don't think you can overstate how good they are.)

The best chance for Republicans to retake the White House is by working together and “finding our middle ground,” Texas Gov. Rick Perry said in Iowa today. Perry was the conservative’s conservative in the 2012 presidential battle.



When he stormed onto the Iowa scene as a big-footing latecomer two years ago, his tea party beliefs and ability to connect with evangelical Christian voters were considered to be among his best assets for stomping Mitt Romney in the fight for the GOP nomination.



But there’s no shortage of that kind of conservative in the 2016 crop, and Perry’s strategy for outshining the others is centered now on rebranding himself as the guiding spirit of the Texas economic success story. xxxxxx



Asked about the debate du jour on the rift between the tea party wing of the GOP and center-right, establishment-leaning Republicans, Perry answered: “This isn’t a purity test.”



“I think that most Republicans do fall into the camp of, ‘Listen, if you don’t win, you can’t govern.’ It doesn’t make any difference if you’re here or over here in the spectrum. I’m a big believer in that. Let’s win the elections.”



But which kind of Republican might be more successful winning the presidency in 2016? A tea partier or someone closer to the center?



“I don’t think any of them have a better chance of winning by themselves,” Perry said. “I think it takes all of them working together. I’d rather have a half a loaf than no loaf. And so, finding our middle ground – listen, I’m a big believer that most Republicans, most conservatives don’t think that the answers are going to be found in Washington, D.C.”





In her report in the Register on Perry's speech - recorded for posterity by C-SPAN - Kathie Obradovich reported:

Texas Gov. Rick Perry delivered a brief but harsh tongue-lashing to the Obama administration and Washington politicians tonight in a 13-minute speech in Des Moines. Perry skipped most of the usual preliminaries and shoutouts to local politicians, failing to even mention Senate candidate Matt Whitaker, who worked for his Iowa campaign. He did, however, profess to enjoy his time campaigning in Iowa in 2011.

xxxxxxx



“I have some really fond memories of campaigning here, competing in the Iowa caucuses. The only thing I really regret is taking a really big bite out of that veggie corndog at the Iowa State Fair,” Perry said.

xxxxxx

Perry poked a bit of fun of himself as well. “Our leaders have forgotten how to govern. And believe me, I know a few things about forgettin’,” he said. Perry was apparently referring to his “oops” moment during a campaign debate, when he forgot one of the three federal agencies he wanted to eliminate.



Perry made all of the rounds today in Des Moines that one might expect of a potential 2016 candidate. He met with business leaders, Gov. Terry Branstad and attended a private reception before tonight’s dinner. He did a bunch of media interviews and was energetic and engaging.



Tonight’s speech was frequently interrupted by applause and it seemed to hit the right note with this crowd. It was not, however, the attention-getting, memorable event that will have Iowa Republicans hankering for a Perry reprisal. While most people appreciate brevity, it seemed like Perry missed an opportunity. He was scheduled for about 35 minutes, live on C-SPAN. He didn’t come close to making the most of his time.



He didn’t stay to shake hands and talk to people afterward, either. That’s the sort of omission that Iowa Republicans notice.





Also in the Register, Jennifer Jacobs did a 20-minute interview with Perry that included "a speed round of lighter qusetions," in which Perry revealed that his greatest phobia was snakes.

Perry: Whats the old movie line? Snakes? Couldn't it have been anything but snakes? Was that Indiana Jones? I think it was. I hate snakes. It's a reason to run with a pistol.

Also:

Q. Can you describe yourself in three words? A. Father, soldier, statesman. Q. Whats your favorite music or favorite band? A. I've got to say my favorite band is The Who. I'm a child of the 60s. Q. What are one or two of your worst bad habits? A. I've pretty much tried to give up all my bad habits. My wife would tell you my bad habit is, put down your iPhone and pay attention. Q. What do you do to unwind after a long day at work? A. From time to time, go sit out on the porch and have a Shiner Bock.

Good morning Todd, how are you?

On Friday morning, Gov. Perry, still in Iowa, appeared on MSNBC's The Daily Rundown with host Chuck Todd, the highlight of which was his reference to Todd as Todd - as opposed to Chuck - in both his opening line, above, and closing line - "Thank you Todd."

Here is the Huffington Post's report

There are a few possible explanations for this:

1) Knowing he was on hostile turf on MSNBC, Perry was trying to signal his disinterest or hostility to all things MSNBC, including the full names, or correct order of the names, of its talent. Maybe he was trying to subtly get under Todd's skin. 2) Let's face it. The man has two first names. He must, by now, be used to being called Chuck when he should be called Todd and Todd when he should be called Chuck, though I must admit Todd Chuck doesn't work nearly as well as Chuck Todd. 3) Perry was confused.

Meanwhile, next up for Perry for President 2016 - South Carolina.

From Katie Glueck at Politico:

Texas Gov. Rick Perry, fresh off a speech in Iowa, is going to another early 2016 state next month.



He will head to Spartanburg, S.C. for a winter dinner and conservative banquet on Dec. 3, the South Carolina Republican Party and the Spartanburg County Republican Party announced on Friday.







CRUZ GOES HOLLYWOOD

Ted Cruz had his Tonight Show debut Friday night. Here it is in two parts, 1 and 2, in what added up to about 9 minutes of air time. It was fairly serious discussion in which a skeptical, and what I thought a very well-prepared and engaged Leno, challenged Cruz on Obamacare, the government shutdown, his father's pronouncements, social issues, the tea party and the importance of compromise

Cruz: My view on compromise is actually exactly the same as Ronald Reagan's was. Reagan said, "What do yo do if they offer you half a loaf? Answer, you take it and then you come back for more.'" Leno: I don't think Ronald Reagan could get into the tea party today. Cruz: I don't think that's right at all.

Based on the applause, the audience seemed divided in their opinion of Cruz.

(This post has been edited to correct some typographical errors.)