House Speaker John Boehner (R-Ohio), left, and House Majority Whip Kevin McCarthy (R-Calif.). ( Mark Wilson/Getty Images)

As we continue to marvel at the success of the far-right rabble in the House Republican caucus in getting Speaker John Boehner to give up the gavel and go home to Ohio, I’m still stuck on an observation made by my highly placed source on Capitol Hill when we spoke on Sunday. “Will the opposition stop yelling long enough to organize and take power?” asked the source. “They seem content to stay outside and throw rocks.”

Op-ed pieces in the New York Times and the Wall Street Journal on Tuesday add some historical context to that astute view. They both illuminate the problem with the so-called Freedom Caucus and why it will never go beyond causing chaos in congress.

[GOP caucus chaos: Where’s the Whip when you need one?]

“The extremists have the ability to disrupt the congress, but not to lead it,” writes Geoffrey Kabaservice in a column for the Times. “Their belief that shutdowns will secure real concessions is magical thinking, not legislative realism. And the more power they gain, the less likely it becomes that a Republican-controlled Congress can pass conservative legislation, or indeed any legislation at all.”

Kabaservice is the author of “Rule and Ruin: The Downfall of Moderation and the Destruction of the Republican Party, From Eisenhower to the Tea Party.” His Times piece draws a parallel between what is happening today with what happened in the 1960s. Then, the “radicals” who rallied around the presidential campaign of Sen. Barry Goldwater (R-Ariz.) “had no interest in developing a governing agenda.” Today, “[t]he radicals have no realistic alternative solutions of their own. Even to contemplate the negotiations and compromises such policies entail would sully their ideological purity.”

[McCarthy will get whipped like Boehner and Cantor]

Meanwhile, Wall Street Journal editorial board member Kimberley Strassel contrasts the current Republican revolutionaries with those of 1994. She runs down the history of the “rebellion” that started in 1989 led by then-Rep. Newt Gingrich (Ga.) and culminated in his rise to speaker of the House when the GOP took over the chamber for the first time in 40 years. “Now, that’s an insurgency,” Strassel writes before asking the pertinent question. “Where is today’s Newt Gingrich?”

That gets to the heart of what my source said. There is a lot of complaining about the GOP leadership, but its far-right opposition doesn’t have enough gumption to rally around one of its own to lead the caucus. “The Boehner opposition has demands, but it hasn’t been willing or able to stand up a candidate who will persuade 218 Republicans to follow,” Strassel explains. “It can obstruct the leadership agenda but can’t elect its own leaders.”

The lower leadership posts of majority leader and majority whip will field suitably hard-line conservative candidates. But the fact remains that beyond defund Planned Parenthood, repeal Obamacare, kill the Export-Import Bank and whatever else has “stop” or “end” as its legislative raison d’etre, the Republican House majority is neither about compromise nor governing. McCarthy’s reputation for back-slapping bonhomie and his role in bringing the Tea Party revolution into the House means that a bad situation could get worse.

Follow Jonathan on Twitter: @Capehartj