Planned Parenthood President Cecile Richards (AP Photo)

(CNSNews.com) – A pro-life group has expressed outrage over the New England Journal of Medicine (NEJM)’s decision to publish a commentary last week by Planned Parenthood President Cecile Richards promoting access to birth control and abortifacients and the nation’s largest abortion provider’s vital role in providing that access.



“The NEJM commentary entitled ‘Protecting and Expanding Access to Birth Control’ by Planned Parenthood Federation president Cecile Richards says two things about this once prestigious journal,” Judie Brown, president of American Life League, said in a statement issued to the media.



“First, the pages of the journal are for the purpose of spreading propaganda that has no basis in fact from a purely clinical point of view,” Brown said. “Second, NEJM has delivered itself into the hands of political leftists who are all in for promoting every manner of culture of death positions, from the assisted suicide posture it took in the year 2000 to today's presentation of a diatribe by Richards that fails on every count to reflect sound medical findings and scientific facts.”



In the commentary published on March 3, Richards praised the Affordable Care Act, or Obamacare, for helping more women get free birth control and criticizes what she called “political attacks against women’s health care” and “politicians with extreme views on reproductive health.”



“Like many other women’s health care providers, we work to ensure that all forms of birth control are available to women and advocate for innovative ways to expand access,” Richards wrote. “By increasing access to all forms of birth control, including intrauterine devices (IUDs) and hormonal implants, we enable women to choose the methods that work best for their bodies and lifestyles.”



Articles appearing in the same issue of the journal as Richard’s commentary try to make the case that when women don’t have access to long-acting reversible contraceptives, or LARC, that pregnancy rates increase.

“Shame on NEJM,” Brown said.



Brown noted the harm that can be caused to women who use some types of birth control and that some methods end the life of an unborn child.



|In the commentary, Richards also claims that women who don’t have access to a Planned Parenthood clinic will be “left out in the cold.”



“Many have claimed repeatedly that Planned Parenthood patients can simply go to other health care providers — but tragically, that is not the case. Instead, women are left out in the cold,” Richards wrote.



However, according to research done by the Alliance Defending Freedom (ADF) and the Charlotte Lozier Institute, the education arm of the Susan B. Anthony List, community health clinics outnumber Planned Parenthood in states around the country and offer the same services and in some cases more services, including mammograms. The clinics, identified as those eligible for the same federal funding Planned Parenthood receives, do not perform abortions.



In Texas, for example, there were 38 Planned Parenthood clinics and 732 community health care centers at the time the maps were posted on the Family Research Council’s Facebook page.



In Pennsylvania, community health care centers number 326 compared to the 37 Planned Parenthood clinics. In New York, Planned Parenthood has 58 clinics, but there are 625 community health care centers.



The data shows there are nationwide 13,540 clinics providing comprehensive health care for women, versus 665 Planned Parenthood clinics.



According to its latest annual report, Planned Parenthood affiliated clinics performed 323,999 and received $553.7 million in government health services grants and reimbursements.



A pro-life group has expressed outrage over the New England Journal of Medicine (NEJM)’s decision to publish a commentary last week by Planned Parenthood President Cecile Richards promoting access to birth control and abortifacients and the nation’s largest abortion provider’s vital role in providing that access.