Topics: From the Wires, News

SAN FRANCISCO (AP) — For a century and a half, San Francisco’s Chinatown, the nation’s oldest, has sheltered waves of immigrants seeking a new life.

It’s the birthplace of Chinese America, and to some extent, the broader Asian America that descended from immigration over the Pacific Ocean throughout the 19th and 20th centuries.

Now, Chinatown faces powerful economic and demographic challenges that could upend its identity as the city undergoes an unprecedented growth in tech jobs.

Rising rent elsewhere in the city has entrepreneurs eyeing Chinatown for offices, entertainment and housing. A $1.6 billion subway set to open in 2019 could provide an economic boost, bringing customers from outside while taking residents out to jobs. But speedier transit also brings added development pressures, especially in a pocket of the city coveted for its location.

At the same time, many Chinese Americans have scattered across the Bay Area, reducing the customer base of San Francisco’s historic Chinese center. Banquet houses that once hosted celebrations are closed, with some making way for modern restaurants and others sitting empty.

Can the birthplace of Chinese America maintain its heart in the midst of a race for space?

“It is the last frontier, when you think about it,” said Bertrand Pellegrin, a brand specialist with the firm b. on brand who is interested in helping preserve the neighborhood. “It is one of the last central places downtown that has not been completely gentrified and overdeveloped.”

Some civic leaders say traditional values and zoning regulations should protect the neighborhood of 15,000 to 18,000 people against too much development. Plus, they say, who would want to put a tech startup company in an older building without elevators or commercial janitorial service?

Others say, however, that younger generations of property owners may take the money from the rising land values and run.

“The northeastern waterfront has always been the biggest battleground for property and development because it’s so beautiful. The battle has always been to limit growth,” said Howard Wong, a founder of a group opposed to the subway construction. “A huge transit development will make that situation worse.”

And Chinatown leaders don’t even agree on what the district should be, other than a gateway for immigrants and destination for tourists.

Take 1920c, a fledgling co-sharing business launched in April, which offers work space to freelancers and to socially conscious startups. The people who bounded into the sunny yellow space one recent morning were young, plugged into wireless devices and, in many cases, not Chinese.