By Masahiko Takeuchi, Minato-Tsukiji.com

The pollock fishery in Alaska’s Bering Sea for the 2015 A season will open at noon on Jan 20, with producers asking for higher prices in major product forms.

The Bering Sea pollock quota is set at 1.31 million metric tons for 2015, 3% higher than 2014, with 40% of the total amount allocated to the A season, which runs through until June 9.

“There are no concerns that the fleets would leave quotas in the water thanks to healthy stocks, especially in the year class of 2006, 2008, 2010, and 2012,” said an executive for an at-sea sector producer. “And it could bring us more chances to enjoy the product mix strategy, depending on prices.”

According to sources, price talks over main items such as surimi and fillets have been underway after the turn of the year.

At these early negotiations, producers offered frozen fillets to the EU market at $3,300 per metric ton, $200-300 higher than for the 2014 B season.

Meanwhile, frozen headed and gutted (H&G) products have been quoted at $1,600/t-$1,650/t, which is as high as, or a bit higher than for, the previous season.

“Demand by EU buyers remains strong but there has been no contract,” said an executive for an inshore plant sector packer. “That is because market circumstances other than the balance of supply and demand have changed a lot in a year.”

External factors

One of the changes is exchange rate swings.

The dollar rose to its strongest level in 11 years against the euro on Jan 16, weakening the purchasing power of EU buyers. Also, there is increasing anxiety as to how the EU’s economic uncertainties could affect the sales of finished products.

On the other hand, Russian pollock producers, whose quota has increased 5% year-on-year to 1.72m metric tons, have the potential to boost the sales of double-frozen H&G products as the ruble has slumped over 40% against the dollar in a year.

“Russian producers seem to have offered the H&G for double-frozen product to Chinese secondary processors at $1,500/t for the upcoming season,” said a fourth source. “The offering prices stay stable but they could easily go down. Russian producers could earn profits in rubles buoyed by the super weak currency.”

Alaskan producers have also yet to settle the prices of H&G products with Chinese processors, who typically procure the raw materials after the Lunar New Year holidays.

This year, the Lunar New Year falls on Feb 19 compared to Jan. 31 in 2014, meaning Chinese re- processors have enough time to negotiate prices.

Marketing of surimi

Meanwhile, Alaskan producers are calling for an increase in the prices of surimi products as market players have seen the shortage worldwide.

For tropical surimi, raw material catches have been unfavorable in Thailand and China.

In India, fishermen are said to continue to harvest more shrimp and squid rather than fish for surimi because of good prices. Even for surimi species, Indian processors have seen higher profitability in the sales of frozen whole fish than of surimi products.

In Hokkaido, Japan, the output of pollock and Atka mackerel surimi in 2014 was below that of the previous year. Surimi inventory in Japan was as low as 57,000t as of the end of Oct 2014, marking a consecutive 17-month year-on-year drop.

Alaskan pollock has become the only reliable source for most of the surimi (imitation crab meat) product market, except for Russia which has banned the import of seafood from Western countries since last summer.

Russia is now keen to procure tropical surimi as Thailand’s custom figures show that surimi exports to that nation jumped 3.5 times to 910t in Nov 2014.

For Japanese surimi buyers, the devaluation of the yen is the big challenge in the procurement of tropical surimi. But as Japan-bound Alaskan pollock surimi has traditionally been quoted in yen, the weakening of the yen could impact both Alaskan producers and Japanese importers.

“We have seen the price gap among markets, especially between Japan and other regions such as the EU and S.Korea,” said the executive for the at-sea sector producer. “The gap was as wide as 20-30 yen for the 2014 B season. Japan has been an important market but we have to rectify the disparity.”

Biggest concern

A prominent concern in 2015 for Alaskan pollock producers is the sales of pollock roe. With markets limited to Japan and South Korea, the output reached only some 60,000t in 2014, together with Russian-origin eggs.

Production for 2015 is expected to remain unchanged at 2014 levels although there could be more carried-over inventories of raw materials due to the slower sales of mentaiko (salted/spiced roe product) in Japan.

Alaskan producers are likely to increase the mako (fully-matured roe) product composition as muchas possible to maintain prices.

The huge drop in oil prices is a positive factor for Alaskan producers this year. However, it could be off-set if the fleets have to move great distances and if their operations are longer in order to reduce the salmon by-catch ratio.

“Overall, total production cost could increase,” said the executive with an inshore-plant producer. As examples, he cited the increase in the minimum wage in Alaska, the higher burden due to ‘Obamacare’, and environmental-related expenditures.