Oscar's slow start in California

With help from Jennifer Haberkorn, Rachana Pradhan and Darius Tahir

COVERED CALIFORNIA NUMBERS ARE OUT — The state's new enrollment numbers are worth picking through for several reasons: Covered California is the largest state-run exchange in the country, and the data dump is unusually detailed. The latest numbers tell two stories.

Story Continued Below

— Aggressive prices are luring customers from competitors. For instance, Blue Shield — which had one of the lowest rate increases in the state — gained more than 17,000 renewing consumers from Anthem, which had the state's highest rate increase. However, about 88 percent of renewing customers kept their plan.

"Compared to much of the nation, where many consumers changed plans when they renewed, our success at keeping prices low allowed consumers to have a win-win — many got to keep their existing plan while getting a good deal," said Anne Price, the exchange's director of health plan management.

— An early referendum on Oscar Health. The much-hyped insurance start-up expanded to California, but signed up just over 2,000 customers through the exchange and another 3,000 or so off-exchange. It's a very slow start for the New York-based company, which investors have valued at more than $1.75 billion — and which lost more than $40 million on its New York customers alone, according to company filings through the third quarter of 2015.

"Oscar has a good marketing pitch and attractive consumer-facing technology, but they don’t yet bring much else to the table," Kaiser Family Foundation's Larry Levitt told PULSE.

On the other hand, Oscar can argue that it's rapidly growing. It now has about 145,000 members, up from 40,000 members last year. Is that enough to justify the valuation and the hype? My story for Pros.

Tracking health care's unicorns: Oscar's among a half-dozen startups that have emerged as so-called "unicorns," all valued at $1 billion or more by investors. But as their values have shot up, their problems have mounted too. For example:

— Zenefits: The founder stepped down earlier this month amid a growing compliance scandal.

— ZocDoc: The CEO stepped down in November, and the company recently retooled its strategy.

— Theranos: The lab-testing company's technology has faced widespread scrutiny, and CMS recently determined that its California lab was "deficient."

THERANOS SUBMITS CORRECTION PLAN — Theranos submitted a remedial correction plan last Friday to FDA, company spokeswoman Brooke Buchanan said on Wednesday, confirming a Bloomberg report. The embattled startup, which has faced questions from the government and skeptical scientists, has no sense of when CMS might rule on its plan, Pro's Darius Tahir reports.

WHAT WE LEARNED FROM THE TOWN HALLS — Wednesday's cable TV town halls allowed the candidates to expound on their health policies a bit:

Trump repeated his attacks on the drug industry. Donald Trump, who again claimed that he would require Medicare drug negotiations that would "save $300 billion," said other candidates wouldn't even bother proposing reforms. "These candidates are all controlled by the drug companies," Trump said, pointing out that Jeb Bush's campaign finance chair is Woody Johnson — an heir to the Johnson & Johnson medical fortune.

Trump also promised not to raise Medicare's eligibility age. "I’m not doing it," he told MSNBC's Joe Scarborough and Mika Brzezinski. "I don’t want to do it."

Rubio vows to reform Medicare, as long as it doesn’t affect his mom. Over on CNN, Marco Rubio called for reining in the costs of the nation's major entitlement programs, with one major catch. "I am against any changes that are bad for my mother," Rubio said. "Pretty good policy."

Carson's not looking beyond his fading candidacy. Asked by a physician if he'd be interested in serving as HHS secretary or surgeon general, Ben Carson demurred. "I'm not looking for a job" beyond the White House, he said.

One questioner asked how Carson reconciled his Christianity with the GOP's criticism of welfare and ACA subsidies for the poor. "We the people have the responsibility to take care of the indigent," Carson responded. "It's not the government's job."

— Carson did have two notable moments in arguing health care policy. He blasted the rise of "rules and regulations" that have made physicians less happy to practice medicine today. Carson also said there aren't enough resources for mentally ill patients. "It would be a lot cheaper if we begin to take care of these people the way they should be taken care of," Carson said.

** A message from National Community Pharmacists Association (NCPA): Expand seniors’ access to prescription drugs. Right now Medicare drug plans force patients to make long trips for medication or to pay more to use their longtime pharmacy. Let Medicare beneficiaries choose the pharmacy that’s best for them. Visit www.ncpanet.org/pharmacychoice. **

BURWELL IN FLINT TODAY — The HHS secretary will tour the Hamilton Community Health Network, a federally qualified health center that's providing lead testing and other services, and she'll speak about the federal response to the city's toxic water's crisis.

— And she's back on the Hill next week. She'll be testifying in front of the House Appropriations Committee on Thursday, Feb. 25 — her third stop in the series of hearings about the administration's budget request.

THIS IS THURSDAY PULSE — Where we're collectively buzzing over Gov. Paul LePage's claim that immigrants are bringing the "ziki fly" to Maine. (As a public health theory, this one kind of bites.) Send your news and tips to ddiamond@politico.com and @ddiamond.

STATE SUED OVER LIMITS ON HEP C DRUGS — A new class-action lawsuit accuses Washington state of illegally denying Medicaid patients access to hepatitis C treatments based on the cost of the drugs, Pro's Sarah Karlin reports. The state's health care agency is restricting the use of drugs like Sovaldi and Harvoni to only the sickest patients — and the lawsuit alleges that the policy violates federal law requiring Medicaid drug programs to provide access to prescription drugs. Sarah's story for Pros.

Whether or not the lawsuit prevails, it's worth noting that CMS has been worried about Medicaid programs imposing limits on the expensive hep C drugs: The agency sent letters to all 50 states just three months ago asking about restrictions.

ACADEMIC CENTERS FAILING TO POST CLINICAL TRIAL DATA? — That's the conclusion of a new study in the British Medical Journal, which found that only 29 percent of completed clinical trials led by investigators at major U.S. academic centers were published within two years of completion. Nearly 90 percent of results weren't posted to ClinicalTrials.gov, either. http://bit.ly/1QJZ0aw

— Why it matters: “The lack of timely reporting and publication fundamentally impairs the research enterprise, violates the commitment made by investigators to patients and funders, squanders precious time and resources, and threatens to compromise evidence based clinical decision making,” researcher Harlan Krumholz of the Yale School of Medicine and colleagues conclude.

ED USE STAYS FLAT — About 18 percent of adults age 18 to 64 visited the emergency department in 2014, in line with a decade-long trend, according to a new study out today from CDC’s National Center for Health Statistics.

Most patients, unsurprisingly, said they visited the ED because they were facing an urgent medical problem, although about one in five respondents said it was an access-related issue. (Either their doctor's office wasn't open, or they lacked access to other providers.)

— One key takeaway: The study didn't find a significant change in emergency department use as the ACA coverage expansion took effect. However, researchers who have analyzed unrelated studies on ED use have suggested that it takes time for behaviors to change.

DARTMOUTH: CARE FOR THE ELDERLY STILL FALLS SHORT — The latest Dartmouth Atlas report focused on health care for the aging population and flagged several potential improvements, including:

— Reducing unnecessary screening for breast and prostate cancer after age 75.

— More promptly referring patients to hospice.

— Avoiding over-use of feeding tubes in patients with advanced dementia.

HEALTH PLANS GEAR UP FOR ANNUAL FIGHT OVER MEDICARE ADVANTAGE — The Obama administration will get its last opportunity to make a dramatic impact on the Medicare Advantage system this week when it releases the preliminary rates for 2017, Pro's Paul Demko and Jennifer Haberkorn write.

The administration is expected to release its preliminary notice of MA rates on Friday, with final rates coming on April 4. That sets up nearly two months of intense lobbying over how much the government should pay for the plans administered by private insurance companies. The story for Pros.

DO ANY PROMINENT LIBERAL ECONOMISTS SUPPORT BERNIE? — That's the question after four former chairs of the Council of Economic Advisers under Presidents Bill Clinton and Barack Obama — Alan Krueger, Austan Goolsbee, Christina Romer, and Laura D'Andrea Tyson — wrote an open letter on Wednesday that blistered Senator Bernie Sanders' economic proposals as unrealistic. "Making such promises runs against our party’s best traditions of evidence-based policy making and undermines our reputation as the party of responsible arithmetic," the economists write. A slew of other liberal economists have raised questions about whether Sanders' Medicare-for-all plan and other economic policies are feasible.

WALKER TO SLASH PLANNED PARENTHOOD MONEY — Wisconsin Gov. Scott Walker this morning will sign two bills defunding Planned Parenthood, Pro's Rachana Pradhan writes. The first would pull Title X family planning grants from the organization and the second would change how much clinics can get reimbursed under Medicaid for prescription drugs, including contraceptives. The bills would cut $7.5 million from Wisconsin Planned Parenthood clinics per year, according to local reports,

DEMS ASK SCOTUS TO UPHOLD BIRTH CONTROL RULES — A group of 123 Democratic lawmakers on Wednesday asked the Supreme Court to uphold the health care law’s birth control coverage requirement for religious-affiliated institutions. The court will hear oral arguments in the case, Zubik v. Burwell, in late March. The amicus brief: http://1.usa.gov/1QmIFIr

AROUND TOWN — Nora Super, who served as the executive director of the White House Conference on Aging, has joined the National Association of Area Agencies on Aging as Chief, Program & Services.

HEALTH REFORM ROILS 'DOWNTON ABBEY' — Art imitates life on this PBS television show, as a hospital merger has become a major plotline. Your author hears that the show — and Jenny Gold's Kaiser Health News analysis — are worth your time, but he's avoiding clicking on the latter until he watches the former. The link, if you're not scared of spoilers: http://bit.ly/1SzN2Gr

WHAT WE'RE READING by Paul Demko

How many cities beyond Flint are experiencing a lead poisoning crisis? There’s no way to know because cities and states aren’t required to report this information, explains Vox’s Sarah Kliff. http://bit.ly/1OguB1z

The Department of Veterans’ Affairs doesn’t pay for expensive in vitro fertilization, limiting the ability of many disabled vets to start families, explains NPR. http://n.pr/1TrddPu

Hollywood Presbyterian Medical Center paid a $17,000 ransom in bitcoins to a hacker who seized control of the hospital's computer systems, ending a nearly two-week standoff, reports the Los Angeles Times. http://lat.ms/1oqPpOX

Congressional Republicans are showing signs that they’re serious about unifying behind a credible Obamacare replacement plan, argues the National Center for Policy Analysis’s John Graham in Forbes. http://onforb.es/1orqHyA

The Justice Department has wrapped up its probe into providers' overuse of cardiac devices, and more than 500 hospitals ultimately settled with the government. http://j.mp/1WsYT7i

Event Friday: POLITICO’s Sixth Annual State Solutions Conference — POLITICO hosts one-on-one conversations with governors Phil Bryant (R-Miss.), John Hickenlooper (D-Colo.), Asa Hutchinson (R-Ark.), Jack Markell (D-Del.), Matt Mead (R-Wyo.), Jay Nixon (D-Mo.) and Peter Shumlin (D-Vt.) as the National Governors Association comes to town. Feb. 19, 11:30 a.m. — 901 K St. NW. RSVP: http://politi.co/1R6OHjq

’TIS THE SEASON: POLITICO PRO’S CAMPAIGN PRO — POLITICO Pro, POLITICO’s premier solution for policy professionals offers our solution for campaign season. Get breaking news and analysis about the presidential, House, Senate and gubernatorial races, with coverage including campaign strategies, fundraising and ad buys. Beyond campaign coverage, Campaign Pro also offers the Campaign Pro Race Dashboard — Political junkies can geek out and search for any House, Senate and gubernatorial race by candidate, consulting firm, state or office to obtain the latest polling numbers and consulting details. Ready to find your inner political wonk? See if you qualify for complimentary access to Campaign Pro.

** A message from National Community Pharmacists Association (NCPA): Many Medicare drug plans effectively require the use of “preferred” pharmacies that are inconvenient for patients. That means a long trip or higher copays to stick with the pharmacies that patients like. In urban areas, these plans often fail to meet the government’s standard for pharmacy access. In rural areas, “preferred” pharmacies are often 20+ miles away! Support H.R. 793 / S. 1190. This bipartisan legislation is supported by leading consumer advocates and would let patients use any pharmacy willing to accept the “preferred” pharmacy terms and conditions. Learn more at www.ncpanet.org/pharmacychoice. **