Recreation, reservoir looking ahead to new open space, storage

Construction of Chimney Hollow Reservoir, which would be surrounded by open space pictured here, could begin in 2018 if the design and permitting process continue as expected. (Gregory Mayse / Special to the Reporter-Herald)

Chimney Hollow: The details Costs: Chimney Hollow Reservoir is expected to cost $400 million when done with the cost born by the cities and water districts that will benefit from the stored water. Permitting has tallied $14 million, and the property cost an additional $4 million. Participants: Thirteen entities are participating in the project, which will hold 90,000 acre feet of water when full. These are Loveland, Little Thompson Water District, Louisville, Broomfield, Ft. Lupton, Evans, Central Weld County Water District, Superior, Lafayette, Longmont, Greeley, Erie and Platte River Power Authority. Another reservoir: While the permitting process is almost complete for Chimney Hollow, it is still going for Northern Integrated Supply Project, which includes Glade and Galeton Reservoirs. The final environmental impact statement is expected in 2017 with another year anticipated before a decision is made, which could be followed by potential lawsuits. So far, the permitting process has cost $15 million with the entire project estimated at $600 million.

For more than a decade, officials have envisioned a new reservoir west of Loveland to provide a stable water supply for several entities as well as hiking, camping and motorless boating.

Advertisement

That vision is still at least six years from opening to public use, but officials involved in creating Chimney Hollow Reservoir say design of the water storage could begin early next year with construction starting in 2018.

"There's a light at the end of this tunnel," said Brian Werner, spokesman for Northern Water, the district that began the federal permitting process for Chimney Hollow in 2003.

And as far as the recreation around the future reservoir, Larimer County's Department of Natural Resources has begun plans for allowing hiking, non-motorized boating and camping at the open space that is expected to open alongside the water storage piece.

"I think it'll be the largest water base, flat water, for non-motorized (boats) in the state," said Gary Buffington, director of the natural resources department.

"It'll be almost as big as Carter Lake."

Recreation

Chimney Hollow will be located near Carter Lake, Flatiron Reservoir and Pinewood Reservoir west of Loveland and will be operated similarly. The reservoirs are owned by the Bureau of Reclamation, the water use is managed by Northern Water, and the open spaces surrounding them are owned and managed by Larimer County.

Carter Lake is known for its boating waters, which allow motorized as well as sail boats, plus camping spots, hiking trails and a swim beach.

Flatiron is quieter with no boating allowed and is known for its accessible fishing and campground, which includes rentable teepees.

Pinewood does allow boats at a slower pace, prohibiting wake speed boating, and boasts a newly remodeled campground.

Recreation at Chimney Hollow, which will have 800 to 900 surface acres, is expected to be slightly different from all three with larger waters allowing paddle and sail boats and a trail system. There also likely will be some campsites that are accessible only by boat, according to early plans.

"It will be a wholly different kind of experience," said Buffington.

"It's Ponderosa pine. It's rolling hills. It's a different choice."

Detailed planning, however, has not begun as the open space project will trail the actual construction of the dam and reservoir.

Reservoir

That construction likely will not begin for another two years. Project manager Jeff Drager said he believes design will kick into full gear in early 2016, allowing construction to begin in 2018.

Although it may not seem like much has happened in the past year since the federal government signed a permit allowing construction just before last Christmas, Drager explained that officials have been working hard all 2015 on two more permits. A water quality certification from the Colorado Water Quality Control Commission and a wetlands permit from the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers need to be in place before construction can begin, he said.

Drager said Northern Water is "very close" on the water permit, which he expects to be finalized in early 2016.

That piece is a prerequisite for the wetlands permit, which Drager anticipates will be completed by the middle of 2016. This is the piece that will detail what steps Northern Water will take to replace any wetlands that are destroyed by the reservoir.

"There's less than two acres of wetlands along narrow stream channels," Drager said. "Our plan right now is to buy into a wetland bank. There are properties that restore or maintain wetlands (in lieu of those destroyed)."

During the permitting process, which has cost about $14 million so far, Northern Water has begun some preliminary design work and drilled some holes on the future dam site to assess the geology.

But the bulk of the design work will begin next year and is expected to take about two years with construction beginning in 2018.

The earliest water could begin filling the reservoir would be 2021.

"It could fill in a year or it could take two to three years to fill," Drager said. "It depends upon the water year, the amount of water."

While there is a "light at the end of the tunnel," officials admit that the tunnel of permitting and planning has been much longer than they expected.

"We never thought it would take this long when we bought the property," Drager said.

Both Northern Water and Larimer County officials said they are excited for the permitting to end and the actual design and construction to begin.

"We're really excited about it," said Buffington. "We'll get it open as soon as we can."

Pamela Johnson: 970-669-5050, ext. 526, johnsonp@reporter-herald.com, www.twitter.com/RHPamelaJ.