Topics: Editor's Picks, Highway bill, Republicans, Ronald Reagan, Tea Party, Business News

As I write, it looks like Congress may well avoid the catastrophic slashing of highway trust fund spending this summer — a once mundane feat, which passes for a major accomplishment these days. Just don’t look too hard at the details (still in flux) — gimmick-based funding for only less than a year, which means, essentially, no change from the disastrous Tea Party-dominated status quo. As New York Times reporter Ron Nixon put it, at the end of a recent story on the highway spending bill shenanigans:

Transportation Secretary Anthony Foxx, a former mayor of Charlotte, N.C., has lobbied Congress for a four-year spending plan that would allow state and local governments to begin work on longer-term projects that cannot be squeezed into a limited time frame.

“We’ve had 18 short-term measures in the last five years,” Mr. Foxx said. “The cumulative effect of short-term measures is that the country is grinding to a halt.”

There are bills in both chambers, notes Becky Moylan at the blog of the American Society of Civil Engineers [ASCE], warning, “However, either bill would take some reconciliation to pass through the other chamber. More critically, neither bill provides a long-term, sustainable funding solution.”

This comes at the same time that federal high-speed rail has been entirely abandoned, while China is in a building spree that recalls America’s late-19th century railroad boom. America’s stagnation as a world leader could not be summarized any more simply than this — and those self-proclaimed patriots with their foot on the brakes are blaming everyone but themselves.

It’s not a completely new situation, however. America has been under-investing in its infrastructure for decades. The CASE has been issuing report cards on the overall infrastructure shortfall since 1998 that are nothing short of staggering, following an earlier, similar report in 1988. There was a brief respite when Democrats gained control of Congress in the 2006 elections, followed by Obama’s election in 2008. During the recession — as officially recognized — infrastructure spending as a percentage of GDP hit a 20-year high. Since then, spending has plummeted. It’s part of the broader austerity onslaught, which Obama himself initially encouraged via his presidential deficit-cutting commission, but which the Tea Party has taken to such extremes they have twice threatened to throw the country into default.

Yet, if austerity mania is primarily explained as hostility to the welfare state, the anti-infrastructure side of it reveals something else: a much deeper and older hostility to the very nature of the common good, the earliest and most passionate advocates of which were, ironically, the historical progenitors of the GOP — namely, Alexander Hamilton and his fellow Federalists, followed by Henry Clay’s Whigs.

Indeed, it was not until the depths of the Great Recession, with its unprecedented mass unemployment ,that the Democratic Party fully embraced the cause of national infrastructure building, after almost 150 years of vacillating between intense opposition and sporadic support. Under FDR, the CCC, WPA, PWA and other agencies built a staggering amount of public infrastructure — roads, bridges, dams, schools, hospitals, airports, etc. — much of it still being used to this day. It was enough to help revive the economy partially — restoring high levels of GDP growth, but not enough to return the economy to full employment, which would not happen until mobilization for World War II finally brought all sectors of the political establishment on board. From then through the 1950s, when Dwight D. Eisenhower proposed the Interstate Highway System, and the 1960s, when the most intensive build-out took place, America experienced a golden age of bipartisan support for national infrastructure spending that helped us reach the peak of international power and influence.

Among the public at large, that bipartisan consensus endures. In 30 years of polling since 1984, the General Social Survey has found that roughly four times as many Americans think we’re spending too little, rather than too much, on the nation’s highways and bridges, and the difference between Democrats and Republicans has only been 2.9 percent on average, with Republicans slightly more concerned that we are spending too little. Democrats have been more concerned than Republicans just three times out of 18, with one tie.

It’s not just voters, either. There is plenty of support for infrastructure spending among donors to both parties — but there’s a catch. The more directly infrastructure spending concerns a donor group, the more likely the group is to strongly favor some spending plans over others, and thus the fragmentation process sets in. It’s a story as old as the republic itself, as historian John Lauritz Larson explained in his 2001 book, “Internal Improvement: National Public Works and the Promise of Popular Government in the Early United States.” The idea of public infrastructure spending was initially quite popular, with advocates as prominent as George Washington himself, and spanning the entire political spectrum for a time — a fact that’s hard to square with a lot of popular mythology:

Americans of the late twentieth century have been conditioned to see free enterprise and government noninterference as virtues so compelling and self-evident that they must have been the goals of our revolutionary forebears…. Yet, in the early decades of the Republic, articulate, even elegant designs for social and economic development sprang from leading minds of the revolutionary generation, setting the agenda for politics and competing for popular approbation.

This situation did not last long, Larson notes:

Very quickly — and with no little irony — people found the seeds of paralyzing conflict within the broadly popular and virtuous objective of internal improvement. They took to supporting or opposing public works according to their private or local interests, and sometimes according to whether they believed that the revolution had empowered the nation, the states, or private individuals to impinge on the conditions of life for the larger community.

More broadly, the entire view of the proper role of government was affected:

How such promotions were introduced, whose interests they promised to serve, and whether they yielded the desired results all helped shape the electorate’s attitudes toward energetic government. No less important, however, was the way in which the enemies of particular projects, or of internal improvement in general, exploited the rhetoric of revolutionary republicanism to discredit positive government and advance a libertarian variation as the true legacy of the American Revolution.

Initially, under the Articles of Confederation in the 1780s, and the U.S. Constitution in the 1790s, internal improvements were supported by virtually every prominent politician, usually in very similar language, which masked a variety of divergent lines of thought. Larson illustrates this with the example of Washington’s advocacy for developing the Potomac River as a gateway to western expansion:

The Potomac navigation activated Washington’s whole vision of the rising American empire. The West held the key to America’s future greatness. The ‘vacant’ lands back of the Atlantic states promised safety and prosperity for generations to come.

Washington’s frustrations in trying to realize his vision under the Articles of Confederation was part of what propelled him to support a stronger federal government. However, Larson notes:

Many of Washington’s Virginia friends and neighbors shared his interest in Potomac navigation without embracing the interlocking purposes of his grand developmental vision.

Jefferson and Madison were two such figures, whose differing views Larson illuminates. It was only after multiple rival river development schemes in Virginia, Maryland, Pennsylvania and New York collapsed disastrously, leaving few but speculators as winners, that criticisms hardened into a political ideology of populist anti-elitism that the Democratic-Republicans, led by Jefferson and Madison, rode to power in 1800 and thereafter.

There were ample good reasons for their views — many reflected in the Occupy movement’s criticisms of Wall Street rule in our day. But there was also a much sounder basic development vision at issue, as well. The key reason for the multiple failures was the sheer difficulty involved, combined with a lack of sufficient expertise — a problem set we understand far better today than anyone possibly could have at the time. But when all was said and done, the genuine need for internal improvements remained — unlike the “need” for exotic shadow banking schemes today.

It’s true that the Federalists, following the plans laid out by Alexander Hamilton, were the great advocates of internal improvements and an activist central government, and the Democratic-Republicans, led by Jefferson and Madison, opposed them. Yet, Hamilton’s overall vision of crafting a unified nation-building economic framework endured in the form of tariffs protecting manufactures (first passed in 1816) and a central bank (the Second Bank of United States was authorized that same year) despite decades of Democratic-Republican rule. Although the fate of internal improvements generally languished, even Jefferson realized their importance in practice, as he signed legislation in 1806 authorizing funding for the Cumberland Road, the first major federally funded highway, which connected the Potomac with the Ohio River Valley and beyond — a much less speculative venture than reengineering rivers at that time. Later, Monroe further funded its extension, after initially vetoing funds for its upkeep because he thought the expenditure to be unconstitutional.

The War of 1812 virtually destroyed the Federalists — who had opposed it — as a political force. Yet, ironically, it gave new life to their most positive ideas, as explained on the U.S. Senate website:

Henry Clay‘s “American System,” devised in the burst of nationalism that followed the War of 1812, remains one of the most historically significant examples of a government-sponsored program to harmonize and balance the nation’s agriculture, commerce, and industry. This “System” consisted of three mutually reinforcing parts: a tariff to protect and promote American industry; a national bank to foster commerce; and federal subsidies for roads, canals, and other “internal improvements” to develop profitable markets for agriculture. Funds for these subsidies would be obtained from tariffs and sales of public lands. Clay argued that a vigorously maintained system of sectional economic interdependence would eliminate the chance of renewed subservience to the free-trade, laissez-faire “British System.” In the years from 1816 to 1828, Congress enacted programs supporting each of the American System’s major elements.