BRECKENRIDGE — With resort snowpack already surpassing average measurements from the past two seasons and ski areas opening record amounts of terrain for mid-December, mountain communities are enjoying the strongest start since 2007.

Last year, all the callers to Mark Waldman’s Summit County residence rentals were asking whether there was any snow.

“This year, it’s the exact opposite. They are excited about the skiing,” said Waldman, whose 150 units are booking steadily and are nearly sold out over the New Year’s holiday. “Last year, we had to convince people to not worry about the snow, telling them how the resorts make really good snow. This year, they just want to know how good it is.”

Breckenridge lodges are celebrating a 13 percent increase in bookings over last year, and the story is the same across the high country, where the bountiful early-season snow is thrilling lodgekeepers, resort operators and tourist operations.

As the snow fell heavily in November, the pace of lodging reservations surged, setting the stage for a December to remember. By the end of November in Aspen and Snowmass, lodging reservations were ahead of last year for every day of December. Every lodge in the Roaring Fork Valley is expected to be full for the New Year’s holiday.

“This is my 25th winter in Colorado, and I can tell you that never have I seen this much terrain open this early, with this much high-quality snow, shared by this few people on the slopes,” said Bill Tomcich, the head of the Stay Aspen Snowmass reservation company, in his monthly letter to valley hoteliers.

The return to 2007 occupancy levels spreads across the West’s mountain resorts. Lodging reservations at 17 mountain destinations in six Western states are up 8.7 percent from November through April, compared with the same period last season.

Revenues are up 14 percent, according to DestiMetrics, the Denver-based research group that surveys mountain properties across the West. That leaves winter bookings pacing to at least to match the record highs set in the bountiful 2007-08 ski season, said Ralf Garrison, director of DestiMetrics, in a statement detailing occupancies for the season.

“Both the past summer and forthcoming winter show gains on both occupancy and rate in every month — good individually and consistently better than the past. Only recently have we seen this kind of consistent growth of the overall Western mountain resort aggregated,” Garrison said.

The Steamboat ski area, which has seen close to 100 inches of snowfall since Oct. 1, expects to be 100 percent open by Christmas. The snow has supercharged the town as it heads into the lucrative holiday season.

Larry Mashaw, vice president of sales and marketing for the Resort Group, one of the largest property-management companies in Steamboat, said bookings have returned to prerecession levels.

“Pacing for December has been unbelievable this week. By the end of this week, we’ll have more reservations for December than we ended with at the end of the month last year,” Mashaw said. “We fully expect to surpass the last few Decembers.”

Jason Blevins: 303-954-1374, jblevins@denverpost.com or twitter.com/jasontblevins