The leaky World War II-era building is one of the Pantex Plant’s oldest, most secret facilities. Dust seeps in through its doors, a resident snake keeps rodents at bay and the electrical system is outdated.

Inside, engineers test and sample high explosives to ensure they meet rigorous standards for the U.S. nuclear weapons stockpile.

“I guess one of the things that really got my attention was the working conditions, not necessarily in the bays and cells, but for the engineers and the other people who are out there. It’s just really bad,” said Rep. Mac Thornberry, a Clarendon Republican who has visited the building and serves as vice chairman of the House Armed Services Committee.

A government staffer who also has toured the dilapidated building in Pantex’s Zone 11 said the roof leaks when it rains and water streaks dot its interior walls.

Periodically, employees must put tarps over the high-

explosives testing equipment to protect it from rain and the elements.

“In this case, I would say it’s not a safety issue; we’re not talking about nuclear materials,” said the staffer, who agreed to speak on condition of anonymity. “It’s just a matter of the working conditions and the risk of damaging state-of-the-art, very expensive equipment. If there was real damage, you would not be able to analyze these samples, and it would put at risk the ability of the Department of Energy to certify to the president that the current state of our nuclear weapons are safe, secure and effective.”

Pantex, which assembles, modernizes and dismantles all weapons in the U.S. atomic arsenal, has about 643 buildings, 48 miles of paved roads and 461 miles of fences.

Frank Klotz, a retired Air Force general who oversees Pantex and the nation’s entire nuclear weapons complex, toured Pantex recently to take stock of the installation.

“There’s a part of the facility here where, quite frankly, where there are some very old buildings in which there are some issues associated with the HVAC, the heating, ventilation and air conditioning system, with the plumbing, with the seals on the building itself that are not the best place for our employees to work and are not the best place to put very expensive scientific diagnostic equipment,” Klotz said.

“By the way, we face that across the entire nuclear security enterprise. ... A number of our buildings date back literally to the end of the Manhattan Project or at least the very early days of the Cold War.”

In January, plant officials said they completed a major Pantex project, a $36 million high-pressure fire loop system that can instantly deluge nuclear weapons bays and cells with water to snuff out a fire.

The Defense Nuclear Facilities Safety Board, a congressional watchdog agency, cited concerns about fire protection after safety officials cited fears about the potential threat of a fire and accidental high-explosive blast that could disperse plutonium and other nuclear materials into the air.

The system provides water to about 100 Pantex facilities and required nearly 20,000 feet of corrosion-resistant plastic pipe, plus fire hydrants and dozens of valves.

The National Nuclear Security Administration, Klotz said, is now finishing a new Pantex high explosives pressing facility that will modernize the plant’s explosives operations.

Construction of the $65 million, 45,000-square-foot facility began in 2011, and it is expected to be operational in September 2016.

So far, the project, managed by Pantex contractor Consolidated Nuclear Security LLC and the Army Corps of Engineers, is on time and within budget, NNSA officials said.

In June, Pantex and Siemens USA completed a five-turbine, privately financed wind farm expected to provide more than 60 percent of the plant’s yearly energy needs, saving an estimated $2.8 million in annual energy costs over the next 18 years.

Steve Erhart, manager of the NNSA’s Nuclear Production Office that oversees Pantex and a Tennessee weapons plant, said the agency also plans to add another High Explosive Science and Engineering facility that eventually will replace other aging Pantex structures.

The NNSA, Klotz said, is taking steps to fix infrastructure throughout the weapons complex and points to a new state-of-the art Kansas City facility where nuclear weapons components are manufactured as one of the agency’s recent successes.

The general said the NNSA also has built new facilities at New Mexico’s Los Alamos National Laboratories, at Lawrence Livermore National Laboratories near San Francisco and at the Y-12 National Security Complex in Oak Ridge, Tenn.

“That said, we still have an awful lot of facilities and buildings which quite frankly are old, aging and need to be replaced both to continue to ensure the safety of our people, and to ensure our ability to continue to conduct operations.”

Thornberry, too, said infrastructure problems continue to mount at Pantex and across the weapons complex.

Another infrastructure issue facing Pantex is the plant’s plutonium storage facilities, where thousands of radioactive cores for nuclear weapons are stored.

The NNSA recently announced plans to build new plutonium facilities at Pantex to move storage underground and reduce security costs, but those have yet to be finalized.

“I think understandably so with very limited dollars, the top priority has been the bays and the cells where the work on weapons actually takes place. Meanwhile, a bunch of other things are deteriorating,” he said.

“We’re having to put money into fire loops and all of that other stuff that it’s just patchwork. We’re doing just enough to get by.”