Texas Sen. Ted Cruz says he’s the only presidential candidate who can block Donald Trump from winning the Republican nomination.

During a rally at Johnson County Community College in Overland Park on Wednesday evening, Cruz lambasted Obamacare and business regulations, characterizing them as huge drains on the economy.

“When we repeal Obamacare, when we pass a flat tax, when we abolish the IRS, we’re going to see small business exploding,” Cruz said. “We’re going to see millions upon millions of high paying jobs, of wages through the roof, of young people coming out of school getting, two, three, four, five job offers."

Cruz warned that, with the death of Justice Antonin Scalia, the Supreme Court is potentially one justice away from a liberal majority, which he said would effectively erase the Second Amendment and promote civil rights at the expense of conservative Christian religious beliefs.

Cruz lambasted Donald Trump, the clear front-runner in the Republican primary. Cruz accused Trump of hiring foreigners to help staff his hotels and funding Democratic candidates. In fact, the sitting senator warned voters of choosing a “Washington deal maker” in Trump. Cruz maintained he’s the only viable alternative.

“There is only one campaign that has beaten Donald Trump over and over again and that can and will beat Donald Trump,” said Cruz.

Cruz noted that Sen. Lindsey Graham, a fellow Republican who recently joked fellow senators would turn a blind eye if someone were to murder Cruz, now says the party should unite around the senator from Texas.

“Lindsey and I had disagreements on some policy issues, on some tactics. But I do think Lindsey is acknowledging the simple reality of this race,” Cruz said. “If we’re going to beat Donald Trump, the field can’t remain fractured.”

Florida Sen. Marco Rubio agrees with the general sentiment but says the GOP should unite around him. Rubio is scheduled to campaign in Wichita, Topeka, and Overland Park, on Friday. Kansans caucus Saturday.

Frank Morris is a national correspondent and senior editor at KCUR 89.3. You can reach him on Twitter, @FrankNewsman.

Update, 9:30 a.m. Friday: this post was updated to reflect additional campaign stops on Friday by Sen. Marco Rubio.