Microsoft has been quiet about the upcoming Surface Pro 4, though many online reports suggested it would be released in July. However, new reports suggest that the tablet/laptop hybrid may not be released in October, so it can come with Windows 10. Venture Capital Post reports the news on the Surface Pro 4.

“However, there is a clashing with regards to the release date of the new two-in-one machine. According to reports, the Microsoft Surface 4 will be released on July. Other sources would claim however that the device would be released this year in October since it would also be the time wherein the Windows 10 software is to be released. This would then make the Surface Pro 4 the first device to have a pre-loaded Windows 10.”

Perhaps it does make sense that Microsoft would hold off the release the Surface Pro 4 until October, when Windows 10 is released. Then again, they could release it in July with Windows 8.1 and offer a Windows 10 upgrade in October. Venture Capital Post reports that the Surface Pro 4 will have some incredible specs.

“The Surface Pro 4 is said to have a 4K screen. The device will run with an Intel Core-i5 and Core-i7 processor and will have a stylus pen just like the Surface Pro 3. Other rumors would claim that the Surface Pro 4 will be the first Windows 10 device that will host Skylake chip – which is scheduled to be released in August 2015. But it is consistently reported that the two-in-one device will come in 2 models, the 12-inch and 14-inch model and will have up to 1 terabyte of storage and 16GB of RAM. Both models will use stylus and matching keyboards.”

The Inquisitr spoke to Los Angeles industry analyst Paul Mueller, who believes that the Surface Pro 3 is doing well enough for Microsoft to hold out until October to release the Surface Pro 4.

“The Surface Pro 3 is selling just as well as it did when it first came out. Even though people expected a June or July release for the Pro 4, it probably won’t happen until Windows 10 is released. That way, Microsoft could capitalize on both Windows 10 and the new Surface Pro at the same time,” Mueller says.

The Surface Pro 4 will definitely be a direct competitor to Apple’s upcoming iPad Pro, which is said to include a stylus for digital inking. The iPad Pro is rumored to arrive with a variation of Apple’s desktop operating system, OS X. Let’s hope the Surface Pro 4 and the iPad Pro can prove that tablets aren’t dead just yet.

[Photo Credit: Daryl Deino]