Tom Green Democrats to lead discussion

By Federico Martinez, Federico.Martinez@gosanangelo.com Federico_sast

A series of educational forums that will address issues such as religious liberty, "Obamacare" and the Middle East will kick off at 7 p.m. on May 5 with "The Truth About Religious Liberty." The event will be held in the Stephens Library Community Room.

The six-month "The Truth About ..." series will feature a different topic each month and is being sponsored by the Tom Green County Democratic Party. Everyone is welcome to attend and there is no admission charge.

"My goal is to make a contribution to the community by encouraging people to think, not just believe what they hear," said David Currie, chairman of the Tom Green Democratic Party. "I'm not trying to bring in just Democrats to talk about things like Obamacare. I want speakers who will be objective."

Featured presenters for the religious freedom event include Rabbi Jack Moline, president of The Interfaith Alliance in Washington, D.C., and Brent Walker, executive director of the Baptist Joint Committee for Religious Liberty, also headquartered in Washington.

A retired Baptist minister, Currie tried to select a broad variety of current topics, some more personal to him than others.

"I'm very passionate about religious liberty," he said. "When the First Amendment was created it did not say we were created as a 'Christian' society. We were formed as a secular community that needs to respect and get along with each other."

All of the monthly forums, except June, will be held at the library on the first Thursday of the month and begin at 7 p.m.

Question-and-answer periods will be held after each presentation to encourage dialogue.

The primary goal is to provide an opportunity for people with diverse opinions to dialogue about issues that are of concern to most people, Currie said. Another goal is to raise the visibility of the Democratic Party in Tom Green County.

"We need more than one party," Currie said. "Although locally we have pretty good leadership, having more than one choice or view is important."

“Truth About ... Series”

7 -8:30 p.m., Thursday, May 5: The Truth About Religious Freedom, Stephens Library Community Room, presenters Rabbi Jack Moline, president of The Interfaith Alliance, Washington D.C. and Brent Walker, executive director, Baptist Joint Committee for Religious Liberty, Washington, D.C.

7 -8:30 p.m., Thursday, June 9: The Truth About the Middle East and ISIL, Stephens Library. Community Room, presenters retired Three Star General Ronnie Hawkins, San Angelo.

7 -8:30 p.m., Thursday, July 7: The Truth About Obamacare, Stephens Library Community Room, presenters to be announced.

7 -8:30 p.m., Thursday, Aug. 4: The Truth About Social Security and Medicare, Stephens Library Community Room, presenters to be announced.

7 -8:30 p.m., Thursday, Sept. 1: The Truth About Public Education and Vouchers, Stephens Library Community Room, presenters to be announced.

7 -8:30 p.m., Thursday, Oct. 6: The Truth About Voter ID Laws and Voter Fraud, Stephens Library Community Room, presenters to be announced.

The public is invited to all of the presentations. There is no cost to attend.