Eggs have long been a symbol of new beginnings.

Now they are celebrating a new chapter of their own, with the Scientific Report of the 2015 Dietary Guidelines Advisory Committee’s recommendation to lift the long-held limit on dietary cholesterol.

It turns out that for the vast majority of people, the cholesterol we eat doesn’t significantly raise our blood cholesterol; rather, saturated fat does. So foods that are relatively low in saturated fat but high in cholesterol — primarily shellfish and eggs — have been freed from the restriction.

Eggs have a lot going for them. For just 70 calories, a large egg provides 6 grams of satisfying protein, vitamin D, a variety of B vitamins, essential minerals such as iron and zinc, choline, which is important for brain health, and lutein and zeaxanthin, which promote eye health.

Actually, deciding which carton of eggs to grab at the market can be the most difficult thing about them. Here’s some information to make the egg hunt a bit easier.

■ Farm-fresh or all-natural: These are marketing terms; they have no official meaning whatsoever. Disregard these words — and any images of bucolic fields, for that matter.

■ Cage-free, free-range or pasture-raised: These labels pertain to the way the egg-laying hens are treated. Cage-free means the birds are housed in barns where they can walk freely, rather than being confined to cages. Free-range means they are not only uncaged, they also have at least some access to the outdoors. And pasture-raised hens are kept outdoors for most of the year and brought indoors at night for protection.

There is no mandatory regulation of these terms. To ensure that these claims are verifiabl, look for products with third-party certifications, such as “certified humane” or “animal welfare approved.”

■ Organic: Eggs with the USDA Organic seal come from hens that are raised on organic feed (grown without synthetic pesticides, fungicides or fertilizers) and are free-range (uncaged with outdoor access). Facilities are checked by accredited inspectors.

■ Hormone-free or antibiotic-free: Hormones or antibiotics are not used in egg production, so these claims are irrelevant.

■ Vegetarian-fed: This means the chicken’s feed contained no animal byproducts. But because the bird’s natural behavior is to forage for insects, it also implies they did not spend time outdoors.

■ Pasteurized: These eggs are heated until just below the temperature at which they coagulate, so they can be used in recipes that call for raw eggs, such as many Caesar dressings.

■ Omega-3: Eggs enhanced with this good-for-you fat come from hens whose feed is spiked with omega-3-rich ingredients such as flaxseed, marine algae or canola. The eggs contain anywhere from 100 mg to 600 mg omega-3 each, whereas a regular egg has about 30 mg.

It’s worth noting that the predominant type of omega-3 in eggs is a form that is the considerably less potent than that found in fish.

■ Grade: There are three grades bestowed by the U.S. Agriculture Department: AA, A and B. Grade AA is best, with thick, firm whites, high, round yolks and clean, unbroken shells. Grade A eggs, most common in stores, have the same qualities as AA but with slightly less firm whites. Grade B, rarely sold retail, is primarily used in prepared egg products.

■ Color: Different hen breeds lay different colors of eggs. They are no different in quality, flavor or nutrition.