SALEM, Ore. -- The Department of Consumer and Business Services has issued a warning to consumers that scammers may be trying to take advantage of Moda Health's financial troubles to obtain sensitive information.

DCBS reported multiple incidents in which callers have claimed they could help consumers asking for personal information, including Social Security numbers. The call could come with a threat of cutting off health coverage, said Aaron Corvin, DCBS spokesman.

"You have a financially troubled company, which has unfortunately created an opportunity to use it because consumers get worried," Corvin said.

More: State forces Moda to exit individual insurance market, raise capital

Moda Health is operating under financial oversight of the state. It entered the health insurance exchange under the Affordable Care Act with aggressive prices and acquired a significant share of the new market. But Moda suffered when the federal funds that were meant to help absorb the costs of entering an unknown market didn't come through as planned, and its new members turned out to be more costly than expected.

While DCBS doesn't know whether anyone has lost money through the issue, it wanted to make people aware as early as possible.

Corvin said consumers should be on guard if a caller isn't clearly identifying themselves. If consumers are shopping around for individual plans, they should work with the carriers' websites directly, rather than using a third-party website.

Those who believe they were victims should call the Oregon Department of Justice at 503-378-4320 or the DCBS consumer advocates at 888-877-4894.

syoo@StatesmanJournal.com, (503) 399-6673 or follow at Twitter.com/syoo.

More top stories:

Multnomah County sheriff accused of workplace misconduct

Oregon Constitution presents hiccup for minimum wage bill

Hiker 'feeling great' after rescue on Mt. Hood

Earthquake warning system needs funding

Follow us on Facebook for the latest breaking news updates

Watch live or check weather & traffic updates on the go with the KGW News app.