The Eye

Nicki Minaj And Meek Mill Not Splitting After Drake Feud, Couple Has 'Put In Too Much Time'

SIGN UP TO RECEIVE THE LATEST NEWS FROM FASHION&STYLE

(Photo : Getty Images: Frederick M. Brown) Nicki Minaj and Meek Mill won't split over the "I'm A Boss" rapper's feud with Drake, sources say.

Meek Mill's ongoing feud with Drake may have caused tension in his relationship with Nicki Minaj, but that doesn't mean the "Anaconda" rapper is ready to call it quits with her current boyfriend.



Minaj has found herself in the middle of a heated feud between beau Mill and label mate Drake after the Philly rapper accused Drake of using a ghostwriter on his new album, "If You're Reading This It's Too Late."



While sources close to Drake reveal that the rapper has yet to accept Meek Mill's apology following his Twitter rant last week, sources close to Minaj are now revealing that she won't split with Mill despite his actions, Hollywood Life reports.



"She's not letting Meek go over some Twitter beef. They've both put in too much time and effort and hard work on making their relationship work," the source reveals of Minaj's decision to stay with Meek following the feud.



The source continues, "She wants a future with him and so does he. Meek's her rib. Nobody can come between them and the love they have for one another."



Similarly, the source admits that while Drake is furious with Minaj's man for trying to publicly bash him on Twitter, he and Minaj are working to ensure their friendship remains intact after the fight.



"Drake is like a brother," the source says of Drake and Minaj's friendship, "For real. She respects him as a person and as an artist and no one can take the fact away that he's a heavy hitter in the music industry biz."



Meek Mill made headlines yesterday after he was heard referring to Nicki Minaj as his "girlfriend" while introducing her as the headlining act for their joint "The Pinkprint Tour."



While neither Minaj nor Mill have officially spoken out against the breakup rumors, fans took to social media to express their relief regarding the couple's decision to stay together despite rampant split rumors.



Do you think Nicki Minaj should stay with Meek Mill, or is her friendship with Drake more important?



SIGN UP TO RECEIVE THE LATEST NEWS FROM FASHION&STYLE

© 2015 Fashion & Style.com All rights reserved. Do not reproduce without permission.