Health insurance companies are on the prowl for more customers. There are still three months to go for people to enroll in health plans under the Affordable Care Act, but insurers don't want to rely solely on state or government websites to find them. Some are finding a path to Americans' inboxes by partnering with companies that operate health-screening kiosks -- those machines in supermarkets and drug stores where people check their blood pressure or weight.

One of these kiosks sits in aisle ten of a Safeway grocery store near San Francisco. It’s nestled next to the shelves of antacid and cold medicine. Sitting down at the machine is like slipping into the cockpit of a 1980s arcade game. There’s a big plastic seat and foot rest for measuring weight and body mass index, a window for testing vision, and a blood pressure cuff.

"Make sure the cuff comes up above your elbow," a gentle female voice prods. It belongs to an attractive brunette on screen wearing a white lab coat, her hair in a tight bun, her eyebrows carefully sculpted. She asks a lot of personal questions throughout the session, like “Do you have a blood relative who was told they have a heart problem?” Or, “During the past 30 days, how many days have you felt sad or depressed?”

The machines are owned by a company near Atlanta called SoloHealth. It started installing the kiosks in Walmart and other retail stores in 2008 to give people a way to keep better track of their health. Today there are more than 3,500 SoloHealth stations across the U.S. and the company plans to install another 1,500 this year. The company says more than 12,000 Californians use one every day.

SoloHealth first made money by selling ads for pharmacy items displayed near the kiosks. But in the era of health care reform, the company happened upon a new business model. All the data it’s collected about people’s health, diet, and family disease history is suddenly very valuable to health insurance companies.

“As much as we’ve moved to the market, the market has really moved to us,” says Bart Foster, CEO of SoloHealth. “We’re able to provide much more detailed information than the health plans even know what to do with today.”

For now, the company is selling just names, email addresses and phone numbers to insurers who want to market health plans directly to consumers. In the past, insurers sold most of their plans through large employer contracts. Now that all Americans are required to have insurance by March 31 or pay a penalty, insurers are looking for new ways of finding potential customers, and competing with each other to get their attention. Anthem Blue Cross is one of them. It brokered an exclusive agreement with SoloHealth to be the sole insurance company featured on kiosks throughout California.

“We know that engaging consumers early and engaging them with our messaging helps improve the chances of them choosing Anthem as their health plan,” says spokesperson Darrel Ng.

As a part of that plan, SoloHealth added a new voice to its machines in October offering help with understanding the Affordable Care Act.

“If you would like to learn more about the upcoming changes to the health care system and how they affect you, select the continue button at the bottom of the screen,” he says.

A drawing of a doctor with a stethoscope around his neck flashes when he adds: “We can have an experienced professional reach out to help you find the plan that meets your specific needs.”

But the friendly voice doesn’t make clear that the “experienced professional” that will follow up is not a doctor or SoloHealth rep, but an insurance broker. That is explained after the person enters their name and email.

Privacy advocates say this is misleading.

“Consumers have every reason to be shocked this is happening,” says Pam Dixon, executive director of the nonprofit World Privacy Forum based in San Diego.

She says most consumers don't understand that their information is being sold. There is a two-page health privacy disclosure, but it can only be viewed by clicking a blue button at the bottom of the screen. Whether customers read it or not, they agree to all the terms when they hit a separate green button. Dixon says that’s not good enough.

“The fact that they’re not being told in a clear, conspicuous and prominent manner is problematic,” she says.

The company says it is reviewing the customer experience of machines. It also made another recent change. Until a couple weeks ago, the company's comprehensive privacy policy that governs what the company can do with the data it collects wasn't on the machine. There was a web address provided, but there’s no internet connection at the kiosk, so there was no way to actually read it. At first, SoloHealth said it was too cumbersome to scroll through on the small kiosk screen. But then, in mid-December, the company added the full policy to its machines – it said, to improve transparency.

“We work with retail partners, our attorneys, and our corporate sponsors to make sure that we’re totally buttoned up,” says Foster, CEO. “We have a number of very large companies that have looked at this and are very comfortable with where we are.”

But some consumers aren’t very comfortable. Stacey Winn has been using the kiosk at her local supermarket for the last six months to track her blood pressure. She doesn't remember ever seeing a privacy policy, even when she visited late last month. What she did notice for the first time were ads for a health insurance plan. Now she feels uneasy about her blood pressure records, weight, age, and ethnicity details being stored in the company’s database.

“I wonder now what they’re doing with that information when I hadn’t really wondered that before,” she says. “There’s a saying that if a service is offered for free then you’re actually the product that’s being sold, and I think that this is turning into an example of that.”

by April Dembosky