After finding a small but desirable property in the village of Les Praz, a prime residential neighborhood serving the French ski resort of Chamonix, Renaud Chevallier had to make a decision: renovate or rebuild? Mr. Chevallier, who studied architecture in Paris and New York, decided to keep elements of the building's original structure, allowing him to present the project to planning boards as a remodel rather than a teardown. Jeremy Wilson for The Wall Street Journal …

Chamonix, Mr. Chevallier's hometown, is located in the shadow of Mont Blanc, the Alps' highest peak. It was the site of the first Winter Olympics in 1924 and has remained a major winter sports mecca thanks to its legendary ski runs. Getty Images …

Shown is the home before the renovation process. Mr. Chevallier bought the lot, which measures about one-tenth of an acre, in 2010 forabout $473,000. Reconstruction took nearly two years—including eight months of locked horns with local authorities over his changes. The cost of reconstruction was about$593,000. Chevallier Architectes …

The radical refurbishment turned the original two-story building, containing ground-floor storage space and a small second-story apartment, into a four-level, high-tech contemporary chalet, with four bedrooms, three bathrooms, geothermal heating and LED light fixtures. Mr. Chevallier—a principal in Chevallier Architectes, the family firm—now specializes in high-end residential properties in this corner of the French Alps. Jeremy Wilson for The Wall Street Journal …

Open-plan layouts dominate the house, from the ground-floor kitchen, shown, and living areas to the sprawling, top-floor master bedroom, where even the bathroom components are spread around a light-filled, loft-like space. Jeremy Wilson for The Wall Street Journal …

The kitchen has one wall covered with faux alligator hide tinted a dark shade of purple. 'I wanted to have some kind of color,' says Mr. Chavallier. Jeremy Wilson for The Wall Street Journal …

Ground-floor interiors echo the kitchen's black-and-white color scheme. The kitchen includes a bar covered with rough-cut granite. 'The goal of using this material,' he says, 'is to remember that we are in the mountains.' Jeremy Wilson for The Wall Street Journal …

In addition to his geothermal-powered underfloor heating, Mr. Chevallier has triple-glazed north-facing windows but only double-glazed south-facing ones, to harness the sun's heat. The house is so well insulated that when he uses his new fireplace—a cylindrical, black-and-white wood-burning unit—he likes to open the windows to keep from getting too hot. Jeremy Wilson for The Wall Street Journal …

The top-floor master bedroom is shown. The room's sets of trapezoidal windows required custom-made blinds. Jeremy Wilson for The Wall Street Journal …

The master bedroom incorporates a bathroom with a free-standing tub. Mirrored windows allow Mr. Chevallier to see out but prevent his neighbors from seeing in. Jeremy Wilson for The Wall Street Journal …

In the guest bedrooms, Mr. Chevallier uses strips of resin material in different colors and textures as de facto headboards. He has reserved a whole floor of the house for guest bedrooms. New chalets in the region typically include a number of extra bedrooms, he says, allowing for a full house of guests during ski season. Jeremy Wilson for The Wall Street Journal …

His house is covered in horizontal wooden panels. He varied the facade with a rust-colored Cor-Ten steel box on the second floor—a cosmetic addition that transforms the previous entrance to the original structure's small apartment. On the lower right, is an enclosed unheated utility area where he stores skis in winter and bikes in summer. Jeremy Wilson for The Wall Street Journal …

The architect, shown, says he didn't set out to build himself a luxury residence, but to create a showroom for his architectural talents and a 'bachelor pad' to host visiting friends and family during Chamonix's long ski season. 'This is exactly the house I wanted,' he says. 'I'm free.' Jeremy Wilson for The Wall Street Journal …