But BCBS Georgia President Morgan Kendrick addressed these issues head-on Thursday.

Parent company Anthem announced earlier this month it was the victim of a massive data breach from a sophisticated cyberattack that could affect 80 million current and past customers. That would be almost 3 million in Georgia, said Glenn Allen, a spokesman for Georgia Insurance Commissioner Ralph Hudgens. Kendrick said he could not provide specific numbers but said there is no sign anyone has actually suffered from the attacks. He added that the company was “very aggressive and very transparent and very quick” to announce it and offer two years of credit protection to those who might be affected, which includes himself.

“I don’t like it,” Kendrick said in a phone interview. “I’m affected as a consumer as well, my family. But at the same point in time, it’s unfortunately a part of the world we’re living in.”

In fact, dealing with the FBI as they investigate this breach has opened his eyes to the serious and pervasive nature of cyberattacks on businesses now.

“Really, they describe two types of companies: those that have been hacked and those that don’t know they’ve been hacked,” Kendrick said. “This was a very well-orchestrated, well-financed operation.”

The company is also still trying to amend contracts and rates with physicians that has riled many of them and led the Medical Association of Georgia to complain to Hudgens’ office last year. The commissioner required the company to immediately rescind those proposed amendments and submit new ones, which it has done and are being reviewed.

What perturbed physicians was the contract amendment appeared to require physician practices to get approval from the company to make major changes, such as adding new partners, or risk being dropped from their network, said Dr. Phillip Kennedy, president of Primary Care Association, which represents 90 primary care physicians in the Augusta and Statesboro areas. It also appeared to require them to give up certain rights to appeal, he said. Worse, the company’s sample new rates appeared to increase in some areas but a reading of the actual proposed rates showed to be a decrease, Kennedy said.

“So the sample was just a lie, it was just made up,” he said. Even after being verbally promised an increase, the actual reading of the codes showed a decrease, Kennedy said.

Kendrick strongly denied that the sample was misleading, saying it was an “exact” copy of the proposed new codes and blamed part of the problem on “misinformation.” Some payments for certain services were going to increase and others would decrease “but in aggregate the increase was a 2 percent increase in what we were paying people,” he said.

The company was going to increase some payments for things related to preventive services, for instance, but as it simplified from three contracts to one those increases “didn’t go in,” Kendrick said. “So, unfortunately, we didn’t raise the rates like we had intended to because our intent by this was to move to a simpler contract.” Still, he said, 70 percent of the physicians would have been paid more under the new rates, he said.

As for the language changes, the new proposed contracts “were not materially different at all,” Kendrick said. “There might be some wording differences and things of that nature. And I think that’s where the communication of those facts could have been better.”

The physician group MAG has still not seen the new contracts, but the company has formed a physician advisory group to work with them and that could be seen as a positive step, said Executive Director and CEO Donald Palmisano Jr. But physicians still have concerns over how the company handled the new contracts, he said.

“I think we are too early to tell if some of those bad blood issues have been resolved,” Palmisano said.

It is also too soon to tell how Blue Cross did in its second year in the Marketplace but early indicators show it is likely to meet its projections and top what it did last year, in part because of an overall 11 percent reduction in rates over the previous year, Kendrick said.

“I do expect it to be more than last year simply because our price point was more competitive,” he said. “We went into year one and learned a lot. I feel good about it. I really do.”