Topics: From the Wires, News

SAN FRANCISCO (AP) — The 9th U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals is set to hear arguments Monday on gay marriage cases from Hawaii, Idaho and Nevada.

Gay couples in Nevada seek to overturn a lower court ruling upholding the state’s same-sex marriage ban. Idaho’s governor is appealing a lower court decision striking down that state’s marriage ban.

Meanwhile, gay marriage foes in Hawaii are arguing to keep the legal case in that state alive in hopes that the U.S. Supreme Court someday will rule against gay marriage. The state legalized gay marriage last year.

A look at some of the couples who are plaintiffs in the lawsuits:

IDAHO:

In Idaho, four same-sex couples sued to overturn the state’s ban and to compel Idaho to recognize marriages performed in other states.

The couples, all women, argue they are denied rights and subject to different tax rules than are applied to families of married couples.

Two couples in the lawsuit were legally married in other states: Sue Latta and Traci Ehlers, married in 2008 in California, and Lori and Sharene Watsen, married in 2011 in New York.

Both couples have children but Idaho does not recognize either marriage, which compelled Lori Watsen to obtain power of attorney to legally consent to medical treatment for her son.

The two other couples named in the lawsuit are seeking to wed in Idaho. Shelia Robertson and Andrea Altmayer were denied marriage licenses in Boise. So were Amber Beirle and Rachael Robertson.

The couples were planning on marrying when Idaho’s gay marriage ban was originally lifted by a federal district court in May. But before they could tie the knot, the court’s ruling was put on hold pending a 9th Circuit ruling.

NEVADA:

Eight couples have sued in Nevada seeking similar outcomes as those sought in Idaho.

Beverly Sevcik, 76, and Mary Baranovich, 78, of Carson City, have been together almost 43 years, and raised three children in Seattle before moving to Nevada in 2003. The retired bookkeepers have four grandchildren.

Antioco Carrillo, 47, and Theodore “Theo” Small, 46, live in Las Vegas. They’ve been a couple since 2006. Carrillo heads a nonprofit HIV/AIDS advocacy group. Small is a teacher.

Karen Goody, 53, and Karen Vibe, 40, live in Reno and have been engaged since December 2005. Goody is a medical supply sales agent. Vibe teaches music and is a Reno Philharmonic Orchestra percussionist.

Fletcher Whitwell, 39, and Greg Flamer, 42, live in Las Vegas with their 3-year-old daughter and 7-month-old son. Whitwell and Flamer have been together for more than 16 years.