JOSEPH A. GARCIA/THE STAR Ron Golden, vice president of community investment at United Way of Ventura County, serves as moderator for the 2013 Ventura County Real Estate & Economic Outlook Conference at the Hyatt Westlake Hyatt on Thursday.

SHARE JOSEPH A. GARCIA/THE STAR Sandy Mazur, a division president at Spherion, gave her talk on how social media affects all aspects of a business at the 2013 Ventura County Real Estate & Economic Outlook Conference at the Hyatt Westlake Plaza on Thursday. JOSEPH A. GARCIA/THE STAR Chris Meissner (left), owner Meissner Filtration Products, chats with Eric Chen, client manager for Bank of America and Craig Kaihara (cq), owner of AMS Craig LLC., at the 2013 Ventura County Real Estate & Economic Outlook Conference at the Hyatt Westlake Plaza on Thursday, JOSEPH A. GARCIA/THE STAR Guests attending the 2013 Ventura County Real Estate & Economic Outlook Conference, at the Hyatt Westlake Plaza on Thursday, listen to the different guest speakers.

By Stephanie Hoops

Ventura County's economy began returning to normal this year and will continue improving in 2014 with stronger job creation, lower unemployment, more consumer spending and new housing.

That was the forecast Mark Schniepp, director of the California Economic Forecast, delivered Thursday during the 2013 Ventura County Real Estate & Economic Outlook Conference at the Hyatt Westlake Plaza in Thousand Oaks.

Schniepp sees few dark clouds on the horizon now that the 2013 tax increases have been absorbed and negotiations over the debt ceiling have not impacted growth. Health care reform remains a question, but Schniepp said California's economic momentum won't be slowing down.

"As the world economy improves, and as investment in the U.S. picks up once again, California will have a disproportionate share of that improvement," he said.

In Ventura County, job growth has improved significantly as company departures and layoffs have subsided. In Southern California, Ventura County is now second only to Orange County as the fastest growing labor market.

During the next 18 months, Conejo Valley firms are expected to hire for technology positions. Currently, many area companies are struggling to find skilled applicants for positions.

"Education is not enough anymore," Schniepp said. "Career plan development will be necessary."

With regard to commercial real estate, local vacancies are extraordinarily high in the office sector and Schniepp said it's abnormal. In the second quarter of 2013, nearly 25 percent of total space was available for sale or lease, in part because the finance sector is still not strong.

"This year's rate of building is one of the lowest ever in the business sector," Schniepp said.

On the housing front, Schniepp foresees a 6 percent rise in home sales in 2014, which will only be limited by the amount of resale inventory available.

Sales prices will continue to rise until they peak in 2016, but that upward momentum will be slower than it was this year, he said. "There is still pent-up demand for housing, especially among trade-up buyers."

That demand will induce the building of more inventory.

"New housing is not being built," Schniepp said. "It's up a little bit but it's still very, very low."

Neither Schniepp nor the other economist who spoke at the conference ? Wells Fargo Managing Director and Senior Economist Mark Vitner ? discussed the type of housing that younger people will be demanding. Both said the state and nation need more housing, but weren't specific about the type of housing needed.

That issue was explored last week at the Ventura County Housing Conference, where speakers were unanimous in their opinion that young people are no longer interested in McMansions but want to live in smaller and denser properties.

Vitner is confident more single-family housing will be built in the U.S. over the next five years, but doesn't foresee a normal rate of residential construction returning until around 2016-2018.

"The inventory of new homes available for sale in the U.S. is the lowest it's ever been," he said.

Social media was also a topic explored at Thursday's conference. Employers are discovering they have to harness social media if they want to attract and retain high-caliber employees, said Spherion Staffing Services Division President Sandy Mazur.

"Finding good people and keeping them is an expensive proposition," she said.

Spherion has studied social media trends for 15 years and reports that more than half of businesses do not have a social media strategy. That can be a costly mistake as potential employees today are aware of reputations, according to Mazur.

"They're taking great interest in what other people say about your company," she said. "People they know, and people they will never meet."