Groton - Superintendent Michael Graner on Thursday outlined a proposed education budget of $77.6 million for the coming fiscal year, a 3 percent increase over current year's spending.



The draft budget, which may still be adjusted before public hearing, includes an additional elementary classroom teacher, two more math specialists so each elementary school has one and three clinical social workers to work in each of Groton's three programs for students with severe behavior problems.



The budget, presented to the Groton Board of Education, would also reach out to gifted students. It includes a $2,700 stipend and $900 in supplies for each elementary school to provide enrichment activities after school.



The activities would be open to all students but would be structured, with one focusing on science, math and technology, one on the arts and one on physical fitness. Groton has not had a gifted and talented program in about 10 years, school board members said.



The district has seen a substantial increase in tuition payments for students choosing to attend magnet programs elsewhere. The budget for magnet school tuition would increase about $358,000, or 45.6 percent under Graner's proposal. Graner said he intends to compete.



"If we had 50 children coming to our middle school, that would offset what we're losing and we're going to pursue that, definitely," he said.



But Groton is also coping with students as young as 5 and 6 years old who have experienced severe trauma and cannot function in a traditional classroom, Graner said. The district's three programs for students with severe behavior programs are staffed with a paraprofessional for each student and a behavior specialist, but it's not enough, Assistant Superintendent Susan Austin said. The students need clinical support, she said.



Denise A. Doolittle, director of pupil personnel services, said hiring three social workers would keep the students in the district. Otherwise, students might require private clinical programs which Groton would have to pay for, administrators said.



The spending plan also proposes a different approach to dividing money for school supplies. Instead of splitting instructional supplies evenly, money would be given to schools based on a formula of $150 per student. Each school would then decide how much they want to spend on items such as art supplies, workbooks and other items, and turn it into the district, so that teachers know how much is available for what.



Last year, parents at one school complained that they had no money for crayons and glue sticks, and had to come up with it themselves.



The budget also includes money to purchase a new truck and plow. This year, one truck rotted, a second had its drive shaft fall out and a third lost its plow, so town crews had to step in during the blizzard.



d.straszheim@theday.com



Twitter: @DStraszheim