Supreme Court Justice Antonin Scalia, who died Saturday, was known for his sharp tongue and piercing pen, qualities that underscored his adeptness at delivering a splashy dissent.

From the court's decisions on gay marriage to Obamacare to immigration, Scalia, who was known for his wit, challenged them all with pizazz. This is the 79-year-old who likes his constitution "dead, dead, dead," after all. Here are five of his most colorful—and acerbic—dissents.

See also: Obama will have a hard time replacing Antonin Scalia, to put it mildly

Obamacare: King v. Burwell

In June 2015, the Supreme Court ruled 6-3 to keep Obamacare intact. With his signature literary flair, Scalia shaped a dissent that satisfied both Harry Potter fans and conservatives alike.

The Court’s next bit of interpretive jiggery-pokery involves other parts of the Act that purportedly presuppose the availability of tax credits on both federal and state Exchanges. It is curious that the Court is willing to subordinate the express words of the section that grants tax credits to the mere implications of other provisions with only tangential connections to tax credits. One would think that interpretation would work the other way around.

And then he added a cherry on top with another colorful term for rubbish:

Qualified individuals receive favored treatment on Exchanges, although customers who are not qualified individuals may also shop there. The Court claims that the Act must equate federal and state establishment of Exchanges when it defines a qualified individual as someone who (among other things) lives in the "State that established the Exchange". Otherwise, the Court says, there would be no qualified individuals on federal Exchanges, contradicting (for example) the provision requiring every Exchange to take the "‘interests of qualified individuals’" into account when selecting health plans. Pure applesauce.

Gay marriage: Obergefell v. Hodges

Carlos McKnight of Washington, waves a flag in support of gay marriage outside of the Supreme Court in Washington, Friday June 26, 2015. Image: Jacquelyn Martin/Associated Press

After the court decided in support of gay marriage, 5-4, in the landmark Obergefell v. Hodges, Scalia used a footnote to deliver quite the diss pointed squarely at Justice Anthony Kennedy's majority opinion's opening lines.

If, even as the price to be paid for a fifth vote, I ever joined an opinion for the Court that began: "The Constitution promises liberty to all within its reach, a liberty that includes certain specific rights that all persons, within a lawful realm, to define and express their identity," I would hide my head in a bag. The Supreme Court of the United States has descended from the disciplined reasoning of John Marshall and Joseph Story to the mystical aphorisms of the fortune cookie.

Arizona immigration: Arizona, et al., v. United States

Tanya Hernandez, 4, demonstrates at a pro-immigration rally with others with the Coalition for Humane Immigration Rights, Tuesday June 26, 2012 at City Hall in Los Angeles. The group was reacting to Monday's Supreme Court decision to overturn three parts of the Arizona law but uphold a section that requires police to check the status of people who might appear to be in the U.S. illegally. Image: Nick Ut/Associated Press

In June 2012, the Supreme Court ruled 5-3 to invalidate three provisions of an Arizona immigration law known as S.B. 1070. Scalia's dissent was described as "blistering" and at one point he went so far as to say that states would have never joined the Union if they could conceive of such a Supreme Court decision back in the day.

Through ratification of the fundamental charter that the Convention produced, the States ceded much of their sovereignty to the Federal Government. But much of it remained jealously guarded—as reflected in the innumerable proposals that never left Independence Hall. Now, imagine a provision—perhaps inserted right after Art. I, §8, cl. 4, the Naturalization Clause—which included among the enumerated powers of Congress “To establish Limitations upon Immigration that will be exclusive and that will be enforced only to the extent the President deems appropriate.” The delegates to the Grand Convention would have rushed to the exits.

Indiana nudity laws: Barnes v. Glen Theatre, Inc.

In June 1991, the Supreme Court ruled 5-4 that states have the right to ban public nudity and doing so does not violate the freedom of expression. Scalia imagined quite a sight in the Indianapolis Hoosier Dome in his opinion as he reasoned "that moral opposition to nudity supplies a rational basis for its prohibition."

Perhaps the dissenters believe that "offense to others" ought to be the only reason for restricting nudity in public places generally, but there is no basis for thinking that our society has ever shared that Thoreauvian "you-may-do-what-you-like-so-long-as-it-does-not-injure-someone-else" beau ideal - much less for thinking that it was written into the Constitution. The purpose of Indiana's nudity law would be violated, I think, if 60,000 fully consenting adults crowded into the Hoosierdome to display their genitals to one another, even if there were not an offended innocent in the crowd.

Upholding the right to abortion: Planned Parenthood of Southeastern Pennsylvania v. Casey

People protest outside of Planned Parenthood on Wednesday, Sept. 23, 2015, in Jackson, Mich. Image: Nick Gonzales/Jackson Citizen Patriot via A/Associated Press

In June 1992, the Supreme Court upheld Roe v. Wade, 5-4, and with it the right to abortion. In his dissent opinion, Scalia commented on the "abortion umpiring business."

At the same time, Roe created a vast new class of abortion consumers and abortion proponents by eliminating the moral opprobrium that had attached to the act. ("If the Constitution guarantees abortion, how can it be bad?"—not an accurate line of thought, but a natural one.) Many favor all of those developments, and it is not for me to say that they are wrong. But to portray Roe as the statesmanlike "settlement" of a divisive issue, a jurisprudential Peace of Westphalia that is worth preserving, is nothing less than Orwellian. Roe fanned into life an issue that has inflamed our national politics in general, and has obscured with its smoke the selection of Justices to this Court in particular, ever since. And by keeping us in the abortion umpiring business, it is the perpetuation of that disruption, rather than of any pax Roeana, that the Court's new majority decrees.

Partial birth abortions: Stenberg v. Carhart

In this 2000 case, the Supreme Court built off its decisions in Casey and Roe and struck down, 5-4, a Nebraska law criminalizing partial birth abortions. Scalia was forceful in his dissent, decrying: "Case closed."

It is a value judgment, dependent upon how much one respects (or believes society ought to respect) the life of a partially delivered fetus, and how much one respects (or believes society ought to respect) the freedom of the woman who gave it life to kill it. Evidently, the five Justices in today's majority value the former less, or the latter more, (or both), than the four of us in dissent. Case closed.

Additional reporting by Katie Dupere.

Have something to add to this story? Share it in the comments.