The Julie Ruin

Music Hall of Williamsburg

66 N. Sixth St. Brooklyn

(718) 486-5400

Friday

ENLARGE The Julie Ruin with Kathleen Hanna Getty Images

Kathleen Hanna spent her 20s as a firebrand fronting '90s riot grrrl punk band Bikini Kill, touring with the likes of Nirvana and recording with another tough lady rocker, Joan Jett. In the aughts, Hanna wedded her sneer to danceable beats with her next act, Le Tigre. And after a yearslong mortal struggle with Lyme disease, Ms. Hanna finally returned to music this year with her new band, the Julie Ruin, which splits the difference between her previous two projects. It has the fierce rock chops of her first band wedding with the infectious new wave bounce of the latter.

Sensation

Barclays Center

620 Atlantic Ave., Brooklyn

(212) 359-6387

Saturday

Electronic music's surging popularity stateside the past few years is no doubt wedded to the visual spectacle that accompanies numerous EDM acts. Sensation, which began as a tribute to a deceased Amsterdam party promoter before turning into a roving global dance party, recently celebrated its 100th show in Las Vegas. Featuring a ludicrous array of visuals (from fountains to massive LCD projections to Cirque du Soleil-styled aerial acrobatics), Sensation returns to NYC with its "Ocean of White" dance party, featuring Nic Fanciulli, Sunnery James & Ryan Marciano, Fedde le Grand and MC Gee. Wear white.

Drake

Barclays Center

620 Atlantic Ave., Brooklyn

(212) 359-6387

Monday

ENLARGE Drake will be at the Barclays Center. Getty Images

Canadian teen actor Aubrey Graham started releasing rap mixtapes in 2006 (going by his middle name Drake) before he broke out in a big way in 2009 with his debut "Take Care." Drake has proved himself a global force in hip-hop with each subsequent release, one that undercuts the form's inherent braggadocio with a tangible sense of malaise. That sense of isolation and disquiet pervades Drake's latest "Nothing Was the Same," where even a song namechecking Wu-Tang Clan can turn melancholic with its rippling minor keys and sparse production. But that hasn't kept Drake from overtaking the radio waves and being the King of Hip-Hop, though he might know well the adage: "It is lonely at the top."

Willis Earl Beal

Knitting Factory

361 Metropolitan Ave., Brooklyn (347) 529-6696

Monday

ENLARGE Willis Earl Beal Getty Images

While he began to show up on music radars in Chicago, troubadour Willis Earl Beal was itinerant, at times homeless, posting up peculiar fliers looking for new friends and nice ladies to date. Now signed to XL, Mr. Beal has stabilized ever so slightly with his 2011 debut album "Acousmatic Sorcery" and this year's follow-up "Nobody Knows." He claims to be that "nobody," even cloaking himself in a black cape and mask onstage to that effect. At times, he prefers the gnarled, growled blues of Tom Waits but on his latest album, he also reveals himself to be equally at home amid guttural southern soul belters like Clarence Carter and Wilson Pickett.

Kurt Vile

Terminal 5

610 W. 56th St. (212) 582-6600

Friday

ENLARGE Kurt Vile will perform with former Sonic Youth guitarist Lee Ranaldo and the Dust and Beach Fossils. Getty Images

Philadelphia rocker Kurt Vile began his career amid that city's freak-folk circles, crafting his fingerpicking skills before he signed on with notable indie label Matador for 2009's "Childish Prodigy." There he added more alt-rock fuzz to his sound that brought to mind early 90s acts like Sonic Youth and Dinosaur Jr. On 2010's "Smoke Ring for My Halo" and this year's excellent "Wakin on a Pretty Daze," Mr. Vile perfected that balance while also embodying a type of laid-back sensibility that brings to mind classic rock icons like Tom Petty and J.J. Cale. With former Sonic Youth guitarist Lee Ranaldo and the Dust and Beach Fossils.