We are living in a world that has turned judging others into an art form. On the whole, as a nation, we still judge skin color and perceived sexual orientation. Judging a person as ‘liberal’ or ‘conservative’ has been elevated to an actual putdown – rather than an American institution of political freedom. We judge people who make a decision to live in the city or those who choose to live in the suburbs.



It seems that we are actively looking for new excuses to judge others. And, today, the continued judgment of those with visible tattoos serves as yet another reminder that we are quick to make judgments based on outwardly signs, rather than the content of a person’s character.



The acceptability of tattoos in mainstream America continues to be controversial. I wrote about this topic last November when there was criticism of Colin Kaepernick’s tattoo-covered arms when he was named starting QB for the San Francisco 49ers. Sportswriter David Whitley of Sporting News wrote, “The NFL quarterback is the ultimate position of influence and responsibility. He is the CEO of a high-profile organization, and you don’t want your CEO to look like he just got paroled.”



The generation that is now the Establishment grew up with a definite stereotypical image of those who had tattoos. However, the group with tattoos today represents such a diverse segment of society that there really is no longer a stereotype – but the judgment continues.



No one can, or should, rob anyone of their freedom to have an opinion about tattoos, but anyone who still passes initial judgment on those with tattoos might want to stop and challenge their judgment. Since I have a few tattoos and work in the media, Angela Hill asked me to be on her show today on WWL Radio to talk about tattoos and mainstream America. During the show a caller said that if he goes to any restaurant and a waiter or waitress comes to his table to wait on him – he will immediately ask for another waiter or waitress and if a tattoo-free person is not available he will leave the establishment. While this man has a right to his feelings, I am wondering why he would be so offended if a waiter or waitress had tattoos. Is it cleanliness? Tattoos don’t reflect personal hygiene.



So, it must come down to style. Would the same man refuse to be served by a person with a haircut he doesn’t like or by a wait staff member who was overweight? My question is – what does a tattoo, a haircut or weight have to do with the ability to professionally wait on a customer? Nothing!



I suggest that the judgment of a waiter or waitress or anyone with tattoos is part of the bigger issue of some people trying to tell other people how to lead their lives. There is a growing sense that if “I disapprove” of the way you lead your life then I must pass judgment to make my statement. This tendency is also seen regularly on the city streets. A pedestrian walks when he or she isn’t supposed to walk or a car pulls out – but both the pedestrian and the car are completely clear of obstructing a motorist or even causing the motorist to change lanes or slow down.



And yet, quite often, the motorist feels the need to blare an angry horn at the alleged offender, even though they weren’t actually affected in any way.



And so it is with many of the controversial debates we have in America today. It’s a ‘stand your ground’ mentality.



There are those who will go out of their way to be critical of someone with tattoos - not because they are actually affected by the tattoos – but it is their way of ‘standing their ground’ on what they think is right. The same can be said of many who are critical of same-sex marriage. Those who are, in no way, actually affected by what happens in the privacy of someone’s home are ‘standing their ground’ and condemning based only on what they think is right.

I am a ‘hostile witness to the Baby Boomer Generation’ because I grew up with a generation that promoted equality and being non-judgmental and now I see much of that generation failing to recognize equality while practicing the art of judging others – on style rather than character.



It has been discussed on “The Scoot Show” that the idea of getting a tattoo for a young person may be a subconscious way of searching for something that will be permanent as they live in today’s ever-changing world.

The New Orleans Police Department is working on implementing new regulations for tattoos. The new rules apply to all new recruits – no tattoos below the elbow, below the knee or above the neck. The Army is also proposing similar regulations with all new recruits. The question is not whether a government agency or a business has the right to make regulations about tattoos – the question is - why is there judgment of those with tattoos since we can honestly say that tattoos do not reflect a person’s character?



If tattoos are indeed a reflection of one’s character, then the question should not be “do you have any visible tattoos” – the question should be “do you have any tattoos?”



There is also a subtle, but growing sense of losing influence. The Baby Boomers have been a self-centered generation and because of the percentage of the population they have accounted for, they have demanded, and gotten, attention. And continue to get attention in many ways. Maybe this is the case with every generation that becomes the Establishment – if we didn’t do it then it’s not good!



For those in today’s Establishment who will argue that these young people will regret their tattoos – only time will tell - but understand that every generation defines the era they occupy.



CEO’s, doctors and maybe even presidents may one day have visible tattoos and they will not be judged because tattoos will be something that is an accepted part of their generation.





Tags :

People :





Back To Blog