When a baby is born addicted to drugs, their tiny body often suffers seizures and they cry uncontrollably.

These infants often suffer lasting health problems, and state hospitals are reporting an increasing number of newborns who tested positive for drugs or alcohol at birth, according to the Oklahoma Department of Human Services.

The agency listed 375 such newborn babies in the 12-months ending June 30, the latest data available. Of those, 42 babies were showing symptoms of withdrawal, which can include seizures, excessive crying, fever, sweating and vomiting.

Last year, DHS reported 322 newborns who tested positive for drugs or alcohol. The new data indicates a 16.5 percent increase.

Sheree Powell, a DHS spokeswoman, cautioned reading too much into the data. This is just the second year the data has been collected and reported, and it doesn’t necessarily reflect an increase in babies born exposed to drugs or alcohol, she said.

“There could be an increase in the number of substance exposed newborns. Or, there could be an increase in the reporting of it,” Powell said. “We don’t have enough baseline data to know what to attribute it to.”

The data is approximate because mothers and newborns aren’t routinely tested. Instead, hospital staff look for certain circumstances such as an expectant mother arriving at a hospital far from home with no explanation, no prenatal care, premature birth or labor, placental abruption (when the placenta detaches from the uterus), self-reported or physical signs of drug abuse or a positive drug test during pregnancy.

The most reliable way to test a newborn for drugs is through a sample of its meconium, the stool passed soon after birth. Exposure to drugs up to five months before can be detected in meconium.

Of the 375 drug-exposed newborns in the report, DHS substantiated abuse or neglect in 187 cases. In 68 of the cases, the agency recommended removing the child from the home due to drug use.

Hospitals report

While DHS is required by state law to compile the data on newborns exposed to drugs or alcohol, it is dependent on hospitals to report.

Major, urban hospitals routinely report the prevalence of positive drug tests in newborns, but rural hospitals still lag in reporting, said Dub Turner, program administrator for the Oklahoma Bureau of Narcotics and Dangerous Drugs, which works with DHS to reduce the impact of drug-related crimes on children.

As part of the agencies’ partnership, DHS workers now have access to the state’s online Prescription Monitoring Program, which DHS uses to determine if a caregiver’s use of prescription drugs is excessive. The database compiles patients’ prescription information into one place.

Prescription drug abuse is a growing problem. Among the newborns in the DHS report, 96 babies — or 21.6 percent — tested positive for prescription medications, nearly double the number in the 2013 report. The Department of Human Services notes that a positive test for prescription drugs is only considered abuse or neglect if the mother doesn’t have a prescription for that medication and she wasn’t given the drugs at the hospital.

‘People can recover’

Care providers should view an expectant mother’s drug addiction as a brain issue, not a moral issue, said Janet Cizek, president of the Oklahoma Substance Abuse Service Alliance.

“People can recover. They can certainly have babies born with no drugs in their system and learn to be adequate parents. It’s heartwarming because you can save two lives and not just one,” she said.

Though any residential drug treatment center should be equipped to provide services to a pregnant woman, there are only six in the state that allow women to bring children while they are undergoing treatment, according to the state Department of Mental Health and Substance Abuse Services.

A waiting list of 1,500 exists for residential treatment in Oklahoma, but pregnant women are a top priority, the agency said.