Insight

Tara O'Neill

Executive Summary

Aware of the unsustainability of rising health care spending, policymakers have sought to implement myriad policies and programs aimed at reducing such spending growth. One such attempt is the Independent Payment Advisory Board (IPAB) authorized under the Affordable Care Act (ACA). However, IPAB’s statute limits its ability to achieve long-term success. For example, requiring all savings to be achieved in a single year will likely cause disruptive changes to the Medicare program. The restrictions imposed on IPAB leave it little authority to make changes except to Medicare Advantage (MA) and Part D—the only parts of Medicare that necessarily must work to improve care and reduce costs because of their competitive nature—or to provider reimbursement rates, which will likely restrict access to care. IPAB is not likely to be successful in sustainably reducing health care costs without having harmful effects on Medicare beneficiaries.

Background

IPAB was established by the ACA in an effort to “reduce the per capita rate of growth in Medicare spending”—but not to actually reduce Medicare expenditures. The Board has not yet been established, but if and when it is, it would consist of 15 members—3 chosen exclusively by the president and the other 12 chosen in consultation with the majority and minority leaders of both the House and Senate; all ultimately must be confirmed by the Senate (unless the president makes recess appointments). In the event that the IPAB is required to act but is not appointed, does not have a quorum, or fails to submit a proposal by its deadline, the Secretary of Health and Human Services (HHS) is vested with all the powers the IPAB would otherwise have and must then submit a proposal of his or her own. In either case, the Secretary is to automatically implement the Board’s (or in its absence, the Secretary’s own) proposals unless Congress passes, and the president signs, legislation to block such proposals. Thus, the “Advisory Board” has much more authority than a typical “advisory” panel – and perhaps even more authority than Congress itself, since its actions are not subject to presidential veto. In addition, the ACA specifies that “there shall be no administrative or judicial review” of IPAB decisions.

Scope of Authority

While the law does not prescribe specific actions for the Board to take, it does set parameters for what the proposals may and may not contain, and who and what the proposals may impact. Further, IPAB is specifically instructed to primarily consider proposals which would extend the solvency of the Medicare program. IPAB’s proposals are supposed to improve health care delivery and outcomes; protect and improve beneficiaries’ access to necessary and evidentially-supported services and products; and focus on areas of excess cost growth. IPAB is also instructed to consider the impact any changes in provider payments may have on beneficiaries; providers already scheduled to receive a payment reduction through another provision of the ACA cannot be targeted.[1]

IPAB may not recommend proposals that would “ration care, raise revenues, increase Medicare beneficiary premiums … [or] cost-sharing, or otherwise restrict benefits, or modify eligibility criteria.”[2] Of course, it is unclear how these restrictions could be enforced, because the prohibition on judicial review means that they cannot be challenged in the courts, and the prohibition on administrative review means they cannot be challenged through any executive branch proceedings either.

If these restrictions are followed, there are few areas left for IPAB to change, and as such these few areas will be likely targets. Of particular concern is IPAB’s authority, and the statute’s explicit imperative, to consider reductions to MA or Part D payments, including MA performance bonuses and by denying high bids or removing them from the calculation of national averages for purposes of determining the benchmark for Part D plans. MA and Part D are the parts of the Medicare program which we should be bolstering, not undermining. They provide choice, benefits, and care coordination that the traditional fee-for-service programs (Parts A and B) do not. Reducing performance bonuses would be counterproductive to efforts across the health care industry to improve the quality of care. Denying or removing high bids from the calculation of the Part D benchmark weakens the competitive nature of the program which has made it so successful and could restrict plan choice to only those plans with limited coverage and benefits. Furthermore, Part D is the only component of Medicare to consistently spend below forecasts.[3]

Another likely option for IPAB is provider and supplier reimbursement cuts, though as mentioned, the targets for such a provision are limited. One of the few options unambiguously open to the IPAB is to cut payments for physician (as opposed to hospital) services. Consequences of such action would include stifled medical innovation—meaning fewer treatment options and slower medical advancement—and reduced access to care as providers and suppliers stop accepting Medicare. In addition, cutting physician payments could serve as a “back-door” way to actually cut benefits, by cutting reimbursements for certain disfavored services to levels so low that providers cannot afford to provide them. Further explanation of these consequences can be found here.

Potential Savings

The limitations and requirements written in the statute authorizing IPAB will make it difficult for the Board to achieve worthwhile, sustained savings without violating its statutory restrictions. Besides limiting how savings may be achieved, the statute also requires that specified savings be achieved in a single year, each year IPAB is triggered. This is not conducive to implementing effective, structural long-term changes. Further, IPAB is instructed to propose changes that will save the least amount necessary to bring per capita expenditures back in line with targets.

In order to calculate the savings that need to be achieved (or not) each year, the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid (CMS) Chief Actuary must determine whether the projected per capita Medicare expenditures will exceed a pre-specified target. If the Chief Actuary determines that the per capita growth rate will exceed the target growth rate for any “determination year,” then IPAB must act; otherwise, IPAB action is not triggered. The Chief Actuary must establish an “applicable savings target” for the “implementation year” which is based on projected Medicare expenditures in the “proposal year” and the “applicable percent”. The “applicable percent” for each year is the lesser of either the projected excess (as a percentage of total Medicare expenditures in the implementation year) or the percent set by statute which gradually increases from 0.5 percent in implementation year 2015 to 1.5 percent in 2018 and beyond. IPAB’s proposal(s) must achieve savings (in one year) equal to, but not greater than, the applicable savings target.

Over the 2015-2024 period, given current projections of Medicare expenditures, the maximum savings that could be achieved through IPAB proposals (based on the applicable percent for each year) is $123 billion, or 1.37 percent of the $9 trillion that will be spent on Medicare over the next decade.[4] To put in perspective, this would be a savings of $1,895 per beneficiary over ten years, or an average of less than $200 per beneficiary each year. However, given that the 2015 Medicare Trustees’ Report predicts expenditures will exceed the target in only four of the next ten years, the total savings over the next decade would be reduced to $60.7 billion, or an average of $89 per beneficiary per year.

Results in Other Countries

Other countries have created similar programs or organizations to assist with reining in rising health care costs. The result has largely been the rationing of care either through actual restrictions or limits on services available, price controls, limited funding, or a combination of these things. Consequently, there have been increased mortality rates from illnesses affected by such services.[5] Cancer survival rates in the United Kingdom are below the European average for breast cancer, colon cancer, lung cancer, prostate cancer, and ovarian cancer, for which researchers suggest “delayed diagnosis, underuse of successful treatment, and unequal access to treatment” may be to blame.[6] The National Health Service in Britain has been accused of, at the recommendation of the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE), denying or limiting the use of expensive cancer treatments.[7] NICE uses the value of a quality-adjusted life year (which they place at roughly £20,000 to £30,000) to determine whether or not a treatment or service is cost-effective given a patient’s age and the state of health and quality of life the patient will have should the treatment or service be provided, and makes recommendations to the NHS regarding which services to cover and for whom.[8] For example, the NHS restricts cervical screenings to patients between the ages of 25-64, with few exceptions.[9] Individuals who have not fully adhered to their doctor’s advice or taken their prescribed medication will be denied a heart transplant.[10]

In Canada, which has a publicly-funded single payer health care system, the Canadian Agency for Drugs and Technologies in Health assesses the cost-effectiveness of drugs and medical technologies to make recommendations regarding the use of such treatments. The Patented Medicine Prices Review Board regulates the prices of new medicines as they enter the market and monitors prices over time with the authority to intervene if price increases are deemed to be “excessive”.[11] Global budgets—which provide a fixed lump sum to a health care provider for all services furnished to all patients in a given time period (typically, a year)—were implemented as a tool to constrain growing health care expenditures. However, the use of this funding mechanism has limited the amount of services provided, resulting in long wait times and reduced access to care, and limits the incentive to increase efficiency in care provision.[12] The supply of physicians and nurses has also been restricted. Capped budgets and a limited supply of care providers has coincided with limited availability of medical resonance imaging (MRI) machines and the wait time for patients needing an MRI in Ontario was found to be seven months at one point[13]; there are nearly 3 times fewer MRI exams performed per 1,000 people in Canada than in the U.S., yet nearly 1.5 times as many scans performed per MRI machine in Canada, suggesting a significant lack of resources.[14]

Conclusion

Given the scale of the budget shortfalls, and the share for which Medicare is responsible, IPAB will not be able to substantially reduce Medicare spending within its statutory restrictions. Substantial, meaningful reforms are needed in Medicare, and successful reforms are most likely to come from expansion of and innovation within Medicare Advantage and Part D, rather than across-the-board cuts in payment rates. The competitive nature of these programs requires providers to improve care and reduce costs in order to gain customers (beneficiaries). An organization with such limited scope which almost necessitates it propose spending reductions to the very programs most likely to produce long-term savings will certainly have negative consequences for both health and budgets.