AbbVie Inc. (NYSE:ABBV), Amgen Inc. (NASDAQ:AMGN), and Johnson & Johnson (NYSE:JNJ) are among the drug-makers who are most exposed to the risk of sales decline for their top revenue-generating drugs, amid the impending launch of biosimilar drugs.

Biologic drugs are made from living cells, which increases their cost of manufacturing and consequently, their price. Biosimilar drugs, on the other hand, are an imitation version of the biologic drugs which are also developed from living cells; however, the living cells used to develop the biosimilar versions are different from the cells used to develop the original biologic drugs, due to which the biosimilars are only similar to the biologics, instead of being their exact copies.

Since biosimilar drugs are not exact copies, analysts expect them to be priced lower than the original reference drugs. However, according to a report published by Market Research Reports, Inc., the cost of developing a biosimilar ranges between $100-200 million. Moreover, the whole process of development of biosimilars takes about 8-10 years, which clearly shows why the price differential between a biosimilar and a biologic cannot be compared with the price differential between a branded drug and its generic version.

Biologics are among the most expensive drugs in the world, and most of them cost more than $100,000 per patient annually. The biologic drug market is expected to be worth as much as $190 billion. Half of the world’s top 20 revenue-generating drugs are biologics, and by 2018, revenue from biologic drugs would represent almost 50% of the revenue generated by the top 100 drugs.

However, the revenue from biologics can be expected to decline from 2018 onward. Several biologics have already lost their patents, and many others are due to reach their patent expiration between now and 2020, which creates a massive opportunity for biotechs to develop and commercialize biosimilar drugs which offer cost benefits of as much as 20-30%.

Biosimilars have been available in the European markets since 2006. The EU market currently has 19 biosimilar drugs approved for use. The US, on the other hand, did not have any regulatory framework to approve biosimilars until 2010, when the government passed the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act. Under the law, the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has been given the authority to approve biosimilar drugs after thorough examination. Comprehensive assessment criteria are required to test biosimilars before approval, since biosimilars are not exact copies of original drugs.

March 6 marks the approval of the first ever biosimilar drug in the US, as the FDA approved Zarxio, a biosimilar version of Amgen’s Neupogen, developed by Novartis AG (ADR) (NYSE:NVS). After an aggressive battle between the two drug-makers, which involved multiple lawsuits, Novartis has been given the green signal to launch the biosimilar in the market next month.

Companies Most Exposed To Biosimilar Threat

AbbVie, Amgen, and Johnson & Johnson are among the drug-makers who would be most impacted after the launch of biosimilars in the US market. AbbVie’s blockbuster drug Humira is set to lose its patents in 2018. Amgen’s top revenue-generating drug, Enbrel, will lose its patents this year. Other top revenue-generating drugs from Amgen’s portfolio whose biosimilar drugs are being developed include Neulasta and Neupogen. Johnson & Johnson’s top revenue-generating biologic, Remicade, is also due to lose its patent protection in 2018.

Novartis seems to be best-positioned to take advantage of the opportunity, as its generic drug unit, Sandoz, is developing almost all of the biosimilar drugs that are expected to be the most successful in the US.

According to a survey from Bloomberg Intelligence, biosimilar drugs for Humira are expected to be the most successful in the US, followed by biosimilars for Neupogen, Remicade, Nuelasta, epoetin-alfa, and Enbrel.

Assuming that the survey statistics prove to be true, AbbVie, Amgen, and Johnson & Johnson may be in for a rough time as their top drugs face threat from biosimilars.

Sales revenue from biosimilar drugs in the US alone is forecasted to reach around $1.9 billion this year. According to the report, sales revenue from biosimilar drugs is projected to increase to $11 billion by 2020. The revenue figures are expected to grow rapidly, as more biologics reach patent expiration and more biotech firms develop and roll out biosimilar drugs for blockbuster biologics.