Registered nurse Doug Pince checks in equipment used in eye surgery at the ambulatory surgery center at the Marshfield Clinic on April 29. (Photo: Dan Young/Gannett Wisconsin Medi)

Kristi Lenzo always wanted to be a nurse.

As she completes her clinical training in the neonatal intensive care unit at Ministry Saint Joseph's Hospital in Marshfield, the Mid-State Technical College student looks forward to the day when she is finished with her education and is officially a certified nurse.

"I really enjoy working in the NICU ... just taking care of people and helping others," Lenzo said.

As a soon-to-be nurse, she is entering a field with abundant job opportunities, experts say.

"There's growth in all areas of health care," said Tony Violetta, director of human resources at BayCare Clinic in Green Bay. "Within our industry, there's going to be growth within really every aspect."

Violetta said a small part of the growth can be attributed to the Affordable Care Act, which has given more people access to health care. More is due to the state's aging population.

SALARY INFORMATION: How much can you make in the health care field? Read down to the bottom to find out!

He said the state has seen shortages in medical specialists, mostly in primary care. With that comes in a shift in the industry in which people are relying more on mid-level providers like physician assistants and nurse practitioners.

Violetta said the growth that results from increased use of health care services is not only in jobs directly related to patient care. Positions are also available in information technology, finance, marketing and communications.

The aging population means not only more are using health care in Wisconsin, but more people leaving the field.

SPECIAL SECTION: State of Opportunity

"A lot of the nurses and other clinical staff are reaching that retirement age and so, we're having to re-infuse our workforce with other professionals," said Ben Shuda, recruitment manager for Ministry Health Care, a Catholic health care system with locations throughout Wisconsin. "We hire for a variety of positions from degreed positions, which require many years of training, licensure and certification to other support departments such as IT or human resources, which may require some amount of education and some amount of certification."

Surgical technician Sue Erickson does online training in a surgical suite at the ambulatory surgery center at the Marshfield Clinic on April 29. Continuing education is important to keep medical personnel skills current. (Photo: Dan Young/Gannett Wisconsin Medi)

Demographic drivers

The Wisconsin Hospital Association's 2014 Workforce Report said that alongside the state's aging population is a decline in the birth rate.

"As the workforce ages into retirement with little growth seen in upcoming generations, there is a serious risk that Wisconsin will not have enough workers to meet employer demand," the report states.

READ MORE: Learn about health care in Wisconsin

The biggest need in hospitals, according to the report, is for registered nurses. More than half of all reported vacancies were for registered nurses.

Steve Rush, vice president of workforce and clinical practice for the Wisconsin Hospital Association, said nurses are the largest number of health care workers in hospitals.

"Even though the vacancy rate is hovering just under 5 percent, it still accounts for a lot of open positions, because there's a lot of nurses hired," Rush said.

Training for jobs takes place largely in educational programs, experts say. Many jobs that pertain to patient care require academic degrees that vary in the length of the program.

"There's just about every level," Violetta said.

Specialists can require more than a decade of training, while some nursing degrees take about two years to earn. Many programs also require training in the field.

Students in the nursing program at Mid-State Technical College, for example, complete clinical work at agencies near the college to get experience in providing care.

"Students are out on the job working," said Sue Akey, a nursing instructor at MSTC. "That, by itself, just kind of is a capstone, (it) pulls it together. Many of these people are offered jobs or at least encouraged to interview at the same time."

The program prepares students to work in a variety of settings, including hospitals, clinics, insurance companies and jails.

With the numerous positions in the health care field comes a wide range of financial prospects for the different occupations.

"Compensation pretty much follows how much time is invested in the education, to a large degree," Violetta said.

He said pay for specialists can vary, however, because physicians are in a better position to dictate their work schedule.

"A doctor who prefers work-life balance over really getting out there and working 70 hours weeks, even if they're in the same specialty, there's going to be a pretty big disparity," he said.

Science education

Experts recommend people who are considering health care careers get a good education in science as preparation for the field.

"Get a good, strong core science education that is applicable to different degrees," Rush, a former nursing educator, said. "You need those strong, core science courses."

Students can also get experience by volunteering or job shadowing in a health care facility.

"Anything that you can do to expose yourself to the health care industry, whether that be taking health care classes in high school or even volunteering at a hospital or clinic would definitely be helpful to get you jump started into that type of career," Shuda said.

Wisconsin health care jobs, median salaries

Pharmacist — $126,200

Family and general practitioners — $180,290

Physician assistant — $91,880

Physical therapist — $79,320

Registered nurse — $63,260

Nurse practitioner — $89,440

Medical and clinical laboratory technologist — $56,860

Dental hygienist — $64,180

Radiologic technologist — $53,520

Emergency medical technician and paramedic — $28,220

Pharmacy technician — $28,750

Medical records and health information technician — $35,760

Home health aide — $22,270

Nursing assistant — $25,770

Dental assistant — $35,380

Medical assistant — $31,350

Source: Department of Workforce Development

Sari Lesk writes for Stevens Point Journal Media. Reach her at 715-345-2257 or slesk@gannett.com. On Twitter @Sari_Lesk.

Buy Photo Registered nurse Joanne Anderson goes through her post-surgical routine in a surgical suite at the ambulatory surgery center at the Marshfield Clinic in Marshfield last week. (Photo: Dan Young/Gannett Wisconsin Media)

Read or Share this story: http://spjour.nl/1zzlLMf