In 2015, a municipal clinic on Ninth Avenue in Chelsea that provided critical healthcare in the field of sexually-transmitted diseases was closed for a multi-year renovation. At the time of its closure, city health officials were referring former patients to a clinic on West 100th Street, according to a report filed by Andy Humm for Gay City News. Alternatively, some were suggesting that former Ninth Avenue clinic patients seek treatment at the diminished Mount Sinai clinic.

For a time, the closure of the Ninth Avenue clinic triggered a stronger reaction amongst grassroots HIV/AIDS activists, like members with the group ACT UP New York, than from the established nonprofit groups, like Housing Works and GMHC. Demonstrations, and even one town hall meeting, were organised by activists in response to the clinic’s closure. ACT UP New York sponsored one protest outside City Hall to increase political pressure on the de Blasio administration to replace the Ninth Avenue clinic.

But Mayor de Blasio’s controlling and deliberate management style does not respond well to grassroots movements. As has been seen time and again, the de Blasio City Hall only engages community groups that have hired expensive lobbyists, which act to subvert public discourse to backroom negotiations that better suit the political sensitivities of elected officials. This was seen when NY-CLASS was forced to first hire The Advance Group, then Henry Sheinkopf, before finally adding Mercury Public Affairs to its campaign to end the horse carriage industry, moves that nonetheless ended in legislative disaster for the animal rights group. Another community group, Pledge 2 Protect, had been opposing a waste transfer station in the Upper East Side. It took, in part, hiring The Advance Group to reach a settlement with City Hall. The police reform coalition, Communities United for Police Reform, had, for a time, worked with the unregistered lobbying firm BerlinRosen, before tensions made that relationship untenable.

The de Blasio doctrine of affirming the role of money in politics relegates the public’s business to private negations between lobbying firms and his staff. It also reinforces everything that was bad about how a lobbying firm and real estate developers were able to, without a public process and without any public input, negotiate for the payment of $16 million to lift the deed restrictions on Rivington House, paving the way for a speculative real estate sale and proposed luxury condominium conversion of the former AIDS nursing home.

Although advances in medicine as long ago as in 1997 had foretold that people with AIDS would be living longer, possibly without as many people with AIDS needing the intensive complex care of nursing homes, people with AIDS and people at higher risk of contracting HIV/AIDS are still expected to require complex healthcare and supportive housing, if not for end of life care for people with AIDS, then for people for whom supportive housing could improve their health and wellbeing, and for gradations in-between. According to information published by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, for example, homeless youth are at risk for HIV infection if they “exchange sex for drugs, money, or shelter.”

In New York City, there is an unmet need for providing shelter to homeless LGBT youth, for example. Despite this unmet need, the large, establishment nonprofit groups did not advocate for the repurposing of Rivington House for supportive housing for either people with AIDS or for homeless LGBT youth, a wasted opportunity for sure, but an example of the kind of abdication that can be seen in their silent response to the loss of Rivington House.

Speaking generally to Progress Queens about large nonprofit HIV/AIDS groups before news of the controversy surrounding Rivington House became public, one activist from the LGBT community observed that many groups now provide housing or supportive housing, and these large nonprofits either own or are seeking to purchase real estate for housing or shelter programs. Even though nonprofit groups are meant to operate without a profit motive, they are still vulnerable to pressures of competition for scarce government funding or grants. The unfortunate consequence of competition may reveal a second, mixed motivation to explain the large HIV/AIDS advocacy groups’ silence.

Since grassroots groups, like ACT UP New York, cannot afford to pay five or six figures to a lobbying group, the big and bulky independent healthcare facilities that developers covet for luxury housing conversion will continue to be susceptible to closure, speculation, and flipping, in large part because the larger, establishment AIDS advocacy groups have been silent about the disappearance of complex, long-term AIDS healthcare facilities.

If the investigations reportedly launched to probe what happened at Rivington House lead to any reforms, then that process may act to create some marginal protections for healthcare facilities going forward, which is more than can be expected from the silent treatment by establishment groups, like Housing Works and GMHC.