El Paso County deputies continue to investigate an assault in which an 11-year-old boy is believed to have stabbed his mother multiple times Friday and then either jumped or fell from the third-story window of their townhome onto the driveway.

The mother and boy were treated at different Colorado Springs hospitals for serious injuries before being transported by helicopter to hospitals in the Denver area, El Paso County sheriff’s spokeswoman Jacqueline Kirby said Saturday.

Their identities have not been released.

“The fact that they were transported to Denver does not look very good,” Kirby said Saturday. “I’m just very, very sad. I have no idea what would lead to this.”

An emergency call was made from the townhome just outside Monument, about 20 miles north of Colorado Springs, at 5:25 p.m. Friday, she said.

When deputies arrived, they found the mother and the boy on the driveway.

“The mother had been stabbed multiple times,” Kirby said. “It appears the boy either fell or jumped out of the third-story window. It was at least 30 feet.”

It’s unclear whether the mother or a neighbor called 911. After the boy stabbed his mother, she searched for the boy and found him on the pavement, Kirby said.

“There is evidence that he is the one who did the stabbing, but we will have to wait until the investigation is completed until we know for sure what happened,” Kirby said.

The woman and her son were the only two people who lived in the townhome and the only two inside when the incident took place.

The circumstances leading to the stabbing are still under investigation. Deputies canvassed the neighborhood looking for witnesses who may know something pertinent to the assault.

“I think this is a little more challenging to investigate given the condition of the mother and boy,” Kirby said.

The El Paso County district attorney’s office will determine what charges to file and whether the boy will be tried as an adult, Kirby said.

“It’s all based on the circumstances,” she said.

Kirk Mitchell: 303-954-1206, denverpost.com/coldcases or twitter.com/kirkmitchell