This holiday season, Black Lives Matter activists ramped up their protest efforts in order to increase visibility for their cause. Their tactics have primarily veered toward being “disruptive”:

Notably, people on social media have predominately not been in lockstep with the protesters on these actions:

While I’m inclined to side with the activists, I can also understand some of the points made by these Twitter posters. If protesters are attempting to build a movement, it doesn’t necessarily help to alienate low and middle class citizens by impeding their commutes. There are other ways to protest without intentionally adding a hassle to the lives of potential allies.

However, as we’ve seen this week from Cleveland’s failure to indict the officer who murdered Tamir Rice, it’s not as if increased awareness has remedied the situation. While more people are certainly talking about this issue, the racist system itself isn’t budging. Authorities are continuing to impede justice and give cops a pass. The fact that officials let police off while knowing full well that public outcry would ensue just goes to show how institutionalized the disregard for black lives is.

Disruptive demonstrations have become more commonplace because the typical marches haven’t brought about change. If the government treats the deaths of black citizens like “business as usual,” then expect protesters to disturb “business as usual” for everyone else. It’s their way of illustrating the unrest they’ve been experiencing for far too long.

Talk to activists who have participated in a freeway shutdown and I doubt you’d get an apology. If you’re pissed off at spending an extra hour in your car, just imagine how pissed off you’d be if you actively feared for your life from the same people being paid to “serve and protect” you. It’s not enough for American citizens to say, “But I’m not part of the problem!” This crisis requires more people to actively be part of the solution.

That’s not to say that it wouldn’t be worthwhile for Black Live Matters protesters to re-examine some of their tactics. Though blocking an airport to prevent travelers from visiting their families at the holidays is impactful, it probably isn’t likely to win over many new supporters or in any way discredit the police force that winds up looking like Christmas heroes when they arrest the protesters and clear the roadway.

However, if you’re one of the many people who have complained about a protest-caused traffic jam while failing to voice an opinion against the racist police state, then you’re definitely part of the problem. All that does is signal that you believe the inconveniences that the protesters are inflicting are somehow more outrageous than police killing black people without ramifications. And if that’s the case, then of course the activists aren’t going to mind disrupting people who are — at least implicitly — siding with their oppressors. White America has been able to comfortably ignore this racist epidemic, and it shouldn’t be allowed to be comfortable with it anymore.

Photo Credit: Tony Webster