JACKSON, Miss., Nov. 24, 2015 (GLOBE NEWSWIRE) -- Magnolia Health, a wholly owned subsidiary of Centene Corporation and leading Mississippi-based Coordinated Care Organization, has made key executive staff additions to position the company for future growth.



Aaron Sisk has been appointed chief operating officer, and will oversee all health plan operations for the company. He was previously vice president of operations, a position he held since joining the company in 2013. Michael Ruffin has been named vice president of network development and contracting for Magnolia Health.

“We are thrilled with Aaron’s increased role with Magnolia, and Michael adds exceptional health care finance and contracting expertise as we continue to expand in the rapidly changing health care industry,” said Dr. Jason B. Dees, president and CEO of Magnolia Health. “These two strong leaders will help ensure that Magnolia continues to deliver quality service to our members and providers in Mississippi.”

Prior to joining Magnolia, Sisk served as senior attorney for the Mississippi Department of Insurance and director of the department’s life and health actuarial division. In that role, he was intricately involved in monitoring market reforms associated with the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, and managing the department’s effort to implement a state-based health insurance marketplace for Mississippi.

In his role as COO for Magnolia, Sisk will also manage local sales, member and provider services for “Ambetter from Magnolia Health,” the company’s commercial health insurance product available exclusively on the health insurance marketplace in Mississippi.

Sisk received his Juris Doctor from the University of Mississippi School of Law, and is an active member of the Mississippi Bar Association. He earned a bachelor’s degree in sociology with a certificate in criminal justice from Mississippi State University.

Ruffin has deep roots in Mississippi, and previously served as corporate director of physician practices at Pioneer Health Services in Magee, Mississippi. In that role, he oversaw the organization’s physician practices and rural health clinics, comprised of some 50 clinics and 80 physicians across the region.

Prior to that, Ruffin worked with several large, multi-state public healthcare companies managing physician practices on the local and regional level. He has more than a decade of experience in healthcare systems, hospitals and clinics, where he was instrumental in restructuring provider contracts and relations and improving operations and financial productivity.

Ruffin received a bachelor’s degree in accounting and finance from Mississippi College.

About Magnolia Health

Magnolia Health is a long-term solution to help the state of Mississippi enhance care for Medicaid and Children’s Health Insurance Program (CHIP) recipients, while most effectively managing taxpayer dollars. A physician-driven, Mississippi-based Coordinated Care Organization (CCO), Magnolia is backed by its parent company, Centene Corporation (Centene). Centene has more than 30 years of experience in Medicaid, CHIP and other government-funded programs such as Supplemental Security Income (SSI) and long-term care. For more information about Magnolia, visit www.magnoliahealthplan.com.

Contact: Todd Smith 601.460.0705 615.202.7944 todd@deanesmithpartners.com