Melissa Joan Hart is in hot PR water. After first complaining that 9/11 wasn’t given sufficient media coverage to pay tribute to the anniversary, Melissa Joan then allegedly exploited the significance by publicizing her decision to “honor” the day with free shipping for products from her King Of Harts attire business, reported MSN.

The contradictions from the former Sabrina the Teenage Witch and Clarissa Explains It All star began when Melissa Joan said that given so much media attention shines on the Kardashian family, a single day should be devoted to covering 9/11.

On that same day, Hart publicized her business by saying her King Of Harts enterprise was offering free shipping for purchasers using the 911 code. The backlash was immediate, with Melissa Joan facing accusations that she had hyped her decision to honor the day in order to profit.

“I hope those that know what I stand for know that I never meant to have the attention turn to me today. I was merely venting,” tweeted Hart.

In addition, Melissa Joan shared her defense on Facebook.

“I want to apologize for yesterday’s free shipping post. It was meant to be my small way to give something back. I wanted to cover the shipping charges as a heartfelt gesture, not an exploit of 9/11. I see now how it was interpreted and viewed as being in bad taste. I apologize. It was a mistake.”

For Hart, however, her decision to express herself at length initially by criticizing the media’s coverage of 9/11 while at the same time publicizing her own clothing line has resulted in a virtual firestorm, reported the Wrap.

Melissa Joan, who also had starred in Melissa & Joey prior to its cancellation, tweeted about specific news outlets’ coverage.

“Extremely disappointed in @foxnews and @CNN for not having continual coverage of Sept11 memorial &names listed on the banner!!#neverforget,” declared Hart.

The actress also argued that it made a bad impression on her children.

“My children need to know that this day changed our lives in the U.S. and the world and without solid news coverage, I’m discouraged… If Kardashians can be covered 24/7 why can’t we have one day dedicated to a moment in history that changed our path? I don’t need to see tragedy, I need to see stories of healing &memory!”

But when it came to focusing only on her desire to remember and honor 9/11, Melissa Joan shifted her tone by including her King of Harts company in an Instagram post.

“Free Shipping in honor of the victims, families & first responders of 9/11. Use the promo code ‘911’ during your online checkout at KingofHarts.com.”

What do you think about Melissa Joan Hart’s comments on social media? Did she exploit 9/11 with her offer of free shipping? Post your comments below.

[Photo by Frazer Harrison / Getty Images]