Buoyed by the bipartisan repeal of Medicare's much-maligned payment formula for physicians – the so-called "Doc Fix" passed this spring – Rep. Kevin Brady, R-Texas, said Tuesday he's eager to move forward this fall on a new Medicare reform proposal.

Brady, House Ways and Means Health subcommittee chairman, gave the closing keynote address Tuesday at the U.S. News Hospital of Tomorrow conference in Washington, telling a room full of hospital executives that the latest proposal would simplify Medicare payments to hospitals and introduce value-based payment to post-acute care settings, such as nursing homes.

The physician-payment reform effort, which incorporated feedback from congress and health-care stakeholders – including members of hundreds of physician groups – represents a model for how to proceed. Healthcare committee members have already crafted a draft bill and are now incorporating feedback.

"We're working on version 2.0," Brady said.



The goal, he explained, is to save Medicare. The program's trustees say the program is likely to run out of money in 2030, depleted by aging baby boomers whose ranks are projected to swell the number of Medicare beneficiaries from 54 million today to more than 80 million in just over a decade. "Medicare turned 50 this year, but it won't see another 50th birthday without important changes, because the demographics don't work," Brady said in response to questions from U.S. News Editor and Chief Content Officer Brian Kelly.

Brady's push to reform the hospital payment system is the second of a trio of planned Medicare overhauls. The third, which he hopes to tackle next year, would be the most challenging of all. It involves giving seniors the option to choose Medicare plans that are more tailored to their needs. It would also involve combining Medicare's hospital and physician coverage, capping out-of-pocket spending and crafting a personalized Medicare option that most call "premium support."

Although the details remain to be worked out, the notion involves providing seniors with a fixed amount of money to enroll in a private health plan.



"If we start the discussion not based on how much money we can save but on how smart a design we could offer consumers for Medicare, I'm convinced we can do this," Brady said.

Brady echoed Sen. Bill Cassidy, R-La., who spoke earlier Tuesday, in his opposition to the Affordable Care Act. "I think it's the wrong solution," Brady said, adding that he would like to see any Republican who is elected to the White House quickly signal the willingness to repeal the bill, tackle Medicare reform and "fix the broken tax code, some of which plays into Medicare."

Barbara Jagels, chief quality officer of the Seattle Cancer Care Alliance, asked Brady whether, with open enrollment set to begin in the federal health insurance marketplace, congress could lower a critical barrier to cancer care – the narrow networks that many insurance plans employ to limit beneficiaries to certain hospitals and doctors with negotiated payment rates.

"We're the only National Cancer Institute-recognized cancer center West of the Rockies, and we can't avail ourselves of open enrollment because of narrow networks," Jagel said. "Is there a Congressional fix for this kind of problem?"

"We're seeing the same thing in the Houston region with M.D. Anderson [Cancer Center]," Brady said, noting that no one anticipates getting cancer and that people often opt for low premiums without recognizing that the lower the premium, the higher the out-of-pocket costs they will have to pay. People need "dramatically more information," he said, about the plan they're choosing "and the real-life choices they face."