More Video...

A fiery crash in northwest Wichita left one person dead and sent 3 others to the hospital. It happened just after noon on Sunday on Maize Road near 13th Street.

Witnesses say the driver of a Ford Mustang was speeding down Maize Road. One witness tells KAKE News it looked like the driver was trying to initiate a street race before the wreck.

"He comes hauling up the road by this blue sports car like a Nissan," says Aaron Harrod. "I look out of the truck I see the cars side by side."

Harrod says he was was stopped in traffic when he saw the driver of the Mustang speed off past the Nissan.

"Gets squirly and cuts clear across the intersection and collides with that Range Rover and that silver car and burst into flames."

The crash set two vehicles on fire sending smoke and flames well above the treeline.

"All the smoke was coming to our house and we were watching the whole thing and the little kids were all panicking as well," says witness Christina Aguirre.

The driver of the Mustang was pronounced dead when police and fire crews arrived. Three people from the other vehicles were taken to the hospital where one remains in serious condition.

Wichita Police tell KAKE News it's too early in the investigation to tell how fast the driver was going, but it was clearly a high rate of speed. The vehicle started to lose control hundreds of feet before the accident.

"We're trying to find the point where the vehicle started losing control so we want to start from the beginning and work up to the collision," says Wichita Police Sgt. Joseph Kennedy.

Witnesses say this accident is very sad, but also upsetting. A lot of lives were in danger on one of northwest Wichita's busiest streets.

"I've got family out there and if that would've happened to my family it wouldn't have been good," says Harrod. "My prayers are out to the families and the survivors."

The deceased victim is a man in his mid-thirties. Police have not released his name or any information about the other victims.

Police are searching for a light blue Nissan resembling a 350Z that may be involved. Anyone with information is asked to call Wichita police.