Unborn babies should not be put to death due to rapist father



CONTACT: Juda Myers juda@ <NOSPAM> freedommarchlifewins.org





freedommarchlifewins.org CALL: 1-800-997-LIFE [5433] or 281-451-8460



By Kevin Fobbs Babies should never receive a death sentence for the sin of their father who was a rapist. All babies deserve life. Choices4Life and its executive director, Juda Myers marched on May 6 to protect the tens of thousands of babies that have been murdered, due to the sins of their rapist father. The FREEDOM MARCH #LIFEWINS goal is to bring an end to the prejudice against the rape conceived.A half century ago on May 8, 1966, Mother's Day, Mississippi legislators enacted House Bill 562 which paved the way for the first U.S. legal abortion. The abortion law opened up the floodgates which allowed 19 additional states to permit the murder of unborn children. In 1973 the U.S. Supreme Court ruled on Roe V. Wade in 1973 to legalize abortion throughout the nation.By gathering in the state capitol to rally prolife supporters, Choices4Life is focusing attention on ending the exceptions that new pro-life legislation is allowing in laws to protect the unborn. These laws that allow for abortion exceptions for rape and incest are viewed by Myers as legalized genocide.Myers stressed, "Leaders are more concerned about passing laws now than they are about continually standing for what is right until there is a break through. Many have careers in "making laws" and if abortion were ever abolished abortionists wouldn't be the only ones losing their job."2011 marked a turning point for pro-life forces but not for those who support the protection of all unborn life. According to the New Republic , in 2011, "legislators in Oklahoma, Utah, Florida, Idaho, Indiana, Ohio, Virginia, North Carolina, and Iowa all adopted laws barring some insurance providers in the state from covering abortion procedures but excepted cases of rape or incest."The very next year, in 2012, legislators in North Carolina, Pennsylvania, Virginia banned abortion coverage in policies to be sold on Obamacare's health care exchanges. These same states made an exception in all cases involving incest and rape.This is a human tragedy that many people who claim to be prolife do not seem to understand or want to acknowledge is a serious life and death issue. A lot of the opposition to saving the life of an unborn baby that was conceived by rape originates from family members of the mom. According to Myers. "Many family members hate the child especially in the beginning. My own grandmother wanted me dead before I was born. But many times the child completely changes the heart of family members because few people look at a baby and feel anything but joy."Changing the hearts and minds of family members and society as a whole is a crucial mission for the leader of Choices4Life. Myers stated that many mothers as well as their children who they gave birth to from the rape, face some degree of psychological trauma that can negatively affect them as well their children. Myers has spent years working with rape survivors and their children. She mentioned, "Many want to end their lives for all the horrible things said about them. Young mothers are called whores and liars for loving and saving their rape conceived babies."Myers firmly believes that Choices4Life which she established in February 2011 to promote and restore honor and dignity to women and children of rape conception can make a difference to end rape conceived abortion exceptions. The time to end 50 years of legalized genocide is now.The American Christian Civil Rights Movement executive director Judi Lake supports Choices4Life and their continued progress. She supports, Juda Myers and her organization Choices4Life's and stated, "The May 6th FREEDOM MARCH #LIFEWINS event in Jackson, Mississippi provided a noble and necessary beacon of light that can dramatize a shameful condition which permits legal murder of the most precious and the most innocent."The time to end a half century of legalized genocide is now. Support Choices4Life and its battle to end the silence, because silence on the issue is betrayal.© Kevin Fobbs