Safe passage: Sydney fisherman at the blessing of the fleet at Sydney Fish Markets on Sunday. Photo: Kate Geraghty

Although neither pulls in the nets on the Francesca anymore, fishermen Sam Bagnita, 68, and his cousin Nicola de Salvo, 69, never miss the annual blessing of the fleet at the Sydney Fish Markets.

Mr de Salvo weeps with joy as the statue of Santa Maria di Porto Salvo, the saint of fishermen, is lowered to his wheelchair. Mr Bagnita, a third-generation fisherman who came to Sydney from the village of Bagnara in southern Italy in 1962, claps a trembling hand on his cousin's shoulder.

Mr Bagnita has Parkinson's disease. Mr de Salvo has motor neurone disease.

"I am lost for words," says Mr de Salvo's daughter Carmela while wiping tears from her eyes. "Dad wanted so much to come out here today."

Advertisement

The blessing of the fleet is a centuries-old tradition from Italy's fishing villages, where many of the Sydney fleet's fishermen were born. The Catholic ceremony is meant to ensure a safe and bountiful season.

At the Sydney Fish Markets, a crowd of fishermen, Sydney locals and curious tourists soak up the sunshine as they follow the statue of St Maria around the markets. A dozen strapping men carry the statue on their shoulders, pausing at each business as Father Christopher Slattery prays for the blessing and protection of its workers. Holy water is sprinkled as cheers go up among the fishermen.

The story behind the tradition tells of a ship caught in a ferocious storm off the coast of Bagnara. The ship was carrying a painting of the Madonna in its cargo. As monstrous waves slammed into the boat, the priest who was escorting the painting asked everyone on board to pray to the Madonna. The storm died down and the ship was saved. Santa Maria di Porto Salvo – St Mary of Safe Ports – has been venerated as the protector of seafarers and fishermen since.

Sydney fisherman Paul Bagnato says the event is a celebration of Italian-Australian history. "Out at sea, it's not always an easy journey," he says. "When a storm hits, you have to respect the sea and know the Madonna will guide you to safety."