Doug Enders, right, hugs Betty Jo Bell, center, after the unveiling of the "Honor Wall" on May 22. The wall features photos of The Hillcrest Senior Living Community residents who are veterans. ( Luke Whittaker / Loveland Reporter-Herald )

Vern Thompson wears his green Army uniform every Memorial Day, but for a special ceremony recently at The Hillcrest Senior Living Community in Loveland, his Purple Heart hung off the lapel.

His wife of 64 years, Marj Thompson, also lives at the Hillcrest and said last week that she can't remember seeing Vern ever wear the respected military honor before. He earned it after being shot in Anzio, Italy, during World War II, Marj said.

"The shrapnel is still in his shoulder," she said.

Another permanent reminder of his service, Vern's family has a photograph of the first lieutenant standing atop the massive railway gun known as Anzio Annie. The German-made weapon kept tens of thousands of Allied soldiers pinned to the Anzio beachhead in 1944.

In the 1970s, Vern and Marj traveled back to Italy, where they found the foxhole where Vern had lived for months during the battle.

"He knew it right away," Marj said.

Proud Vets

As executive director of the Hillcrest, where the residents' average age is 87, Jeanne Bruni has heard countless stories of courage and heroism from the Greatest Generation. If the veterans are unable to tell their own stories, the wives and children carry them on.

"Not only do we have proud vets, but we have proud wives and proud families," Bruni said. "We get to know all the stories."

Advertisement

Twenty of the 100 people currently residing at the Hillcrest are veterans of Korea or World War II. Every branch of the military is represented in that number — they were Navy pilots, Merchant Marines, infantry soldiers. One resident, John Buckland, was a captain in the Canadian Army who was assigned to work intelligence in the U.S. Pentagon.

As could be expected, every Memorial Day and Veterans Day are big events around the Hillcrest, but Bruni said they wanted year-round recognition of the residents' service.

Darrell Staley, middle, and others wave flags at The Hillcrest Senior Living Community of Loveland during a May 22 ceremony honoring residents who are veterans. (Luke Whittaker / Loveland Reporter-Herald)

In a ceremony May 22 attended by residents and their families, the Hillcrest unveiled the "Honor Wall." Side-by-side along the wall, framed photographs hang of the 20 veteran residents — present-day photographs and photos taken when they were in the service.

"We know that we owe you our lives and our freedom," Bruni told veterans during the ceremony. "We want you to know in a small way how much we appreciate you, how much we appreciate what you did for us."

The wives of veterans, many of whom live at the Hillcrest, were also honored during the ceremony.

Permanent Display

For Bill Stewart, an Army master sergeant who fought in France and Germany during World War II, the black-and-white photo alongside his current picture brought back memories.

"That picture was taken just before I went overseas in June 1942," he said. "I think it's really great. It's wonderful to see all of the pictures."

Harold Crusen, who fought in World War II and then went back to Korea with the Army, agreed.

"I was surprised that they took a before and after. It made quite a difference in the way I look," he said, laughing.

The wall, which also honors residents who have died, is meant to be a permanent way to honor the veterans, said Donna Hamernik, the Hillcrest activity director who spent months gathering the photos and information for the wall.

"We used to have a big picture on the wall ... it honors them more this way," she said.

Vern Thompson's daughter, Kelly Thompson-Frater, traveled from Wisconsin to see the wall unveiled.

"It makes me very proud," she said.

Buckland said he felt proud, too, to see his picture hanging on the wall, along with those of his friends.

"This was really a very big part of our lives," he said.

Contact Reporter-Herald Staff Writer Jessica Maher at 970-669-5050 or maherj@reporter-herald.com