Topics: Editor's Picks, Facebook, Hillary Clinton, Shades of Green, sustainability, Vegetarianism, Vegetarianism and veganism, Wal-Mart, Sustainability News

I’m from the South, so I know a little about evangelism.

When I was in eighth grade, a boy I liked asked me if I wanted to go on a hayride for Halloween. “I’d love to,” I said, even though I was allergic to hay.

“It’s sponsored by my church,” he said.

I didn’t care; I thought we might get to hold hands anyway, even if my eyes were swollen shut. The day came; I wore leggings and a dress from the Limited sale rack — too big for me, but they were clothes that made me feel grown-up. I don’t remember the first part of the afternoon, just that it was sunny, not quite cold, and that my best friend was there with another boy. We sat on hay bales while the boys compared their basketball shoes, and discussed the strangely competitive church basketball league with the swagger of barely pubescent boys whose universe was a small tobacco town. I admired them with the devotion of a pale-haired, barely pubescent girl whose universe was a small tobacco town.

Soon the youth minister — we’ll call him Steve — gathered the young people into a dim room in a farmhouse. We sat cross-legged on a harsh rug, half-reverent and overly aware of whom we were sitting next to. I was already starting to sniffle from the hay.

“I want you to close your eyes,” he said. Steve was skinny and his eyes brimmed with passion that made me uncomfortable. The rumor was that Steve wore a hairpiece — it was a curly hairpiece — and I was afraid of him, so I did exactly what I was told. He loomed over us. We bowed our heads.

“I want you to raise your hand if you’ve accepted Jesus Christ into your life.”

Now as much as I like doing as I’m told, I also like being honest, and I was working these gray and murky things out for myself, so I didn’t raise my hand. I was unsure, between camps.

Apparently I was the only one.

Steve waved the group out toward the hayride, but pointed to me. “Megan — is that your name?” he said. “Can you stay here with me?”

Gulp.

Lesson learned: If you choose the wrong moment to express your beliefs, or your lack of clear beliefs, you’re the one who has to sit on the bench next to the youth minister with the hairpiece while your friends go on a hayride. He calls your beloved, but apparently inferior, minister “Brother so and so.” And then he tells you that you’re headed down the wrong path, a dark and restless path, and because you’re in eighth grade and afraid of dark and restless paths and his curly hairpiece and his hand on your leg, you cry — and can’t stop crying until you get home to your mom. And then your boyfriend realizes that although you masquerade as a goody-two-shoes ballerina, you have a darker soul than he expected, and, although this is in fact true, you don’t want anyone to know it.

Cover blown.

Fast-forward 20 years and we’re nearly all armchair activists with fewer mysteries, our beliefs and passions often neatly aligned with Facebook likes, pages and categories. We have no shortage of platforms for our polemics and positions. And if you’re anything like me, you’re proud to identify with your ideological heroes and causes. If my friends know I like Wham!, Hillary Clinton and heritage chicken breeds, fine. If you’re anything like me, a small percentage of your social media feed provides anthropological insight into how the “enemy” thinks, and you read their posts with intrigue, knowing they probably dismiss your heartfelt think-posts with the same eye-roll. If you’re anything like me, you’re also prone to ill-timed bouts of righteousness.

Just the other week my friends showed me a picture of themselves standing arm-in-arm on an unnaturally green golf course, a picture someone had captioned “spending time in nature.”

“A golf course isn’t nature!” I spat, my vitriol catching them — and me — unaware. “Golf courses are saturated in biocides!”

I instantly knew I’d chosen a weird moment to take a stand, and worse than that, I’d taken a shrill and ineffective stand. I hadn’t changed anyone’s mind about pesticides, I’d simply offended people I care about — at no net gain.

I bump up against this decision point all the time. To speak up or stay quiet? Take, for example, the weddings I’ve been to where the language clearly implies a submissive marriage contract, subservient wifedom. I seethe and hyperventilate and dig my fingers into my husband’s leg, but I know it’s not the moment to climb the banquet table and quote “The Second Sex.” Or is it?

There’s the neighbor liberally spraying Monsanto Round-up products across his lawn. A friend going on about delicious foie gras, or another ordering unsustainably caught fish like cod at dinner. There’s the vocal climate change denier in the general store, gregariously holding forth on global warming as a hoax as he tops off his coffee.

Or my family, sitting at the dinner table. Someone has gotten takeout, a Styrofoam container of chicken wings, and orange-hued oil is collecting underneath the waxy-looking, non-organic, non-humanely sourced wings. And my two toddlers want to eat them. They look to me for permission. I grit my teeth and nod. Sure. Yes. OK.

They see delicious, steaming-hot chicken and I see cheap, abused bird carcass shot through with antibiotics, a dead bird sourced from a factory farm. I’m watching my beautiful children suck the last bits of greasy chicken off of bones and they love it. They L-O-V-E it. They’re blissed out and I’m picking restlessly at my salad, thinking about air pollution, bacteria and animal cruelty. I’m biting my tongue and everyone around me knows why.