Fiat Chrysler and UAW agreed to "explore innovative ways to improve quality," and will establish a health care co-op to focus on improving benefits and reducing costs

Buy Photo Dennis Williams, UAW president. The agreement he reached with Fiat Chrysler calls for raises for both veteran workers and those hired after 2007. (Photo: Regina H. Boone, Detroit Free Press)Buy Photo

UAW Dennis Williams pushed for a health care proposal that would pool his members across the Detroit Three automakers, possibly even salaried non-union people, to bargain for better rates from health insurers.

How much of his proposal made it into the tentative agreement with Fiat Chrysler Automobiles?

Based on the highlights that Williams and his fellow bargainers will share with local UAW leaders, not much changes in the near-term for members. Details were sparse.

The newer workers, those hired after 2007, pay deductibles and make co-insurance contributions. Their more experienced co-workers have not paid deductibles in the past and apparently that doesn't change.

But FCA and the UAW agreed to "explore innovative ways to improve quality," and will establish a health care co-op to focus on improving health care benefits, quality of care, reducing costs and eliminating waste. The highlights contained no specifics about deductibles, co-pays or restrictions on selection of doctors.

"Programs that may be implemented through the co-op may be educational or may create incentives to use particular providers or sites of care, prescription drugs, or other health care benefits in a way that does not diminish overall benefit levels or imporse additional costs or any other barriers to clinically-appropriate care.

"Members will always have an option to maintain current benefit levels by choosing to have care delivered with a network or at a center of excellence."

Under the Affordable Care Act, beginning in 2018, any individual health insurance plan costing more than $10,200 annually, or any family plan costing more than $27,500, will be subject to a 40% tax on the amount over those thresholds. Nearly all plans covering UAW-Detroit Three workers hired before 2007 cost more than those thresholds.

UAW members won't be the ones paying the tax. Health insurers will be assessed, or in the case of self-insured companies, it will fall to the employer. Even so, the assumption is that insurers will pass on the cost of the tax through higher premiums.

Contact Greg Gardner: (313) 222-8762 or ggardner@freepress.com. Follow him on Twitter @GregGardner12

Read or Share this story: http://on.freep.com/1KlqVNB