SIGN UP FOR OUR NEWSLETTER

On Saturday, Judge Jeanine Pirro, host of the Fox News Channel’s “Justice with Judge Jeanine” criticized President Obama’s comments at the National Prayer Breakfast, declaring “Barack Obama is comfortable with extremism.”

SIGN UP FOR OUR NEWSLETTER

“Barack Obama is comfortable with extremism…it’s part of what happens” she declared.

Pirro continued, addressing the president’s reference to the Crusades and Inquisition during the Prayer Breakfast, “with the Crusaders you so easily identify them as Christians, why is it so hard for you to identify today’s jihadi terrorists as Muslim?…That was then and this is now, the Koran is interpreted by some as demanding jihad, the taxing or killing of nonbelievers, and a worldwide caliphate, and, surprise, today’s terrorists are beheading, imposing that same [nonbeliever] tax, and in their march to create an even bigger Islamic state. Stop apologizing and stop pussyfooting around with this language dance. We get it. Not all Muslims are terrorists. It was Egypt, the country of 90% Muslim[s], that rose up against the jihadists, who were also Muslim…Mr. president, please identify what other violence is being committed against Americans in the name of any other religion, or, is it just coincidence?”

She concluded, “the overwhelming majority of Americans think it’s at least somewhat likely Islamic terrorists will launch an attack on US soil soon. But I believe you are so comfortable with extremism, that you’ve lost an understanding of the danger to Americans. You boast a security policy of strategic patience. What are you waiting for? While you wait, they keep winning, and Iran gets closer to nuclear enrichment, all the while you open your borders, reduce our military, and criticize Americans and

America at the UN and in Cairo. If nothing more, you’re consistent, extremism is just the part of life. But the danger, your nonchalant attitude puts our entire nation in jeopardy.”

Follow Ian Hanchett on Twitter @IanHanchett