Nearly three dozen Knoxvillians were in the crowd that descended on Nashville on the opening day of the state Legislature to show support for Insure Tennessee — even though Republican legislative leaders and the governor have said the health insurance program is dead.

"It was a successful day. We delivered the message that Insure Tennessee is still alive. We have not folded our tents, we have not slunk off over into the corner. There is energy and enthusiasm, and we're going to keep fighting," said retired TVA executive John Stewart, who was among those traveling by bus to the State Capitol on Tuesday.

Stewart said the rally, attended by hundreds, was a collaborative effort of the Tennessee Justice Center, the Tennessee Health Care Campaign and other statewide organizations. Former state Rep. Gloria Johnson was involved through Organizing For Action, with which she works.

Insure Tennessee was proposed by Gov. Bill Haslam last year as an alternative to expanding Medicaid provided in the federal Affordable Care Act, or Obamacare.

Under the plan, the federal government would pick up the cost of new, previously ineligible enrollees for the first three years. Some 280,000 low-income Tennesseans would benefit.

Two separate Senate committees killed the plan in special and regular sessions.

Stewart said he had it from an "authoritative source" that by focusing on some key people to have a change of heart, like House Speaker Beth Harwell, R-Nashville, that the program might pass.

He didn't want to name his source, but his son is state Rep. Mike Stewart of Nashville, Democratic House Caucus chairman.

"It would be a tougher job in the Senate," Stewart said.

State Sen. Becky Duncan Massey, R-Knoxville, who supported the program in a Senate Health Committee vote, said a "very" grassroots effort in the House is needed "to get momentum." She said she suspects there is a bill the program could be attached to if interest is there.

Her colleague, Sen. Richard Briggs, R-Knoxville, also an Insure Tennessee supporter, was a rally speaker.

Afterward, the group went inside the statehouse and lined hallways, many wearing their trademark purple T-shirts.

Johnson, a Democrat who was defeated by Republican Rep. Eddie Smith for re-election to represent the 13th District, was contacted for comment since she represents Organizing For Action. She replied by email she wasn't available because she was at the hospital with a family member.

"The rally was awesome by the way!" she said.