Q. Why are you running?

A. I am running for re-election because Congress needs leaders who are willing to make the tough choices, not the politically popular ones. Throughout my career as a public servant, I have proven I have the courage to fight for what is right, even if it hurts me politically. If I am re-elected, I will continue to provide this type of principled leadership in Congress, and continue to serve my constituents.

Q. Have the issues at the VA been properly addressed?

A. The VA reforms recently passed by Congress addressed some of the VA’s temporary and immediate problems, but they do not solve longer-term issues. In addition to the tragic deaths suffered by many of our veterans in Phoenix and across the country, likely as a direct result of their inability to access care, the reports that whistleblowers suffered retaliation from VA management further shows the distorted priorities inside the organization created to care for our heroes. Our veterans put their lives on the line to ensure we are able to live safely and freely here at home, expecting a government bureaucrat to treat them with the most basic level of respect is just not asking too much. I believe Congress must overhaul the entire organization if we are to expect accountability and results in the future. In addition, we must open up more choices for our veterans and allow them to seek the very best medical treatment outside government-run options if they choose.

Q. What kind of effect has the Affordable Care Act had on Arizonans?

A. Premium increases, cost increases and inferior care-per-dollar have all resulted in a negative impact for most Arizonans. Worse yet, I met and heard from hundreds of constituents who lost their health care, despite being promised they could keep it under the ACA. Unfortunately, the negative effects from the ACA are not over. An August report in the Arizona Republic showed 11-percent premium increases are expected after just the first year — and we should not be surprised by that number. Government has now stepped in, overstepped in my opinion, and dramatically reshaped a market, which is bound to cause distortions in both services and costs now and into the future.

Q. What are your thoughts on the recent ruling and impending hearing about gay marriage in Arizona? And do you support the state’s ban on it?

A. As a strong constitutionalist, I am, and always have been, a strong advocate for state’s rights. I strongly believe that anything that is not clearly dictated by our Constitution is left for the states to decide. This applies to all issues, from education to social. However, on the issue of gay marriage, I remain a staunch believer that marriage is between one man and one woman.

Q. What can Congress do to spur job growth in our area? What industries would you target?

A. I have met with several hundred business owners and job creators while serving in Congress, and I can say without a doubt the most common theme I hear from them is to get government out of the way. Whether it is higher taxes or over-regulation, Washington is very good at putting up obstacles to job growth. The last thing job creators need is perpetual anxiety over how the next law Congress is about to pass will affect them, or watch more new regulations pour out of the executive. The No. 1 way to spur business growth is to provide certainty, stability and a regulatory climate that concerns itself with enabling job creators to develop their own plans, not blocking them with red tape.