SHARE Rep. Blake Farenthold, Rep, U.S. Rep Dist 27 (incumbent)

By Matt Woolbright of the Caller-Times

U.S. Rep. Blake Farenthold, R-Corpus Christi, fresh off his stunning upset of incumbent Democratic Rep. Solomon Ortiz in 2010 had a lot to learn about Washington politics. He figured a new Congress could undo President Barack Obama's Affordable Care Act right away.

Farenthold and his fellow freshmen class of lawmakers, swept in on a conservative wave across the country, soon learned it wasn't that simple. It would take years of forming alliances to make lasting changes.

"You as an individual are not as powerful as you think," Farenthold said. "What you've got to do is work with people, make friends and build coalitions to get things done. Congress is a team sport."

Armed with that knowledge, Farenthold believes he began succeeding at the new top priority: play defense. He is seeking a fourth term and faces challenger Gregg Deeb in the primary Tuesday.

"For the most part, we've been successful at stopping the president from passing any more bad laws," Farenthold said. "Now I'm hoping to get a Republican president in office so we can go on the offense and undo some of the bad laws that got passed before I got there."

That would still start with the reason the Corpus Christi native ran for office to begin with — repealing the Affordable Care Act. Once that's done, Farenthold is hoping Congress' attention shifts south and border security is addressed.

The congressman wants to "change rules of engagement to allow the border patrol to do their job and actually deport people," he said.

Three more priorities include bolstering the fight against the Islamic State in Syria, or ISIS, making changes to the tax code and revising the nation's welfare system, Farenthold explained. He also wants to continue his efforts to improve transportation infrastructure in District 27, including building on the momentum from Interstate Highway 69 signs being posted in Robstown and improvements to the Port of Corpus Christi.

But aside from policy, Farenthold has another message he's been working to get out this campaign: that he's not just another face in Congress. It's that message he believes will prevent his seat from becoming a casualty of a national wave of voters angry with the federal government and insider politics.

"Not everybody in Congress is an idiot," Farenthold said. "I've developed the ability to fight for what is right without making enemies, and that's a skill you need as a congressman. You can disagree with somebody without being disagreeable about it."

Still, he's being cautious to not exaggerate what can be accomplished, like he said some radio personalities and "opponent's ads" have done.

"It's frustrating as hell that no matter what we do it either doesn't get 60 votes in the Senate or the president vetoes it," Farenthold said.

He's hoping that frustration will dissolve come November.

The 27th District serves the Coastal Bend, including Bastrop, Caldwell, Gonzales, Lavaca, Wharton, Matagorda, Jackson, Victoria, Calhoun, Refugio, Aransas, San Patricio and Nueces counties. Members of Congress earn a salary of $174,000 annually.

Twitter: @reportermatt

Blake Farenthold

Name: Blake Farenthold

Age: 54

Occupation: Member of Congress

Political experience: Current U.S. House of Representatives

What is your plan to help stimulate job growth in your district?

Farenthold: Right now, it's easier for someone who is not working to get affordable health benefits than it is for someone who has served and defended this country. We need to get rid of unnecessary regulations that are job killers, like the Affordable Care Act that I'm fighting to repeal. I will continue to fight to repeal the ACA, which has financially crippled the middle class, and will continue my support for small business owners.

What can you do to restore voter confidence in Washington's ability to resolve the nation's challenges?

Farenthold: Since taking office, the new Harbor Bridge has finally been approved and I-69 will now be expanded. Since I was elected, veteran homelessness has dropped by 33 percent. The House passed the Hire More Heroes Act, the Clay Hunt Act, Long-Term Care Veterans Choice Act and more. But there's still much to be done and I will continue this fight in D.C.

What distinguishes you from your opponent?

Farenthold: I'm a seventh-generation Texan. I stand on my record, which includes national security and protecting the border, protecting life, fighting against the current administration's attempt to disarm law-abiding Americans through unconstitutional attacks on the Second Amendment, reining in federal overreach with oppressive and costly regulations, pushing real health care reform and working with the VA to bring more health care choices to local vets.

What do you see as the three major issues you would tackle, if elected?

Farenthold: Securing our borders and protecting American's from threats like ISIS members posing as refugees. Assisting with the deepening and widening of the Port's Channel, completing the extension of the La Quinta Channel and building the new Harbor Bridge. I'm also committed to the completion of Interstate 69 and building an additional rail line in Portland. I will continue to advocate for our Veterans and seek to protect CCAD from cuts to their budget.