READ MORE More stories and a breakdown of the tiers of coverage at Special Section: Affordable Care Act More info: CoveredCA.com

Community clinics across the Inland Empire are scrambling to get ready for the nearly 300,000 newly insured patients who under the Affordable Care Act could potentially flood their offices in early 2014.

Enrollment for the historic program will begin Oct. 1.

“We believe community clinics and health centers will play a seminal role in the success of the Affordable Care Act nationwide,” said Carmela Castellano-Garcia, president and chief executive officer for the California Primary Care Association, which represents 900 not-for-profit community clinics and health centers statewide.

Among the big San Bernardino County expansions include the SAC Clinic in San Bernardino and Kids Come First Community Health Center in Ontario, which doubled its space by moving into a new facility last week.

In San Bernardino County, 30,000 people who have been covered on a special federally backed transition-to-health care-reform program that will, under the Affordable Care Act, be transferred into Medi-Cal coverage, said Dr. Brad Gilbert, chief executive officer of the Rancho Cucamonga-based Inland Empire Health Plan.

Another 90,000 low-income people will become eligible for Medi-Cal benefits that have been created by health care reform, said Gilbert, whose organization is one of the largest public not-for-profit health plans in California.

An estimated 150,000 residents will be eligible for group health insurance rates offered from a newly created insurance exchange established by the state of California, in accordance with health care reform guidelines. Many of those people will be eligible for subsidies to help pay the monthly premiums of those plans.

Covered California, the organization charged with creating this new insurance marketplace, estimates that about half of 5.3 million Californians needing individual insurance will be eligible for financial assistance with their premiums.

“The great unknown in all this is when those people will choose to buy health insurance. One possibility is that many will wait to apply for coverage until a major health problem surfaces,” Gilbert said, which will be bad for the financial health of the exchange.

“It would be kind of like people waiting to get fire insurance until their house begins to catch fire,” Gilbert said.

Advertisement

Gilbert said that estimates of how many of those 150,000 will sign up for a health plan offered through the exchange “jump all over the place. I wouldn’t want to even hazard a guess,” he said.

To get the word out about new benefits and the insurance exchange, Loma Linda University Health and the Community Clinic Association of San Bernardino County, have won a $990,000 grant to conduct outreach and education programs.

The first effort is set to start Tuesday at SAC Health Systems, 1455 East Third St., on the former Norton Air Force Base.

San Bernardino County’s Community Clinic Association, which incorporated in 2011, took a lead role in the grant proposal and is the main contractor for the grant, having hired seven employees to work full time on spreading information about the insurance exchange and other health care reform changes, said Matthew Keane, the clinic association’s chief executive officer.

The association staff will shelter the organization’s 13 members, from having to send staff to education seminars and shift their duties to health care reform information education, Keane said.

Of the San Bernardino County clinics, SAC Health Systems has navigated the most dramatic transformation to get ready, Keane said.

To qualify for certification as a Federally Qualified Health Center, which is where the Obama administration has been funneling money to support the Affordable Care Act, SAC Health Systems needed to disengage from the Loma Linda health system and incorporate as a separate entity, said Nancy Young, SAC’s chief executive officer.

As a result of that action, SAC obtained the funding to let it move, on July 1, the Family Medical Practice internship program over to its building, where residents and attending physicians can be tapped to provide care to the poor.

The SAC organization is planning to request architectural plans be drawn for a proposed 150,000-square-foot downtown campus, on Interstate 215 freeway frontage property west of San Manuel Stadium.

When it opens, which is expected in 2015, other primary care residency programs will move into it and eventually all Loma Linda University residency programs are expected to be folded into the new downtown campus, meaning that specialized medical services will be available to underserved residents as well, Young said.

San Bernardino-based Inland Behavioral and Health Services recently opened a new clinic in Banning and has been focused on building that operation, said Temetry Lindsey, president and chief executive officer.

Beverly Speak, executive director and CEO of Kids Come First, said that even if some of her patients go elsewhere, there will still be a large number who are likely undocumented who will continue to see its specialists.

Dr. John Testerman, chairman of the Loma Linda Department of Family Medicine, said that the Inland Empire is going into the coming period of increased demand for primary care physicians with the lowest number in any region in California, only 40 per 100,000.

The recommended level is 60 to 80 per 100,000, with the state average of 63 “barely reaching the low end” of the recommendation, Testerman said.

The recommended level of specialists is 85 to 105 per 100,000, while the two-county Inland Empire has 70 per 100,000, again the lowest in the state, he said.