SCOTTSDALE, Ariz. — Manager Walt Weiss sat next to guest instructor Larry Walker during Saturday’s game and was stumped. Neither one could come up with a comparable player to the Los Angeles Angels’ Mike Trout, who hit a 430-foot home run and stole a base in a blink.

“The only one I could come up with is Jose Canseco in his early days,” Weiss said.

Added Walker: “He’s bigger than I thought. That’s a pretty good body type.”

Trout runs like a tailback and hits like a linebacker. He weighs 235 pounds. The skill set that makes him a strong candidate to win American League MVP honors was on full display before a Rockies-record crowd at Salt River Fields of 12,667.

Trout spoiled Juan Nicasio’s line with a laser to center field.

Reliever Adam Ottavino hit Trout in the left arm in his next plate appearance. Trout swiped second base on the first pitch. He wasn’t trying to send a message.

“I was just working on stuff, on my first step, getting good jumps,” Trout said.

Butler, Gray head to minors. Eddie Butler and Jon Gray weren’t making the Rockies out of spring. This was the plan from the end of last season.

They made the Rockies’ decision interesting, maximizing their monthlong stay with ability and maturity that suggests it won’t be long before they return to the bigs. They were sent down Saturday and will resume pitching on regular rest in minor-league camp. Both will open the season at Double-A Tulsa.

Butler posted a 3.86 ERA, with Gray at 5.40 ERA.

“They have plenty of arm, plenty of stuff to not only pitch at this level but to be really good. It’s a matter of having a plan to attack hitters,” Weiss said.

Footnotes. Carlos Gonzalez is wearing a bracelet on his right wrist given to him by a cancer patient he met at Children’s Hospital Colorado. The young girl visited spring training as part of a trip that Troy Tulowitzki hosts for kids and their families. … Tulowitzki (bruised left shin) ran and took groundballs. He’s likely to return to the lineup Wednesday.

Rockies recap

Rockies 4, Angels 4 (10 innings)

At Salt River Fields

Hits: Carlos Gonzalez hit his first homer because “I left a slider down and in right where he likes it,” said Angels starter Jered Weaver. … The center-field battle remains a dead heat. Corey Dickerson showed improved defense Saturday, and Drew Stubbs improved his average to .333 with two doubles. Charlie Blackmon and Brandon Barnes are also in the mix.

Misses: Jason Pridie grounded into a 7-6-3 double play to end the game as the Angels used five infielders. … Brennan Boesch was thrown out in the second inning for arguing a called third strike.

What’s next: Rockies at Dodgers. Jordan Lyles tries to get a grip on the fifth spot in the rotation.

Troy E. Renck, The Denver Post