Salinas >> A year after Salinas Valley Memorial Hospital officials proposed formal affiliation talks with Monterey County and Natividad Medical Center, the county has still not responded and prospects for a partnership between two of the area’s largest health care organizations have dropped off the radar.

Supervisor Simon Salinas said Friday there has been no discussion about affiliation talks, or even a response to the Salinas Valley Memorial proposal sent in a Jan. 23, 2014 letter, for months and no plans to resume them any time soon.

“The status right now is it’s on the backburner,” Salinas said.

Salinas had been named with Supervisor Fernando Armenta to an ad hoc committee in February charged with considering a formal response to the partnership talks proposal.

Salinas said the county and Natividad decided to focus on implementation of the area’s first Level II trauma center at the county hospital after former CEO Harry Weis left his post over the summer. He also acknowledged Natividad labor representatives from SEIU asked for so many conditions on a potential letter of intent designed to set a framework for the talks that it scuttled any chance of moving forward.

The ad hoc committee hasn’t met for months, Salinas said, noting that Salinas Valley Memorial officials also haven’t inquired about the affiliation talks.

Salinas said hospital administrators have been discussing common areas between the two institutions, and argued that cooperation doesn’t require a formal partnership, whether through a joint powers authority or legislation.

Salinas Valley Memorial CEO Pete Delgado acknowledged the public district hospital had focused on other priorities, including adjusting to the Affordable Care Act and quality care outcomes. But he also said hospital officials still believe there’s an opportunity to partner with the county.

“We stand ready to help them in any way,” Delgado said. “If the opportunity to collaborate, to participate in any way, we’re ready. It makes sense for two great organizations to work together on behalf of the community.”

The hospital has also been dealing with contract negotiations with the powerful California Nurses Association since early last year, and only this week reached an agreement to enter mediation over the contentious talks after declaring an impasse late last year.

Salinas Valley Memorial’s proposal envisioned a joint powers authority between the hospital system and the county to operate Natividad. Salinas Valley Memorial also expressed concern about the county hospital’s financial capacity to host a trauma center and requested the Board of Supervisors delay implementation until a thorough review of Natividad’s finances was conducted.

Advertisement

All three entities have expressed an interest in forming a partnership, arguing that cooperation would be better than competition given the demands of a changing health care industry under national reform. Natividad, led by Weis, submitted a partnership proposal during Salinas Valley Memorial’s affiliation quest in 2012, but was rejected. County officials spearheaded a resumption of affiliation talks with Salinas Valley Memorial the following year. Those talks commenced — with Weis excluded — under a memorandum of understanding that expired Jan. 31 last year, just after Salinas Valley Memorial sent its proposal.

The two hospitals have seen a significant shift in their leadership ranks during the past year. Salinas Valley Memorial has added three new board members in last fall’s election, and has seen a complete turnover on its five-member board since 2012. Natividad saw Weis depart and be replaced by interim CEO Dr. Kelly O’Keefe, the former board chairman.

County supervisors began the hiring process for a new Natividad CEO by engaging consultant firm Spencer Stuart in December to conduct a nationwide search for potential candidates. The $258,000 contract lasts through December but Salinas said he expects a new top administrator to be in place in the next six months.

O’Keefe said Friday he has decided he will not seek the permanent CEO position, citing the demands of filling the position on a long-term basis. His interim contract runs through Jan. 31 with subsequent extensions upon mutual consent. He said he will help with the search process for the new CEO.

Jim Johnson can be reached at 726-4348.