Mustangs season ends in semi-finals for second straight year

A host of Fort Morgan defenders work to bring down Pueblo East running back Bryson Torres on Saturday at Dutch Clark Stadium in Pueblo. The Mustangs fell to Pueblo East 28-7. ( Brandon Boles / Fort Morgan Times )

PUEBLO — Fort Morgan played the first half they wanted on Saturday at Dutch Clark Stadium, gaining 141 yards of offense and scoring one touchdown while holding the defending champs from Pueblo East to about 10 offensive yards.

One play kept the Eagles in the game early, and in the second half they returned to their top-seed form, defeating the Mustangs 28-7 win to advance to the 3A State Championship and finish Fort Morgan's season.

Pueblo East would not get going on offense in the first half, as the front seven for the Mustangs stifled the Eagles run game and two big interceptions from junior Angelo Rivera and senior Nate Gertner held the offense in check. Despite gaining just one first down in the half, the one play keeping the Eagles in the game early was an 85 yard punt return for a touchdown late in the first quarter that gave Pueblo East a 7-0 lead.

In the second quarter, Fort Morgan evened up the game up when junior Tate Kembel bounced a run to the outside for 46 yards and raced to the end zone. Two teams averaging a good amount of points so far in the postseason were held to just seven points entering the half.

"We have got fighters on this team, and it showed early," head coach Harrison Chisum said.

Right away in the second half, Fort Morgan had a golden chance to get its first lead of the game when the defense got a three-and-out and the offense started its first drive of the half in Eagles territory. The Mustangs drove in the red zone but would have to settle for a field goal attempt from senior Francisco Gonzalez that missed wide left.

Advertisement

From that point in the game, Pueblo East took over.

The Eagles jumped back ahead three plays later when Bryson Torres found a seam and went 59 yards on the ground for the second score of the game with 6:13 to go in the quarter. They also made the adjustment on defense to stop the Mustangs from hitting big runs off tackle and to the outside, slowing down the Mustangs ground game and forcing a fumble from Kembel.

Fort Morgan senior Nate Gertner (#22, top) goes up and gets an interception just before the end of the first half against Pueblo East. (Brandon Boles / Fort Morgan Times)

Late in the quarter, the Eagles drove 60 yards and capped a long eight-play drive with a touchdown pass by Daniel Martin on the first play of the fourth quarter to extend the lead, 21-7.

There were very few opportunities for the Mustangs offense to move the ball on the ground, and the passing game was stopped by a strong pass rush and good coverage when the Mustangs rolled out quarterback Dalyn Knapp. The Eagles held Fort Morgan to under 40 yards of total offense until their fourth touchdown, a two yard run, gave Pueblo East a 28-7 lead with just under five minutes remaining in the game.

"I think we wore down a little bit," Chisum said. "Pueblo East is a great football program. We just ran out of time."

Despite the loss, Chisum said he was proud of his team fighting to the end in the game, highlighted by three turnovers forced from the Mustangs defense, a trend from the first two playoff games. Senior Jacob Fritzler led the team unofficially in tackles. On offense, Kembel finished with 184 yards and one touchdown to lead the team.

The first loss of the season marks the conclusion of the Mustangs season in 2015 at 12-1 and a second straight appearance in the 3A state semifinals.

"That's a credit to the kids," Chisum said. "I'm very fortunate to have these kids in our program."

Brandon Boles: 970-867-5651, sports@fmtimes.com or twitter.com/FMT_Sports