Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share Patty Judge tells The Des Moines Register's editorial board that water quality is a crisis point and discusses the EPA's role in regulating bodies of water.

Buy Photo Patty Judge, Democratic candidate for US Senate, meets with the Des Moines Register editorial board Tuesday May 10, 2016. (Photo: Rodney White/The Register)Buy Photo

Patty Judge’s interview with the Des Moines Register on Tuesday helped clarify a few things — not so much about her positions on issues but on the line of attack Republicans will take against her.

Tweets from GOP operatives during the one-hour editorial board session went something like this:

Robert Haus: @pattyforiowa needs to get her hands on a LOT of briefing materials, sorry to say. She is not prepared to be a US Senator #iasen

Tim Albrecht: DMR to Judge at the edit board: Yeah, you’ve attacked (Chuck) Grassley but issues? She lists topics but not solutions. No pushback. #iasen

Robert Haus: @DMRegister Ed Bd pressing @pattyforiowa for specifics on issues. Repeatedly, because she's got not much beyond talking points. #iasen

Jimmy Centers: "Hogs still smell" is about the only thing @pattyforiowa has said confidently in this ed board meeting. #iasen

You see the theme here: Judge isn’t prepared, she doesn’t understand federal issues, all she has is talking points. The criticism isn’t entirely fair — political attacks seldom are. But Judge has given her opponents ammunition for complaining that she’s light on details and she gave them more to complain about during Tuesday’s interviews.

For example, asked why the Register editorial board should endorse her, Judge said: “I think I’ve been on the statewide scene for a long time. This is the fifth time that I’ve been on a state ballot and people are familiar with me. They know what I’ve done throughout my political career.” She mentioned flood recovery, preschool expansion and civil rights issues addressed during her four years as lieutenant governor and concluded by saying she has a “strong resume” and looks forward to the “next step.”

Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share Patty Judge, Democratic candidate for the U.S. Senate met with The Des Moines Register's editorial board on May 10, 2016 to discuss her primary campaign.

This was the first question and the most predictable, but Judge gave a limp-noodle answer instead of a galvanizing argument of why she should be Iowa’s next senator.

Judge touted her electability against incumbent Republican Chuck Grassley but was vague about her strategy. She said her campaign plan would include “all kinds of media.” Asked about the lack of content on her campaign website, Judge said that’s coming soon, but she’s only been in the race since March. “This whole social media thing to me is very new,” she said.

Of all of the issues discussed during the meeting, Judge perhaps offered the most detail about making college more affordable. She said she wants to increase Pell grants and allow graduates to refinance their loans. “I would certainly look at a proposal for tuition-free community college for two years if the students kept a certain high grade-point average,” she said. But she confessed she doesn’t understand why student loan rates are so high and why politicians are reluctant to deal with it.

Judge offered one idea for dealing with wage disparity: Raise the minimum wage to $15 per hour nationwide. She said $15 is the right level because it’s “certainly not sky-high but it is a place that starts to make a wage that people can talk about living on.”

She would raise the $118,000 payroll tax cap for Social Security. Ideally, she said, the cap would be eliminated, but she suggested she’d be willing to settle for raising it to some unspecified level. She said the Affordable Care Act needs controls on the cost of prescription drugs. She raised the need for stronger, community-based mental health and increasing access to providers but said she didn’t know what the state is doing now.

She was fuzzy on how the EPA’s Waters of the United States rule would fit into her vision for water quality, yet walked into the Republicans’ line of fire on a hot-button issue for farmers. Asked whether she agrees with EPA’s definition of waters of the U.S., she said, “I think they’re probably on target, and I know a lot of my agricultural people, friends don’t agree with me on that,” she said. “But again, we are at a point where we have to be serious about improving water quality.”

Republican operatives leaped on that generally positive assessment of WOTUS. Albrecht tweeted: “And there we have it. This gaffe is one you’re going to hear about a lot.”

My impression is that Judge is trying to convey that she’s capable of working across party lines for solutions and she doesn’t want to be overly prescriptive in her issue positions. That’s a difficult balancing act, however, as she’s also trying to persuade Democratic primary voters that she’s the most experienced both as a candidate and as a policymaker.

It’s especially tricky in a year when many voters seem to prefer bold pronouncements over picky details. Judge, however, lacks the showy rhetorical finesse that can make voters forget about the nitty-gritty.

Republicans are deploying the same playbook against Judge that they used successfully against Christie Vilsack’s congressional run in 2012, saying she’s in over her head. Judge is well-grounded in a range of policy experience, but she’s going to have to make it clear she knows exactly what to do in the U.S. Senate and how to do it.

Read or Share this story: http://dmreg.co/1T9DP5y