By

After having been a landlord for many years, Karl Brien’s real estate agent suggested he get his license so he could save himself the real estate commission from buying and selling properties. “Once I did that, many of the guys from my investors’ group asked me for help selling their properties and it got to the point where I was making more money than I was at my full-time job, so I broke off into real estate. I was first licensed in 1999 and started selling in 2004,” he said during this edited interview.



What do you enjoy about selling real estate?

I like the interaction with the people. I also like success when it all comes together and everyone is happy because it gives me some satisfaction.

How do you consider yourself to be different than other agents?

I look at the real estate industry more as a service business rather than a selling business. I’ve had about 30 years in service businesses and I’ve learned that, rather than trying to sell, you have to approach it more as a guide.

What role should an agent play for a client?

You’re a guide who is there to help clients make their own decisions. The key is to educate them about what the options are so once they understand them, they can make an educated choice.

What qualities make for a good agent?

Dedication, a willingness to put in long hours, and the ability to listen and understand.

How do you keep yourself current with the various aspects of the industry?

I read as much as possible and we get a lot of material from the Board of Realtors. Many sources of material come our way. Of course, we also have to take accredited continuing education classes and I’m not afraid to get guidance from others, either.

What role does technology play in selling homes?

Now, it’s more so than ever. Everyone has a smart phone and is using the Internet as their first source for viewing properties. One thing I’ve found works really well is hiring a professional photographer to take my pictures because having online presentation is so important. There is a lot of inaccurate information online and you have to educate clients on which sites are better and how to differentiate from what is valid information and what isn’t.

Have you had any mentors?

The gentleman who got me into real estate, Lou Fons, is one person I call a mentor. Dick Kollmansberger was my original broker.

What’s the best advice you’ve been given?

Always make sure your clients’ interests come first.

What’s the most important advice you give to clients?

Try as hard as you can to keep emotion out of the process.

What have you learned from your clients?

I’ve learned paying close attention to their wants and needs is greatly appreciated as is giving them a chance to think for themselves.



How have you developed as a realtor since the beginning?

I did pretty well out of the gate as Rookie of the Year. Almost all of my business has come from referrals from past clients and people I’ve worked with. When you give people good service, it just seems to grow. A lot of people may disagree, but it’s been working for me.

Is there anything you do differently than you did at the beginning?

I don’t think so. You have to work at clients’ schedules and put in a lot of hours. There isn’t any magic to it.

What’s your business philosophy?

I don’t look at deals as large or small, because I’ve had situations where I’ve helped a client sell an investment property in the inner city and the client became one of my biggest. I’ve helped him flip a number of properties and sold his personal residence. I just treat everyone the same and it comes back to you.



What’s the biggest challenge clients face in today’s market?

Being able to level with themselves and price their property properly. This can be tough because people tend to look at what they have as higher value and what they want to buy as lower value. I take the time to provide as much information as possible so they can come to the right conclusion on their own.

What do you do if you a client is making a particularly poor decision?

You have to provide enough information so clients can help themselves. The decision ultimately has to come from them.

How do you relax in your down time?

My wife and I do motorcycle tours and we spend a lot of time camping with our children and their families. We live on the lake, so we enjoy the water life.

What professional/charitable organizations are you involved with?

We’re involved with our church.