DUBLIN--(BUSINESS WIRE)--Research and Markets has announced the addition of the "Healthcare Cloud Computing Market - Analysis and Global Forecasts to 2020" report to their offering.

Cloud computing helps store, manage, and process data from disparate locations, and delivers hosted services over the internet. In the healthcare industry, cloud computing as a technology is offered in four forms computation, storage, memory, and networking. Cloud computing is increasingly being adopted in the healthcare industry owing to the increasing pressure to curtail healthcare costs while maintaining the quality of care provided to patients.

The global healthcare cloud computing market is segmented on the basis of application, deployment model, service model, pricing model, component, end user, and region. By application, the market is categorized into clinical information systems (CIS) and nonclinical information systems (NCIS). In 2015, CIS is expected to hold the largest share of the market. This segment is expected to grow at the fastest rate during the forecast period (2015 to 2020).

Key factors expected to spur the growth of this market are reforms in various countries benefiting healthcare IT, proliferation of new payment models and the cost-efficiency of cloud technology, and the implementation of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (PPACA). Moreover, teleCloud and the formation of accountable care organizations (ACOs) are creating growth opportunities for the market. However, the security of patient data on the cloud is a crucial issue likely to restrain the growth of this market.

On the basis of regions, this market is classified into North America, Europe, Asia, and the Rest of the World (RoW).

Companies Profiled:

Athenahealth, Inc.

Carecloud Corporation

Carestream Health, Inc.

Cleardata Networks, Inc.

Dell Inc.

Global Net Access (GNAX)

IBM Corporation

Iron Mountain, Inc.

Merge Healthcare, Inc.

VMWare, Inc.

Report Structure:

1 Introduction

2 Research Methodology

3 Executive Summary

4 Premium Insights

5 Market Overview

6 Case Studies

7 Healthcare Cloud Computing Market, By Application

8 Healthcare Cloud Computing Market, By Deployment Model

9 Healthcare Cloud Computing Market, By Component

10 Healthcare Cloud Computing Market, By Pricing Model

11 Healthcare Cloud Computing Market, By Service Model

12 Healthcare Cloud Computing Market, By End User

13 Healthcare Cloud Computing Market, By Region

14 Competitive Landscape

15 Company Profiles

For more information visit http://www.researchandmarkets.com/research/rrwtms/healthcare_cloud