Critics of ObamaCare have lodged many complaints against the law — about spiraling premiums, unstable insurance markets, high deductibles, burdensome taxes waste, and so on. But here’s an interesting new complaint — ObamaCare is fueling the nation’s opioid epidemic.

Even more eye-opening is the source: Time Magazine, the same magazine that heralded ObamaCare when Democrats managed to get it through Congress without a single Republican vote as “the most sweeping piece of social legislation since the 1960s Great Society initiatives.”

Time senior writer Sean Gregory says that ObamaCare’s patient satisfaction surveys are contributing to the growing problem of opioid abuse in the U.S. More than 60% of drug overdoses in 2014 were from a prescription opioid, and ERS treat more than 1,000 patients a day for misusing the drugs.

What’s the connection? The satisfaction survey asks questions about things like hospital cleanliness, noise levels and staff communication. But it also asks questions about pain management, including whether the hospital did “everything they could to help you with your pain.”

Under ObamaCare, these patient satisfaction surveys, along with other quality measures, are tied to $1.5 billion in Medicare payments to hospitals, giving the hospitals a huge incentive to make sure they score well.

The problem, Gregory notes, comes from “tying a patient’s feelings about pain management to a hospital’s bottom line,” which “to many physicians and lawmakers struggling to contain the nation’s opioid crisis … is deeply ­misguided, if not downright dangerous.”

He goes on to point out, “In a 2014 survey published in Patient Preference and Adherence, over 48% of doctors reported prescribing inappropriate narcotic pain medication because of patient-­satisfaction questions. One doctor wrote that drug seekers ‘are well aware of the patient satisfaction scores and how they can use these threats and complaints to obtain narcotics.’ ”

Another study found that patients who gave higher ratings on satisfaction surveys tended to spend more on prescription drugs and have a higher mortality rate.

The problem has become big enough that Sen. Susan Collins, R-Maine, has called on the Health and Human Services Department to investigate any connection between the ObamaCare survey and overprescribing narcotics. And four senators have sponsored a bill to de-link that Medicare money from the pain management questions.

In the meantime, add this to the growing pile of problems that ObamaCare has caused to a health care system that it was meant to improve.

RELATED:

Personal Data At Risk In ObamaCare Exchanges, Audit Finds

ObamaCare Premiums Rose A Lot More Than HHS Wants You To Believe

ObamaCare’s ‘Cadillac Tax’ Will Hit Chevy-Class Families Hardest, Study Finds