Out Boulder's 12th annual Pridefest kicked off Sunday with the Big Gay 5K, a run that's new to Boulder — and one that participants praised for being more about fun than competitiveness with lots of costumes and encouragement.

Patricia McInroy and her girlfriend ran the race costumed as Batman and Robin. McInroy, who also volunteered at the festival's Sierra Club booth and is just getting into organized races, said she likes the sense of accomplishment that comes from setting a goal and running with a group.

"It's neat to see people who are gay out doing something healthy," she said. "The run had a very community feel."

The 5K ended at Boulder's Central Park, where about 120 vendors and community organizations set up booths for Pridefest.

Elizabeth Leonard, left, and Emily Trostel skip to the finish line of the Big Gay 5K during the 12th annual Boulder Pridefest at Central Park on Sunday. For more photos and a video, go to www.dailycamera.com. (Cliff Grassmick / Staff Photographer)

"The festival marks a milestone," said Out Boulder executive director Mardi Moore. "Each year, we have wins and setbacks. Here, we can celebrate and reconnect. We can be in a public space and be the majority."

Out Boulder's Samantha Field added that the goal in organizing the event was appealing to all the diverse groups in the LGBTQ community.

"It's the one time of the year we get to be together and celebrate the entire community," she said.

She noted that the 5k run was organized in conjunction with Colorado Frontrunners to coincide with a meeting of the International Frontrunners in Denver. About 50 "frontrunners" registered for the run, which had about 225 participants altogether.

Advertisement

Colorado Frontrunners hosts weekly Saturday runs in Denver and Sunday runs in Boulder for the LGBTQ community.

"We like to encourage a healthy lifestyle and camaraderie," said Colorado Frontrunners President Steve Monroney. "People have made lasting friendships in this group, and it's a good way to meet people."

Sunday's festival capped off several days of Pridefest activities, including an annual youth talent show, opening of the LGBTQ History in Boulder exhibit at the Boulder History Museum and a screening of "Transamerica."

Susan Grutzmacher, right, and her son, Coen Johnson, push dad, Chris Johnson, is a stroller during the 12th annual Boulder Pridefest at Central Park on Sunday. For more photos and a video, go to www.dailycamera.com. (Cliff Grassmick / Staff Photographer)

The festival included all the traditional staples, from live music to food trucks to face painting. There was also plenty of color, with participants donning everything from rainbow wigs and hats to rainbow tutus and capes.

Wyllow Mason, of Littleton, added wings and a unicorn horn to go with her rainbow striped knee socks.

"I love all the variety of vendors and everyone who's represented here and the inclusive atmosphere," she said.

A Longmont transgender woman who goes by Tesla Z went with all pink, including fuzzy pink leg warmers, a pink tutu and a fuzzy pink hat.

"I love seeing all the people come together here," she said. "You can feel the love."

Most of the organizations and businesses at the festival were focused on the queer community or are queer-friendly, from a financial planner specializing in working with the gay and lesbian couples and families to Lambda's pro-bono legal services available to the LGBTQ community.

Barber Linda Cox, who offered on-the-spot haircuts at the festival, works at A(s)He in Denver, a 1-year-old gender-free salon. She said one of her specialties is working with people transitioning from one gender to the other, providing help with grooming, skincare and fashion along with hair cuts and coloring.

"This is a good way to meet people and let them know we provide services no matter what your pronoun," she said. "I create fleeting art. It's my artistic expression."

In the health and wellness area, a local roller derby team took on a local rugby football team in a game of flag football. The YMCA of Boulder Valley also sponsored an expanded youth and family area this year that included a performance stage and a storytime spot.

One of the storytime readers was Horizons K-8 teacher Jeanne Kipke, who read her book, "Bobbi and Me." She said she decided to write because there's a lack of books about gender non-conforming children.

"Every year, there are one or two students who don't quite fit in the boy or girl mode," she said. "I'm hoping to relate to any kids who don't feel like they fit in."

Dani Cooke, a Boulder teen who was on the event planning committee, said she wanted to create a safe, supportive place for young people.

"It's really important for youth to have a supportive place," she said. "The festival is it has a really cool energy. Everyone is happy and excited."

Amy Bounds: 303-473-1341, boundsa@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/boundsa