I always thought Democrat Mark Udall’s first commercial in his Senate re-election bid would focus on his maternal grandfather, the first entrepreneur to bring loads of tourists to Rocky Mountain National Park. But instead of reintroducing himself to voters — important in a state where politics isn’t the end all, be all — Udall focused on his opponent Cory Gardner’s views on birth control and abortion.

In a recent interview, the former senator addressed his campaign.

“I’ve been criticized for not running a campaign that defended my brand and presented me as the authentic Coloradan I am, and I’ve certainly thought a lot about that,” Udall said.

“The rationale was that by showing that Congressman Gardner had extreme positions on women’s reproductive rights, people would see his other extreme positions. It didn’t happen with those swing voters. So sometimes, late at night, I think perhaps it would’ve been worthwhile running more ads extolling my successes and who I am, and how well I match up with the state.”

Exactly. In fact, Gardner’s campaign says the Udall ad that did well with its focus groups featured mountains, streams and Udall in a pair of blue jeans talking about “what’s in here” as he tapped his heart. (Of course at the time, the Gardner campaign didn’t mention that and just hammered the ad.)

Udall lost to Gardner by 1.9 percentage points and now is a visiting fellow at the University of Chicago Institute of Politics. He recently sat down with the university’s The Gate.

In the interview, Udall lauded the type of campaign Gardner ran, explained why he voted against the war and his efforts on national security and said he was surprised to receive fewer votes in the red and rural counties than Democratic Senate candidate Michael Bennet did in 2010 “because I’m Colorado through and through.”

“I just thought in the end that Coloradans would see me as someone who reflected their Libertarian, pro-environment, fiscally responsible point of view,” Udall said. “But there was a pent-up desire on the part of people in those counties and in the Republican Party to send a strong message to the president, and I was the way to do it.”

He failed to mention that voters viewed Bennet’s opponent, Ken Buck, as a flawed candidate who imploded in October while Gardner seemed to be the one catching the breaks in 2014.