By GAYLA CAWLEY

A crowd of seasoned politicians and other hopefuls are vying for the senate seat vacated by Anthony Petruccelli, the East Boston Democrat who resigned to become a lobbyist.

The race will likely be decided in the primary election on April 12 since there are no Republicans in the contest.

Seven Democrats are running including former Revere Mayor Dan Rizzo, Revere City Councilor Steven Morabito, state Rep. Jay Livingstone, Winthrop Housing Authority Chairman Joseph Boncore, Lydia Edwards, Paul Rogers and Diana Hwang. The First Suffolk and Middlesex District Senate district encompasses Revere, Winthrop, East Boston and other parts of Boston and Cambridge.

Rizzo served one term as Revere mayor until he lost the seat by 117 votes last year. He served as a councilor-at-large for a dozen years, and is the longtime owner of an insurance agency. Rizzo said he knows the value of a legislative seat to a city or town, which prompted his decision to run.

“It’s a seat I’m very prepared for and I could make an effective difference starting on the first day,” he said.

If elected, Rizzo said the opioid epidemic would be a top priority. He said while Beacon Hill has adopted legislation to combat narcotics abuse, it will also take other measures to solve the problem. Rizzo said the district has among the highest rates for drug abuse and overdoses.

Rizzo would also invest in what he called a “21st century transportation system,” including commuter rail, roads, bridges and sidewalks. He also wants to invest in education, and making sure schools are funded so students can keep up with the global economy. Rizzo also cited job creation and affordable housing as key issues.

Morabito is serving his second term as a Revere councilor-at-large. He has worked as a manager at Johnnie’s Foodmaster for 18 years. As a city councilor, he learned much about state laws and what a city can and cannot do, he said. If elected, he said he would resign from the council.

Morabito said he would also focus on the opioid crisis, and providing treatment for addicts who want to beat their addiction, rather than serve jail time. He would continue work begun by Gov. Charlie Baker, who signed a bill this month that would make it more difficult for opioid prescriptions to be written and abused. Morabito said he would also focus on fair wage equality and getting funding for early education.

“Not all issues can be handled on the local level,” he said. “This developed in me as a desire to help people. I can help more people as a state senator than I can on the local level.”

Livingstone, a second term state representative, said if elected, he would build on work he’s done in the House. He supports early education funding, criminal reform and equal pay for women.

Prior to serving in the House, Livingstone was a labor law attorney.

As the only legislator in the race, he has an advantage because of his relationships with House and Senate lawmakers, he said.

“I’m already in the middle of some of the issues that will be dealt with,” Livingstone said.

Boncore has been a member of the Winthrop Housing Authority for six years, and is a public defender in Boston and Chelsea courts where he works with clients who are mentally ill or suffering from addiction. He said the commonwealth is spending too much money putting addicts in jail, when rehabilitation programs cost half as much.

He would also focus on ensuring that children have access to quality schools.

“Education is a great equalizer in our society,” he said. “Too many children are falling through the cracks. Pre-K needs to be universal throughout the district and the commonwealth.”

Ensuring public transportation is available and working is his priority, citing immobility as the major cause of poverty in society. He would work to reinstate late-night service on the commuter rail and keep fares reasonable.

Edwards is a legal services attorney at Greater Boston Legal Services, a Boston-based agency that provides free legal assistance to low-income residents, where she learned Spanish and Portuguese. Edwards also lobbied to bring about the domestic workers bill of rights. Enacted in 2014, the measure bans discrimination for people of color and lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender workers.

While working on the legislation, Edwards said she learned to navigate the State House.

If elected, Edwards said she would focus on income equality, affordable housing and development, affordable education and transportation.

“The fact of the matter is, change comes to the State House,” she said. “It doesn’t come from within the State House.

Rogers has been a small business owner in the software and technology field for 20 years. But he said most people know him in East Boston for his work in the community as a leader in social media. Rogers’ Facebook group “East Boston Open Discussion” has nearly 6,000 members, he said, and has been a great way for residents to have a voice in what’s happening in the community.

“I’m different because I’ve already been out in this community before this campaign even started,” he said. “This is nothing really new for me.”

Rogers’s priorities would be public education, public transportation, and housing and development, he said. He said people have been priced out of housing in the district because developers are purchasing property and raising rents. Rogers said he would work to find solutions to stabilize the housing market so people could afford to continue living in the neighborhood.

In education, he would focus on getting more computational-based sciences incorporated in classrooms.

Hwang is the founder and executive director of the Asian American Women’s Political Initiative, the only political organization for Asian American leadership in the country. She started as an aide to former Rep. Deborah Blumer, who wrote the original Affordable Care Act.

Hwang said she has spent her career fighting for women and would focus on issues such as pay equity, family leave, women’s reproductive rights and strengthening protection for victims of sexual, mental and physical abuse.

Hwang said she is a daughter of immigrants and felt how much her parents worried about money growing up. There was a time when both of her parents lost their jobs.

“The people in this district need someone representing them, who understands their issues, and shares their struggle,” Hwang said. “I will be able to hit the ground running on the first day.”

Gayla Cawley can be reached at gcawley@itemlive.com. Follow her on Twitter @GaylaCawley