Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share (Photo: AP)The nation's largest health-care insurer, UnitedHealthcare, will exit the Affordable Care Act marketplace in Arizona next year, a move that will reduce or eliminate options for consumers to buy subsidized plans in more than half of the st Wochit

UnitedHealthcare, the largest health-care insurer in the U.S., will leave the Affordable Care Act marketplace in Arizona next year. (Photo: AP) Story Highlights UnitedHealthcare will drop out of marketplaces in Arizona and several other states

Blue Cross Blue Shield of Arizona also may discontinue marketplace plans in some counties

The nation's largest health-care insurer, UnitedHealthcare, will exit the Affordable Care Act marketplace in Arizona next year, a move that will reduce or eliminate options for consumers to buy subsidized plans in more than half of the state's counties.

Blue Cross Blue Shield of Arizona also said it will evaluate “all options,” including discontinuing marketplace plans, in some counties for coverage that begins Jan. 1, 2017.

UnitedHealthcare and Blue Cross Blue Shield are the only health-care insurers that sold marketplace plans in every Arizona county this year. If Blue Cross Blue Shield also drops marketplace plans in some rural counties, it could leave consumers in those counties without a way to get subsidized health-care insurance.

RELATED: Sticker shock: Health insurance no guarantee of lower bills for some patients

RELATED: Arizona's Affordable Care Act health-insurance sign-ups slow in third year

UnitedHealthcare said Tuesday that it will quit marketplaces in all but a "handful of states." While the insurer did not specify in which states it will remain, the insurer told the Arizona Department of Insurance in a letter Tuesday that it won't sell individual plans to Arizonans next year.

Blue Cross Blue Shield, meanwhile, said it lost $185 million on individual plans in 2014 and 2015, the first two years of the marketplace, as new enrollees racked up expensive claims and some consumers hopped in and out of coverage.

Blue Cross Blue Shield representatives said the company will examine each Arizona county and decide whether to continue to sell plans or change the types of plans it sells.

Blue Cross Blue Shield of Arizona is considering discontinuing marketplace plans in some Arizona counties for coverage that begins Jan. 1, 2017. (Photo: Sue Dorfler/The Republic)

"The losses are not really something that are sustainable," said Jeff Stelnik, Blue Cross Blue Shield's senior vice president of strategy, sales and marketing. "We have to look county by county and make sure it makes sense to offer a product going forward."

Similarly, UnitedHealth Group CEO Stephen Hemsley cited the financial difficulty of the federal marketplace in his company's decision to drop plans in most states.

"The smaller overall market size and shorter-term, higher-risk profile within this market segment continue to suggest we cannot broadly serve it on an effective and sustained basis," Hemsley said during an earnings conference call Tuesday. "Next year, we will remain in only a handful of states, and we will not carry financial exposure from exchanges into 2017."

Rural counties may feel impact

More than 135,000 Arizonans enrolled and paid for a health plan as of Dec. 31, and most of those sign-ups were in Maricopa and Pima counties, where consumers had plenty of options. Maricopa County consumers could buy from eight insurance companies, and Pima County residents had five insurance providers.

But experts say losing UnitedHealthcare and Blue Cross Blue Shield as an option on Healthcare.gov would be devastating in rural counties that may be left without marketplace options.

“My concern is that rural Arizona is left with too few choices.” Kim VanPelt, who oversees state health policy and advocacy for Vitalyst Health Foundation

Consumers who want to buy a subsidized health-care plan must purchase it over the federal marketplace. If no insurer sold a marketplace plan in a county, consumers there would not have access to subsidized health-care insurance.

"It is a notable concern that is not lost on the Department (of Insurance) and others," said Erin Klug, an Arizona Department of Insurance spokeswoman.

Blue Cross Blue Shield and UnitedHealthcare's All Savers are the only Arizona health-care insurance companies available through the ACA marketplace in eight counties where more than 30,000 people chose a plan — Cochise, Graham, Greenlee, La Paz, Pinal, Santa Cruz, Yavapai and Yuma counties.

Kim VanPelt, who oversees state health policy and advocacy for Vitalyst Health Foundation, formerly known as St. Luke's Health Initiatives, said she would like to see the state and federal government work "to make sure communities are not left out of getting access to health coverage."

"My concern is that rural Arizona is left with too few choices," she said.

Deadline approaches for plan proposals

Health-care insurers must file proposals for 2017 plans and rates with the Arizona Department of Insurance by May 11, Klug said.

At that point, Arizona regulators will know which insurers, including Blue Cross Blue Shield, intend to sell plans next year.

Stelnik said other areas of Blue Cross Blue Shield's health-insurance business are financially healthy, including insurance plans sold to large and small businesses, seniors and federal employees.

But the individual market has faced a financial cliff since the widespread changes of the Affordable Care Act. The individual market consists of plans sold directly to consumers via the federal marketplace, or "off-exchange" plans sold directly to consumers or through brokers.

Insurers are no longer allowed to deny coverage to individuals based on a person's health condition. Insurers were allowed to deny coverage before the health-care law's reforms took effect.

Stelnik said the typical customer had medical claims of $267 per month before the marketplace started Jan. 1, 2014. Consumers who signed up for Blue Cross Blue Shield plans in 2014 had average medical claims of $659 per month, he said.

He said there is evidence that shows Blue Cross Blue Shield and other insurers have not been able to attract the young and healthier consumers to offset the cost of those with health conditions who have incurred expensive claims.

Stelnik said Blue Cross Blue Shield believes the federal marketplace has not done a sufficient job of enforcing rules for special-enrollment periods, which allow people to sign up for coverage outside the normal three-month enrollment period due to a life change such as a job loss, marriage or divorce.

The federal government, which oversees the federal marketplace, said earlier this year it will require people to provide documents to show they are eligible to sign up outside the normal enrollment period.

Pressures on insurance market

Further pressuring Arizona's insurance market, Stelnik said, have been the lower rates charged by individual insurance companies.

"We want to make sure the individual market is sustainable on its own," Stelnik said

Health Net had the lowest marketplace insurance rates in 2014 and signed up the vast majority of consumers in this state.

In 2015, the state's non-profit co-op Meritus slashed its monthly premiums and signed up thousands of customers, but the Department of Insurance placed it under supervision and suspended its authority to sell or renew policies. That move shot down the co-op by the end of the year.

Katherine Hempstead, who directs Robert Wood Johnson Foundation's work on health-care insurance, said she is not convinced that the problem necessarily rests with expensive medical claims of the newly insured consumers on the marketplace. It is possible insurers are not collecting enough money through insurance premiums, either because plan prices are too low or because consumers are not paying a full 12 months worth of premiums.

"The market has changed, and I think it's been difficult for a lot of carriers (insurers) to adjust," Hempstead said.

Read or Share this story: http://azc.cc/1St2thr