Age-old question. Are you suggesting Peyton Manning returns next year as quarterback of the Broncos after the 43-8 loss in the Super Bowl? Dude, you’re kidding, right? What will it be like next season, when Manning is a year older and a year slower?

Joe, blames the quarterback

Kiz: The problem wasn’t Manning. The problem, especially after season-ending injuries to offensive tackle Ryan Clady and linebacker Von Miller, was the Broncos were too reliant on Manning. It’s not a question whether Manning can be effective next season. The real question is: Would Broncos executive John Elway dare ask Manning to restructure his deal to allow the team to spend more money on its areas of need?

Tebow factor. The 50 or so people at my home for a Super Bowl party all agreed the Broncos are forever under the curse of Tim Tebow for how Elway and the team treated him. Many people around the country feel that way. Life goes on. But what goes around comes around.

Rick, seeking revenge

Kiz: To err is human. To forgive divine. It’s seems many bitter fans of Tebow are more human than divine.

Joke’s on Broncos fans.When does the Super Bowl parade for the Broncos take place? Oh, wait a minute. I forgot. You guys lost the Super Bowl! How insensitive of me to make such a terrible faux pas at what must be a painful time for you losers. … I mean Denver fans. Still rolling on the floor and laughing,

David, Overland Park, Kan.

Kiz: Always good to hear from a fan from an AFC West division rival. Way to stay classy, Chiefs Nation. Now, help me out here. When was the last time the Chiefs won a playoff game? Was it when George Bush the younger or the elder was president of the United States? It was so long ago, I forget. And know the funny thing? It was so long ago, most Chiefs fans forget, as well.

Color of humiliation. The orange uniforms have got to go. The Broncos need to hold a public bonfire and burn the darn things. Every Super Bowl they wear those orange uniforms they get humiliated.

William, feeling blue

Kiz: The Broncos will keep the uniforms. They’ll change a lot of guys who wore the uniforms during the loss to Seattle.

At a loss from the toss. Here’s a piece of Super Bowl analysis I thought I’d share with you. The Broncos lost because of the coin flip. When Seattle won the toss and elected to defer, I genuinely think the Broncos had no idea what to do with themselves. The offense wasn’t ready to be on the field, clearly wasn’t ready for the crowd being loud on the first snap and the rest was history.

Jason, life’s a game of chance

Kiz: Orange uniforms? Coin flip? Oh, boy. Can’t wait to hear the next knucklehead’s theory why the Broncos lost.

Conspiracy to tank.Watching the Super Bowl, I kept saying to myself: “I don’t believe this!” The extent of Denver’s loss seems unbelievable. Well, here’s a disturbing hypothesis: Some Broncos took a dive. Yes, I realize what I’m suggesting is shocking, insulting and perhaps completely inaccurate.

Paul, conspiracy theorist

Kiz: Yep, these are my peeps. They’re nuts. God bless them.

Russian flush. And today’s party shot is fired at the $50 billion winter soiree thrown by Russian President Vladimir Putin.

The opening show in Sochi was so Russian — think Potemkin village — glitz on the outside but forgot the plumbing.

Natalie, Castle Rock

Kick it with Kiz by writing mkiszla@denverpost.com. Or join him 7-9 a.m. Monday through Friday at 93.7 FM, 1510 AM and denverpost.com/pressbox.