American society thrives on the notion of natural rights and individual freedoms. From birth, we are granted privileges that safeguard our ability to speak freely, to act decisively, to love openly. But in a constantly evolving country, the passionate debates and unwavering dedication that established our rights are simply overlooked. The allure of advancement floods our focal vision, and the Constitution, our Founding Fathers, even the vulnerability of our own rights, are shoved to the periphery. The first seven constitutional articles, however, provide the fundamental structure for the United States government. Just as modern technology promotes freedom by providing universal access to information, so do our governmental branches support the universal battle against deprivation of rights. One could argue that Articles I through VII are our rights and that without them, the unified essence of our nation would cease to exist. Our rights were established before our nation was even conceived; and in an era of tremendous change and discovery, the mere existence of these liberties – and the need to reflect on their constitutional origins – has never been more imperative.

Equally significant is the role played by our three governmental branches in the conservation of American liberties. Federal regulations enacted by the legislative branch serve not only to manage criminal activity and impose order in American municipalities; they defend the fragile existence of our individual liberties. Vested with the ability to create laws, declare war, and impeach presidents, among other duties, the U.S. Congress possesses an extraordinary amount of power. The fortification of our rights is heavily dependent on the decisions made by Congress, and the impact of these decisions ranges from a national level – so-called “hot topics” including warfare, contentious laws, and impeachments – to a far more personal level, pertaining to our rights as citizens, as constituents of communities, and as family members, friends, and personal advocates. Lawmaking has the potential to alter both the potency of an individual, and the power of a nation – and, consequently, the rights from which these powers are derived.