Brush gets two upsets to go to Great 8

Brush freshman Ryan Dunker pushes the ball up the court in Friday's first round game against Kent Denver. The Beetdiggers earned a 52-50 victory Friday to advance to the Sweet 16 on Saturday, which they won against host Sterling. (Brandon Boles / Fort Morgan Times)

STERLING — After a third place finish in the Patriot League Tournament, the Brush Beetdiggers boys basketball team drew the 22 seed in the CHSAA 3A State Tournament, where they would go up against Kent Denver in the first round Friday night.

After getting a 14-12 lead in the first quarter, senior Austin Garcia and junior Noah Lechman scored nine of the team's 11 points in the second, helping the Beetdiggers sustain their lead at the half, up 25-21. A free throw to open the quarter by Lechman gave Brush a 26-21 lead, and that would be the largest lead of the entire game, as both teams would get in a dogfight the rest of the way.

Brush senior Niko Guzman picks up his dribble after being stopped by a Sterling defender on a drive in the first quarter in Saturday's Sweet 16 win against the Tigers. (Brandon Boles / Fort Morgan Times)

The game was held close in large part to the struggles at the free throw line Brush had, including a 1-6 stretch from the charity stripe late in the game that could have sealed the deal. While the result wasn't great, the team had a 52-50 lead with just seconds left, and Brush came through with a final stop at the buzzer against the Sun Devils to advance to the Sweet 16 on Saturday, 52-50.

Up ahead was a familiar foe for the Beetdiggers, as they would go up against fellow Patriot League foe Sterling, a team they played three times in the regular season, but fell in all three games.

"We played them tough the first two times, and I think those guys understand that," head coach Bob Held said after the win Friday on Sterling. "Both teams will be pumped up, it's a local rivalry game. It'll be a battle."

And a battle it was.

On Saturday, the Beetdiggers and Tigers each looked to earn their bid to the Great 8, with Brush looking to change fate and get Sterling when it mattered most this season. Senior Niko Guzman had an opening three-pointer and Lechman added four in the first quarter, but it was Sterling who took the early lead, 15-7.

The game changed in the second quarter, as Brush locked in defensively. That effort, added by some offensive from Garcia, Lechman, freshman Micaiah Rocha and senior Kyle Rosenbrock, led to a 15-0 run to start the quarter, giving Brush a 20-15 lead. They would go on to take a 24-19 lead at the half.

Twice this season, Sterling trailed Brush at the half, but came back and got the win in the second half. The Tigers and Beetdiggers both knew this, and the third quarter saw the intensity of the game pick up.

Brush maintained their lead for the majority of the third, but their lead would be slim. Sterling was able to get their offense back on track, and erased their five point deficit at the half and tied it up at the end of the quarter at 35.

Early in the fourth, Sterling grabbed a 41-37 lead, and it looked like a third case of déjà vu could be coming for Brush. But the Beetdiggers scored four straight to take a 43-42 lead, and with two minutes to go both the Tigers and Beetdiggers were tied heading to a wild finish.

Brush had more free throw woes on Saturday that carried over from Friday, as they missed some important attempts to extend their lead. Senior Niko Guzman missed at the line late, and with seven seconds left Sterling could get the last shot and get the lead.

But when the shot went up and bounced off the rim, Rocha grabbed the rebound and was fouled with .7 seconds left. The bench was elated, and after intentionally missing the free throw and Sterling's full court heave not hitting the mark, the bench ran out on the court to join the rest of the team and celebrate a 43-42 win, their first win in four games against the Tigers this season.

"We just needed to find that little glimmer of hope, and we found it," Held said following the Sweet 16 win Saturday. "We promised ourselves all week that Sterling could not beat us four times this season. The kids worked hard, and they started believing in each other. We're not supposed to be here, but we are."

Seven Beetdiggers scored in the upset Saturday, led by Garcia with 13 points and Lechman with nine. Rosenbrock scored all six of his points from behind the arc, Guzman finished with five points, and senior Erik Barfuss, junior Clay Shaver and Rocha each added a couple points to round out the scoring.

The victory Saturday puts Brush in the Great 8, and they will be heading to Golden to play at the Colorado School of Mines. On Thursday, the team will first face Lutheran, the 3 seed in the tournament. In their first two games of the State tournament, the Lions defeated La Junta 54-38 and Bennett 77-56 to qualify for the Great 8. Thursday's Great 8 game between the Beetdiggers and Lions is scheduled to tip at 1:15 p.m.

While many on the outside gave very little to no chance for Brush to be playing in Golden, the Beetdiggers have the last laugh, and look to continue their exciting run towards a State championship.

Brandon Boles: 970-867-5651, sports@fmtimes.com & Twitter @FMT_Sports