QUESTION: Tell your thoughts on Gov. Rick Scott’s job-creation efforts. He promised to create 700,000 jobs in seven years.

Fishkind: Since the governor took office in January 2011 Florida’s economy has generated 827,500 new jobs, which would seem to say we’re way above the governor’s promise.

The question is though, are these jobs the result of Gov. Scott’s policies or would they have been created anyway?

Fishkind: That’s exactly what the question is. Are these 827,500 new jobs that would not have occurred but for the governor’s policy? And the way to figure that out is to first look at the U.S. economy; we’ll set that as a baseline: We’ll say that Florida should have at least as done as well as the nation as a whole.

So since 2011, the U.S. economy has generated 11 million new jobs, thereby growing at 8.4 percent. Florida’s 827,500 jobs is a growth rate of 11.5 percent. So Florida’s job growth was 3.1 faster than the nation’s. So, perhaps, the governor’s policies might explain these 3.1 percent faster growth.

Assume that’s the case. Take that 3.1 percent apply it to Florida and the extra jobs, the faster job growth, would represent 220,183 jobs. Now to be fair, the governor said he was going to do this in seven years and we only have four. That’s about 55,000 jobs per year, times four years. If we multiply that by seven years it would be about 350,000.

So he’s running about half of the rate. And that’s best case. That assumes that all of the fastest job growth in Florida could be ascribed to the governor’s policies and that’s not really true.

Q: Is there a way to tell exactly where those jobs came from and why they came about?

Fishkind: Well, to exactly pinpoint it is a little hard. But as economists would say ‘To a reasonable degree of economic certainty,’ that we can do. The governor’s program was to generate 700,000 new jobs by regulatory reform — that was a quarter of a million jobs, He wanted to eliminate the corporate income tax for 370,000 jobs, and have a state incentive fund.

Let’s imagine those programs, were in fact, implemented. They weren’t implemented but assume that they were for the sake of discussion. Then let’s look at the job creation.

Well we have 200,000 new jobs that were in retail trade and transportation services. That really doesn’t have anything to do with the governor’s programs. That has to do with people moving into Florida. And they’re moving to Florida because of the weather, because of the climate and because of the economic conditions in terms of interest rates and housing markets east of the Mississippi River improved enough to allow them move. That really doesn’t have anything to do with the governor’s policies.

Or take the 200,000 new jobs created in leisure and hospitality. I mean that has to do with Harry Potter and the rebuilding of Walt Disney World and the institution of Legoland. It really doesn’t have anything to do with the governor’s policies.

In other words if we go by the sector-by-sector job growth it’s very hard to identify how the governor’s proposed policies would have generated the job growth that we did see.

Q: Are their any specific numbers that we can take a look at what job changes have been made in Florida’s job landscape because of Gov. Scott’s policies?

Fishkind: Well, yes. The most obvious is the reduction in government employment. The governor decided to shrink down the size of government and he succeeded. Of course that doesn’t help the job total.

I guess one can say the regulatory reform program did have some effect on finance, perhaps, or perhaps on business and professional services. But those are relatively small effects on relatively large numbers. So it’s very hard to link that to the governor’s programs.

And the other point of it is that the academic research, and practical reality, indicate that most government economic incentive programs really don’t work very well. Regulatory reform, investment in education and health care, those things have effects, but only over a long term.

In the short run it’s very hard to link specific programs to particular changes in jobs.

Q: Are there any strategies where Gov. Scott could up his job-creation numbers?

Fishkind: Yeah, there are. There are a couple of things. Healthcare, for example. We’ve spoken about the fact that Florida did not decide to participate in the Affordable Care Act, giving away billions of dollars of federal money that would support healthcare spending and healthcare employment in the state of Florida. That certainly would be very effective in boosting the governor’s game.

And the senate has passed a bill to do exactly that, in a state form of the program. So this is a real opportunity.

Hank Fishkind is a principal at Fishkind & Associates, in Orlando, Naples and Port St. Lucie

Read or Share this story: http://on.flatoday.com/1yCkx2j