Nearly six years ago, I sat in the boardroom of the Bangor Region Chamber of Commerce’s Bass Park headquarters and gulped hard. More than a dozen community leaders had assembled to hear how I would turn the chamber around and help Bangor become more vibrant. This was one scary job interview.

As a former business journalist, I’d done some homework. I pored over Census data and other economic indicators. I walked the downtown and talked to business owners. I asked folks in my network what they thought of Bangor and its prospects.

From that I saw something special. The labor force, the transportation links, the proximity to tourism destinations and the R&D at the University of Maine all stood out.

“I think, over the next five years, Bangor could become the most dynamic and fastest-growing community in Maine,” I told the group. “Eclipsing even Portland.”

So here’s a really good job interview tip: If you want a group of civic leaders in Bangor to hire you, tell them they can beat Portland at something.

I was lucky to get the job, and lucky as well that much of what I hoped for in that interview has come true for the Bangor region. Alex Gray of Waterfront Concerts calls it the “Bangor Mojo.” We all feel it: the energy, the vibrancy. The downtown has taken off. The Cross Insurance Center has proven to be a great asset and source of community pride. There is a sense that Bangor is on the move. To the degree that I helped — and by all means, many, many people contributed to this turnaround story — I’m proud.

Next week I move on to the next chapter of my life. I’ve taken a job in Portland with MaineHealth, the state’s largest health care provider, as a system director of marketing and communication. I have a passion for the mission of providing good, affordable health care, and I’m excited about this new challenge. It’s the right move for my family and me.

I have many people to thank for the opportunity I was given at the Chamber; too many to list here. Instead, I’d like to use this space to issue some parting advice about what the Bangor region should do to keep its mojo:

— We’ve done a lot of hard work and have a great story to tell, but we don’t have the means to tell it. Our economic development entities need to get serious about a plan to market the region to investors, businesses that might choose to relocate here and entrepreneurs. In many communities the chamber holds this mission. In others it’s held by a regional economic development entity. Regardless, funding needs to be found and staff needs to be dedicated to this important task.

— Because Bangor is a center of health care delivery, Medicaid expansion in Maine under the Affordable Care Act would be the single-most impactful thing that could be done for this region’s economy. There is no sound economic argument against bringing $1 million a day in federal money to Maine to help shore up our health care system.

— A local minimum wage ordinance is the wrong way to address a legitimate national concern. Bangor should drop this idea.

— A national park for the Katahdin area is an economic winner for that region and the Bangor region as well. Fears of its impact on timber harvesting, meanwhile, are way overblown.

— Can we somehow make the site of the dormant asphalt tanks on the Bangor Waterfront into open space? Meanwhile, is the vacant lot at the corner of Railroad and Main streets really helpful as open space? Maybe it should be offered up for the development of shops and restaurants, etc.

— The best long-term opportunity the Bangor region has for economic growth is the R&D activity at the university. Bangor needs to become a friendly place for entrepreneurs ready to commercialize new technologies. That means continuing to build our lifestyle amenities and creating more resources and support for tech start-ups.

— The above imperative suggests that public investment in high-speed broadband Internet capacity would be a smart strategy for the Bangor region.

— We should stop stressing over the myth that our young people are leaving and focus instead on our strengths, including our good public schools and public safety record. We are a great community for people 30 and older who want to raise kids and enjoy an outdoor-oriented lifestyle. We don’t need to attract people in their 20s if we are drawing more experienced people in their 30s.

Truth be told, I have received much more than I’ve given to Bangor. I learned a great deal turning around and then leading a chamber organization as its CEO. But you can’t do this job without caring about the community. I’m thrilled to have been a part of the mojo. Even though I’ll be in Portland, I’ll be rooting for Bangor to continue its winning streak.

John Porter became president and CEO of the Bangor Region Chamber of Commerce in January 2010. His last day on the job was Aug. 28.