St. John’s Medical Center CEO Lou Hochheiser announced his retirement Monday, ending what will be a four-year term as the chief executive of the hospital.

Hochheiser made his announcement official at Monday’s board of trustees meeting, but the board was already prepared with a three-person search committee ready to be seated and an Illinois executive search firm waiting to be approved.

Hochheiser, a former family physician and former chief medical leader for Humana, originally contracted with St. John’s in 2012 for two years. He extended his contract with the hospital twice, each for one-year terms.

Hochheiser plans to stay on with the hospital at least through June 30, but said he is staying flexible in case the medical center needs more time to find a successor.

“I don’t know exactly when the process will end, so I’m leaving myself open without making any commitments to still help out if I’m needed,” he said.

Hochheiser has been credited with expanding collaborative efforts with surrounding medical facilities, most notably with University of Utah Health Care and most recently with Sublette County Rural Health Care District.

He also is known for “significantly expanding” the community wellness program, which includes the “Dinner with a Doc” series at the Senior Center of Jackson Hole and open house events about the Affordable Care Act, hospital spokeswoman Karen Connelly said.

“Before Lou got here, we were a place defined by four walls,” Connelly said.

“With Lou at the helm, this hospital has come light years,” said St. John’s Board Trustee Scott Gibson. “The whole community wellness program, that’s totally his.”

Hochheiser also is credited for expanding St. John’s staff to include additional surgeons, an internist and a cardiologist.

Gibson noted that Hochheiser’s clinical experience allowed him to steer the hospital to what types of physicians to hire and which departments to expand.

“To have that deep medical background as CEO, you can really weigh in on important medical calls,” he said.

The three-person committee created to lead the search for a new CEO consists of trustees Cynthia Hogan and Gibson and board chair Michael Tennican. Hogan will chair the committee.

Hogan asked the board to approve hiring Witt/Kieffer, an Oak Brook, Illinois, firm that specializes in executive searches, to aid in the process. The board unanimously approved the firm, though a contract has yet to be negotiated.

“The board believes it is appropriate again to cast our net widely to ensure ourselves and our community that we identify the best candidate possible to succeed Lou,” Tennican said in Monday’s board meeting. “It is our goal to have the next CEO in place by June 1, in order to pave the way for a smooth transition.”

Though the position will be open nationwide, Hochheiser said he has been grooming a candidate for more than a year: Dr. Marty Trott, an ear, nose and throat doctor who also serves as vice president for clinical operations.

Trott moved into this part-time administrative role, a new position for the hospital, in December 2014.

“I’ve been working hard to create a successor, and we have a really strong candidate internally,” Hochheiser said of Trott. “But the board feels this is so important to the community that they need to go through the process.”