U.S. Sen. Dick Durbin and challenger Jim Oberweis sparred Wednesday night in their first meeting on a formal debate stage, with the rivals arguing over whether the incumbent's experience is an asset or a liability.

Republican state Sen. Oberweis, 68, cast Durbin as a “smooth talker” and a “career politician” whose time in office should be up.

Durbin, 69, the Democratic front-runner, said his long tenure in the Senate — he is seeking a fourth six-year term — is exactly the reason why voters should return him to Washington.

In his opening statement, Durbin said the Nov. 4 election was about helping working families in Illinois, rewriting the tax code to keep companies in America and letting students renegotiate student loans. The U.S. senator highlighted the millions of people who have benefited from the Affordable Care Act.

Oberweis, in his opener, said that he would offer Illinoisans “a different way forward” and draw on his skills as a businessman to create better opportunities for people.

The candidates both touted working in a bipartisan manner.

Oberweis said that in his time in Springfield, he had “stayed with my principles” but also worked with the other side.

Durbin pointed to immigration legislation and other bipartisan efforts he's been involved in during his time in the Senate.

“I work with Republicans, and we get results,” he said.

Oberweis, when asked about the prospect of the Senate switching to GOP control, said it would mean a “real opportunity” to pass bills blocked by Durbin and Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid, D-Nev.

“It means that we as Republicans would be forced to work with the president,” Oberweis added.

The Republican said the average Illinois family earns $5,053 a year less since Durbin’s last election, which was in 2008. Oberweis said he would help kids get a better education with better schools.

Durbin said his experience in the Senate had helped Illinois, arguing that the state now receives more federal dollars for highways, bridges and transit than in the past.

The candidates also fielded questions on Ebola, gun control, gay marriage, an increase in the minimum wage and equal pay for men and women.

The candidates were asked whether they supported a federal standard on same-sex marriage, which is legal in Illinois and several other states.

Durbin, who has led throughout the race in polling and fundraising, unequivocally said yes. Oberweis said he would prefer the issue be decided by individual states, but that same-sex marriage was now “well established” and that “there’s no arguing about it any longer.”

Pressed to clarify his stance — Oberweis last year voted against Illinois’ same-sex marriage law — he said: “Time has passed, and I believe courts have said that that is the law, and I will uphold the law of the land.”

On the federal government’s response to the Ebola crisis, Durbin said things were going “in the right direction.” He pointed to the Republican Party’s tea party faction, saying its supporters have made the problem worse by forcing reductions in federal spending.

Oberweis said the government’s response had been too slow and that Durbin “should be picking up the phone” to pressure President Barack Obama to do more.

The candidates were asked if they would agree to pull their negative ads from the airwaves.

Durbin said that Oberweis had opened up with almost a million dollars of negative advertising and that if his rival wanted to pull those ads, he would follow suit.

Oberweis demurred, noting that super PACs would not be obligated to do the same.

Durbin, the Senate’s No. 2 Democrat, said he supports a ban on assault weapons. Oberweis said he supported Second Amendment rights and would support such a ban only if there were evidence it would reduce violence.

As he has done repeatedly in recent weeks, Durbin linked Oberweis to tea party conservatism.

Durbin referred to a statement Oberweis made earlier in the year to tea party activists that they should “take over the Republican Party.”

Oberweis said he meant that tea party activists should get involved in the GOP’s establishment wing.

The debate was hosted in the WLS-Ch. 7 studios in Chicago. Anchor Kathy Brock moderated the event, which was sponsored by the League of Women Voters of Illinois.

The candidates will meet again next Wednesday at a forum that will be broadcast by WTTW-Ch. 11.

kskiba@tribune.com

Twitter @KatherineSkiba