David Koch is not your enemy

Manhattan: I enjoyed reading your “Koch and a smile” editorial (March 11). I have known David Koch for years and am glad that your newspaper is recognizing the good things that he does for our city. David is outspoken about health care because his life’s passion is to find a cure for cancer. The only exception I take is that you describe Koch as a “conservative,” when in fact he is a proud libertarian and socially liberal. He is pro-choice — believing in a woman’s right to choose abortion — pro-peace, anti-war and he has long been a supporter of marriage equality, for which he is on record since 1980. The only thing conservative about Koch is his fiscal belief in smaller government instead of a billowing federal bureaucracy, and that we shouldn’t spend more than we have. And that’s just common sense. Brad Comisar

Pour out the Koch

Manhattan: With regard to March 11’s editorial on David Koch, let me be clear: I support the East Side’s hospital corridor as a hub of research, innovation and fighting illness. What I am firmly opposed to are the undemocratic activities of the Koch brothers, as are many of my constituents and, apparently, the editors of this paper — including pouring vast sums into radical causes such as the destruction of the Affordable Care Act and opposing women’s reproductive rights. Ben Kallos, New York City Council Member

Memory check

Whiting, N.J.: For many years, my father recounted his terror at seeing the remains of the 1960 TWA/United plane crash in New York City (“My memories plane chilling,” March 11). Like Denis Hamill, he never forgot the impact of the crash. However, I believe the United flight was a DC-8, not a DC-10. The 10 didn’t start commercial service until 1970. Deborah Charles

Can’t make it up

Howard Beach: My third-grade granddaughter brought home a list of famous women to do a report on. Students are supposed to research their biographies, accomplishments and contributions to U.S. history. I was shocked to see the first woman on the list was Nancy Drew! How sad is it that a teacher or teachers did not know that Nancy Drew is a fictional character created in the 1930s by an author under the pseudonym of Carolyn Keene? No wonder the school system is such a mess. Susan Church

Schools for scandal

Forest Hills: Every New Yorker should know the truth behind those commercials claiming that Mayor de Blasio is kicking children out of their beloved schools. Eva Moskowitz is the CEO of Success Academy and afraid of losing money if she is forced to pay rent for her charter schools. Her allies have given Gov. Cuomo $800,000 in campaign donations to ensure that he supports her agenda. She has spent millions of dollars on television and newspaper ads to distort the truth, which is that although her charter schools can afford to pay rent, they don’t want to. They want to piggyback off of public schools while excluding disabled and bilingual children from their schools. This will make our public schools more crowded and take away funds from schools that serve all of the children of NYC, and not just a select few. Libby Gurgis

Shoe’s on the other foot

Ozone Park: Funny how the Daily News dismissed valid UFT claims against former Mayor Bloomberg when he ignored any semblance of a fair and open process in order to starve and then close a generation of public schools. But now The Daily News lauds Eva Moskowitz, the half-million-dollar-a-year operator of the so-called Success Academies when she files suit against Mayor de Blasio’s righteous protection of disabled and poor students, whom Eva wants to throw onto the streets or into smelly and moldy trailers. David S. Pecoraro

Both sides now

Long Island City: The Daily News often demonizes opponents of charter schools, and most recently even those who place legitimate restrictions on their expansion (“Bill’s orphans,” editorial, March 7). Thus it was refreshing to read a rational rebuttal to the charter pimps and shills by Juan Gonzalez on the same day (“Listen, it isn’t personal — it’s just fairness”). Given that charters excel only by extending school hours, pushing out “problem” students and infusing special-interest funds into their budgets, their legacy is undermining confidence in our public school system, one that must now serve the vast majority of students with unjustified lower expectations. Steven Hackbarth

Not her call

Bronxville, N.Y.: Re Chirlane McCray’s statement to a Harlem audience that “I’m not ready to settle for crumbs or table scraps or Band-Aids. I’m ready to fight” (“Zip it, lady!” March 11): Someone should tell her that she is not the elected mayor. She can make her point, but there is no “I.” The mayor has to decide. Evelyn Ciota

Class action

Manhattan: The mayor’s wife referred to universal pre-k as the civil rights issue of the time. Gov. Cuomo countered with the truth, which is that the state of all public education is the issue. Do we just write off kids after pre-K? Look at the big picture, Mr. Mayor. Those children in K through 12 need education reform, too. Michael Palutke

Going down smoothly

Flushing: To Mayor de Blasio, certain Council members and all other officials who have declined to march in the St. Patrick’s Day Parade, I extend this old Irish blessing: “As you slide down the bannister of life, may the splinters never point the wrong way.” Tommy Lydon

Correcting the record

Kew Gardens: The March 9 paper contained a couple of errors. The page on “Eire Supply” used four-leaf clovers instead of shamrocks, which are one of the national symbols of Ireland. The shamrock has three heart-shaped leaves and a stem. Also, your TV listing for the program “Heartbeat of Home” said “dancers move to the rhythms of Africa.” This program was developed by the producers of Riverdance, and features mostly Irish dancing, as well as Latin and Afro-Cuban dancing and music. Patricia Farrell

History in the making

Jersey City: What’s the big deal about Ukraine? Nations and boundaries often change. It wasn’t that long ago that Yugoslavia was carved up. Martin McClosky

Pushovers

Kew Gardens: It is no surprise that Vladimir Putin has contempt for America and its President. Any country that allows itself to be invaded by tens of millions, then rewards the invaders with money (through so-called entitlements) and citizenship is worthy of contempt. Larry Trapani

Consider the source

Myrtle Beach, S.C.: I just can’t believe the Daily News has hired Anthony Weiner to provide political commentary. What’s next, Jerry Sandusky doing a teenage sports column? Shame on you. John M. Schaeffer

Who’s the boss?

Bayonne, N.J.: To these celebrity women who want to eliminate the word “bossy,” well, OK (“Beyoncé, Jennifer Garner, Jane Lynch join prominent women in #BanBossy campaign,” NYDailyNews.com, March 10). As long as we can also eliminate the word “alimony. ”Anthony Esposito

Equine equity

Valley Stream, L.I.: NYCLASS is paving the road to equestrian hell. We all know the result of a carriage ban will be dozens if not hundreds of euthanized horses. All for a land grab as the real estate for the stable property is sold at a premium — that is, if Mayor de Blasio and his bobblehead, Melissa Mark-Viverito, get their way. NYCLASS claims it is inhumane for horses to work in dangerous Midtown traffic, though they have somehow managed to do so for decades. If the city government continues to pursue this stubborn quest to throw 300 working families and horses off the streets, we need to take to the streets in peaceful protest, to let politicians know we want families to keep their jobs, horses to keep their lives and New York City to keep her classic character. Deirdre Harvey