Mike Konczal argues that the big divide between New Keynesians and Old Keynesians lies in the NK belief that, contra Keynes, the economy can be counted on to “auto-correct” back to full employment. I guess I’d quibble a bit both with the intellectual history and with Mike’s emphasis on rational expectations as the key divide, and I want to say a bit about that. On the main point, however, Mike and I are in complete agreement: any self-corrective forces in the economy of 2013 are very weak and slow, and we can stay depressed for a very long time.

OK, so about that history of thought issue: The standard view of a self-correcting economy is that it comes from long-run wage flexibility. The textbook picture — literally: this is taken straight from the World’s Best Principles Book — looks like this:

Photo

According to this picture, short-run declines of output below potential are all about short-run nominal wage rigidity. So where does this come from? Actually, its intellectual lineage runs straight back to Modigliani 1944 (pdf) — not exactly a New Keynesian! — who basically added an aggregate supply curve to Hicks’s IS-LM analysis and correctly concluded that this implied that everything depended on M/W, the ratio of the money supply to the wage rate, except in a liquidity trap. As the memory of the 30s receded, that last qualifying clause came to seem like trivial small print.

By the way, at various points in Keynes the master seems to agree, arguing that historically it had been possible to restore full employment by raising the quantity of money relative to wages; his view, however, was that something like a liquidity trap had become the norm by the 1930s. Obviously his prediction proved wrong, but I don’t think his logic was very different from Modigliani’s.

So what does this have to do with our current predicament? Until the late 1990s, I think most Keynesians, old or new, would have said that the process described by the figure may be right, but you don’t want to go through it, because wages adjust so slowly; in the long run the economy self-corrects, but in the long run we are all dead. Far better to get M/W in line by raising M instead of cutting W.

But then came Japan’s rediscovery of the liquidity trap — and a decade later, the Japanification of the whole advanced world. Suddenly Modigliani’s small print becomes big news: even if wages are flexible downward, that doesn’t help, because increasing the real money supply doesn’t reduce interest rates. In terms of the figure above, the aggregate demand curve becomes vertical.

Or maybe worse than that: once we take balance sheet effects into account, the aggregate demand curve may well slope the “wrong” way, so that flexible wages and hence prices make things worse (pdf):

Photo

That figure, by the way, is taken from a paper that is very much New Keynesian in its setup, although the basic insight can be expressed in IS-LM too.

Now, since World War II the US economy always has tended to return to full employment after slumps. Why? Well, the answer is that (a) it wasn’t in a liquidity trap and (b) we had an active monetary policy response (in fact, before 1990 monetary policy generally caused the slumps, so all the Fed had to do was stop the punishment). The trouble is that none of this experience is relevant to our current situation.

So is there no route back to full employment absent the kind of massive stimulus that only seems to happen via war? OK, even Keynes wasn’t that pessimistic: he argued that investment would eventually recover once “use, decay, and obsolescence” created a sufficient scarcity of capital. Once we take the problem of debt into account, I think you’d want to add deleveraging and default — which reduce the debt overhang — to his list. So even on a very Old Keynesian view, depressions aren’t forever. And I think you can see some of those Keynesian mechanisms of long-run recovery at work in the US economy now, with a depleted housing stock and a somewhat reduced debt burden driving a gradual upswing despite Washington’s best efforts.

But it could be a very long time before we have anything like full employment — and there will, as Mike says, be legions of people denying that there even is a gap that needs closing.