Long Beach, along with California and the nation, is facing a primary care physician shortage that grows worse every year. As health care reform takes full effect and millions more Californians gain coverage and therefore can afford to seek the care they need, many will have trouble finding a family physician or other primary care doctor to care for them, as many patients already do.

Several areas of Long Beach are designated by the state of California as Primary Care Shortage Areas. Access to care is especially difficult for people whose care is covered by the state’s Medi-Cal program, as the Press-Telegram recently reported.

Because Medi-Cal payments to physicians are among the lowest Medicaid rates in the country, many primary care and other physicians say they can’t afford to see additional Medi-Cal patients and still keep their practices financially viable.

A 2010 California HealthCare Foundation report found a large percentage of physicians in all specialties, including primary care, were declining to accept new Medi-Cal patients. Since that time, the state has cut those payments by 10 percent and health care reform is bringing several hundred thousand new patients into the Medi-Cal program.

When we combine these factors with the primary care physician shortage, it’s easy to understand the difficulty patients face finding a primary care physician whose practice will serve as their medical home, the cornerstone of their health care.

To address both problems, the 8,700-member California Academy of Family Physicians (CAFP) is sponsoring legislation to increase the number of primary care physicians in the state and supporting legislation to strengthen the Medi-Cal program, which makes health care available for several million lower-income people in our state. No one should be unable to find care because of his or her income level.

CAFP is sponsoring Assembly Bill 2458 (Bonilla, D-Concord) to create a Graduate Medical Education (GME) Fund in California. The goal is to increase the number of medical residency slots in physician training programs that have a proven record of graduating primary care physicians and serving the underserved. The California Medical Association is co-sponsoring the bill.

CAFP also is supporting two key bills that would improve Medi-Cal beneficiaries’ access to physicians. AB 1805 (Skinner, D-Berkeley) will reverse the 10 percent Medi-Cal provider payment cut adopted in June 2011 and implemented late last year. AB 1759 (Pan, D-Sacramento) will extend the Affordable Care Act provision that increases primary care physician Medi-Cal payments to the higher Medicare levels and is set to expire at the end of 2014. This bill also will create an annual independent assessment of Medi-Cal provider payment rates and their impact on access and quality of care for patients.

Advertisement

In addition, a pending resolution in the Assembly, ACR 107 (Bloom, D-Santa Monica) would declare 2014 The Year of the Family Physician. Several elements of the national health care reform law specifically put primary care at the center of the U.S. health care system. Our role as family physicians is to provide culturally responsive preventive and primary care, including expert treatment of chronic illnesses such as diabetes and heart disease. This care improves health, quality of life and patient outcomes. It also saves precious health care dollars.

If California’s elected leaders are serious about ensuring that the people of our state have access to high quality, affordable health care, they will pass these bills and address any other barriers to care in the future.

Providing more people with health care coverage as the ACA is implemented doesn’t mean much if patients can’t find physicians to care for them.

Mark Dressner, MD, is a Long Beach physician and president of the California Academy of Family Physicians; www.familydocs.org.