NEW HAVEN >> ProHealth, a large group of mainly primary care practitioners, has managed to reduce the emergency room visits by its patients, as well as hospitalizations.

“Hurrah! You might think we got shared savings, right?,” John Lynch, vice president for research and government affairs for the organization, told state Comptroller Kevin Lembo at a recent hearing.

Unfortunately, Lynch said increased hospital prices for both out-patient and in-patient services made it impossible for ProHealth to turn around an overall reduction in costs to Medicare in 2013.

Lynch said he did not know if the costs were tied to facility fees charged by hospitals and physicians, mainly specialists, whose practices have been purchased by hospitals.

Advertisement

The state is currently reviewing the extent of these fees, how they are determined and how they can be justified. They have ranged from as low as $25 to several thousand dollars and appear to hit patients with high deductible insurance plans the hardest.

The Affordable Care Act has been promoting Medicare Savings Plans to physicians who work with hospitals and specialists in an Accountable Care Organization to deliver quality care and cut costs.

The incentive is Medicare’s offer to split 50/50 any savings ProHealth can show in costs to the government program as it monitors the myriad needs of its patients.

ProHealth has some 400 practitioners, 95 percent of whom work in primary care in 90 practice sites in the state. Lynch said it is viewed by physicians as an alternative to joining a hospital system.

The savings program is one of many plans in the Affordable Care Act aimed at reducing healthcare costs.

Lynch said in 2013, payments to ProHealth physicians made up only 4.5 percent of the cost of care to its patients, which means they have to get a handle on the other 95 percent of expenditures. Of the total, hospital care made up 46 percent of those costs.

“This model isn’t really working the way it hopefully would be,” Lynch said of their first year in the plan.

Each ACO has a benchmark of per patient costs based on the previous three years of expenditures. But Lynch said, this was before facility fees were a factor. ProHealth’s benchmark per patient was $9,955 with .49 percent allowed for inflation.

“It is pretty hard when prices have gone up substantially more than that. So, in that sense it is really not a sustainable model,” Lynch said. The actual cost came in at $10,514 per patient in 2013, an increase of 5.6 percent.

ProHealth achieved a 6.6 percent drop in hospitalizations in 2013 for its patients and 3.16 percent fewer emergency department visits.

But for the more than 10 hospitals in the ProHealth network, the inpatient price paid per admission was up an average of 10 percent to $12,001.

This was the case even though the three most expensive — Yale-New Haven Hospital, St. Francis and John Dempsey at the University of Connecticut — saw price drops from 2012 to 2013.

Lynch said one of the higher cost factors was an increased market share by hospitals that boosted their rates. Hartford Hospital’s price per admission was up 10 percent and the number of ProHealth patients using Hartford Hospital went from 22 percent to 26 percent.

He’s hoping the figures are better for 2014 by getting timely notification from hospitals when their patients are being discharged so they can be properly followed, while they also want to reduce the length of stay in a nursing home.

Lynch also said transparency on pricing should help patients make some better decisions. As an example, he said he had a colonoscopy at Masonic Care, as opposed to Midstate Medical Center and saved $1,000 because Masonic did not have a facility fee.

“So there are ways to do it if you can be an empowered patient like I try to be,” he said.

Probably the most important factor going forward is getting covered for the extra work they are putting in.

Lynch said ProHealth was expending a lot of resources “hoping that we will get shared savings to help pay us back a year and a half to two years later.”

Currently, there is no cash flow for the additional work, he said.

He told Lembo that the expenditures from hospitals and others that they have no control over are impacting the savings model in a negative way and “making it very unsustainable.”

Lynch predicted that if the coordination of care and other responsibilities continue to go unreimbursed and ACOs fail to qualify for shared Medicare savings “those services ... won’t stay around very long.”

Ellen Andrews of the Connecticut Health Policy Project said of the 11 Medicare Accountable Care Organizations in Connecticut, only one was successful in earning a shared savings bonus and on the national scale four of the Pioneer ACOs have dropped out.

The Pioneer ACO model is for health care groups that already have a lot of experience with coordinating care for patients with hospitals and other practitioner groups.

Andrews predicted more will get out of the program down the line when the participants will face reimbursement cuts if they fail to achieve the projected savings.

“ACOs are relatively new, especially in Connecticut, and there is little evidence for effectiveness at improving value even in more mature, better sophisticated systems from other states,” Andrews wrote in testimony before Lembo’s committee.