HUNTINGTON, W.Va. (AP) - His restaurant closing is one thing, but finding a place for the treasures within is another.

Darrell “Bo” Smith has come to grips with the reality that his 29-year-old business, Tascali’s Decades Pasta and Grill, will open for the last time on Tuesday. What he has not yet determined, however, is the fate of the massive amount of unique memorabilia which adorns the walls of the restaurant, and what will become of the coveted 29th Street Wiggin’s Barbecue recipes.

Wiggin’s was known for its carhop service of spaghetti, barbecue sandwiches and homemade dishes.

“I have a buyer for all the equipment and furnishings, but I’m keeping ownership of the memorabilia and recipes,” Smith said, citing his age and other life factors as reasons for closing. “But I have this wonderful memorabilia that needs a home. These amazing works should remain in public domain. I could sell them, but I’d rather it be displayed in the right place.”

Smith, 70, said one aspect of the memorabilia in particular, the murals which have been a 10-year effort of artist Tim Decker, need a home along with the recipes. Since its beginning, Tascali’s Italian-American menu has featured the Wiggin’s recipes, which are more than 75 years old.

“I will continue to look for an opportunity to find an outlet for the 29th Street Wiggin’s Barbecue recipes, which have been a staple of Tascali’s these past 29 years,” he said. “The new owner is not interested in the recipes, and 40 percent of our customers eat something made from the Wiggin’s recipes.”

Founded in November of 1985 by Smith and his business partner, the late Edward Humphries, Tascali’s was originally located at 5505 U.S. Route 60 East in Huntington. The restaurant operated in that location for 19 years before moving to its current location at 6007 U.S. 60 in Barboursville’s River Place Shopping Center in 2005. Smith retired from Inco Alloys in 2000 at age 55.

When the restaurant relocated, Smith launched its current “Decades Pasta and Grill” theme which features three dining rooms, each containing 20 years of history illustrated by the aforementioned murals, calendars, posters and individualized music beginning with the attack on Pearl Harbor and ending with the terrorist attacks of Sept. 11, 2001.

“I am proud of what we accomplished these past 29 years,” Smith said. “My most significant rewards have come with the human interaction with the staff and customers.” Tascali’s currently has between 14 and 16 employees. Smith said he doesn’t know if the new owner intends to retain any of the current staff, but through the years, his employees have been the catalyst for some of his more fond memories.

“I have watched many of my past employees use Tascali’s as a spring-board to start their careers and their families,” he said. “When former employees come in with their children it only reinforces the fact that a business’ success is not always measured by a profit-and-loss statement.” Smith praised his staff - Natasha Workman in particular - for continuing to work, thus not forcing Tascali’s to abruptly close.

He also thanked his customers.

“I want to thank our customers not only for their continued support, patronage and understanding,” he said, “but for the memories they have shared about the role Tascali’s has played in their lives over the years.” The new owner and tenant of the location at 6007 U.S. Route 60 will open Fratelli’s Italian Restaurant, slated to open in early June.

Smith will for the first time be fully retired as of April 1. He said he will likely spend most of his time remodeling his house with his wife, Pat.

“It’s the end of the road,” Smith said. “We are doing what we have to do. As Bob Hope would say, ‘Thanks for the memories.’”

___

Information from: The Herald-Dispatch, http://www.herald-dispatch.com