Top Stories School district shuffle: Thomas announces more administration changes Modified: Saturday, Mar 26th, 2016









EVANSTON — Evanston Middle School is the only school in Uinta County School District No. 1 still unaffected by school administration changes. The other schools will see principals and vice principals leaving and coming in and shuffled around come July 1.



Tuesday night’s Uinta County School District No. 1 Board of Trustees meeting was the shortest and most sparsely attended meeting since October, with fewer than 20 community attendees and almost exactly an hour of public business and discussion.



The board began by removing the executive session for personnel from the agenda.



The board recognized the EHS Classics dance team for its phenomenal performance at state.



The board accepted four resignations and approved contracts for Doreen Platt (who will become media specialist at Davis Middle School) and Somer Moore (who will be a science specialist at North Elementary). The board also approved two administrative contracts for Chris Brown and Kimber Fessler, who will be principals of Davis Middle School and Clark Elementary, respectively.



In his press release, Superintendent of Operations Ryan Thomas wrote, “I am confident in the leadership ability of these men and women and know each of them represents a different leadership style and have different strengths and weaknesses that you may not be used to. I am optimistic that, given a chance and given your support, your building and the district will thrive and grow. We have had enough distractions, discord and uneasiness this year; it is time to heal.”



He also noted that these assignments will cut two positions from administrative staff (UME assistant principal and EHS/Horizon co-principal), saving the district $113,006. This is especially important as the district tries to reduce expenses and positions to prepare for budget cuts in coming years.



“Our challenge is to reduce the budget to the point of being pinched but not where we begin to bleed,” Thomas wrote.



After discussion of contracts, representatives from UME, North and Clark gave a presentation to the board about upcoming trips to Teton Science School for fifth graders.



UME assistant principal Kimber Fessler said students build up their excitement for this trip from kindergarten until fifth grade.



Clark Elementary students will take the trip May 2-6, and 28 students and four sponsors will go. It costs $380 per participant. Principal Steve Peterson said Clark has made this trip for about 25 years.



He said students each have to pay $100 to go on the trip unless they participate in fund-raising, in which case they only have to pay $50. The rest of the money comes primarily from a variety of fundraisers.



Fifth grade teachers Brooke George and Megan Matthews presented for North Elementary. North Elementary students will go May 16-20, and 44 students and eight sponsors will attend. Tuition costs $395 per participant. Students at North Elementary are asked to pay as much as they can, but the school also does fundraising, and the student council donates toward scholarships.



UME students will go May 12-16, and 60 students and 10 sponsors are expected to go. The cost per participant is $407, partly because the school does the extra ropes course. UME students are expected to pay the full cost with the help of fundraising. Assistant principal Fessler said the school’s policy is, “encouraging kids to work towards something with the idea that this is worth every cent that they pay for it.”



Matthews said the cost continues to go up every year, which could make the trip more difficult as budgets and resources wane.



Members of the local Veterans of Foreign Wars organization presented a check for $500 to each school participating in the Teton Science School trip.



The board then discussed a climate survey and how it will break down the survey to give to different subgroups, starting by having separate surveys for certified and noncertified staff.



Special Education Director Dan Mayer gave a special services presentation.



The Special Olympics has had a good start, and the school district may host its own event soon. He also discussed various support systems within the school and how the schools are working to improve attendance and help students who do not earn a traditional diploma to continue their education beyond age 18. The schools are allowed to teach these students until the age of 21 and try to help students get to the next phase in life, including getting an apartment and a job. Several students have jobs in the community.



“I think it is a fantastic program,” trustee Jenny Welling said. She said Mountain West, where she works, has one such student as an employee, and she has been impressed by his passion and dedication.



Thomas commended Mayer on his good work with staffing; most schools struggle to find specialized staff, but Mayer has found several excellent employees who are able to meet the needs of students.



Thomas gave an HR presentation. He said he believes that the Lifetime of Service Stipend is a good thing to have in place, as it rewards administrative, certified and support staff at the same level.



He said the Affordable Health Care Act is worrisome as well; it is complicated to adhere to and has huge financial costs if it’s not followed perfectly.



‘There’s potential of penalties,” he said. “... It’s truly an unknown.”



However, he said the district has had a good year for compliance.



“I think I’m called Captain Compliance for a reason,” he said.



He also discussed teacher retention and the need to replace his administrative assistant, Colleen Fackrell, who has submitted her resignation, as well as the leave incentive. Teachers have a general leave of 11 days, which is less than last year (17 days). However, if teachers do not take leave, they receive $100 per each unused leave day. This does not apply to blackout days, though, which include certain weeks (the first and last weeks of school), days close to holidays and professional development days. These are days that are hard to get substitutes for.



Staff that miss blackout days for reasons other than family emergencies forfeit the incentive. Staff have to send Thomas an email about it in order to appeal the forfeiture.



“I want them to get that thousand dollar check because they’ve been in the classroom those 10 days,” he said.



He noted that the district will likely see more teacher absences on blackout days now that professional development days are right before the weekend on half days and before holidays.



Thomas said the district needs to rework two policies. He is working with the Evanston Education Association to modify the grievance policy, which is currently cumbersome and hard to understand and use. The district also needs to create a social media use policy. The district looked at it in late 2015, but the policy was set aside in October when conflicts arose. Thomas said he plans to talk to the EEA and to the board about the policy, which can be controversial.



The board adjourned into executive session at 7 p.m. EVANSTON — Evanston Middle School is the only school in Uinta County School District No. 1 still unaffected by school administration changes. The other schools will see principals and vice principals leaving and coming in and shuffled around come July 1.Tuesday night’s Uinta County School District No. 1 Board of Trustees meeting was the shortest and most sparsely attended meeting since October, with fewer than 20 community attendees and almost exactly an hour of public business and discussion.The board began by removing the executive session for personnel from the agenda.The board recognized the EHS Classics dance team for its phenomenal performance at state.The board accepted four resignations and approved contracts for Doreen Platt (who will become media specialist at Davis Middle School) and Somer Moore (who will be a science specialist at North Elementary). The board also approved two administrative contracts for Chris Brown and Kimber Fessler, who will be principals of Davis Middle School and Clark Elementary, respectively.In his press release, Superintendent of Operations Ryan Thomas wrote, “I am confident in the leadership ability of these men and women and know each of them represents a different leadership style and have different strengths and weaknesses that you may not be used to. I am optimistic that, given a chance and given your support, your building and the district will thrive and grow. We have had enough distractions, discord and uneasiness this year; it is time to heal.”He also noted that these assignments will cut two positions from administrative staff (UME assistant principal and EHS/Horizon co-principal), saving the district $113,006. This is especially important as the district tries to reduce expenses and positions to prepare for budget cuts in coming years.“Our challenge is to reduce the budget to the point of being pinched but not where we begin to bleed,” Thomas wrote.After discussion of contracts, representatives from UME, North and Clark gave a presentation to the board about upcoming trips to Teton Science School for fifth graders.UME assistant principal Kimber Fessler said students build up their excitement for this trip from kindergarten until fifth grade.Clark Elementary students will take the trip May 2-6, and 28 students and four sponsors will go. It costs $380 per participant. Principal Steve Peterson said Clark has made this trip for about 25 years.He said students each have to pay $100 to go on the trip unless they participate in fund-raising, in which case they only have to pay $50. The rest of the money comes primarily from a variety of fundraisers.Fifth grade teachers Brooke George and Megan Matthews presented for North Elementary. North Elementary students will go May 16-20, and 44 students and eight sponsors will attend. Tuition costs $395 per participant. Students at North Elementary are asked to pay as much as they can, but the school also does fundraising, and the student council donates toward scholarships.UME students will go May 12-16, and 60 students and 10 sponsors are expected to go. The cost per participant is $407, partly because the school does the extra ropes course. UME students are expected to pay the full cost with the help of fundraising. Assistant principal Fessler said the school’s policy is, “encouraging kids to work towards something with the idea that this is worth every cent that they pay for it.”Matthews said the cost continues to go up every year, which could make the trip more difficult as budgets and resources wane.Members of the local Veterans of Foreign Wars organization presented a check for $500 to each school participating in the Teton Science School trip.The board then discussed a climate survey and how it will break down the survey to give to different subgroups, starting by having separate surveys for certified and noncertified staff.Special Education Director Dan Mayer gave a special services presentation.The Special Olympics has had a good start, and the school district may host its own event soon. He also discussed various support systems within the school and how the schools are working to improve attendance and help students who do not earn a traditional diploma to continue their education beyond age 18. The schools are allowed to teach these students until the age of 21 and try to help students get to the next phase in life, including getting an apartment and a job. Several students have jobs in the community.“I think it is a fantastic program,” trustee Jenny Welling said. She said Mountain West, where she works, has one such student as an employee, and she has been impressed by his passion and dedication.Thomas commended Mayer on his good work with staffing; most schools struggle to find specialized staff, but Mayer has found several excellent employees who are able to meet the needs of students.Thomas gave an HR presentation. He said he believes that the Lifetime of Service Stipend is a good thing to have in place, as it rewards administrative, certified and support staff at the same level.He said the Affordable Health Care Act is worrisome as well; it is complicated to adhere to and has huge financial costs if it’s not followed perfectly.‘There’s potential of penalties,” he said. “... It’s truly an unknown.”However, he said the district has had a good year for compliance.“I think I’m called Captain Compliance for a reason,” he said.He also discussed teacher retention and the need to replace his administrative assistant, Colleen Fackrell, who has submitted her resignation, as well as the leave incentive. Teachers have a general leave of 11 days, which is less than last year (17 days). However, if teachers do not take leave, they receive $100 per each unused leave day. This does not apply to blackout days, though, which include certain weeks (the first and last weeks of school), days close to holidays and professional development days. These are days that are hard to get substitutes for.Staff that miss blackout days for reasons other than family emergencies forfeit the incentive. Staff have to send Thomas an email about it in order to appeal the forfeiture.“I want them to get that thousand dollar check because they’ve been in the classroom those 10 days,” he said.He noted that the district will likely see more teacher absences on blackout days now that professional development days are right before the weekend on half days and before holidays.Thomas said the district needs to rework two policies. He is working with the Evanston Education Association to modify the grievance policy, which is currently cumbersome and hard to understand and use. The district also needs to create a social media use policy. The district looked at it in late 2015, but the policy was set aside in October when conflicts arose. Thomas said he plans to talk to the EEA and to the board about the policy, which can be controversial.The board adjourned into executive session at 7 p.m.



















Select Page: Top Stories Sports Obits Opinion Rich County Outdoors Classifieds

Within: 1 Months 3 Months 6 Months 12 Months

Keyword: Advanced Search Select Page:Within:Keyword:

Enter your search terms Submit search form

Entertainment