AUSTIN — Like Lubbock and a growing number of Texas cities, Amarillo now has a freestanding emergency room and three more are in the works.

“When you look at freestanding emergency rooms and hospital-based emergency rooms, they are synonymous, they are the same,” said Gerad Troutman, a doctor and a business partner at ER Now, the 24/7 Amarillo facility that opened on Sept. 4

Those medical facilities are proliferating in Texas because “the patients like the experience,” Troutman explained. “They are in and out so they can continue doing what they need to do.”

This was in reference to the long waits that characterize many emergency rooms at hospitals.

“In a freestanding ER, the longest wait is 30 minutes and we apologize to our patients if they have to wait 30 minutes,” Troutman said.

For its part, the Texas Department of State Health Services defines a freestanding ER as “a facility that is structurally separate and distinct from a hospital and which receives an individual and provides emergency care.”

Call it a sign of the times.

Six years after the Texas Legislature passed a law that allows freestanding ERs to operate in the state, the facilities are sprouting everywhere, especially in large urban areas such as Dallas, Houston and San Antonio, according to various reports.

“Freestanding emergency departments (FSEDS) are on the rise,” the Texas Medical Association says about the more than 160 facilities already operating in the state.

“The development of FSEDs is driven by growing population trends in urban and suburban communities, demand for more convenient care closer to home, and a dwindling number of hospital emergency departments despite the growing need for emergency care,” the association posted on its website. “ From 1995 to 2005, the number of emergency rooms in the United States decreased from 4,176 to 3,795. ”

Factors in success

The Texas Association of Freestanding Emergency Centers, the umbrella organization for the industry, attributes the success of the facilities to the following factors:

■ Access — FECs provide access to emergency medical care for every patient that walks in their doors.

■ Quality — FECs provide consummate quality of care. They are licensed, closely regulated, fully equipped for all medical emergencies and required to have an emergency room (ER) physician on-duty at all times.

■ Convenience — FECs provide unparalleled convenience. They are located nearby patients and wait time is consistently shorter than hospital ERs. Unlike urgent-care facilities, FECs are required to be open 24/7 to provide all levels of care.

■ Cost — FECs charge equal to or less than hospital ERs for emergency care that often exceeds the hospital ER standard.

■ Satisfaction — Among all urgent- and emergency-care providers, FECs receive the highest satisfaction scores from everyone involved — patients, physicians and staff.

In addition, Troutman and the organization emphasize the differences between freestanding ERs and urgent care centers, which have also become popular in recent years and can usually be found in strip malls and shopping centers.

“Urgent care centers are a totally different ballgame,” Troutman said. “Urgent cares are usually open during the day, maybe in the evening and they offer very limited services.

“They don’t have a CAT scan, some may have an X-ray but certainly not all of that, and often staffed by low-level providers,” he added.

The Texas Association of Freestanding Emergency Centers stresses the following on its website:

“Unlike urgent-care centers, FECs are required to operate 24/7; have ER physicians on-site at all times; provide around-the-clock lab and imaging services; and stock medications not required for urgent-care centers.”

Some skeptical

However, as with other industries, not everyone is completely sold on the freestanding ERs.

“Freestanding emergency departments want to claim, ‘oh, we are convenience to patients because we reduce the burden on hospital emergency departments and we can offer care at a lower cost because we are not sort of a burden when all of the costs of staffing a hospital,’ ” said health care economist Vivian Ho.

“I am skeptical of that,” said Ho, director of the Center for Health and Biosciences at Rice University’s Baker Institute of Public Policy in Houston.

“What an emergency department would do is ‘oh, we’ll bill your insurance, just come on in’ and what it turns out that in many cases is that they actually are out of network,” Ho explained. “They don’t tell the patient that, they just say ‘we will bill your insurance’ and they balance bill the patient for the remainder and the patients often are stuck with a very high bill and they are allowed to charge that because they charge the facility building’s fees, which is what the emergency departments do.”

Moreover, the freestanding ERs are usually in upper class neighborhoods which not only have residents with higher than average incomes but are also insured and usually healthier than the rest of the population, Ho and others say.

State Rep. John Smithee, who in this year’s session sponsored a bill that helps consumers avoid sticker shock after they or someone in the family receives emergency medical care, said it remains to be seen how the new law – which went into effect on Sept. 1 – will work on the billing practices of freestanding ERs.

“When we were going through the process with that legislation we weren’t thinking particularly of the new private emergency rooms,” Smithee, R-Amarillo, said in reference to the so-called “balance billing” legislation that consumer advocates hailed.

“But I don’t know of any reason why the law would not apply to those freestanding emergency rooms,” Smithee said.

Nonetheless, “it would be prudent for patients or families of those patients, if it is not an absolute emergency, to take some effort to make sure that the facility is in their network,” he recommended. “But if you still have the problem that even if the facility, the hospital or the other emergency is in network some of the treating physicians may be out of network.”

Troutman said he has heard those concerns but consumers shouldn’t have anything to worry about when they or some in their family go to a freestanding ER.

“If you look at the ACA (the federal Affordable Care Act) and Texas law, whenever a patient presents to an emergency department, the insurance that that patience has, has to pay in-network rates to that facility,” Troutman said. So, in some ways if that facility or a doctor is in-network or out of network “is not necessarily all that important to the emergency medical business.”

However, “it is important when you go in-patient,” Troutman stressed. “If you go in-patient you’ll be admitted to a hospital and if you go to an out-of-network hospital, you’re going to have the entire bill.

“If we do have a patient that is going to need surgery, we ask the patient’s preference first, that’s always most important and then we check that their insurance is going to be in-network for that.”

enrique.rangel@morris.com

512-673-7553