Bloomberg

Medtronic has 99 problems — but taxes ain’t really one.

The medical-device maker’s $42.9 billion merger with Ireland-based Covidien this week is being billed as the latest example of how the U.S. needs tax “reform” — read, lower corporate taxes — but it’s not. This deal isn’t the move of confident job creators seeking the best outlet for their brawny creativity. Instead, it’s a move from weakness, made by two mature companies responding to private-sector cost controls by shifting their emphasis from engineering to financial engineering.

The real problem for medical-device companies is that they are getting squeezed hard by the long-running push to contain health-care costs, which only accelerated with the Affordable Care Act. Lobbyists for the industry, and companies like Boston Scientific BSX, +0.76% said during last fall’s budget fight that they wanted repeal of the ACA’s 2.3% excise tax on medical devices because prices for what they sell were falling.

In other words, hospitals were consolidating to meet their own cost-containment requirements, and their size let them bargain harder with companies like Medtronic MDT, +0.12%

U.S. expats give up citizenship to flee taxes (20:31)

But capitalism — remember capitalism? — has always offered a neat answer to that dilemma: innovate. Build products so compelling they can command above-market margins. Device makers used to do this effectively — that’s why their profit margins before interest, taxes and non-cash charges (but after R&D spending, which is only 5% of Covidien’s sales and 9% of Medtronic’s) are still nearly 10 percentage points higher than those of the S&P 500 companies as a group. Even with all their complaining, device makers’ margins run about 34% of sales, compared with 24.5% for the S&P 500, Standard & Poor’s Capital IQ said last year.

This can be done even in today’s climate — if the product is good enough. The most obvious example is Gilead Sciences GILD, -1.41% whose $84,000 hepatitis C drug has taken over its market in less than a year since winning U.S. regulatory approval. Its gross margins are 90%-plus.

A shortage of innovation, combined with skepticism about price and value, has led the whole medical-device group to underperform the S&P 500 badly since 2009. That means Medtronic wants to raise its dividend — which, at an annual yield of 1.9%, is right about at the S&P 500 average, but not high enough to compensate for weakening growth prospects.

To deliver competitive returns, Medtronic needs to do one of two things. It plans to raise its dividend — and to meet its target of returning 50% of free cash flow to shareholders, it would sure help to repatriate the offshore part of Medtronic’s $14 billion cash reserve without paying taxes.

Or Medtronic and Covidien each could merge with another player to get bigger, and regain bargaining power with hospitals. That would help profits, driving shares higher.

Or both.

Which is what they did.

“Sure, there is more cash flexibility, and we will use that to our advantage,” Medtronic CEO Omar Ishrak said on a conference call Monday. “But the strategic element of this deal is extremely important, and that was a primary driver.”

So, please, let’s skip the blather about lost U.S. jobs or competitiveness. This deal had nothing to do with that.

Both companies will keep their operational headquarters in the U.S. Covidien, which is already based in Ireland legally, has three of its 41 factories there and 19 in the U.S., generating 82% of the dollar value of Covidien’s production. Its top execs live near Boston. Covidien (like Medtronic) will keep jobs near where customers and labor’s needs are.

The trick for both policy makers and investors is to watch the balls that really matter. For policy makers, that means jobs — and they’re staying in the U.S. For investors, that means sales and profits — the lion’s share of those are staying here too.

Washington, which has a budget to kinda-sorta balance over time, may eventually tighten the tax loophole that enabled this deal. It should. The loss of innovation shifting to paper entrepreneurialism hurts the economy far more than nominal U.S. corporate tax rates of 35% — which, after our unusually generous deductions, produce tax bills at or below developed-nation averages.

If you believe Medtronic’s deal says anything about U.S. competitiveness, look harder at the numbers. If you can still sell the idea that the corporate tax is why companies succeed or fail, you may yet forge a career convincing in-demand engineers and corporate executives to move to countries like Ireland, with an unemployment rate twice as high and incomes 40% lower than in the United States.

Tim Mullaney writes on the economy, health care and technology. His favorite slice of Ireland is his brother’s Pittsburgh-based pub. Contact him at tim.mullaney@outlook.com or follow him on Twitter at @timmullaney.

More from MarketWatch:

How investors can tap into multibillion-dollar premiums

Medtronic-Covidien deal raises the stakes in medical-device universe

The real insider trading problem? That no one cares

More from MarketWatch