At a recent town hall rally for Republican presidential frontrunner Donald Trump, an obnoxious attendee suggested that Obama is a Muslim.

Though some suspect this Trump supporter to be a progressive activist planted to stir up controversy, twenty-nine percent of Americans continue to question Obama’s true religious allegiances. Some think he’s Muslim; thirty-nine percent think he’s Christian.

Though the media consistently uses this suspicion as a political tool to marginalize Republican and conservative voters and politicians, the only person to blame for the continuing suspicion of Obama’s religious faith is President Obama.

The president has claimed repeatedly and obligatorily that he’s Christian. He’s proud to have been a member of Trinity United Church of Christ in Chicago for more than 20 years. He and Michelle were married at Trinity and his daughters were baptized at Trinity. At one time, President Obama was proud of his mentor — “God damn America” pastor Jeremiah Wright, Trinity’s pastor emeritus — and he defended Wright’s confrontational brand of black theology.

The president has also admitted that he’s used the Bible and his religious faith as sources of strength and guidance when making tough political decisions. He’s even had a number of spiritual advisors — including liberal evangelical Jim Wallis, founder and editor of Sojourners magazine, and Daily Beast columnist and author Joshua Dubois. President Obama is even close with “Reverend” Al Sharpton, a man who by definition does considerable and demonstrable damage to all things Christian, including the integrity of all the decent men and women who share the title “reverend” with him.

So, yes, the president has said that he’s Christian, and it’s obvious that he’s familiar with Christianity (being familiar with Christianity doesn’t make one Christian).

More to the point, a problem for President Obama is that he’s knowingly said so much that simply hasn’t been true.

Obama repeatedly assured Americans they could keep both their doctor and health care plan under Obamacare knowing full well that was a lie. He told the country that Obamacare would reduce premiums, cut the deficit and create jobs, none of which was true. He, pressed to act after his self-imposed ultimatum regarding Syria’s use of chemical weapons had come, dishonestly claimed that he hadn’t given Syria an ultimatum. He said that he was powerless and couldn’t unilaterally alter the country’s immigration process, then circumvented the Constitution by unilaterally changing the country’s immigration system. These are but a few examples.

Even more problematic is that the president has done so much that simply doesn’t square with (small-“o”) orthodox Christianity. In other words, the glaring disconnect between what the president has said about being a Christian and what he’s done, supposedly, while being Christian is what leads people to correctly question his religious sincerity.

It’s no secret that President Obama is an enthusiastic supporter of abortion. He once said, “On this fundamental issue [abortion], I will not yield, and Planned Parenthood will not yield.” In addition to stating his unyielding support for killing unborn children, Barack Obama has also voted against the Born Alive Infant Protection Act as a state senator, four times. The bill would’ve granted personhood and legal protections to all babies fortunate enough to be born alive during the abortion process.

Think about that. A self-identified Christian refused to grant civil rights and legal protections to babies who survived attempted murder.

Speaking to an audience at Planned Parenthood’s National Conference in 2013, the president thanked and extended God’s blessing to them. Even after the release of morally disturbing videos showing the extent to which Planned Parenthood and their affiliates will go to procure organs from aborted babies, President Obama promises to veto any spending bill that seeks to strip the abortion provider of federal funding.

As a self-identified Christian, President Obama’s signature legislation, Obamacare, has also sought to force his fellow Christians — religious business owners, corporations and various religious institutions — to provide contraception and abortifacients in employee and student health insurance plans, which violates sincerely held religious convictions of those under coercion.

In 2008, President Obama told Rick Warren — in church no less (though David Axelrod later admitted that Obama intentionally lied) — that marriage was a sacred union between a man and a woman. Obama noted that for him, as a Christian, “God’s… in the mix.”

And as we know, Obama cited both his religious faith and the Golden Rule as instrumental in his “evolution” away from God and toward gay marriage, contradicting what he told Rick Warren (and America) in 2008, and a Chicago public television audience in 2004. Both times Obama used his religious faith to affirm natural marriage.

He’s also pursues the subjugation of religious liberty in favor of gay rights. This past Sunday at a Democratic National Committee LGBT event, Obama said, “We affirm that we cherish our religious freedom and are profoundly respectful of religious traditions. But we also have to say clearly that our religious freedom doesn’t grant us the freedom to deny our fellow Americans their constitutional rights.”

Same sex marriage isn’t a Constitutional right (it’s literally not in the Constitution) nor is it a law (Congress has yet to pass legislation permitting same sex marriage), but the freedom of religious expression certainly is.

Again, President Obama wants fellow Christians to subordinate their faith in favor of redefining the institution of marriage.

The president also showered the White House in rainbow colors celebrating the Supreme Court’s decision to redefine marriage.

As a Christian, President Obama has seemingly ignored the persecution and slaughter of Christians throughout the Muslim world. Though he’s reluctantly acknowledged what ISIS has subjected Yazidi men and women to, he’s silent when it comes to acknowledging and condemning the hell his fellow brothers and sisters in Christ are enduring under the same evil.

Further, our Christian President, Barack Obama, has also been rightly criticized for ignoring, or not using his influence, to free Christian pastor Saeed Abedini, who’s been imprisoned in Iran for three years.

And then there was his lecturing of Christians to avoid their “high horse” at the National Prayer Breakfast as he morally equated current Islamic radicalism and terrorism with the Inquisition and the Crusades of the past; his sympathies toward Islam and refusing to use the word “jihad” or the phrase “radical Islam”; his preferring the euphemistic phrase “religious extremism” and “workplace violence” as opposed to stating the truth about Islamic terrorism, and on and on and on…

Jesus said, “Even so every good tree bringeth forth good fruit; but a corrupt tree bringeth forth evil fruit” (Matt. 7:17). Again, the incongruity between the president’s words and actions about being a Christian continue to breathe life into the questions surrounding his true religiosity.

I don’t believe President Obama is a Muslim. Though he claims to be Christian, I don’t necessarily believe that either — his actions speak for themselves.

I believe Barack Obama’s true religion is found in being a disciple of progressivism. His religion is Leftism, period. He will use any instrument, including appropriating Christianity — and the confusion that’s created regarding his belief in it — to advance, implement, and morally justify his sincerely held Leftist convictions.

The questions surrounding the authenticity of the president’s religiosity isn’t the fault of politicians or American citizens. The only one to blame — and the only person obligated to defend President Obama’s faith, is President Obama.

No one else.