From the outside looking in, the small town that borders the Hillsborough River appears to be relatively affluent. But appearances can be deceiving.

The city’s estimated per capita income in 2012 was $24,991, down from $26,515 in 2000, according to city-data.com.

That means many Temple Terrace residents struggle to make ends meet, especially when it comes to putting food on their tables.

The volunteers who operate the St. Vincent de Paul Food Pantry on the campus of Corpus Christi Catholic Church in Temple Terrace are well aware of the issue and are there to help those in need.

“Our number of clients has almost tripled in the last couple of years and Obamacare is the main reason,” said pantry coordinator Cheryl Stine. “Companies have cut back employee hours and now those people have to buy their own insurance. Food stamp amounts also have been cut.”

On average the food pantry — which serves people living in 33616 and 33637 ZIP code designations and is open Saturdays from 9 to 11 a.m. — sees 40 to 50 families per week. Each family is entitled to utilize the pantry once a month.

“We also see a lot of seniors who come because they can’t make it on Social Security, and some have custody of their grandchildren,” Stine said.

Church parishioners donate food and funds to the nonprofit lay organization, named in honor of Saint Vincent de Paul of France, a 17th century priest who recognized and heeded the need to serve society’s less fortunate.

The food pantry also greatly depends on contributions from the community.

The Temple Terrace Junior Woman’s Club has been among its greatest supporters by sponsoring an annual food drive to benefit the food pantry, which last year distributed 54,412 pounds of food to the area’s hungry.

For the club’s third annual Food Drive members plans to distribute bags for donations to homes throughout Temple Terrace on April 25.

They will be back in the neighborhoods on May 2 to pick up the food-filled bags and ask that residents place them near their mailboxes by 10 a.m.

Items such as canned fruits and vegetables, soup, tuna, beef stew, pasta, rice, cereals and peanut butter and jelly are welcomed, as are powdered milk, coffee, tea, baby diapers and toiletries. Food must be nonperishable and containers unbreakable.

Stine and St. Vincent de Paul Food Pantry President Joe Affronti and volunteer Norma Gonzalez were present at a recent Junior Woman’s Club meeting and dinner to speak to and thank the members for their support of the organization.

“This is really an honor for us and we feel like we need to honor you,” Stine said. “You have been stalwarts, and we really appreciate that.”

Little did she know the food pantry was about to receive another show of support by the Junior Woman’s Club.

Club member Karen Macaluso presented Affronti with a $500 check, the first installment of the organization’s $2,000 donation to the food pantry.

“The Food Drive for the food pantry is now one of our major projects,” Macaluso said.

Affronti and Stine were overjoyed by the club’s generosity.

“In the summer, when children are on vacation, is when our greatest need is,” Stine said. “So this contribution will go a long way.”