UPDATE at 8:30 PM: After the race was called, Sessions said, “we felt like this race would be very important for us to not only take seriously, but for us to touch all parts of the district to ensure everyone knew who I am as a member of Congress. And by the end, a lot of people figured out who my opponent was. I take this as a huge and strong indication that people understand what I’m attempting to do on their behalf.”

Sessions said he would continue to push for the repeal of Obamacare, and stressed he would work to help Republicans maintain control of the House and retake the Senate in the 2014 general elections.

Pierson said her showing in the primary “exceeded expectations,” and was about holding the Republican establishment accountable.

“I’m excited,” she said. “We have really done a big thing here in Texas, and especially in taking on an incumbent like Pete Sessions. We were told we wouldn’t even break 20 percent.”

Pierson said she isn’t going anywhere, and plans to stay involved with the tea party, both in Dallas and elsewhere.

“This is a beginning of a big shift in the [Republican] party,” she said. “There are several like myself who are young conservatives who aren’t going away, and we’re going to keep doing what we’ve been doing, which is working to keep these folks accountable.”

UPDATE at 7:55 PM: The Associated Press has called the election for Sessions.

UPDATE at 7:30 PM: Dallas County Elections is reporting Sessions has 70 percent of the vote with 22,000 early votes counted. Colliln County Elections is reporting Katrina Pierson has 588 early votes to Sessions’ 569.

Original Post at 7:00 PM:

WASHINGTON–Polls are now closing on the closely-watched Republican primary contest between Rep. Pete Sessions and challenger Katrina Pierson.

The race is something of a test of strength for the tea party movement in Texas, as Pierson runs to Sessions’ right with support from tea party groups hoping for a Ted Cruz-style upset.

She enjoyed support from national tea party groups such as FreedomWorks, hoping to paint Sessions as an “establishment” Republican who isn’t aggressive enough in pushing a conservative agenda.

Sessions won a seat in Congress in 1996. He now chairs the powerful House Rules Committee, which shapes legislation and decides how bills are debated and amended on the floor. He has a solid conservative voting record and has received support from the National Rifle Association.

Pierson and her tea party backers call him a Washington insider who is soft on efforts to repeal Obamacare, limit government spending, and oppose immigration reform, among other issues.

Sessions has defended his conservative record, running ads pledging renewed efforts to fight the president’s health care law.

Pierson, a Garland-based tea party activist, was a top volunteer on Sen. Ted Cruz’s 2012 campaign. He never explicitly endorsed her, though he publicly praised her as “utterly fearless” and his father, Rafael Cruz, stumped for her.

She also drew support from former Alaska Gov. Sarah Palin, conservative commentator Michelle Malkin, and immigration hard-liners such as ALIPAC.

But financial support never really materialized. She raised $144,000, a paltry sum compared to Sessions’ almost $1.5 million.

His last serious challenge came in 2004, when redistricting pitted him against another incumbent, Democrat Martin Frost. Sessions ended up with 55 percent of the vote after the most expensive House contest in the nation that year, and the third costliest in history at that point. Together, Sessions and Frost spent roughly $9 million.