Vance Walker found obscurity in Kansas City.

It wasn’t supposed to happen this way. The Chiefs chased Walker in free agency last March, turning him into their prized offseason acquisition, and almost immediately he became lost on their depth chart.

Walker played well. If he played. He started twice and logged more than 20 snaps in only three games. Seen as a catalyst to an evolving defensive line mix, he turned into a casualty, released after one year.

“I dealt with that when it happened. It’s an unfortunate situation. I can complain about it, but I’ve let it go months ago,” Walker said last week.

For the Broncos, Walker’s inability to crack the Chiefs’ rotation might be the best thing to happen for them. He remained a productive, if sparingly-used player, last season. The Chiefs guaranteed Walker $3.75 million on a three-year, $13.75-million contract. The Broncos kept him from signing with the Seattle Seahawks when he agreed to a two-year, $4-million contract with a $1.5-million signing bonus.

Value and versatility make Walker an intriguing offseason addition in the highly anticipated switch to a 3-4 defense that, nonetheless, features uncertainty along the defensive line.

“It’s obviously a priority as we move forward, and we’ll play a lot of people,” coach Gary Kubiak said.

Walker, 28, didn’t produce as expected in Kansas City, unable to supplant Allen Bailey or Jaye Howard. The Chiefs saved $1.7 million in salary cap space by cutting ties. Their desire to move on doesn’t mean Walker can’t move blockers. Insert a DVD from last season, and you will see the 6-foot-2, 305-pound Walker line up from end to nose and everywhere in between on multiple series.

He has consistently done one thing well, making him a potential fit for defensive coordinator Wade Phillips, who looks “to put players in position to succeed.”

Pressure Point

Vance Walker signed a two-year deal for $4-million with the Broncos, choosing Denver over Seattle. He will be counted on to provide versatility along the defensive line. A look at how he stacks up against the Broncos’ two remaining defensive tackles from last season, according to Pro Football Focus:

.tg {border-collapse:collapse;border-spacing:0;border-color:#ccc;}

.tg td{font-family:Arial, sans-serif;font-size:14px;padding:3px 5px;border-style:solid;border-width:0px;overflow:hidden;word-break:normal;border-color:#ccc;color:#333;background-color:#fff;border-top-width:1px;border-bottom-width:1px;}

.tg th{font-family:Arial, sans-serif;font-size:14px;font-weight:normal;padding:3px 5px;border-style:solid;border-width:0px;overflow:hidden;word-break:normal;border-color:#ccc;color:#333;background-color:#f0f0f0;border-top-width:1px;border-bottom-width:1px;}

.tg .tg-ls8f{font-family:Georgia, serif !important;}

.tg .tg-oa1s{font-weight:bold;font-family:Georgia, serif !important;}

Defensive Lineman QB Sacks QB Hits QB hurries Snaps Vance Walker 2 1 8 238 Sylvester Williams 0 3 13 468 Marvin Austin 0 1 5 299

Walker boasts pass-rushing skills. He posted 32 quarterback hurries in 2013 with Oakland, fifth best among 3-4 defensive tackles, and eight last season in 238 snaps, nearly half of which came in just two games.

“The nose has a lot of versatility in this system,” Walker said. “The biggest thing is really getting after the quarterback. That’s something that I like to do. I’m just looking forward to it.”

Pressure up the middle defines strong defenses. In NFL parlance, it means moving the quarterback off his spot. A hand in the face or a push of the center, preventing the quarterback from planting to throw, can lead to turnovers. The Broncos delivered in many ways last season — their defense ranked first in franchise history in rushing yards allowed per game — but they were not consistently disruptive. Denver ranked 13th in turnovers produced at 25. Phillips’ defense features interchangeable parts, aggressive schemes, and a focus on reaching the pocket with purpose. DeMarcus Ware spent four seasons with Phillips in Dallas, earning three first-team All-Pro berths, while averaging 15 sacks.

“The new guys, the guys already here, everybody’s going to be able to thrive to a new level in this type of defense,” Ware said. “The offenses really have to be keen on who’s bringing the pressure because this is a pressure defense.”

Walker, a teammate at Georgia Tech with Broncos receiver Demaryius Thomas and WWE star Roman Reigns, can help by providing impact and depth. The Broncos’ want to use a rotation of players, but effectiveness is required to share snaps.

It didn’t happen in Kansas City. That, Walker said, is over. Denver presents an unrivaled opportunity.

“We have super high expectations. Just to be the best. We’ve got a really good group of guys between the D-Line, the linebackers, the ends obviously, the cornerbacks and safeties. I don’t think I’ve ever been on a team more talented,” Walker said. “We have high expectations. We’ve just got to go out there and work every day to live up to those.”

Troy E. Renck: trenck@denverpost.com or twitter.com/troyrenck