Obamacare is the law of the land, President Barack Obama says, and it’s time for Republicans who oppose it to move on.

That’s the message a jocular, relaxed Obama delivered during a visit to Tennessee on Wednesday, taking victory lap just six days after the Supreme Court upheld the legislation that created Obamacare in a case known as King v. Burwell.

Story Continued Below

“Part of what I’m hoping is, with the Supreme Court case now behind us, what we can do is now focus on how we can make it even better,” Obama said in Nashville. “Because it’s not as if we’ve solved all of the problems in our healthcare system.”

The response from Republicans: not yet.

White House aides say the president isn’t under any illusions that Republicans will drop their objections to the Affordable Care Act just because the administration won the latest Supreme Court fight. So as he called on the country to move beyond politics and work on the less controversial missions of reducing costs and improving quality of care, Obama took pains to avoid being too confrontational. In particular, he praised the efforts of Tennessee’s Republican governor, Bill Haslam, who has embraced key parts of Obamacare, while treading lightly on the GOP-controlled state legislature that has twice rejected expanding Medicaid.

The goal, White House officials say, is to take the debate off the political front burner and hope Republicans will be open to collaborating with the administration.

But it may be too soon.

“A lot of folks who believe that King was wrongly decided are still trying to wrap their heads around what happened last week,” said Lanhee Chen, a Stanford professor who served as Mitt Romney’s top domestic policy adviser in 2012. “But it is certainly the case that there are opportunities for Democrats and Republicans to work together.”

Obama’s visit to Nashville also serves as a reminder of the partisan tensions that still surround Obamacare more than five years after it passed amid fierce Republican opposition. For instance, Haslam didn’t attend the event, fearing that appearing side by side with Obama would undermine his bid to persuade the GOP-controlled legislature to pass the Medicaid expansion — a key part of the health care reforms and a top Obama priority.

Obama, who did not name Haslam even as he touted the medical innovation initiatives the governor has spearheaded, acknowledged that his association with the law is still toxic. In response to a question from a Democratic state legislator in the audience asking for advice on how to persuade her colleagues to expand Medicaid, Obama replied that politicians respond to public opinion, and “misinformation” has poisoned public opinion against Obamacare.

“If you stop the average Tennessean on the street,” Obama said, and asked if he supports the rule that prevents insurers for rejecting people for pre-existing conditions, an “overwhelming majority” in both parties would support that. But if you ask him if he knows that the Affordable Care Act is responsible for that rule, Obama continued, “You’d get an argument with at least half those folks; ‘Nah that’s not what it’s doing.’”

Administration officials say the political debate over Obamacare’s approach to expanding coverage has overwhelmed its other goals, including transforming the way medical care is delivered and paid for. The ACA includes sweeping measures to encourage doctors and hospitals to emphasize quality of care over quantity. It aims to change financial incentives in the private sector and encourage states to experiment with new ways of structuring their health systems.

Payment reform, as these efforts are broadly known, is a key area “where there could be common ground,” Chen said.

Tennessee is already an example of the potential for cooperation. In 2013, Haslam launched an ambitious payment reform initiative that aims to improve coordination among the various doctors who might treat an individual patient and pay providers based on outcomes, not per procedure.

During his discussion at Taylor Stratton Elementary School in Nashville’s Madison neighborhood, Obama heaped praise on Tennessee’s “strong history of innovation of healthcare” and noted that the state won $65 million in federal Obamacare grant funds to help.

But Haslam skipped the event and did not greet Obama at Nashville’s Berry Field Air National Guard Base. It’s not the first time Haslam — who is now term-limited after a landslide reelection in November — has steered clear of Obama’s visits to the Volunteer State. But this time his absence served their shared goal.

At a news conference on Tuesday, Obama said his next health-related priority is to persuade “some governors — that have been holding out and resisting expanding Medicaid primarily for political reasons — to think about what they can do for their citizens.” Haslam has been open since last year to accepting millions of federal Obamacare dollars to expand Medicaid eligibility to about 200,000 -income Tennesseans.

Like other conservative governors — such as Mike Pence in Indiana, Gary Herbert in Utah and Matt Mead in Wyoming — Haslam negotiated an alternative to traditional expansion that leans more on private insurance and calls on some beneficiaries to help pay for their own coverage.

But like Herbert and Mead, Haslam has been unable to gain the support of his Legislature. (Pence was able to enact expansion without getting statehouse signoff.) It has already failed twice, and advocates are pessimistic about its prospects next session.

“Our perception is that expansion is off the table in the General Assembly right now,” said Bradley Jackson of the Tennessee Chamber for Commerce and Industry, which supports Haslam’s effort. Instead, legislators are increasingly calling for reforms to the existing Medicaid program.

Advocates have blamed advertising by the Koch-backed Americans for Prosperity for blocking expansion, dubbed “Insure Tennessee,” in part to differentiate it from “Obamacare.” But it’s also true that Obama, and by extension his signature law, remains deeply unpopular in red states.

“If Obamacare was the success this president claims it is, it would not have landed at the Supreme Court on three separate occasions to begin with and he would not be traveling cross country to rally support for the failing law five years after it was enacted,” Rep. Diane Black (R-Tenn.) said in a statement released Monday. “The President has picked the wrong location to take a victory lap on the Supreme Court’s irresponsible ruling and my conservative colleagues and I will not relent in the fight to fully repeal Obamacare.”

Still, Obama sought to remind Republicans that some of the most contentious parts of Obamacare incorporate ideas they once endorsed. “I didn’t mind stealing from Mitt Romney,” Obama said, referring to the exchange system his 2012 rival set up as governor of Massachusetts.

Chen, the former Romney adviser, thinks there will be a “narrow window” for Obama to work with Republicans on issues like payment reform, but it will probably last just a few weeks. As the GOP primary heats up in the fall, Chen said, it will be “very, very difficult for anything to get done because all that energy is going to get sucked up in the campaign.”

Rachana Pradhan contributed to this report.