Stephen Larkham signed a three-year deal on Sunday which will see him take charge of the Brumbies under a traditional coaching model when director of rugby Laurie Fisher departs to Europe at the end of the Super Rugby season. Photo: Melissa Adams

ACT Brumbies coach Stephen Larkham will enlist the help of a three-man committee, including Wallabies great Joe Roff and Test captain Stephen Moore, to help design a high-performance program to ensure the club's recent success "isn't a flash in the pan".

The first part of his mission is ensuring the Brumbies stay in title contention this year, despite being thumped by the NSW Waratahs 39-8 on Saturday night and needing to win their last game of the season to make the play-offs.

Larkham signed a three-year deal on Sunday, as forecast in The Sunday Canberra Times, which will see him take charge of the Brumbies under a traditional coaching model when director of rugby Laurie Fisher departs to Europe at the end of the Super Rugby season.

Larkham's deal has been upgraded to keep him in Canberra until the end of 2017 and add stability after a turbulent 12 months.

Advertisement

World Cup-winning coach Jake White quit at the end of last year, chief executive Andrew Fagan resigned, the club relocated its headquarters from Griffith to the University of Canberra and Fisher will link with Gloucester.

The Brumbies' Super Rugby finals hopes hinge on their last round game against the Western Force on July 11, with the team needing to win to make the play-offs in back-to-back years for the first time in a decade.

Former Wallabies playmaker Larkham will team up with Roff, Moore and Brumbies chairman Sean Hammond to find a replacement for Fisher and plan for the future.

''There's a bit more responsibility [for me] and that's exciting. We have to implement a new program, you can't rest on your laurels on what we've done the last three years,'' Larkham said.

''We need to evolve. We certainly feel like we've been [moving towards] creating the best rugby program in the world, but we have to evolve and make sure it isn't a flash in the pan or a one-year thing. We want success over a number of years.''

The injury-hit Brumbies could drop to as low as ninth on the ladder after losing to NSW and having a bye this weekend.

But the good news is that reinforcements are on the way with Matt Toomua, Pat McCabe, Sam Carter, Joseph Tomane, Josh Mann-Rea and Andrew Smith all set to be available to play the Force.

Larkham's appointment for the next three seasons is a huge boost for the club.

He shared the job with Fisher this year, with the role split to give both coaches a say in the running of the team.

Larkham was in charge of recruitment and retention, and his decision to stay in Canberra was a major factor in re-signing seven Wallabies players.

Fisher will be hard to replace when he leaves Canberra at the end of the season. He is regarded as many as one of the best forwards coaches in world rugby.

Set-piece and defence mentor Dan McKellar could move into the forwards coach role vacated by Fisher, with the Brumbies to recruit another coach to join the team.

Larkham said he wanted to remain a hands-on coach, despite his off-field duties increasing.

Brumbies chairman Sean Hammond said the club viewed Larkham as a future Wallabies coach.

''We hope that [the Wallabies] is one of the possibilities of Stephen coaching us for a period of time with players wanting to stay here and players wanting to come here,'' Hammond said.

''If Stephen becomes a Wallabies coach, that's fantastic. We always thought [Larkham] would be the coach [in the future]. The situation with Laurie and Stephen worked seamlessly and they worked fantastic together.

''Laurie has taken another opportunity but Stephen has come through to where we thought he would be.''