Fight Like a Girl founder Kym Rock, left, demonstrates a move with Diane Paulsen at the Fight Like a Girl seminar at the Abbey Field House in 2012. Fight Like a Girl returns to Ca単on City on April 10. ( Jeff Shane / Daily Record )

Fight Like a Girl founder Kym Rock demonstrates a move during the Fight Like a Girl event in 2012. Fight Like a Girl returns to Ca単on City on April 10. (Jeff Shane / Daily Record)

Who says girls can't defend themselves? Certainly not Kym Rock, seven-time World Karate Champion, president and founder of the international program, Fight Like a Girl.

Shorinkan Family Karate is bringing Rock and her 17-year Fight Like a Girl free women's self-defense seminar to Ca単on City.

The event will be from 6 to 8:30 p.m. April 10 at the Abbey Field House, 2951 E. U.S. 50. Doors will open at 5 p.m. Women and girls, ages 10 and older, are invited to attend the event, but girls 14 and younger should be accompanied with an adult.

A press release issued by Shorinkan Family Karate encourages people to register early because space is limited. To register for the event, which is required for attendees, visit http://fightlikeagirlcanoncity.com/" title="fightlikeagirlcanoncity.com">fightlikeagirlcanoncity.com or call (719) 369-7404.

Michelle Pearson, co-owner of Shorinkan Family Karate, said the Fight Like a Girl seminar was in Ca単on City in 2012, and it brought 400 attendees. Pearson said she is expecting 500-600 people this year.

"It's really quite dynamic," she said. "Everybody said, two years ago, that it's really empowering."

Advertisement

Rock's website states that she "is a former victim of domestic violence and cancer survivor who inspires women and girls to take control of their safety and potential through their thoughts, decisions, actions and knowledge of these essential life-saving skills."

The press release states that the event "will empower women through hands-on self-defense tips and techniques." Pearson said attendees will take part in physical activities and practice actual self-defense. She said although not required, participants are encouraged to wear tennis shoes and comfortable clothing that one can move in.

Pearson said they also will collect items for the Family Crisis Center. They are collecting toiletries, but specifically laundry soap and toilet paper, because, Pearson said, "that's what they seem to run out of the most." For those who would like to donate, items can be brought to the Fight Like a Girl event, or can be dropped off from 4 to 7 p.m. Monday through Thursday at Shorinkan Family Karate, 312 S. Ninth St., Suite 1.

"It's a night of encouragement and empowerment for women," Pearson said. "Women need to know that they're worth fighting for."

Aside from being owner and founder of Fight Like a Girl, which is taught nationwide, in Australia and London, Rock's website states her other credentials as being a "United States Martial Arts Hall of Fame Member, World Karate Union Hall of Fame Member, U.S. Martial Arts Karate Instructor of the Year, U.S. Martial Arts Weapons Instructor of the Year, Sixth Degree Black Belt." It states she is also a 17-year owner of Outer Banks Karate Academy.