Covered California — the state’s marketplace for the federal Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act — has included Eureka on its statewide bus tour and will be at the Open Door Community Health Center in Eureka, located at 2200 Tydd St., on Monday from 3:30 to 4:30 p.m.

Eureka’s stop on the 10-day, 29-city tour is to encourage eligible residents to seek health care insurance through the statewide program, according to officials. The enrollment period began Nov. 1 and concludes Jan. 31.

“Open enrollment is a three-month period for all eligible Californians to enroll in affordable and quality health coverage of their choice,” according to the announcement. “They cannot be denied coverage and may be eligible to receive federal subsidies to lower the cost of their coverage.”

During the enrollment period certified insurance agents and certified enrollment counselors will be available to provide free and confidential assistance to those seeking health care insurance under the plan. The agents and counselors can help applicants determine whether they are eligible for assistance to reduce the premium costs or whether they qualify for Medi-Cal.

“Consumers can then compare health insurance plans and choose the plan that works bets for their health needs and budget,” according to the announcement. “Small businesses can purchase competitively priced health insurance plans and offer their employees the ability to choose from an array of plans and may quality for federal tax credits.”

Open Door Community Health Centers member services director Breanne Olmstead said the clinic will staff a table to provide information, do initial screenings and make appointments for those interested in signing up for Covered California.

“It’s really important to sit down and have a follow-up appointment,” she said.

All are welcome to consult with the Open Door staff at Monday’s event.

“It’s open equally to anyone in our community,” Olmstead said.

For more information, visit CoveredCA.com.