Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share VIDEOS | MATT BEVIN ON THE CAMPAIGN TRAIL Video | Matt Bevin following gubernatorial debate at Centre College | 1:48 Republican candidate for governor Matt Bevin discussed taxes following his debate at Centre College. By Jonathan Palmer, Special to the C-J 1 of 9 Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share VIDEOS | MATT BEVIN ON THE CAMPAIGN TRAIL Matt Bevin speaks after Bluegrass Poll debate | 8:24 Matt Bevin speaks to media after Bluegrass Poll debate at Bellarmine University Tuesday night. Matt Stone, The Courier-Journal 2 of 9 Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share VIDEOS | MATT BEVIN ON THE CAMPAIGN TRAIL Video | Bevin hammers Conway with series of questions | 2:16 Bluegrass Debate: Bevin hammers Conway with series of questions 3 of 9 Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share VIDEOS | MATT BEVIN ON THE CAMPAIGN TRAIL Video | Candidate Matt Bevin talks with reporters at Ham Breakfast | 4:43 Matt Bevin, candidate for Governor, talks to reporters about rival Jack Conway and the court's decision concerning Kentucky clerks and issuing marriage licenses. 4 of 9 Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share VIDEOS | MATT BEVIN ON THE CAMPAIGN TRAIL Video | Bevin on dealing w/ ruling on gay marriage | 3:28 Matt Bevin on dealing with Supreme Court ruling on gay marriage 5 of 9 Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share VIDEOS | MATT BEVIN ON THE CAMPAIGN TRAIL Jack Conway, Matt Bevin talk about broadband access in rural Kentucky | 2:22 Kentucky governor candidates talk about broadband access in rural Kentucky during debate at Kentucky Farm Bureau. The Courier-Journal 6 of 9 Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share VIDEOS | MATT BEVIN ON THE CAMPAIGN TRAIL Video | GOP primary victor Matt Bevin speaks after recanvass | 1:16 Video | GOP primary victor Matt Bevin speaks after recanvass 7 of 9 Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share VIDEOS | MATT BEVIN ON THE CAMPAIGN TRAIL Video | Bevin, Conway at Chamber forum | 2:52 Kentucky’s gubernatorial candidates Republican Matt Bevin and Democrat Jack Conway debate during a forum at the Chamber of Commerce in Louisville. Marty Pearl/Special to The Courier-Journal 8 of 9 Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share VIDEOS | MATT BEVIN ON THE CAMPAIGN TRAIL Kentucky Gov. candidate debate: Matt Bevin, Jack Conway on EPA | 3:01 Kentucky Gov. candidate debate: Matt Bevin, Jack Conway on EPA The Courier-Journal 9 of 9 Last VideoNext Video Video | Matt Bevin following gubernatorial debate at Centre College

Matt Bevin speaks after Bluegrass Poll debate

Video | Bevin hammers Conway with series of questions

Video | Candidate Matt Bevin talks with reporters at Ham Breakfast

Video | Bevin on dealing w/ ruling on gay marriage

Jack Conway, Matt Bevin talk about broadband access in rural Kentucky

Video | GOP primary victor Matt Bevin speaks after recanvass

Video | Bevin, Conway at Chamber forum

Kentucky Gov. candidate debate: Matt Bevin, Jack Conway on EPA

Matt Bevin, left, Drew Curtis and Jack Conway pose after they squared off during the Bluegrass Poll's gubernatorial debate at Bellarmine University on Sept. 15. (Photo: By Michael Clevenger/The Courier)

As a youngster, Matt Bevin hit on a surefire money-making scheme: He made up packets of flower and vegetable seeds, then pedaled a bicycle around his rural New Hampshire community selling them to neighbors.

"If a little kid rides down a dirt road to get to your house to sell you something for a quarter, you're probably going to buy it," he said.

His customers did — helping the young Bevin earn the $50 he wanted to pay for a week of summer camp.

Flash forward 40 years.

Now Bevin, 48, is driving a 2001 Chevrolet Suburban with 200,000-plus miles on it around Kentucky, hoping to sell himself to voters as the next governor, convinced he can win if he works hard enough.

With a strong independent streak, tea party appeal and little apparent interest in fundraising, Bevin, a wealthy Louisville business executive, seems bent on running the race like he's run his life.

"I'm entirely self-made," said Bevin in a recent, wide-ranging interview about his life, family, career and campaign. "No one has ever given me anything."

His mission, which Bevin describes with near-evangelical zeal, is to create a leaner, more competitive and business-friendly state government that gets able-bodied people "off the draw" and allows wealth to remain with those who produce it.

"We have created a welfare state," he said, a familiar theme of his public comments. "We have robbed people of the dignity of having any stake in their own lives."

Bevin has never held public office, has raised little outside money and is running a campaign even fellow Republicans say has been light on substance and disrupted by gaffes — such as conflicting statements about Medicaid — that one GOP observer calls the "unforced error."

In the Republican primary in May, Bevin squeaked out an 83-vote win over his closest rival, Agriculture Commissioner James Comer in a race that also included Louisville developer Hal Heiner.

He's faced a growing barrage of negative political ads.

Yet as the Nov. 3 general election approaches, Bevin has managed to stay within five points of his opponent, Democrat Jack Conway, Kentucky's attorney general, according to the latest Bluegrass poll sponsored by The Courier-Journal and other media outlets.

Whether Bevin can win the governor's race is a source of fascination and consternation for political observers who worry about his erratic campaign performance and an independent streak that has alienated some in his own party.

"He's the best of candidates and the worst of candidates," said Louisville lawyer John David Dyche, a Republican and political commentator for WDRB news.

While Dyche says Bevin can be an impressive public speaker, he's worried that Bevin as governor would hurt the GOP's prospects overall. Kentucky's last Republican governor was Ernie Fletcher, elected in 2003, who served a single term marred by a hiring scandal and political miscalculation.

"I'm concerned that if he's elected, he will set back the cause," Dyche said of Bevin. "It would be the Fletcher administration without the experience and maturity."

But he has support among voters like Bobby Alexander, 66, of Elizabethtown, a member of the executive committee of the Hardin County Republican Party and former tea party leader who admires Bevin as a candidate with strong convictions.

"I believe Matt Bevin will handily win Hardin County," Alexander said. "I think he's going to win in the state."

Bevin's positions and statements have varied, most notably when it comes to his opposition to Kentucky's expansion of Medicaid under the federal Affordable Care Act. He initially said that as governor, "I would reverse that immediately."

He now proposes a more modest plan to limit Medicaid enrollment and implement cost-sharing by members and denies he ever suggested eliminating the expansion, which added health coverage for about 400,000 Kentuckians.

He's been ridiculed by Democrats after mixing up Medicare, the government health plan for those over 65, with Medicaid, a state-federal plan for low-income and disabled Americans. He did so most recently during a debate at Centre College in which he responded to a question about Medicare with an answer about why he supports random drug-testing for some people on social benefits.

The Democratic National Party responded with a news release deriding the plan to drug test elderly citizens on Medicare as "a new low, " irking Bevin, who said the context of his comments made it clear that's not what he meant.

"I'm trying to do this to Medicaid," Bevin said. "The liberals, they're just trying to scare everyone."

And he said the point of drug testing people on Medicaid wouldn't be to kick them off the health plan; rather it would offer a means to get them into drug treatment.

HIS GOALS

Bevin's objectives include fixing Kentucky's seriously underfunded public pension system, introducing a right-to-work law, cutting taxes and promoting job growth, tort reform and, school "choice," meaning vouchers and charter schools.

He also has pledged to do away with Common Core in Kentucky, voluntary, more rigorous educational standards adopted by states that some conservatives have characterized as a "federal takeover" of schools. Bevin wants to stop "federal overreach" into public education.

He opposes abortion, although he supports the death penalty. And as a gun owner with a concealed-carry permit, Bevin said he sees no need for further regulation of firearms despite the recent wave of mass shootings.

He's running his campaign largely on his own money. The most recent spending reports show Conway has raised $6.1 million for the general election compared to $1.6 million raised by Bevin, who has contributed almost $1 million of that in loans.

Bevin, whose wealth is estimated in the millions from a career in business and investment management, has no lack of confidence when it comes to taking on the better-funded and better-known Conway.

"My secret in life is to stay one step ahead of everybody else," he said.

He has declined to disclose his tax returns, as Conway has done, a point of contention with Democrats who keep demanding what Bevin has to hide. Bevin said he sees no reason to do so, commenting "If it was required, I'd submit them."

LIFE EXPERIENCES

And Bevin is unconcerned about his lack of political experience, saying his business experience and extensive travels equip him to be governor.

"A lot of people in government don't understand how the real world works because they've never been there," he said.

Vivek Sarin, a local businessman and friend of Bevin, said he admires him for jumping into the governor's race.

"I think it's very bold and courageous," said Sarin, who runs a metal stamping plant in Shelby County. "It does take a special person to step forward and run for this."

Bevin's first run for public office was last year, a nasty GOP primary battle in which Bevin unsuccessfully challenged Kentucky's senior Sen. Mitch McConnell, one of the nation's most powerful Republicans. After losing, Bevin raised GOP eyebrows by refusing to endorse McConnell by name.

Though McConnell endorsed Bevin as the GOP candidate for governor, McConnell's public comments about Bevin have been tepid.

And Bevin astonished Kentucky Republicans when, in a recent debate on Kentucky Sports Radio, he indicated that among the GOP candidates for president, he prefers South Carolina neurosurgeon Ben Carson over Kentucky's junior Sen. Rand Paul.

"Of those still in the race right now, I like Ben Carson," Bevin said.

Louisville businessman Bill Stone, a former chairman of the Jefferson County Republican Party, considers Bevin a political "neophyte." Stone said Bevin's rebuff of Paul was an example of what he consider's Bevin's knack for the "unforced error."

"It really upset a lot of Republicans who support Rand Paul," Stone said.

Stone said he finds Bevin bright and engaging but says he puts people off with his attitude of being "the smartest guy in the room."

Still, Stone thinks that in the current political climate, Bevin could be the next governor.

"He will either be a real change agent or he might be a major disappointment," Stone said. "There's no in-between with Matt."

GROWING UP IN NEW HAMPSHIRE

Bevin, one of six children, speaks often of growing up in a poor but close family in New Hampshire. They lived in an old farmhouse with no central heat, only wood stoves to get through the bitterly cold New England winters.

His father held various jobs, including teaching school and working in a factory.

"We raised a lot of animals and a lot of crops," he said. "It was a good life. It was a hard life in some respects but we had two parents who loved us and took care of us."

Bevin found his niche in the local 4-H organization, serving as president of the local and county 4-H Club, president of the county Dairy Club and on the state teen council for 4-H.

He credits 4-H with introducing him to a wider world of travel, public speaking and leadership.

Bevin initially attended a small Christian school. When he reached 10th grade, he and some siblings switched as day students to the Gould Academy, a private boarding school in Maine just across the state line from their home.

Bevin's father was working at a wood mill near the school and would drop the children off each day. Bevin said he worked summers to earn half of the $3,600 annual tuition and the school made up the difference in scholarships.

SCHOOL, ARMY AND BUSINESS

After attending college at Washington and Lee University in Virginia on an ROTC scholarship, Bevin entered the U.S. Army as a 2nd lieutenant — but first took eight weeks off to ride a bicycle across the country, traveling some 3,800 miles from Oregon to Florida.

He was stationed at Fort Polk in Louisiana when, on a blind date, he met a young nurse who would become his wife, Glenna Bevin.

After the Army, he began a career in business and finance, working in several cities before he and his wife in 1999 settled in Louisville, where he took a job with National Asset Management. He started his own investment management firm in 2003 and now owns or is co-owner of several businesses that he said employ about 75 to 80 people.

He and his wife have nine children, four of them adopted from Ethiopia. A 10th child, Brittiney, their eldest, died in 2003 at age 17 after a car accident on Lexington Road on her way home from school.

Bevin said the loss was devastating to the family.

"You lose a piece of yourself that you never get back," he said.

In 2012, Bevin and his wife established the Bevin Center for Missions Mobilization at the Southern Baptist Theological Seminary, near the site of their daughter's fatal accident and dedicated to her interest in missionary work. It's among a number of charities Bevin said he supports.

Dr. Albert Mohler, president of the seminary, said he's come to know and admire Bevin through his work with the foundation meant to encourage missionary and evangelical careers.

"He and Glenna have the most wonderful family," he said. "They live out their faith."

The Bevin children attend Portland Christian School and the family attends Southeast Christian Church.

Bevin said that as governor, his Christian faith will be important.

"These are the principals this nation was built on," he said. "It defines my whole decision-making process."

Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share Republican candidate for governor Matt Bevin discussed taxes following his debate at Centre College. By Jonathan Palmer, Special to the C-J

Matthew Griswold Bevin

Age: 48

Family: Wife, Glenna, and nine children

Religion: Christian

Party: Republican

Education: Bachelor’s degree in East Asian studies, Washington and Lee University

Military: Retired as captain from U.S. Army

Occupation: Business and investment management

Net worth: Between $13.4 million and $54.9 million, according to filings with the U.S. Senate Ethics Committee

Odds and Ends: Bevin speaks Japanese, a language he picked up studying in Japan in college. He and his wife took their children out of school for a year in 2011 and the family spent that time driving 26,000 miles around the United States, visiting site of historic and educational interest.

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1RJYifE