Help is on the way to Georgians in need of assistance enrolling in health insurance through the new Health Insurance Marketplace, thanks to a $2.1 million grant from the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.

A consortium of 15 partners, led by Seedco, will conduct outreach and education activities to help make Georgians aware of new health insurance options and of the benefits of being insured. The funding from HHS will support approximately 20 “navigators,” who will be trained to provide consumers with in-person assistance in a culturally competent manner, to inform consumers about the Health Insurance Marketplace, qualified health plans, Medicaid and the PeachCare for Kids and to help consumers select the health insurance option that is best for themselves and their families.

“The Center for Black Women’s Wellness is excited to collaborate with Seedco and this strong and diverse group of partners to reach our shared goal of increasing access to healthcare for Georgia’s uninsured,” added Center for Black Women’s Wellness Chief Executive Officer, Jemea Dorsey.

In addition, navigators will assist consumers in determining if they are eligible for federal tax credits to subsidize the cost of health insurance. Seedco is a national non-profit organization that advances economic opportunity for people, businesses and communities in need.

“We are pleased to have this opportunity to build on our long history of connecting people in Georgia with health insurance,” said Seedco Senior Vice President Ben Thomases. “With our strong network of partners and an ambitious outreach strategy we are ready to reach people throughout Georgia with the information they need to get insured.”

As a consortium partner, the Center for Black Women’s Wellness will assist by drawing upon its extensive experience in conducting culturally appropriate outreach and education services to under served populations. A Patient Navigator will be trained and utilized to offer education, outreach, and enrollment assistance to individuals seeking insurance through the Health Insurance Marketplace.

In addition to the Center for Black Women’s Wellness, other partners include: Boat People SOS, Emory-Grady Urban Health Initiative, Georgia Equality & The Health Initiative; Georgia Refugee Health and Mental Health, Georgia Watch, Georgians for a Healthy Future, Healthy Mothers Healthy Babies Coalition, Jewish Family & Career Services, Latin American Association, Mental Health America of Georgia, Parent to Parent, Quality Med-Care Inc., and Spring Creek Health Cooperative.

Seedco has also recently been awarded Navigator grants in Maryland, New York, and Tennessee, and will be working with its networks of partners across all four states to share best practices.