Senior helps push No. 13 Rams to 15-0

FORT COLLINS -- The one constant has been the winning.

No two matches have really been the same for No. 13 Colorado State, but whatever the Rams have needed on a given night, coach Tom Hilbert's team has produced.

In the sweep over Boise State on Saturday night, it was the middles who needed to produce, and Sam Peters was more than happy to do her part in the 25-15, 25-15, 25-18 victory that moved the team to 15-0 on the season, 6-0 in the Mountain West.

Advertisement

Peters produced 10 kills on 18 swings without an error, and fellow middle Kelsey Snider produced six as the Rams hit .393 to the delight of the 4,801 in attendance, the 10th largest crowd in Moby Arena history.

"The environment we had tonight, you go across the country, there might be two other arenas the entire year who are as good as that," Hilbert said. "That to me is what makes Colorado State volleyball so special."

Sam Peters (Picasa)

This match -- and CSU has never dropped a set to Boise State (8-9, 2-5) -- set up a bit different. It wasn't until the 13th point on the board of the first set that the Rams had a kill from an outside hitter. Then again, that's what the Rams anticipated.

"We also know that once you get into a rally that they leave the middles one-on-one a lot," Hilbert said. "We knew starting Sam in the left front that Sam would have a good match, both blocking and hitting. That indeed did happen. She was great tonight."

No competitive player ever backs away from knowing they are going to be the focal point, but Peters said she didn't view the game plan as anything special. For her, the key was keeping her prep as steady as possible.

It worked, as she hit .556 in the match and also led the team with five blocks, the Rams finishing with 9.5 to just one for the Broncos.

"Yeah, I like being one-on-one in the middle," Peters said with a smile. "I get a lot of opportunities, especially when Deedra puts the ball right where I want it. That was really helpful to know I was going to get set and have the mindset that I was going to be terminal this game.

"I approach every match with the possibility of being the go-to player. I just think about it that way so I'm not surprised when I have to put the ball away."

But as the match wore on, and the Broncos were getting worn down by the Rams in the middle, the outside hitters started finding more open court. Michelle Lawrence finished with eight kills, and Marlee Reynolds and Dri Culbert combined for 11 with just two hitting errors.

"I think that they started picking on Sam and picking on Kelsey," Lawrence said. "Even though it was still a one-on-one block, they were just trying to get up in front of them, so that made it that the middle was rarely there on the outside for both Marlee and I."

Foss finished the night with 32 assists, with both Culbert and libero Jaime Colaizzi collecting 10 digs.

The ability to adjust is part of the reason why the Rams are on the fifth longest win streak in program history, tied for the fifth-longest home win streak (16) and has now won 49 straight matches at Moby against current Mountain West competition. They read the other side and attack the weakness.

Every night, the Rams find a new way to win. In the end, that's all that matters right now. Not who is carrying the load, but that it gets the Rams to the winning side.

"I think as a team Tom's always given us new strategies for whichever team we're facing," Peters said. "We've always been a very good prep team. We go through scout team and watch video, and we don't approach any game the same way. This team has a great mentality of coming into every game like we're the underdog and that we have to win it. We don't assume we're going to win any game that we play."

Mike Brohard can be reached at 635-3633, mbrohard@reporter-herald.com and @mbrohard