For the last two years, David Clayman found and enrolled in a Medicare plan on his own.

This year, Clayman, 68, decided to visit the office of the West Virginia Bureau of Senior Services in Charleston’s Town Center Mall during Medicare open enrollment. He wasn’t disappointed — Clayman chose a new plan that will save him 50 percent on his premium.

“I’m not stupid, but I had no idea what I was doing,” Clayman said. “This is the least painful thing I’ve done since I came on to Medicare two years ago.”

Clayman said he’d done plenty of research on his own, but it wasn’t until his enrollment session with Marcia Meeks that he fully understood his Medicare plan.

“I will be back next year,” he said.

Meeks, director of the West Virginia State Health Insurance Assistance Program and the Senior Medicare Patrol Program, helps dozens of West Virginia seniors enroll in Medicare plans every day from her office in the Bureau of Senior Services, located on the third floor of the mall near the food court. The office has a handful of employees able to help seniors navigate their coverage, and they’re especially busy this time of year — the nation is in the midst of Medicare open enrollment, which ends Dec. 7.

According to Meeks, some of the biggest changes she has seen in Medicare plans this year have to do with pricing — one common plan saw its premium jump from $44 a month to $117, and another from $35 to $60. Drug coverage on the plans also changes from year to year, and Meeks strongly recommends that seniors revisit their plans during open enrollment to ensure they get the right coverage for the right price.

“It’s just so important for them to review their plans during open enrollment so that there are no surprises come January,” she said.

Many seniors may also qualify for one of four programs that assist with out-of-pocket costs, Meeks said. The Part D Extra Help Program, for example, allows individuals with less than $1,471.25 in monthly income or couples with less than $1,991.25 to receive up to $4,700 in Medicare Part D Prescription Assistance per year.

The Bureau of Senior Services has several programs to help both seniors and younger West Virginians, including a full-time navigator and an in-person assister for anyone trying to enroll in a private health insurance plan on the state’s Affordable Care Act exchange.

“We have many disabled Medicare recipients who aren’t seniors, and those folks have spouses and children, and so even before the ACA, people would say, ‘well, my wife needs insurance,’ or ‘I need insurance for my son.’ They were always coming to us anyway,” Meeks said. “We have a navigator here every day Monday through Friday to help.”

WV SHIP has more than 80 counselors that are paid employees of the Bureau of Senior Services, the Area Agencies on Aging through the Aging & Disability Resource Centers and county senior centers. Meeks said the agency is busy year-round — seniors are aging into Medicare all the time, and now, those who turn 26 are eligible to enroll in an ACA-compliant plan with the help of the Bureau’s navigator.

The WV SHIP program accepts both walk-ins and appointments at the Bureau of Senior Services office. To speak to a Medicare navigator, call 1-877-987-4463.

To learn more about WV SHIP or to find a SHIP counselor at the county level, visit www.wvship.org.

Reach Lydia Nuzum at lydia.nuzum@wvgazettemail.com, 304-348-5189 or follow @lydianuzum on Twitter.