Before the law goes into effect this summer, Planned Parenthood and other organizations hope to block the requirement for doctors to share medically unproven information.

Before the law goes into effect this summer, Planned Parenthood and other organizations hope to block the requirement for doctors to share medically unproven information. Gage Skidmore, CC BY-SA 2.0

Planned Parenthood, the American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU), and the Center for Reproductive Rights (CRR) have filed a lawsuit against the state of Arizona in order to block a section of their recently passed abortion law, USA Today reported.

The law, which goes into effect later this summer, prevents women from buying a health care plan that includes elective abortion coverage. The section the aforementioned parties wish to block requires doctors to lie to their patients seeking a medication abortion, saying this particular procedure is reversible. Yet, many medical experts disagree with this logic.

First, here’s how a medication abortion works: Women are required to take two medications, mifepristone and misoprostol, over two to three days. Planned Parenthood reported the first medications blocks the hormone progesterone, which allows the lining of the uterus to break down. And the second medication is what causes the uterus to empty. The second medication may cause cramps and bleeding, but more often than not, these procedures are done safely.

According to Arizona, this type of abortion can be reversed before women take misoprostol; USA Today cited doctors will tell women they’ll have to take different drugs. But during a press call yesterday, Dr. Ilana Addis, an OBGYN and chair of the Arizona section of the American Congress of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, said this idea is “medically untested and unproven.” Andrew Beck, a staff attorney for the ACLU, who was also on the call, said without credible medical evidence, requiring doctors to suggest the procedure is reversible, is “unconstitutional.”

Arizona’s governor Doug Ducey (pictured above) is currently reviewing the law, telling Today he believes the law both provides women as much information as possible and protects taxpayer dollars from being spent on such procedures. The Center for Arizona Policy argues, too, medication abortions have been reversed in the past “and scores of children have been born to mothers who opted out after taking the first abortion drug.”

If the block, or injunction, is not done in time, David Brown, staff attorney for CRR, said they’ll seek a restraining order against the state.

Arizona isn’t the only state interested in passing this kind of law. North Carolina and Oklahoma, for example, propose women wait 72 hours after they decide to have an abortion to schedule a procedure, while Alabama wants to instate abortion clinics be 2,000 feet away from public K-12 schools. So far, in the first quarter of 2015, 330 abortion restrictions have been introduced in 43 states, Beck said.

To learn more about abortion procedures and legislation, click here.