Past News Releases RSS

Just in time for holiday shopping, mom and entrepreneur Sarah Wells today announced the expansion of her collection of stylish, functional and discreet breast pump bags. The new bags include a competitively priced “Lizzy” bag which retails for $89.99 in a chic gray chain-link pattern as well as on-trend “Annie” bags retailing for $165, in Black as well as in “Dazzling Blue,” which was named a Pantone® color trend selection for 2014. The new releases are available for purchase on Amazon.com and through select retailers across the United States.

With the annual number of babies born in the United States increasing after the recession, breastfeeding rates at 79% for newborns and a provision in the Affordable Care Act mandating that insurers cover breast pumps for new moms (source: CDC.gov), the breastfeeding accessories market is booming. Sarah Wells, LLC entered the market in November 2013 with the “Maddy” breast pump bag. The bag received rave reviews by mothers who wanted an efficient and fashionable way to carry their breast pump, accessories, purse items and more.

“I was inspired to launch this business by my own frustration carrying an ugly and inefficient pump bag to my workplace in Washington, D.C.,” said Sarah Wells LLC, CEO and Founder Sarah Wells. “My debut design has been such a huge hit with new moms, that I am expanding the collection for the holidays to offer moms a full range of breast pump bag options, including several different price points, materials, patterns and colors.”

Sarah Wells breast pump bags were designed with functionality that differs from a regular purse wherein new moms can operate their pump equipment from the sides of the bags, without having to setup and break-down the pump parts during their short work breaks. The bags also feature built in cooler compartments, a large main compartment for purse items and laptops. All bag materials are water resistant and include clear pouches on each side for a picture of baby.

# # #

The mission of Sarah Wells LLC is to help new mothers feel confident and fashionable by offering functional and stylish high-quality breast pump bags. For a list of retailers, images of the bags or more information visit http://www.sarahwellsbags.com.