Peter Peterson, the Blackstone Group LP co-founder who has championed the cause of U.S. debt reduction, is now taking aim at some $800 billion in annual waste in the nation’s health-care system.

The billionaire’s New York-based Peter G. Peterson Foundation will announce a $200 million offshoot next month, the Peterson Center on Healthcare. The new organization boasts a boldface-name advisory board -- including Microsoft Corp. co-founder Bill Gates -- and big goals. Peterson and his son Michael Peterson, the president of the foundation, are seeking to further slow the increase in U.S. health-care costs while improving care for patients.

“Health care is one of the single greatest fiscal and economic challenges facing the country,” Michael Peterson said in an interview. “We spend twice as much as many other advanced nations and have outcomes that are often no better. We have an important opportunity to significantly improve the health and health care provided to our citizens and also improve our economy.”

The U.S. spent about 17 percent of its gross domestic product on health care in 2012, at least 5 percentage points more than any other developed nation, according to the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development in Paris.

The Institute of Medicine, a nonprofit group that advises the U.S. government, has estimated that about 30 cents of every dollar spent on health care in 2009, or $765 billion, was wasted on unnecessary services, inefficient practices, high prices, excessive administrative costs, fraud and missed opportunities to prevent costly illnesses and conditions. The Petersons’ new center wants to spend its money promoting practices by hospitals, doctors and others that cut that waste.

Overcoming Skepticism

The new organization will have to overcome the skepticism of Peterson’s liberal critics in Washington, who have said the Peterson Foundation’s focus on debt reduction is misguided and potentially harmful to the beneficiaries of programs such as Medicare and Social Security. One of those critics, Dean Baker, co-director of the Center for Economic and Policy Research, said he wonders whether the Petersons’ new health center is intended to further its namesake’s political agenda.

“Everything he’s done has a clear bias toward cutting public-sector programs, Social Security and Medicare,” Baker said in a phone interview. “I worry this will carry in that same vein.”

Michael Peterson said the health center has no political agenda and deliberately sought out advisers from across the ideological spectrum. Ezekiel Emanuel, a former senior adviser to President Barack Obama who helped design the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, is a member of the center’s advisory board, as is Joseph Antos, a health economist at the American Enterprise Institute, which opposes the law known as Obamacare.

Outcomes, Cost

The foundation also reached out to Baker to solicit suggestions for the new health center’s advisory board, Baker said. He said he declined to respond.

“Our main focus is to drive greater performance in the system,” Michael Peterson said. “As we measure performance it is outcomes and cost. I don’t think there’s anyone in the country who should be opposed to having better health care delivered to Americans at more efficient prices.”

To urge the government to cut the national debt, the Peterson Foundation funds research and holds an annual summit, among other activities.

Peter Peterson, 88, was U.S. commerce secretary under former President Richard Nixon from 1972 to 1973, then led Lehman Brothers until 1984. He co-founded the Blackstone Group a year later. Before creating the Peterson Foundation in 2008, he co-founded the Concord Coalition, a budget watchdog group. He also owns the Fiscal Times, a digital news organization based in New York.

Elder Care

Michael Peterson, 45, worked on the campaigns of President Bill Clinton and Michael Dukakis, both Democrats, and for former House Majority Leader Richard Gephardt, a Democrat.

The younger Peterson declined to offer specific examples of projects the health-care center will support ahead of its Dec. 4 announcement. Jeffrey Selberg, the center’s executive director, said that the initial focus will include primary care and patients who require an inordinate amount of health-care services, such as frail elderly people.

“We will be spending time with those providers who know how to care for these people very effectively so that their quality of life is improved, their clinical condition is as good as can be,” Selberg said in an interview.

Education and wage stagnation, both issues of interest to liberals, are affected by high U.S. health-care costs, Michael Peterson said. Health-care spending “crowds out” budget resources that states and local governments could otherwise use for schools, and rising costs to employers for health benefits suppresses raises in take-home pay for workers, he said.

“Everyone should be rowing in the same direction in terms of trying to improve performance,” Peterson said.

Unique Mission

Drew Altman, president and chief executive officer of the Kaiser Family Foundation, a Menlo Park, California, research group, said that he seldom joins the boards of other organizations. He agreed to advise the Peterson Center because he is convinced that its mission is unique, he said.

“It’s the only organized effort I know of to try to focus on actually gathering the evidence and validating what works and what doesn’t in delivery and payment reform and actually scaling it up across the entire country,” Altman said in an interview.

Ron Pollack, executive director of Families USA, a health consumer advocacy group in Washington that is closely allied with the White House, said he sees a separation between the Peterson health center and Peter Peterson’s views on the federal budget and debt.

“Whether it’s the private sector, employer-sponsored insurance, or individual coverage that people buy, this initiative is designed to really make sure that America’s health insurance system is a much better value proposition,” Pollack said in a phone interview. “It doesn’t come from the perspective of, our top priority is cutting the federal budget.”

(Michael Peterson’s title was incorrect in an earlier version of this story.)