Connecticut's health insurance marketplace is watching closely as the U.S. Supreme Court prepares to rule on a key provision of President Obama's signature health care law — a decision that could cause 6 million Americans in many other states to lose federal tax credits.

Residents in Connecticut are not in danger of losing tax credits as a direct result of the ruling because subsidies paid in states that set up their own health insurance marketplaces are not part of the legal challenge to the Affordable Care Act.

But the top official at Connecticut's online health insurance exchange says Access Health CT has something to offer to — and something to gain from — the states whose residents would become ineligible for the tax credits if the court rules against the Obama administration. Such a ruling would overturn subsidies in the states that use a marketplace operated by the federal government. That, in turn, could send those states scrambling to set up their own marketplaces to keep their residents' insurance premiums subsidized.

"I think we've positioned ourselves to be able to take advantage of that and help other states in need," said Jim Wadleigh, the CEO of Access Health CT.

Access Health CT cannot sell its operating system to other states because it was created using federal funding from the Affordable Care Act. But the state exchange can try to scale its technology to accommodate other states' marketplaces — which Wadleigh says would reduce operating costs for Access Health. If the state marketplace can keep its operating budget in check, even as federal funding expires at the end of the year, residents purchasing health insurance through Access Health would not have to worry about their premiums increasing.

"We're not looking to get rich off of this; it's to share the expertise and lower costs to the state," Wadleigh said.

The case before the high court, King v. Burwell, is a conservative challenge to the Affordable Care Act, Obama's 2010 health care overhaul. According to the Kaiser Family Foundation, an estimated 6.4 million low- and middle-income Americans in 34 states could see their health insurance premiums rise — potentially to unaffordable rates — as a result of the ruling.

Wadleigh said partnering with Connecticut would allow other states to set up state-run marketplaces faster than they would be able to if they pursued separate contracts with consulting and technology firms. He said that as health insurance officials elsewhere await the Supreme Court's ruling, about a dozen states have contacted him to ask about setting up a state exchange and to explore ways Connecticut could offer assistance.

"They've all been mostly red states," said Wadleigh.

A number of states — including Maine, Pennsylvania and Delaware — have set up "contingency plans" to establish their own exchange if the Supreme Court overturns premium subsidies for people who purchased insurance through a federal marketplace.

It's possible Congress could address the issue with a legislative fix, but some states have signaled that they intend to take action on their own rather than rely on Washington. The Illinois Hospital Association, in a policy paper earlier this month detailing the implications of a Supreme Court decision that determines the subsidies illegal, mentioned Connecticut's operating system as one that states could use, but said it would likely come at a fee.

While Access Health CT cannot sell its technology, it can charge states for training and other services. The state marketplace made roughly $250,000 last year when it partnered with Maryland to help assist a struggling state exchange created there. It currently is in discussions with Vermont and Rhode Island, which both set up their own marketplaces, about potential partnerships with those states. But in the situation that could result from the Supreme Court ruling, Access Health CT would be partnering with states that do not have any of the infrastructure in place already — a potentially bigger task.

Wadleigh estimates that Access Health could immediately add one or two states' marketplaces to the system already developed for Access Health. He predicts that by partnering with Connecticut, other states could have a marketplace up and running within four to six months. He also hopes to profit through sales of a mobile application Access Health developed and patented. The app can be sold because it was created solely using fees levied on insurance carriers who sell plans through the marketplace.

The true business opportunity, however, lies not in the small profits of those kind of sales, but in controlling costs by scaling the system.

"If other states use our technology, it would cost us less," said Lt. Gov. Nancy Wyman, who oversaw implementation of the Affordable Care Act here.

"It makes it cheaper for Connecticut and every other state," she said. "We've already invested and they don't have to put as large an investment out."

There is always the chance that a ruling against the Obama administration would result in legislative changes to the Affordable Care Act that could complicate the fix that Connecticut's health insurance officials are envisioning — and even have an eventual impact here. Dismantling the federal subsidies could have far-reaching implications, the nature of which cannot be predicted until Congress responds.

But one health care legal expert said that, in the short term, at least, Access Health CT appears to be taking a smart business approach.

John Aloysius Cogan Jr., a UConn School of Law professor and former executive counsel for the Rhode Island Office of the Health Insurance Commissioner, said Access Health CT could "benefit tremendously if they can scale up their operations to include one or more states."

"Then they share the costs of an exchange that is going to cost too much money when federal funding runs out at the end of the year," Cogan said. The key question, he said, is whether Connecticut can scale up its infrastructure without spending as much as it spends now — or more — to accommodate the additional traffic on call centers and websites.

"They're sort of assuming that there will be economies of scale here," Cogan said. "If they're right and they can do this faster than it would take for a state to set up its own exchange and Congress doesn't do anything, then it's the way to go."