Topics: Abraham Lincoln, Civil War, Emancipation Proclamation, Heritage Foundation, Ian Millhiser, Jim DeMint, Right Wing Watch, ThinkProgress, U.S. Constitution, News, Politics News

Heritage Foundation head and former South Carolina Sen. Jim DeMint has some news for all you Civil War buffs out there: Everything you thought you knew about how the war led to the emancipation of the Confederacy’s millions of slaves is wrong.

Joining Jerry Newcombe of Truth In Action Ministries radio show last week, the Tea Party hero and architect of last year’s government shutdown insisted that the popular narrative was wrong and that an expansion of federal and executive power had nothing to do with emancipation. On the contrary, DeMint insisted, it’s the Constitution and fervent Christians who should get the credit — no matter what those foolish liberals say.

Here’s DeMint’s entire quote, which really must be read in-full to be appreciated:

Well, the reason that the slaves were eventually freed was the Constitution. It was like the conscience of the American people. Unfortunately, there were some court decisions like Dred Scott and others that defined some people as property; but the Constitution kept calling us back to ‘all men are created equal’ and we have inalienable rights in the minds of god. But a lot of the move to free the slaves came from the people, it did not come from the federal government. It came from a growing movement among the people, particularly people of faith, that [slavery] was wrong. People like Wilberforce who persisted for years because of his faith and because of his love for people. So no liberal is going to win a debate that big government freed the slaves. In fact, it was Abraham Lincoln, the very first Republican, who took this on as a cause and a lot of it was based on a love in his heart that comes from god.

As ThinkProgress’ Ian Millhiser wrote in response, it’s hard to know where to start; there’s just so much here that DeMint gets wrong. But here are a few of the more obvious mistakes in DeMint’s attempt to rewrite American history:

*The Constitution makes no mention of “all men are created equal,” a paraphrase of one of the most famous lines in the Declaration of Independence. The Declaration of Independence is not the Constitution, which is one of the key reasons why most historians and otherwise educated people call it the Declaration of Independence instead of calling it the Constitution. Because, again, they’re not the same thing.

*In fact, what mention the Constitution does make of slavery is mostly value-neutral. There’s the infamous three-fifths clause, of course; there’s also the explicit ban on legislation intended to stop the United States’ involvement in the slave trade before 1808. And, most tellingly of all, is the Fugitive Slave Clause, which required that slaves who tried to escape from one state to another in order to attain freedom be returned to their masters.