Trading the streets of Vallejo for the hallways of Kaiser Permanente, Vallejo police officer Ritzie Tolentino is doing community policing in his own way: Working with the staff at Kaiser and talking to the patients and families that wind up at the hospital.

“I look at it as my chance and the community’s chance to just ask me questions or to talk,” Tolentino said. “(People) ask me, ‘Hey, what’s going on in our city right now?’ Or, ‘How are things now? Is it better now?’ Those are opportunities they will never have if they come down here to the police station.”

Tolentino is one officer tasked with the responsibility of working at the Kaiser Permanente campus on Sereno Drive. Part of a recently renewed three-year grant from Kaiser to the Vallejo Neighborhood Policing Project, Tolentino is a presence at the hospital who not only handles anything needing a police officer to be present, but he also gives a kinder face to the Vallejo Police Department.

On a day of work at Kaiser, Tolentino can be seen greeting staff, helping patients in wheelchairs or giving directions to lost visitors. The effect of interactions like this with the public is not lost on Tolentino, and he views it as an important aspect of his job.

“Kaiser is big on building a relationship with the community,” Tolentino said of his role. “They don’t want you there as Mr. Tactical Officer, but would rather that you build that relationship because that’s always been their rule: ‘Bridge that gap’ and let the community hear that we’re here to take care of them.”

Corwin Harper, senior vice president and area manager for Kaiser Permanente in the Napa-Solano area, said that Tolentino’s presence adds a lot to the hospital and the community as a whole.

“We get the whole gamut of activities at our hospital. We get people who come in to deliver their baby, we get people who have been shot and we get victims of other violent crimes,” Harper said. “So the officer there does what officers do: provide a sense of peace and calm for the community in the hospital, but also it gives people a sense that we can have an effective relationship with police officers in our respective communities.

“And I think this creates a positive vibe for everybody that’s on the campus and in the area,” Harper added.

Advertisement

As an officer, Tolentino knows that his presence is not always welcomed around Vallejo, but sees working at the hospital as a nice change.

“The way (people) interact with me in the hospital, it’s completely different than how they would act in the street.” Tolentino said. “It’s almost like, out in the street, it’s strictly business. ‘Excuse me officer, can you help me with this?’ No smile.

“We’re in the hospital, you see that smile and I enjoy that. I let them know that (the police are) not here to just want to arrest people. I did not wake up this morning thinking that I’m going to arrest someone, I’m going to write this many speeding tickets... no. None of us feel that way.”

“It’s very unique (to work at Kaiser),” Tolentino continued. “I really enjoy my responsibilities at Kaiser. I like what they do for the community and it makes the community safer, really.”

Contact Dianne de Guzman at 707-553-6833.