Buy Photo Pastor Paul Slentz of the 61st Avenue United Methodist Church at the Last Minute Toy Store. (Photo: Keel Hunt/Special to The Tennessean)Buy Photo

In a most unlikely part of town, only blocks from the old state prison, I had my visit with the spirit of St. Nick last Thursday and watched his helpers in their busy workshop.

I was standing inside a concrete-block building with a steeple on top, in a section of West Nashville zoned for heavy industry. This is the tiny Sixty-First Avenue United Methodist Church, and for 21 years it has been the scene of a recurring Christmas miracle called “The Last Minute Toy Store.”

By noon, it was standing-room-only inside the sanctuary, when the Rev. Paul L. Slentz, the pastor, gave his cheerful welcome to volunteers from across Middle Tennessee. He tells them this is “not about presents, but presence – your presence here, doing this.”

Minutes later, in an adjacent room that normally serves as the church fellowship hall, another minister Dale Robble was standing on a stool so he could be seen and heard. Using a bullhorn, he was instructing the large roomful of volunteers who would soon spring into action.

Fellowship Hall had become “Toy Store Central,” its tables now filled with age-appropriate gifts – dolls, board games, basketballs, bikes, and more – all donated. Dale had slept only a few hours on Wednesday night – so great is the demand for this Toy Store, so important its final preparations.

“All of you,” he said to the crowded room, “will be a blessing to the people you help here today. But, I assure you, it is you who will be blessed.”

Many volunteers have been doing this year after year. They come from churches, schools, and clubs. I saw young and old from Antioch, Belle Meade, Brentwood, Clarksville, East Nashville, Edgehill, Forest Hills, and Murfreesboro. They work the registration tables or provide childcare or distribute gifts. A dozen high school students, fluent in Spanish, served as translators.

How it works: Each year preparations begin in August, and as December approaches the word goes out to the community so families in need can know the store will be open for four days the weekend before Christmas. To qualify, a parent must be a Davidson County resident and not have received aid from any other toy assistance program.

At 6:30 each morning the store is open, tickets are distributed on a first-come first-served basis. Once inside, each of these “guests” is paired with a volunteer called the “shopper” who assists with toy selection.

But how the Toy Store mainly works is through a great welling up of goodwill from across the town. The level of generosity on display is breathtaking, people giving and doing what they can.

The numbers are not in yet in for total families served this season (today is the final day), but last year toys were provided to about 1,600 families accounting for 4,973 children. On Thursday, tickets already had been issued for 425 families.

Some donors send checks. Near church baptistery, I saw a cardboard blow-up of a check for $1,161.50. It bore the signatures of 88 inmates of Unit 6 at Riverbend Maximum Security Institution. Pastor Paul told me the prisoners had amassed that sum from their meager earnings in the prison shops. One of them had also written this note: “May God bless each child touched with this donation. Wish we could do more.”

When these volunteers share their own stories of the Toy Store experience, you hear the emotion in their voices.

Some may have professional jobs downtown, others may be only a little better off in their circumstances than those they serve in the Toy Store. Here they are equals – all wear nametags but showing their first names only.

“I’ve been on the other side,” said one volunteer named Elizabeth. Another December she stood in the line outside. Today she was on the helping side of the registration table – making good on her private pledge to return someday when her own luck turned – to pay it forward.

Not much time to talk, too many people in line. Elizabeth then turned to greet a new guest waiting patiently to check in, and she spoke to this mother with great respect.

“There was a time when I was like you, on that side of this table,” she said softly. “One day, when your luck turns, you could come back here and help other people like yourself.”

---

Keel Hunt is a Tennessean columnist. Reach him at Keel@TSGNashville.com

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/16CYmMv