In this season of hope and renewal, it’s time to give my predictions for 2014. For those of us in the commentary biz, it’s the equivalent of spring training, when every team thinks it can win the World Series.

The coming year may see some important changes in the markets, as the bull market ages and the Federal Reserve, under a new chair, unwinds (or “tapers”) its unconventional monetary policy, known as quantitative easing. Here are my predictions.

1. The U.S. economy will have its best year since 2006. That was when real GDP growth came in at 2.7%, according to the World Bank. Economists polled by Reuters expect GDP to grow by 2.6% early in the year and 3% by the end of 2014.

What will drive it? The continuation of the multi-year recovery in housing and autos, where pent-up demand remains strong. Companies also may make more capital investments as business confidence rises. What won’t happen, unfortunately, is a surge of middle-class jobs rather than the part-time or low-paying service jobs the economy is creating now. Welcome to Minimum-Wage Nation.

Bloomberg Confetti falls on traders in the S&P 500 stock index futures pit at the Chicago Mercantile Exchange as they celebrate the close of the final trading day of the year in Chicago, Illinois.

2. Washington, D.C.’s toxic politics won’t shake markets in 2014. The budget deal between Rep. Paul Ryan and Sen. Patty Murray marks a fundamental change from the last two years of brinkmanship and dysfunction. During that time, we approached default (August 2011) and experienced a government shutdown (October 2013). Why the change? Practical politics. Republicans’ poll numbers tanked after the pointless government shutdown, but they rebounded following the disastrous rollout of Obamacare. The GOP thinks it has a winning strategy in running against Obamacare in the midterm elections. David Wasserman of the Cook Political Report expects Republicans to gain up to 10 more seats in the House of Representatives. They could take back the Senate as well.

3. A stronger economy and less political dysfunction lead to a faster taper. In his last news conference, outgoing Federal Reserve chairman Ben Bernanke laid out a roadmap for the Fed to phase out its third round of quantitative easing, or QE3, in 2014. I believe the stronger economy and the decline of partisan gridlock in DC will allow his successor, Janet Yellen, to end QE3 ahead of schedule.

Europe's Week Ahead: Busy Start to 2014 (4:32) There’s plenty of interest for traders on the eve of the first full trading week of 2014, with central-bank announcements from the ECB and Bank of England, the latest euro-zone inflation data and Christmas trading updates from the U.K.’s biggest retailers.

Yellen has impeccable dovish credentials, so she has the political cover to do a monetary “Nixon goes to China”: end QE3 quickly, but maintain extra-low interest rates longer than investors expect. I also think she will make a strong argument that “tapering isn’t tightening,” and the markets will believe her.

4. Stocks will hit new highs, but will have their biggest correction in three years. Investors already have concluded that the end of QE3 doesn’t mean the end of the bull market. That means stocks will trade on improving economic and business fundamentals, driving the S&P 500 index to new records above the 2,000 milestone in 2014.