This story updates Holyoke Health Center, Berkshire Medical among state grant recipients

HOLYOKE - Efforts to reduce the number of patients seeking care for non life-threatening conditions in area emergency departments, and to improve the delivery of integrated patient care, particularly to low-income residents, as well as increase services to patients with substance abuse disorders, got a boost Friday from some $1.45 million in state funding to five Western Massachusetts federally qualified community health centers and hospitals.

Two of the larger grants in a total package of $20 million in funds for 48 hospitals and community health centers across the state are to Springfield's Caring Health Center, which dates to 1995, and Berkshire Medical Center, in Pittsfield.

Caring received $479,923 in state Infrastructure and Capacity-Building funding to hire new bilingual staff to help promote a wellness and integrated approach to health care coverage. Berkshire Medical Center, in Pittsfield, received $723,671 in funds for substance abuse disorders.



Community Health Center of Franklin County received two grants totally $65,494 for staff funding, and Cooley Dickinson Hospital, in Northampton, received $58,202 for a consulting psychiatrist.

Marylou Sudders

Massachusetts Secretary of Health and Human Services Marylou Sudders made a brief stop at Holyoke Health Center Friday afternoon to highlight the the fact that the center received $129,629 in funds to upgrade its call center with additional translation services, and implement a mobile app to help patients make appointments in real time.

Sudders call this type of "engagement so important for the citizens of Holyoke."

In introducing Sudders, who toured the center, Jay Breines, the center's chief executive officer, said the technology would help address issues of "getting patients here at the right time, the right place."

Sudders also called the the center "different" from many others in the commonwealth in being a "full service health center that provides primary care, it provides dental, has behavioral health and has a pharmacy."

"In many ways, Holyoke Health Center will lead the pack," said Sudders of the comprehensive range of care the center provides.

Ann Poole, the center director of development and public health programs, said the 40-year-old community health provider (pdf) serves some 20,000 patients annually, about 68 percent of whom are MassHealth recipients, and has more than 80,000 patient visits per year.

"We are a safety net provider," said Poole of the fact the center serves those with and without insurance.

"All of are services are under one roof for ease of access. You can have an appointment with your primary care provider, and when you are walking out of the building the prescription is ready that he or she wrote for you at the visit. It is really trying to remove access to barriers, and we work closely with Holyoke Medical Center. They are a valuable ally with their urgent care department as we do only outpatient visits here."

She said her center sees Medicare and Medicaid patients as well as Health Connector patients, a reference to the state's insurance exchange, who may have been previously uninsured.

"More people are coming and they are coming a bit more frequently," said Poole, adding the center is in the process of hiring some eight new doctors full-time for the new year.

"The challenges have been with helping our patients understand their health care options," Poole said. "Our managed care department helps people enroll in health insurance and understand it. They have been very busy since the Affordable Care Act."

She added community health care centers have historically focused on "seeing patients whole life and what their barriers could be to care."

"It is a pretty big thought shift," Poole said of helping consumers understand when to access services at an emergency room.

"We are really trying to make the first access entrance into care as easy as possible. In preferred language, timely and same day if we can."