People Moves of the Week: Blue Wolf Capital, Fifth Street, Jefferies

Blue Wolf names new CEO of portfolio company; Fifth Street's Steven Noreika is promoted; Jefferies taps auto aftermarket team from BB&T

Armanino LLP— The San Ramon, California-based accounting firm appointed Eric Weis as consulting partner within the governance, risk and compliance practice. In this post, he will advise on matters relating to Sarbanes-Oxley legislation, which was passed by the U.S. Congress to protect shareholders and the general public from accounting errors and fraudulent practices. Before joining Armanino, Eric was a partner at Crowe Horwath where he focused on risk services including internal audit outsourcing and co-sourcing, compliance and best practices in IT governance. He has also held a variety of roles at different firms, such as Deloitte, PwC and Ernst & Young.

Atlantic Street Capital — The Stamford, Connecticut-based private equity firm called up Grant Marcks to be vice president of business development. In the past, Marcks was with the Riverside Co., where he was as a member of their deal origination team.

Blue Wolf Capital Partners LLC — The New York private equity firm named James Langdale chief executive officer of portfolio company Suwannee Lumber Company LLC. He succeeds Frank Faircloth, who has served as CEO of Suwannee since 1992. Langdale comes to Cross City, Florida-based Suwannee with more than 23 years of experience in the forest products industry. Most recently, he headed Pannon Enterprises LLC, a consulting business he launched in 2011. Meanwhile, Faircloth will become chair of Suwannee’s board of directors.

Carter Ledyard & Milburn LLP — Steven Paul McSloy has joined the New York law firm as a partner. He joins Carter Ledyard from Dentons, also in New York, where he was a partner. McSloy’s practice concentrates on corporate finance, including commercial lending, debt securities issuance, tax-exempt lending and joint ventures.

Fifth Street Asset Management (Nasdaq: FSAM) — Steven Noreika (pictured), who has been with the Greenwich, Connecticut-based firm since 2008, was promoted to chief financial officer of the company's subsidiaries, Fifth Street Finance (Nasdaq: FSC) and Fifth Street Senior Floating Rate Corp. (Nasdaq: FSFR). Over the years, Noreika has held a variety of leadership positions at Fifth Street, including a tenure as CFO of FSFR from November 2013 to July 2014. Alexander Frank will remain CFO of Fifth Street Asset Management.

Gridiron Capital LLC — The New Canaan, Connecticut-based private equity firm has promoted William Hausberg to managing director. He also is a director on the boards of several Gridiron portfolio companies, including Motion Recruitment Partners, Counsel on Call, Performance Health and Dent Wizard. Prior to private equity, Hausberg worked as an analyst in the M&A group at Credit Suisse in New York.

Jefferies — The investment bank poached a duo from the automotive aftermarket practice of BB&T Capital Markets. Rex Green and Jonathan Carey will join Jefferies as managing directors and global co-heads of the bank's automotive aftermarket segment which consists of an eight-person team. Green and Carey helped establish BB&T’s coverage of the automotive aftermarket industry in 2004. Prior to that, Green and Carey were both at Pennington, New Jersey-based investment bank and brokerage firm Advest Inc.

Kainos Capital — The Dallas private equity firm has named Daniel Hopkin and Nirav Shah partners. Previously, Hopkin and Shah were principals. Hopkin, who joined Kainos in 2004, was previously with Morgan Stanley. Shah has been with the firm since 2008. Before that, he was with Thomas H. Lee Partners and Bain Capital, and worked as a management consultant at Bain & Co.

Quad Group — The parent company of Quad Capital Management, Quad Securities Holdings and Quad Advisors recently expanded with several hires. They include: John Curran, previously a hedge fund adviser at Caxton Consulting; Philip Gershgorin, formerly of Oaktree Partners-backed commodities company Hartree Partners LP; Laura Hunt, who previously worked for Graham Capital and Goldman Sachs (NYSE: GS); former NYMEX traders Chris Kelly and Steven Overbey; Josh Roberts, formerly of Vermillion; and Bruce Urquhart, who hails from Saint John, New Brunswick-based Irving Refinery.

Safanad — The private equity firm, which is based in New York and Dubai, announced that Mitchell Oh will join on July 20 as senior associate. Oh's hire comes as Safanad continues its growth strategy and investment plan within private equity. Oh will report to head of private equity, Ziad Dannaoui, and will be based in New York. Prior to earning his MBA from Harvard Business School, Oh spent two years as an associate at Thomas H. Lee Partners in Boston. Before that, he was an analyst at Goldman Sachs in New York.

Wynnchurch Capital Ltd.— The Rosemont, Illinois-based private equity firm announced a slate of promotions. Brian Crumbaugh, Greg Gleason, Neel Mayenkar, and Michael Teplitsky were each named managing director. Crumbaugh, who joined Wynnchurch in 2010, previously worked at ShoreView Industries and Piper Jaffray. Gleason and Teplitsky, before joining the firm in 2008, worked for Houlihan Lokey and Lime Rock Partners, respectively. Mayenkar's tenure with Wynnchurch dates back to 2006. Like Gleason, he was also at Houlihan Lokey. Before that, he worked for PricewaterhouseCoopers.

For more information on related topics, visit the following: