Don Kass (Photo: Special to the Register)

The Des Moines Register Editorial Board ran an editorial Aug. 23 titled, “Iowa waterways are a disgrace.” However, in its rush to malign the EPA-supported Nutrient Reduction Strategy and agricultural interests, it ignored some important points.

It is human nature, when a problem arises, to look for someone to blame. Unfortunately, things are rarely that simple in the real world. In this editorial, the Des Moines Register blames agriculture for everything from lake closures to global warming. In fact, one of the most important factors affecting nutrient loss is weather — notoriously unpredictable in Iowa. Particularly wet and warm periods can cause nitrogen to move with storm water, regardless of whether it is naturally occurring in the soil or applied fertilizer.

The Register says that corn requires a high level of fertilizer. Corn production relies on an average of 10,000 pounds of nitrogen that’s found naturally in Iowa’s soil. It also needs 150-200 pounds applied as fertilizer each year to account for what was removed in last year’s crop. The article also mentions a survey of rural Iowans, attempting to paint farmers as out-of-touch or backwards. Nothing could be further from the truth. The very study the paper mentions reveals that nearly half of all Iowa farmers place meeting the Nutrient Reduction Strategy’s goals as a high priority, and that almost three in four (72 percent) would like to improve conservation practices on their land to meet the strategy’s goals.

The second annual report for the Nutrient Reduction Strategy noted that there have been more than 600 field days, 250 presentations, and 190 conferences attended by more than 40,000 farmers and other stakeholders in the last year, proving that farmers are interested in learning about and implementing conservation practices. Since July, four new projects have expanded conservation efforts in Iowa and received funding through the Iowa Water Quality Initiative.

Water quality is a real concern in Iowa and farmers take it very seriously. That is why government officials and researchers at Iowa State University came together to develop the Nutrient Reduction Strategy. This two-year old strategy is based in science, and points farmers toward an array of best practices, since what is right for production on soils in northeast Iowa is much different than what is needed in southwest Iowa. Though we would all like for problems to be solved overnight, the Nutrient Reduction Strategy must be allowed time to work.

The Register bemoans a lack of timelines attached to the NRS, but science and experience shows it can take decades to see water quality changes — something the Register should already know. Watershed projects do set goals that are appropriate for the landscape, and that is where goals make a difference.

The developers of this strategy have taken a long-term view, which is commendable. Rather than racing to an arbitrary deadline, Iowa farmers and other water quality stakeholders are encouraged to continually improve water quality, always striving for more innovative and effective conservation practices. The strategy’s annual report details at least $105 million in state and private organization investments in implementation programs outlined in the Iowa Nutrient Reduction Strategy, on top of farmers’ private investments.

The Des Moines Register clearly supports the lawsuit against three northwest Iowa counties brought by the Des Moines Water Works. This lawsuit is completely disingenuous. The drainage districts have no money to settle this lawsuit monetarily, as has been suggested by some parties. The lawsuit also threatens individual landowners, not some bureaucratic government agency. Instead, county supervisors are held liable, and if the lawsuit were to somehow assign a monetary liability on the drainage districts, all landowners would pay the penalty. Real livelihoods are at stake.

It is irresponsible to lay out farmers as a scapegoat in the water quality debates that are going on in Iowa today. Farmers are stewards of the land and it is crucial to their jobs to ensure that land is protected and preserved. It is disingenuous to suggest otherwise, and I hope for more balance in future articles.

DON KASSis a Plymouth County supervisor and member of the board for Iowa Partnership for Clean Water. Contact: citizenk2@msn.com

Read or Share this story: http://dmreg.co/1EJ4Itz