American Financial Group Inc. announced it has reached a definitive agreement to acquire Summit Holdings Southeast Inc. and its related companies from Liberty Mutual Insurance in an all-cash transaction.

AFG, an insurance holding company based in Cincinnati, is the parent firm of Great American Insurance Group and has assets of about $40 billion.

Based in Lakeland, Fla., AFG’s Summit Holdings is a provider of workers’ compensation insurance in the Southeastern U.S., with approximately $520 million of premium written. Following the transaction, Summit will continue to operate under the Summit brand as a member of AFG’s Great American.

Under the terms of the transaction, AFG will pay Liberty Mutual Insurance an estimated $250 million at closing. The purchase price will be subject to adjustment between signing and closing for, among other things, changes in Summit’s GAAP tangible book value.

AFG’s total capital investment in Summit will be approximately $400 million, inclusive of a capital contribution by AFG at closing. The transaction is expected to close in the first or second quarter of 2014, following customary regulatory approvals. AFG will not use any external financing in the acquisition.

Carl H. Lindner III, co-chief executive officer of AFG, said in a statement: “Summit has an excellent long-term track record of underwriting outperformance. We value its underwriting discipline, talented management team and value-based service model. Their business model fits well with our P&C Group’s strategic focus and complements our Great American Insurance Group specialty workers’ compensation offerings available through our other specialty P&C businesses. We look forward to welcoming Carol Sipe, Summit Group’s president and CEO, and her team to the AFG family.”

Among Summit’s affiliates are:

Bridgefield Casualty Insurance Co.: Does business in Alabama, Arkansas, Florida, Georgia, Kentucky, Louisiana, Mississippi, North Carolina, South Carolina and Tennessee.

Bridgefield Employers Insurance Co. : Sells in Alabama, Arkansas, Florida, Georgia, Kentucky, Louisiana, Mississippi, North Carolina, South Carolina and Tennessee.

BusinessFirst Insurance Co.: Stock insurance company managed by Summit. Coverage is available in Florida, Kentucky, North Carolina and Tennessee.

RetailFirst Insurance Co.: Stock insurance company managed by Summit. Coverage available in Florida. It was formerly the Florida Retail Federation Self Insurers Fund.

Retailers Casualty Insurance Co.: Stock insurance company managed by Summit. Its coverage is available in Arkansas, Louisiana, Mississippi and Texas.