Buy Photo Kathleen Falk, regional director for the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, and former Dane County executive, called on Wisconsinites to sign up for health care through the Affordable Care Act. (Photo: Madeleine Behr/Post-Crescent Media)Buy Photo

APPLETON - A federal official responsible for pushing health care enrollment via Obamacare came to Appleton Monday to encourage Wisconsinites without insurance to sign up before the Jan. 31 deadline.

Americans should be thankful for the Affordable Care Act for the ability "to buy affordable, quality health care," Kathleen Falk, a former Wisconsin Democratic gubernatorial nominee, said in a press conference here Monday.

Falk, now the regional director for the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, was joined by Outagamie County Executive Tom Nelson and Winnebago County Executive Mark Harris, who is pursuing the 18th Senate District seat as a Democrat, to announce enrollment counseling events for east-central and northeastern Wisconsin residents without health insurance.

She touted provisions in President Barack Obama's signature legislation such as allowing adult children to stay on their parents' plans until they're 26, ensuring men and women have equal rates, and eliminating annual or lifetime limits.

Nelson said engaging Wisconsinites at the local level to ensure they get health care before Jan. 31 is important because Wisconsin is one of 19 states that did not expand Medicaid.

Wisconsin Gov. Scott Walker rejected the expansion in 2013, instead implementing a plan to move 77,000 state residents off BadgerCare, the state's Medicaid program, and into the subsidized private health care plans set up by ACA. Another 83,000 childless adults, who were not on Medicaid because of the program enrollment cap, were then moved into BadgerCare.

Walker defended his decision, saying the federal government could not cover the costs of Medicaid in the future because of the national debt.

Monday's press conference was at Partnership Community Health Center on West Lawrence Street in downtown Appleton. Personal enrollment assistance from health care navigators and certified counselors are available free of charge at five locations on Dec. 12 and Jan. 9. Those who want coverage to start Jan. 1 need to sign up by Dec. 15.

Goodwill Industries of North Central Wisconsin's Community Center in Menasha, Partnership Community Health Center in Oshkosh, Mead Library in Sheboygan, Waupaca Area Public Library in Waupaca and Family Health/La Clinica in Wautoma will hold the counseling sessions.

Americans without health insurance are subjected to a penalty, which increases in 2016 from 2014 and 2015 rates. In 2016, those without insurance will pay 2.5 percent of their household income, up to the total yearly premium for the national average Bronze level plan through ACA, or pay $695 per adult and $347.50 per child in their household, up to $2,085.

Madeleine Behr: 920-996-7226, or madeleine.behr@gannettwisconsin.com; on Twitter @madeleinebehr

If you go

Free ACA counseling enrollment will be held Dec. 12 and Jan. 9 at the following locations:

Goodwill Community Center, 1800 Appleton Road, Menasha, 9 a.m. to 3 p.m. Spanish, Hmong interpreters available.

Partnership Community Health Center, 2310 Westowne Avenue, Oshkosh, 9 a.m. to 3 p.m. Spanish interpreters available.

Mead Library, 710 N. 8th Street, Sheboygan, 10 a.m. to 2 p.m.

Waupaca Area Public Library, 107 South Main Street, Waupaca, 10 a.m. to 2 p.m.

Family Health/La Clinica, 400 South Townline Road, Wautoma, 9 a.m. to 3 p.m. Spanish interpreters available.

Read or Share this story: http://post.cr/1HAUhtO