HOUSTON — The relief written all over his face, Erick Green could finally speak about accomplishments completed, not those yet to achieve.

Sure, it was just a start. Green had played his best game of the season — 11 points and three assists in nearly 18 minutes Wednesday night against the Miami Heat — and with it started to rebuild something that had been eroding ever so slightly in his coach, Brian Shaw.

Trust.

“It felt good,” Green said. “Just coming out here when my name was called, and just making the most out of the opportunity. And just trying to show Coach, get some trust, and get some more playing time when I’m out there.”

And along the way, show up on SportsCenter’s top plays for making a buzzer-beating, long 3-pointer to end the third quarter.

It has been an eventful season for Green, a rookie one year removed from when he last played in college at Virginia Tech. His first action in the NBA could be considered a complete success: six points, making all three of his shots, in 10 minutes Nov. 7 against the Cleveland Cavaliers.

And then … a string of struggles.

The low point was in the Nuggets’ three-game road trip last weekend. Green — like most of the rest of the bench — put back-to-back subpar performances on the court. Green’s was in relief of starter Ty Lawson. That had Shaw wondering if the Nuggets needed to look outside for point guard help and shaking his head, trying to figure out what he was going to do in the meantime.

Green saw the comments and took them to heart. He responded with poised play.

It started when Shaw went to him early in Wednesday’s game with a question.

“When you were at Virginia Tech, what did you do best?” Shaw asked.

“Score,” Green said.

“Go out and do that,” Shaw said. “Be who you are.”

And Green did.

“Once he said that to me … I said, ‘All right,’ ” Green said. “I just went out there, had a scoring mentality, making plays and it all paid off. I really appreciated Coach saying that to me. It helped me a lot.”

All isn’t solved with the Nuggets’ reserve ball-handling situation, but Green helped ease some of the anxiety surrounding it. Lawson had been playing long, difficult minutes, and Shaw was concerned about wearing him out.

For the time being, at least, thanks to Green’s showing, it has been placed on the back burner.

“Hopefully, going forward he can build off of that and continue to play solid minutes for us,” Shaw said.

Said Green: “I hope so. It’s still a process. I’m still a rookie. I’m still young. Every day for me, every day I go into practice, everything I do is just showing him that I can give Ty a break. I know he plays a lot of minutes; just giving him a breather here and there, sticking me in there to show I can control the team and hold my own I think would be good for myself, Ty and the team.”

Christopher Dempsey: cdempsey@denverpost.com or twitter.com/dempseypost

DENVER AT HOUSTON

6 p.m. Saturday, ALT 2; 950 AM

Spotlight on James Harden: The former Arizona State star has been every bit the powerful offensive force he’s always proven to be, recently taking over the NBA scoring lead at 26.4 points per game. He’s getting to the free-throw line regularly, averaging nearly 10 attempts per game — and then cashing in on 89 percent of those tries.

NOTEBOOK

Nuggets: They expect to be without Danilo Gallinari, who is dealing with a couple of bone bruises on his right knee. He’ll probably take the weekend off to rest. … Nate Robinson (back) and JaVale McGee (tibia) are questionable for the game. … This is the first meeting between the Nuggets and Rockets this season.

Rockets: Dwight Howard has missed 11 consecutive games because of right knee soreness, but he’s aiming for a return against the Nuggets. Howard is averaging 18.8 points and 11.3 rebounds. … Houston has five losses on the season, and interestingly enough, three of those have come at the Toyota Center. One of those was to the lowly Los Angeles Lakers. The Rockets, however, have won five of their past six at home, including two straight.

Christopher Dempsey, The Denver Post