For 2014, Buick has made a number of modifications to the popular LaCrosse, including a waterfall grill, new front fascia, redesigned head and tail lights, built-in trunk spoiler, and active lower grill shutters for enhanced fuel economy. Last week I tested such a car, a 1SL “Leather package” equipped four-door in Champagne Silver Metallic with Light Neutral leather-appointed seating. It was loaned to me by Ryan Green, internet manager at Weld County Garage in Greeley.

Shaquille O’Neal actually fits into a LaCrosse, as I understand it, due to the front head- and leg room dimensions of 38” and 41.7”, respectively. With those dimensions being virtually the same in the rear, I guess that means that four men the size of Shaq could ride in the LaCrosse. Amazingly, that would represent over 5% of the U.S. population of men over seven feet tall. Shaq, of course, is a spokesman for Buick, as is Colorado’s beloved Bronco, Peyton Manning.

The M.S.R.P. of my test Buick was $36,135, including freight charges of $925. The “Leather package” LaCrosse has heated power front buckets, rear camera, Buick Intellilink phone/audio with voice activation and 8” screen, satellite radio, tilt wheel, power windows/locks/mirrors, and OnStar from GM. Additionally, the car had a five-passenger leather interior and a very attractive dashboard. Interior space, as mentioned earlier, is good and the trunk holds 13.3 cubic feet of cargo.

At no additional charge on this model, Buick provides the 3.6 liter V-6 (304 hp/264 lb.ft.) with E85 capability. EPA ratings for the V-6 are 18 city, 28 highway, and the tank holds 18 gallons of regular gasoline. Coupled to the V-6 is a six-speed automatic transmission with overdrive plus driver shift control with a tap switch on the shift tower. The two-ton car will go zero to 60 in 6.5 seconds with a top speed of 130 mph.

Styling is the hallmark of the Buick lineup in general, and the LaCrosse is probably the company’s prettiest offering. My test car featured an acceptable grill, distinctive hood vents, chrome door handles and bodyside molding, plus the sculpted trunk lid with integrated spoiler. Ten spoke, 18” silver-alloy wheels were fitted with Goodyear Eagle LS2, 235/50R18 all-season radials – the wheels were included with the V-6 power package on the LaCrosse. The rear end styling, reworked for 2014, has new fascia and a full-width chrome accent. Also at the rear are large dual chrome exhaust finishers.

Mid-size sedan shoppers would do well to take a hard look at the Buick LaCrosse for 2014. If the price and equipment list is suitable for such an individual, selection of this car should be a slam dunk.

Share on Facebook