Hunter Donnelly said the Colorado State staff was the first on the scene, offering him on signing day in February. Saturday, while on an unofficial visit, the Martin High School (Arlington, Texas) linebacker, rated a two-star prospect by Rivals.com, wanted to repay that loyalty by offering a verbal commitment to coach Mike Bobo's program.

"Today I was able to expand on those relationships," Donnelly said. "I met with them, and they showed me the ins and outs of everything. Colorado State showed me loyalty, so I showed it back."

Donnelly listed off a host of reasons why Colorado State was a place he called home. He likes the relationships he has built with the coaching staff, nailed the academic program he desired with the school's nationally ranked veteranary school and said his meeting pastor Johnny Square, the team advisor, helped seal the package, saying "that was important to me, because I'm real tied into church back home, and I wanted to make sure if I came three states over that I was going to still be able to grow, not just in relationships, but grow in my walk with Christ. That was really the point that put the cherry on top and sealed the deal for me."

Advertisement

Donnelly finished last season with 128 total tackles, with 24 for a loss, including 4.5 sacks. He met with defensive coordinator Tyson Summers and linebackers coach Marty English, saying they view the 6-foot-2, 205-pounder as an outside backer in the Rams' system. Donnelly said it had been a long process, but reiterated the Rams had been there from the start and never waivered. He feels he'll provide that on the field with his style of play.

"I think definitely enthusiasm; I have a love for the game, a passion for the game," Donnelly said. "Leadership, but also a person when the game's on the line, I'll be able to step up and make something happen."

Donnelly will rejoin former prep teammate O'Shea Jackson, a defensive lineman who signed with the Rams in February. His verbal becomes the fourth early commitment for the program and the second linebacker in a week — James Sutton III out of Miami gave a verbal Wednesday. All so far are from out of state.