The Austin-based Center For Public Policy Priorities think tank has released a study that reminds us just how badly off young, poor Texans are. It also serves as a reminder of how racially and economically segregated our state remains.

Today’s Morning News highlighted the data on the percentage of children in Dallas County without health insurance — 13 percent, down from 22 percent in 2009, before the Affordable Care Act (i.e. Obamacare) went in effect. Dallas County Judge Clay Jenkins wishes that coverage gap could have been made even smaller:

His office has partnered with cities, community groups, insurance companies and churches to boost insurance enrollment, he said. But there’s only so much the county can do as long as the state Legislature refuses to accept the Medicaid expansion offered under Obamacare, Jenkins said. That would provide coverage to an estimated 200,000 uninsured Dallas County residents, he said. The county would go from having 19 percent of all residents, including children, without insurance to 11 percent, he estimates. County taxpayers would get a much better deal because federal taxes would cover more public health costs, he said. “The Dallas-Fort Worth area, despite our best efforts, still has one of the highest uninsured rates in the country because of the decisions being made down in Austin,” said Jenkins, a Democrat.

We’ve written before in this space about how North Dallas has the worst neighborhood income inequality in the U.S, and about how that inequality’s impact on economic mobility makes Dallas County in particular a terrible place to grow up poor (while also a great place to grow up rich). The CPPP study describes the effects of concentrated poverty on children thusly:

Research has found that the “neighborhood effects” of living in high-poverty areas influence not just children in low-income families, but all children who live in the area, including children who do not live in poverty themselves. Neighborhoods of concentrated poverty can isolate residents from resources and opportunities. Distressingly, the trend of concentrated poverty is moving in the wrong direction for Texas children of all races and ethnicities. A growing number and share of Texas children live in high-poverty neighborhoods, and the rates in Texas’ largest cities are particularly high.

How high? This high: