Tennessee’s Raijon Neal autographs socks for fans during the 2014 Medal of Honor Bowl. There are a record 40 bowl games this year.

One year from now, Tommy McQueeney plans to settle into a seat at Johnson Hagood Stadium and watch his dream come true — a traditional college football bowl game played in Charleston.

Sun Belt The Sun Belt is a likely target for Medal of Honor Bowl affiliation. The Sun Belt’s current bowl game tie-ins: Bowl Site Payout (per team) Cure Bowl Orlando $1.35 million GoDaddy Bowl Mobile $750,000 New Orleans Bowl New Orleans $500,000 Camellia Bowl Montgomery $100,000 Sun Belt members TeamRecord Arkansas State9-3 Appalachian State10-2 Georgia Southern8-4 Georgia State6-6 South Alabama5-7 Troy 4-8 New Mexico State3-9 Idaho4-8 Louisiana Lafayette4-8 Texas State3-9 Louisiana Monroe2-11

“We are moving full steam ahead,” said McQueeney, chairman of the Medal of Honor Bowl, the former all-star game that plans to debut as a bowl game on Dec. 18, 2016.

Losing bids With 40 bowl games this year, three bowls have had to take losing teams to fill out the schedule: Bowl Matchup Date TV Site Cure Georgia State (6-6) vs. San Jose State (5-7) Dec. 19 CBS Sports Network Orlando Foster Farms Nebraska (5-7) vs. UCLA (8-4) Dec. 26 ESPN Santa Clara, Calif. Quick Lane Central Michigan (7-5) vs. Minnesota (5-7) Dec. 28 ESPN2 Detroit

But the bowl-game landscape has shifted even since the Medal of Honor Bowl announced its new format in August. With a record 40 bowl games on the slate this year — matching up 80 of the 127 FBS teams — there are not enough teams with winning records (or even .500 marks) to go around.

Three bowl games will have to field teams with losing records — Nebraska, Minnesota and San Jose State, all at 5-7— and the new Arizona Bowl was forced to take two teams from the same conference. Colorado State and Nevada, both from the Mountain West Conference, will play each other in the Dec. 29 bowl in Tucson.

“Clearly, the system is broken,” said Mountain West commissioner Craig Thompson.

‘Deep dive’

Enough of college football’s movers and shakers agree with Thompson’s assessment that an NCAA task force will study the bowl system this off-season. This season, 63 percent of FBS teams will earn bowl bids, up from less than 50 percent 10 years ago. As recently as 1995, there were just 18 bowl games.

“The members are going to have to figure out, what’s the purpose of bowl games,” NCAA president Mark Emmert said at a recent forum. “Is it a reward for a successful season, or is it just another game that we’re going to provide an opportunity for?”

Big 12 commissioner Bob Bowlsby will lead the NCAA task force.

“I think the fact is we do have too many bowl games and we have more bowl games waiting in the wings,” Bowlsby told reporters. “But you can’t fault the communities from going ahead and doing something if they want to. We’re going to have to do a deep dive on it and figure it out.”

Possible solutions include raising minimum payouts for bowl games, or not playing some games if there are not enough bowl-eligible teams in that particular season. The smallest payout this year is from the Camellia Bowl in Montgomery, Ala., at $100,000 per team.

McQueeney, a Charleston businessman and Citadel graduate, has been working to bring a bowl game to Charleston for more than 10 years, and knows it’s a difficult time to break into the bowl business.

“It’s definitely a concern,” he said of the current climate. “And I think maybe it is time they do look at how they are spreading this thing out. But I am confident we will have a game in Charleston, despite the landscape.”

Surplus or shortage?

The NCAA has largely taken a hands-off approach to the bowl business, leaving it up to communities, conferences and TV networks — mostly ESPN — to start and run the games.

ESPN owns 11 bowl games, including the second-year Camellia Bowl. Two new bowl games were approved for this year — the Cure Bowl in Orlando, set for Saturday, and the Dec. 29 Arizona Bowl in Tucson. A bowl game in Austin, Texas, is set to debut in 2016. If the Medal of Honor Bowl also is approved, there could be at least 42 bowl games next year.

McQueeney points out that last season, there were not enough bowl berths to satisfy all the bowl-eligible teams. Temple, for example, was 6-6 last year, but was left without a bowl bid. Georgia Southern (9-3) and Appalachian State (7-5) were not eligible for bowl games last year as they made the transition from the FCS to the FBS Sun Belt Conference, even though their records were good enough.

“Last year, there was a surplus of bowl teams, and this year there is a shortage,” McQueeney said. “But there is such an upsurge in teams leaving the FCS to join FBS conferences, I think this situation may be temporary. Conferences are building up, like with Coastal Carolina joining the Sun Belt.”

The Sun Belt, which currently includes 11 football teams, is a likely target for the Medal of Honor Bowl. It currently has affiliations with four bowls — the New Orleans Bowl; the GoDaddy Bowl in Mobile, Ala.; the Camellia Bowl; and the Cure Bowl. A record-tying four Sun Belt teams — Georgia Southern, Arkansas State, Appalachian State and Georgia State — will go to bowl games this year.

‘Phenomenal interest’

McQueeney said he has had discussions with seven conferences, and said the goal is to land a Power 5 conference — the ACC, SEC, Big Ten, Big 12 or Pac 12 — along with another FBS league.

“It’s ironic that all this is going on now with the bowl games,” said McQueeney, who expects to sign contracts with conferences in January or February. “Because the interest in Charleston has been phenomenal.”

After the Medal of Honor Bowl secures conference affiliations, the next step is to land a television contract. ESPN or its affiliates (ABC, ESPN2) broadcast almost all of the bowl games; the Dec. 26 Sun Bowl is on CBS, Saturday’s Auto Nation Cure Bowl is on CBS Sports Network, and the Dec. 29 Arizona Bowl is on the American Sports Network.

“The better your affiliations, the better the TV contract,” McQueeney said.

When conference affiliations and a TV contract are in hand, the Medal of Honor Bowl will makes its case for NCAA certification in March. McQueeney remains confident that the Medal of Honor Bowl will find its place in the bowl system, whatever that looks like in 2016.

“I think with what we have to offer in Charleston, with the committee we have in place and the success of the all-star game we’ve had here, we are a very attractive situation for conferences to look at,” he said.