Frank Scaturro first came to my attention as a historian. He’s the author of Grant Reconsidered, a brilliant defense of the presidency of Ulysses S. Grant, which I discussed here. He also wrote The Supreme Court’s Retreat from Reconstruction: A Distortion of Constitutional Jurisprudence, which I have not read.

But Scaturro’s talents extend beyond the study of history to law and politics. He served as Counsel for the Constitution for the Senate Judiciary Committee. His focus there was on executive and judicial nominations, as well as legislation related to constitutional issues. In that capacity, he was a key aide in the battles to confirm John Roberts and Samuel Alito.

My trusted source from the Senate Judiciary Committee of that era rates Scaturro very highly.

Scaturro is also a litigator. He specializes in constitutional and commercial cases and typically handles civil rights cases against government entities (God’s work, surely).

Now, Scaturro is seeking the Republican nomination for Congress from New York’s Fourth Congressional District. Scaturro ran for the same seat, which encompasses parts of Nassau County on Long Island, in 2012 as the Conservative Party nominee.

The Fourth District has been represented for years by Democrat Carolyn McCarthy. But McCarthy, who won with 55 percent of the vote in 2012, has announced her retirement from Congress.

Scaturro is a solid conservative candidate. His highest priority is “to bring the economy back on track and restore confidence in the job market.” And a major component of that quest “is to repeal Obamacare and restore medical decision-making to doctors and their patients.”

Bringing the economy back also requires limits on spending. Scaturro favors budget spending caps tied to a proportion of the debt or gross domestic product, with a focus on controlling the costs of entitlement programs including Social Security and Medicare in order to keep those programs solvent in the long term.

On national defense, Scaturro believes the country has lost focus on its values in the post Cold War era. In his view, “meaningful deterrents mean the combination of economic sanctions and some credible military threat.”

Scaturro is also a strong supporter of Israel.

Scaturro has been endorsed by Sen. Orrin Hatch (who knows him from the Senate Judiciary Committee), Rep. Trent Franks (R-AZ) (who emphasizes Scaturro’s commitment to Israel), Rep. John Fortenberry (R-NV), former Rep. John LeBoutillier (R-NY), and various Nassau County Republican officials.

The Republican primary will take place on June 24.

You can learn more about Scaturro here. You can contribute to his campaign here.