LaVoy Finicum, a rancher from Arizona, speaks to reporters at the Malheur National Wildlife Refuge, which an armed group of protesters took over Jan. 2 near Burns, Ore. (Photo: Rick Bowmer / AP) Story Highlights Armed militia's takeover highlights American abuses of treaties with Indian nations.

“We were here first” said Charlotte Rodrique, chairwoman of the Burns Paiute Indian Tribe, whose ancestors lived on what is now the Malheur National Wildlife Refuge, now occupied by a white militia group.

This incident points up, among a host of other issues, the need for the enforcement of treaties with American Indian nations by the federal government: the 371 treaties that have been flagrantly broken by the same government.

In fact, touch the surface of any land issue in the United States from Florida to New York, from the Carolina coast to California and at all points in between, and strong and legitimate claims by Indian nations shall arise.

In Tennessee, in the wake of the occupation, state Rep. Andy Holt, R-Dresden, tweeted – “#bundy militia Where can I send support for your effort?"

Obviously, Holt knows neither the history of the area nor American Indian treaty law.

If he did, he would realize that if anyone needs support, it is the Burns Paiute Indian Tribe in their efforts to have the land, their ancestral home, returned to them, the rightful owners.

To begin with, all of the U.S. is ancestral native land fraudulently taken from its rightful owners in the biggest land grab in world history. All of this country is Indian land.

The U.S. still legally belongs to native people. As one Paiute tribal member recently stated: “All lands have been stolen from the Indian tribes.”

Albert Bender of Nashville is a Cherokee, activist, journalist and author of the recently published "Native American Wisdom." Email him at column-albertbender07@yahoo.com. (Photo: Submitted)

The Refuge is comprised of 187,000 acres and was the 19th century Malheur Indian Reservation.

This was by the Treaty of 1868. But white settlers began encroaching on the reservation as soon as it was established.

President Ulysses S. Grant, under heavy pressure from land-hungry, Indian-hating settlers, began opening areas of the reservation for settlement, reducing native land.

Conflict increased between Indians and whites leading to the Bannock War of 1878.

In January 1879, the Paiutes were forcibly removed by the U.S. Army from the reservation in knee-deep snow, many in shackles, on their own “Trail of Tears,” 350 miles north to present-day Washington state.

In October 1879, the Malheur Reservation was “discontinued,” and ranchers and settlers took possession of the land.

Presently, the Burns Paiute Indian Tribe live on an allotment of 760 acres, a few miles northwest of the city of Burns, Ore.

This is a draconian cutback of the original Malheur Indian Reservation of 1.5 million acres.

But in the meantime, the occupiers who “want their land back," if not the direct descendants of the land pirates responsible for the illegal dispossession of the Paiute people, are the ideological progeny of the same avaricious invaders.

The occupation brings up another point. The whole world is watching the disparity in law enforcement as it relates to Indian and white. This brings to mind Wounded Knee and the government reaction to occupation by native people.

The Burns Paiute Tribe has set as its priority the return of the refuge to reservation status or at the very least maintaining the land as a wildlife refuge that will protect its natural and cultural integrity.

There are still Indian cultural sites on the refuge, and the Paiute people still engage in food gathering in the area.

Tribal members traverse the refuge to gather plants for traditional crafts and native medicine.

Cultural items that have been found, thousands of years old, give mute testimony to Indian life on the land since time immemorial.

Native land claims exist all over the country. There is even a story still abounding that insurance companies in parts of East Tennessee are reluctant to provide certain types of coverage for fear of the resurgence of Cherokee claims arising from fraudulent land-taking in the 18th and 19th centuries.

Speaking locally, the city of Nashville sits on land fraudulently taken from the Cherokee Nation during that same time period. I wonder if Rep. Holt realizes he is a tenant on Indian land.

As for the Malheur Wildlife Refuge, it should be returned, posthaste, to the Paiute people, the rightful owners.

Albert Bender of Nashville is a Cherokee, activist, journalist and author of the recently published "Native American Wisdom.

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/1Rwagg6