Is this the way the Donald Trump campaign ends? Not with a spectacularly intemperate insult that implodes his polls, but with a bunch of policies that in some cases only a Democrat could love?

Trump is nobody's idea of a letter-perfect conservative. But his zigs and zags have been especially apparent in recent days as he has renewed his support for universal health coverage, suggested the United States back off the fight against the Islamic State group in Syria, tried awkwardly to ingratiate himself with Christian conservatives, and announced a tax plan that's a supply-side classic in populist clothing.

A solid chunk of GOP primary voters have been drawn to Trump's energetic outsider candidacy and entertained by his exuberantly nasty tweets and zingers. But ultimately, what will they make of a candidate whose policies swing between perfectly in step and wildly out of step with their party?

[SEE: Editorial Cartoons on Donald Trump]

For instance, in a "60 Minutes" interview with Scott Pelley on CBS, Trump made predictable GOP noises about repealing and replacing "Obamacare," as the Affordable Care Act is known. But then he added, "Everybody's got to be covered. This is an un-Republican thing for me to say." It sure is. The GOP dropped the goal of universal coverage years ago. And Trump's solution would certainly involve more government control of plans and prices than exists now, under Obamacare.

"I am going to take care of everybody. I don't care if it costs me votes or not. Everybody's going to be taken care of much better than they're taken care of now," he said. When Pelley asked how, he said he'd "make a deal with existing hospitals" to care for the poor and "the government's gonna pay for it." Sounds like Medicaid.

Most people, Trump added, would be covered by private plans they buy themselves – "great plans with lots of different competition with lots of competitors with great companies and they can have their doctors, they can have plans, they can have everything." Sounds like Obamacare for all, including those who now have coverage through their jobs, and (somehow) none of that unpleasant insurance-company skimping on choices to keep costs down.

Then there's foreign policy. Trump – who rails constantly about the country's lack of leadership – had some ideas about the Islamic State group (also called ISIS) that would definitely qualify as leading from behind, the phrase conservatives often use to denigrate President Obama.

[GALLERY: Barack Obama Cartoons]

One is to stop bombing the Islamic militant group in Syria and leave it alone to destroy Syrian President Bashar Assad. "Why aren't we letting ISIS go and fight Assad and then we pick up the remnants?" he asked. To which Pelley responded, seemingly somewhat incredulously, "Lay off in Syria, let them destroy Assad. And then we go in behind that?" "Yes, that's what I would say," Trump replied. Alternatively, he suggested punting to Russia. "Russia wants to get rid of ISIS. We want to get rid of ISIS. Maybe let Russia do it. Let 'em get rid of ISIS. What the hell do we care?"

Trump is similarly out of step with the GOP's religious base. The real estate mogul and reality TV star – who never turns the other cheek and until recently favored abortion rights – walked onstage at the Values Voter Summit last week with his childhood Bible in hand. The gimmicky theatrics, and his pledge that as president he'd (somehow) get rid of "Happy Holidays" in favor of "Merry Christmas," were far less convincing than his "this is my wheelhouse" press conference Monday on taxes and the economy.

Trump sounded populist when he said he would eliminate "very unfair" deductions, rates and loopholes for "special interests and the very rich." At that point he interjected, "in other words it's going to cost me a fortune." This is the customary Democratic rhetorical play on taxes – wealthy candidates, backed by billionaires like Warren Buffet, talk about how they want to raise their own taxes.

Yet overall the Trump tax plan is well within the Republican mainstream in its treatment of the wealthy and its disregard for revenue shortfalls. In other words, rich people would benefit hugely from these proposals, including a 15 percent corporate rate, lower rates on dividends and capital gains, and elimination of the estate tax on inheritances. An early analysis suggests the changes could cost nearly $11 trillion over 10 years.

[SEE: Editorial Cartoons on the 2016 Presidential Elections]

The Trumpiest aspect of the plan is that individuals making under $25,000 would owe the IRS nothing but a form that says "I win." (No, seriously.) That would simplify things for millions as well as saving them money. But it does go against the conservative philosophy that everyone should have skin in the game, no matter how low their income and how tiny their contribution.

It also would add millions to the 47 percent of Americans tagged by former Massachusetts Gov. Mitt Romney in 2012 as not paying any income taxes. That would create more ammunition for the dependency-on-government narrative that's a staple among some conservatives.