The Orange County Register has recently taken Covered California to task with one-sided editorials and op-eds.

While I appreciate their recognition that “Covered California for the most part has delivered on its promise of easy-to-obtain health insurance,” the most recent editorial focused on one narrow finding in a Henry J. Kaiser Family Foundation consumer survey related to affordability – that 44 percent of enrollees said that they have difficulty paying their monthly premiums – when, in fact, the survey offers extensive evidence of how well the Affordable Care Act is working in our state.

The survey shows that Covered California has made historic gains in Latino enrollment, in attracting young and healthy consumers and in making sure those consumers both have access to care and are utilizing it. Fifty-nine percent of those surveyed had a checkup or got preventive care by the fall of 2014.

While we know it’s not always easy to afford health insurance, most of the 1.1 million consumers who had active coverage at the end of 2014 continued their coverage, with 92 percent starting the renewal process. We think this is a solid measure of which people are finding value in their plans, even if they wish coverage were more affordable.

Covered California did not downplay survey responses on affordability. We addressed the issue head on in our press release, noting more needs to be done nationwide to address the underlying reasons why health care is expensive in this country. Covered California enrollees concerned about insurance affordability are not alone. Many of those who have private coverage outside the exchange also report concerns about the cost of health insurance.

It is also simply inaccurate to suggest that Covered California is in financial jeopardy, as the Register has claimed. Covered California will start the next fiscal year with $200 million in unrestricted reserves, and we outlined in great detail its revenues and expenditures for the next five years.

In May, we laid out our proposed budget for the upcoming fiscal year. We showed how Covered California, with more than 1.3 million people actively enrolled, is one of the largest purchasers of health insurance in California and the nation. In addition to nearly $200 million in reserves, we also have the ability to use federal establishment funds into the coming fiscal year, as allowed by law, to complete our initial launch.

While we are utilizing grant funding today, we are streamlining our operations and banking the fees collected from our health plans to put us in position to serve millions of Californians for years to come.

We are bringing affordable health coverage within reach for Californians and ensuring they get the care they need. A recent Health Affairs study shows that the hospital networks offered by Covered California’s plans provide just as good, or an even higher quality, of care as those in the private market.

The Kaiser Family Foundation study also found that Covered California enrollees have the same geographic access to care as those with employer-sponsored coverage – with more than 90 percent reporting it was “easy” to travel to their usual source of care. This is all evidence of the ACA working in California, putting health insurance within reach for many millions in both exchange-based health coverage and Medi-Cal for the first time. We look forward to continuing our efforts for many years to come.

Peter Lee is executive director of Covered California.