Patients wait to be seen at the Arrowhead Regional Medical Clinic’s mobile clinic. Arrowhead has been providing care for the uninsured.

SAN BERNARDINO >> Doctors don’t make house calls anymore, but for much of San Bernardino County, a rolling clinic regularly visits underserved neighborhood locations from Yucaipa to Ontario.

Arrowhead Regional Medical Center, the county hospital, funds and operates a 40-foot Medical Mobile Clinic that features two functional private exam rooms and a health education area.

Most of the patients they see don’t speak English, don’t have health insurance and haven’t seen a doctor for years.

The program has grown from 360 patients in 2012 to 1,700 last year, said Eda Gemmell, an RN at the clinic since 2012.

The county budget for the program is about $330,000 this fiscal year, officials said.

At a recent clinic stop at the Ruben Campos Community Center, 1717 W. Fifth St., in San Bernardino, Angelena Rivas, 66, and Genaro Garcia, 64, were among the patients to be seen.

The couple does not have medical insurance and does not qualify for programs created by the Affordable Care Act.

Speaking through an interpreter, Garcia said he is working with the clinic’s medical staff to reduce his high cholesterol levels while Rivas said she has been having significant pain in both knees.

The couple said they come to the clinic for their primary care previously and would have walked to it, except Rivas’ knee issues made that option impractical.

Another patient, Juanita Muniz, 27, brought her three young children.

But she, not the children, would be the patient on that day.

“I don’t have a baby sitter,” she said, adding that she walked to the clinic, which was near her home.

It had been several years since she had seen a doctor and she thought a check-up would be a good idea.

The children are covered by health insurance, but she has none.

“It is refreshing to know an entity affiliated with the county is treating (the poor, disenfranchised) westside (San Bernardino) residents with such courtesy and respect,” said Ericka Flores, a community organizer with the Center for Community Action and Environmental Justice.

The Riverside County-based CAEJ has an office at the Ruben Campos Community Center and its members are present when the mobile clinic arrives, to provide a familiar face to the patients, who might have anxiety about a medical visit, Flores said.

Advertisement

“The (mobile clinic) staff is wonderful.” Flores said.

“It was the residents who learned about the clinic and wanted it to stop at the Ruben Campos center,” she said.

CAEJ and residents talked with ARMC officials to bring the clinic to that location.

Since its inception, seven breast cancer cases and one colon cancer have been diagnosed in early stages by mobile clinic staff, Gemmell said.

On this day, Dr. Siraj Mowjood was the attending physician overseeing two young doctors in ARMC’s family medicine residency program.

Dr. Anushree Gupta, in the second year of the three-year family medicine residency program, said she likes working in the mobile clinic because it has “such a mix of patients and medical problems.”

Patients can be senior citizens, pregnant women or children, she said.

Mowjood said often clinic health professionals detect chronic conditions, such as high blood pressure or diabetes, that have likely been present for years, but unknown to the patient.

Residents get the experience of educating their patients and working with them to manage their newly discovered conditions, he said.

On days when the residents are not there, a nurse practitioner heads up the medical side of the program. Gemmell said.

The clinic works mostly by appointment, although it does accept walk-ins, she said.

Primary care services offered by the rolling clinic include cholesterol screenings and other lab tests. diabetic care and treatment of acute and chronic illnesses, immunizations, mammograms and other womens’ medical services, and well child checks.

To find out more information about the mobile clinic or schedule and appointment call 909-520-1207.