Yahoo Finance's Seana Smith speaks with TJM Investments' Scott Shellady about how bison could impact what you pay for beef.

Starbucks has been able to post strong growth while so many traditional retailers continue to report declining traffic.

McDonald's Corp (MCD.N) has temporarily closed its headquarters for the third year in a row as worker wage protests targeted the fast-food company's annual meeting, it said on Wednesday. McDonald's, based in Oak Brook, Illinois, has encouraged employees to work from home, spokeswoman Lisa McComb said in an email. The company will host the annual shareholder meeting at its headquarters campus on Thursday, with security personnel in attendance as usual, McComb said.

Warren Buffett is an Obama supporter, but he is still bullish on America even if Trump becomes president. He cited the fact that in his lifetime, GDP per capita has gone up six times. He thinks it will continue to rise for at least the next 50 years and that no presidential candidate is going to put an end to that.

At the annual Berkshire Hathaway meeting, Warren Buffett answered a tough question from a shareholder about Berkshire's substantial holdings of Coca-Cola shares. He said, "I elect to get my 2600 or 2700 calories per day from things that make me feel good."

Addressing the issue of climate change at his annual shareholder meeting, Warren Buffett said he doesn't agree that climate change is the most pressing issue facing the Earth. However, he does want to reduce our dependence on oil out of a fear that we're going to use "every last drop."

Warren Buffett wants to cut down our oil use, but not because of climate change

The earnings parade continues this week with several from the health care sector, including highly anticipated results from Gilead Sciences and Humana.

Warren Buffett wants to cut down our oil use, but not because of climate change

Warren Buffett wants to cut down our oil use, but not because of climate change

The earnings parade continues this week, with over 150 companies from the S&P 500 reporting. Several hail from the health care sector, including highly anticipated results from Gilead Sciences and Humana.

Gilead Sciences (GILD), long a darling in the biotech space, releases Q2 results on Tuesday after-the-bell. Estimize is looking for EPS of $2.78, denoting year-over-year growth of 18%, and much higher than Wall Street’s estimate of $2.64. Revenues are expected to come in at $7.54B, also above the Street’s $7.36B.

Despite expected profit growth of 18%, this pales in comparison to the past 5 quarters which have all yielded triple-digit growth. Gilead Sciences successful Hepatitis C franchise, comprised of the drugs Slovaldi and Harvoni, are responsible for strong fundamentals.

However, the pop drugmakers see from new drugs often wanes after the first two quarters following an approval. Slovaldi was introduced in late 2013 and Harvoni in late 2014, meaning massive profits realized from those two names may be tapering. The high price of these drugs have also come into question, with Gilead having to make price concessions for those insurers willing to carry the drugs.

In addition to updates on the Hepatitis C franchise, investors will also be eager to hear any news regarding acquisition targets. Last quarter the CEO, John Martin, said the company was taking suggestions on who to buy.

Get the Latest Market Data and News with the Yahoo Finance App

Humana (HUM) will also be reporting this week, and revisions for EPS have moved down sharply. Estimize is looking for EPS of $1.97 vs. Wall Street’s $1.86. The Estimize consensus has fallen 12 cents since Friday morning, in response to a warning from the insurer that hospital costs for their senior citizen members were higher than initially anticipated and would eat into Q2 profits.

The other big news of course is Aetna’s (AET) bid to acquire Humana for $37B. As health insurers scramble to consolidate in the wake of the federal Affordable Care Act approval as a way to diversify and cut costs, Aetna and Humana were first to the table, followed by Anthem (ANTM) and Cigna (CI) which just disclosed the former would acquire the latter for $54B, with only UnitedHealth Group (UNH) left. This has reduced the number of big insurance companies to 3 from 5.

The Humana/Aetna merger came about as the two hoped being the first big insurers to combine would give them an edge in reviews by antitrust regulators.

MORE RELATED:

Watch for user engagement when Twitter and Facebook report: Estimize

UBS backs bullish calls on Twitter and Facebook ahead of earnings

$1.3 billion Financial Times deal was very good for Pearson: Sorrell