J. Gary DiLaura (Ed Note: The opinions of J. Gary DiLaura do not necessarily reflect those of the Niagara Falls Reporter. However, as believers in the First Amendment, we support his right to express his opinions. Your response is welcome.) When President Barack Hussein Obama took his oath of office (twice), saying "I will protect, preserve, and defend the Constitution of the United States of America, so help me God”, as is required to assume the office of the presidency of the United States, he was not being forthright with the people. That is because the president is a Muslim. Now let me explain why that is a problem. Islam teaches that there is one ruler in all aspects of life and that is Islam! Islam is the church and state. Islam directs when and how to pray, punishment for disbelief, how a trial works, and that women are possessions, not unlike household pets. According to Islam, it is legal to do anything as long as it furthers Islam. Entire countries, such as Saudi Arabia, Iran, Jordan, Libya, Syria, Egypt, Lebanon, 51 countries in all, have, literally, no separation between church and state, because they are Islamic nations. Consequently many, if not all, preach and practice some forms of violence in the name of Islam. The Holy Quran gives an idea as to why this is true. 2:123 … Fight the Unbelievers who gird you about …. 9:5 … fight and slay the Pagans wherever you find them and seize them, beleaguer them, and lie in wait for them in every stratagem…. 9:28 …. Truly the Pagans are unclean… 9:29 Fight those who do not believe in Allah…. J. Gary DiLaura’s view of President Obama. Note: this is a photo-shopped image and not an actual picture of Pres. Obama 4:15 If any of your women are guilty of lewdness, take the evidence of four reliable witnesses from amongst you against them ; and if they testify , confine them to houses until death do claim them , or Allah ordain them some (other) way. 8;12 …. I will instill terror into the hearts of the Unbelievers ; you smite above their necks and smite all their finger-tips off them. 8;65 ….rouse the Believers to the fight…..they will vanquish … the Unbelievers Of course, Muslims counter that other religions, even the Bible, preach violence. But there is a difference. No other religion/state practices violence in the name of a peaceful religion. Saudi Arabia, our ally (?), won’t allow most Americans to step foot into the cities of Mecca or Medina as they are “unclean,” because they are not Muslims. If we told the Saudis that they cannot set foot into New York City, where 19 Saudi Muslims, killed 3000 Americans, I suspect the Saudis would be outraged. So here's the point: The separation of church and state is our “rule of law”, the foundation of our Republic, the reason the Pilgrims left England: religious freedom! But a Muslim cannot take an oath to separate church and state and, therefore, cannot honestly support our Constitution. Our Constitution is in direct conflict with Islam. How then, can any Muslim become president without denouncing Islam? So what do you say to those who say, “So what if the President is a Muslim? Unlike Islam, this is a Christian Nation that welcomes all peaceful faiths. Our law separates church and state." I say people who say this don’t understand Islam. As the Constitution is our written rule of law, the Koran is the written rule of law of Islam. Read the Koran. There is no place for a state apart from Islam. This is why Japan won’t allow Muslims to become citizens. And they may have a point. They are an islands nation and if Islam takes hold their country, they would be no longer Japanese. They'd be Muslims. Consider: When no Country would allow Yasser Arafat and the PLO into their country, Lebanon, a Christian nation, because of Lebanon’s Christian charitable beliefs, gave the PLO sanctuary in the 1960s. The Muslim PLO thanked Lebanon by systematically murdering the Christians and made the country a Muslim nation by 1973. This is exactly what radical Islamic Muslims, like Hamas, Hezbollah, Al Qaeda and ISIS do. Now getting back to the president. It is my belief that President Obama not only was a Muslim, formerly, as he admits, but is still a Muslim. Obama is the son of a Muslim father, the stepson of Muslim stepfather, his half-brothers in Kenya are Muslims. In Islam, if the father is a Muslim, his children are Muslim. The “wedding” ring he wears is an Islamic display that Muslims use to show devotion to Allah, not their wives. Obama claims he stopped being a Muslim at age 21. By the way, I strongly suspect Obama said he was a foreign (Muslim) exchange student in college and that’s why he paid a million dollars to hide his records! His “birth certificate,” mysteriously produced by the president, was, in my opinion, clearly shown by forensic experts in Arizona to be a fraud. However, the law of Islam requires that for a Muslim to change to another “religion,” he must first denounce Islam and Allah before a Muslim gathering. Have you heard of Obama denouncing Islam or Allah? No. He praises Islam! He calls Islamic terrorists in the USA “disgruntled employees” who commit workplace violence. He pulled our troops out of Iraq. He says ISIS is not Islam; Islam is peaceful. He said on 60 minutes, “We are not now nor will we ever be at war with Islam". In 2008, during his campaign, and on a live TV, in an interview with George Stephanopoulos, then Senator Obama said “based on my Muslim beliefs” three times and was corrected each time by George by “don’t you mean my Christian beliefs?” In Obama's first book, "Audacity of Hope," written after becoming a Christian, he wrote “I will stand with the Muslims” when things turn ugly. The Egyptian foreign minister, Ahmed Aboul-Gheit says about President Obama, that in a private meeting during his first term “The American President told me in confidence that he is still a Muslim, who supports the Muslim agenda”. So what does this all mean? Two of Obama’s favorite professors were Richard Andrew Cloward and Frances Fox Piven, sociology professors at Columbia University, who taught that capitalism should be collapsed by overloading the government with financial demands that could not be met in order to convert to socialism. Cloward/ Piven call for overloading the economy, causing financial collapse, resulting in civil unrest and rioting. Then comes martial law and the government can take over everything. In order for this to happen, the government must first take your guns. Some believe that the flood of illegal immigrants Obama is pushing may be part of this strategy. Curiously, Section 5210 of the Affordable Care Act, better known as ObamaCare, provides for a 6,000 man “force”, trained and supplied by the military that reports directly to the president. So, if what I suspect is correct, everything Obama is doing makes perfect sense! Fifty million people on welfare, decimate the military, open the borders, $17.5 trillion in debt and growing, close the coal power plants which provides 40% of our power, appoint known radicals to critical government jobs and exempt them from background checks as Czars. Remove all our troops from Iraq, declare “ISIS is not Islam”, “Islam is non violent” ‘ People…in my opinion, if he looks like a Muslim, talks like a Muslim, acts like a Muslim and says he won’t fight Muslims… then he’s a Muslim. And God help us, the infidels. J. Gary DiLaura is a retired FBI, Agent