Sara Sjolin/MarketWatch Mark Mobius sees more upside potential in emerging markets.

That Mark Mobius has good things to say about emerging markets will come as little surprise given his enthusiasm for economies that are often marginalized in favor of developed markets.

But in his most recent report, the executive chairman of the Templeton Emerging Markets Group at Franklin Templeton shares some compelling reasons as to why emerging markets will continue to shine even if a U.S. rate hike is a certainty.

In Mobius’s view, the Federal Reserve may not be in any rush to tighten monetary policy. “Any rate increases will likely be gradual and measured. Without a major inflationary threat, I don’t think the Fed would want the U.S. dollar to get too strong, as it could negatively impact export-oriented companies,” he said.

The U.S. dollar index DXY, -0.15% a gauge of the dollar’s performance against a basket of six rival currencies, is up 6% in the first five months of this year.

And while market volatility will be inevitable no matter how circumspect the Fed is about shifting to a tightening cycle, that, too, can be a chance to bargain hunt for undervalued stocks. “We see it as [an] opportunity to pick up shares of what we see as good-quality companies at attractive prices,” Mobius said.

Furthermore, with the exception of the Fed, most other central banks are maintaining accommodative policies to support economic growth. “We believe there is still money in motion as central banks globally expand their balance sheets,” he said.

Along with those ample funds, tailwinds for equity markets from Brazil to Turkey include solid growth trends, wide-spread reforms and lower oil prices.

“Brazil’s difficult current situation could be sowing the seeds of recovery with currency devaluation boosting competitiveness, while moves to root out corruption could lead to improved economic and corporate governance over time,” Mobius said.

Free-trade initiatives, including the President Obama–backed Trans-Pacific Partnership, could provide an additional catalyst.

Emerging markets, on the whole, have outperformed their more developed counterparts so far this year. China’s Shanghai Composite Index SHCOMP, +0.26% has surged 52% in 2015, while Brazil’s Bovespa index BVSP, +0.28% has rallied 8.3% and Hong Kong’s Hang Seng HSI, +0.12% has climbed 16%. In comparison, the S&P 500 SPX, +0.70% has so far in 2015 eked out a 2.7% gain and the U.K.’s FTSE 100 UKX, +0.62% has added 5.9%.

More from MarketWatch