Buy Photo Mayor Todd Strange hugs supporters at his election result watch party in Montgomery, Ala., on Tuesday evening August 25, 2015. (Photo: Mickey Welsh / Advertiser)

A long and contentious race ended Tuesday night in victory for Montgomery Mayor Todd Strange

With about 90 percent of the votes counted, Strange had won 20,896 votes, about 56 percent of the total, securing the mayor a third term and avoiding a runoff. Former U.S. Rep. Artur Davis finished second with 10,225 votes, about 27 percent.

"Well, someone said we won the election," Strange said in a ballroom in the Alley shortly after 9 p.m., to cheers and cries of "Roll Todd."

Montgomery County Commission vice-chairman Dan Harris finished with about 11 percent of the vote, while State Board of Education member Ella Bell got five percent. Community activist Buena Browder got one percent.

In a brief five-minute speech, Strange promised to continue working on economic development and city schools in the hopes of making Montgomery a "shining city on a hill."

"We’re going to try to do the right thing about bringing good jobs to Montgomery," he said. "We’ll be more involved in the education side of the equation because frankly, I think we’ve got a board now that’s more receptive as a city and county to help them along the way."

Opponents attempted to make the race a referendum on crime and employment in the city, saying the city lagged in both areas. Davis and other opponents criticized Strange over the existing crime rates in the city, and at one point accused him of reducing Montgomery's police officers. But crime is lower in the city since 2011, and the number of police officers has been consistent.

Job creation also proved to be an issue. Strange touted the creation of jobs in the city during his time in office. Montgomery created about 1,800 jobs over the last year, though there were fewer than cities like Birmingham and Huntsville, which opponents noted. Davis cited a July Forbes study that ranked Montgomery 190th out 200 cities for job creation.

Echoing a long-standing criticism, opponents also suggested Strange was too focused on downtown redevelopment and not looking at other neighborhoods in the city needing help. Strange said that the city could not control where private companies would locate, and that the city would target development based on the needs of individual neighborhoods.

The mayor, who does not plan to seek office again, called the race his "toughest," but said he hoped his victory would "send a message that a positive campaign will win every time."

"I hope each and every one of us in this room and those that are watching appreciate the fact that we stayed very positive," Strange said. "We talked about what’s happened over the last six years, but more importantly, what’s going to happen over the next four years."

For Davis, a four-term congressman who made an unsuccessful bid for the Alabama Democratic gubernatorial nomination in 2010, the race offered a chance to return to politics. Davis, who left the state and became a Republican after his defeat, began broadcasting his intentions to run in July of 2014, started raising money last October and left a job as a director of Virginia-based Huntington Ingalls last November to prepare for the race.

Davis thanked his supporters Tuesday night and said "you will see me four years from now" in another mayoral campaign.

"It's going to be based on the notion that every single person in this city, whether they come from the Westside like I did or one of the places and communities that have been left behind, every single person in this city ought to count," he said.

Strange was first elected mayor in a special election in 2009, and won a landslide victory to a second term in 2011. But his intentions for a third term weren't clear late last year, even as Davis made his plans for the race public.

The mayor jumped into the race on Jan. 22 during his State of the City speech, saying he wanted to build upon achievements in his previous six years. Davis made his campaign official by a video release the same day, outlining a broad plan to attract technology businesses to the city.

The candidates generally focused on the same issues.Harris, a retired Mutual of Omaha vice president, stressed a broad program of economic development and support for education, along with retiring the city's debt. Bell sought to broaden education opportunities and foster investment, especially in the west side. Browder focused her platform on public safety, infrastructure and economic development.

Even before qualifying ended, the rhetoric curdled. Davis accused Strange of "rampant cronyism" and accused the mayor of "dishonoring the dead" when discussing crime. Strange criticized Davis for voting against the Affordable Care Act and accused him of not voting on congressional bills related to elder care and domestic abuse.

The business community lined up behind Strange during the race, leaving other contenders to find money where they could. At least $643,000 of the $720,000 Davis raised for his campaign came from the former congressman's own pockets. Harris' $46,000 came mostly from small donors, though he received $5,000 from Amos Otis, CEO of Virginia-based SoBran, Inc. Browder and Bell also relied on small donors.

-- Staff Writers Drew Taylor and Andrew Yawn contributed to this report.

Read or Share this story: http://on.mgmadv.com/1JkOO7k