Topics: Abortion, Chris Christie, family planning, GOP 2016, Herpes, Marco Rubio, public health, Rand Paul, reproductive health, Reproductive Rights, Republicans, stds, stis, Politics News

One of Chris Christie’s biggest boasts at CPAC on Thursday was about his “pro-life” bona fides. (His other big brag: His habit of telling people to shut up.) “I just stand on my record,” he told conservative radio host Laura Ingraham. “I’m pro-life. I ran on a pro-life platform in 2009. I vetoed Planned Parenthood funding five times out of the New Jersey budget.”

This was a big applause line. Showing how badly you’ve gutted, or how much you’d like to gut, funding for family planning services has become something of a litmus test for Republican presidential hopefuls. Like Christie, Scott Walker eliminated funding for Planned Parenthood under the mantle of attacking abortion access. Rand Paul has previously voted to defund Planned Parenthood and said he would “stop the flow of tax dollars to groups who perform or advocate for abortion.” Marco Rubio joined Paul in the vote to defund the health provider, and has made no secret of his plans to further restrict access.

But because state and federal laws already prohibit public dollars from funding abortion, it’s not abortion access that’s on the chopping block. Instead, going after family planning services eliminates funding for essential preventative care. That means access to cancer screenings, family planning services and STI tests.

What that amounts to is a 2016 GOP platform of Let them have herpes and breast cancer.

Take Christie’s and Walker’s records as a case study in what happens when you grandstand about abortion at the expense of thousands of low-income people who need basic healthcare. (And “basic healthcare” means the ability to avoid pregnancy, safely carry pregnancies to term, check out a lump in your breast and treat syphilis before it makes you lose your vision/go insane. These are not luxury services.)

Christie eliminated all funding for family planning in his 2010 budget. And as Tara Culp-Ressler noted in a report at ThinkProgress, the consequences were drastic. The National Family Planning & Reproductive Health Association found a 25 percent drop in the state’s ability to provide care for New Jersey’s poorest residents. According to data from Planned Parenthood, the cuts meant that providers performed “far fewer” STI tests than in previous years: “From 2009-2012, the number of gonorrhea tests declined by 24 percent, chlamydia by 28 percent, syphilis by 29 percent, and HIV by 18 percent.”