Clemson defensive tackle Grady Jarrett (50) was drafted by the Atlanta Falcons in the fifth round of the 2015 NFL Draft Saturday.(File/AP Photo/John Raoux)

Real-life adversity struck Grady Jarrett and his family, keeping in perspective his later-than-expected entry to the NFL.

The heart and soul of Clemson’s top-rated 2014 defense was finally selected Saturday with the opening pick of the fifth round, by the nearby Atlanta Falcons, who play in the Georgia Dome a half hour’s drive from Jarrett’s mother’s home in Conyers, Ga.

But on Friday night, when Jarrett was not drafted in the second or third round as many pundits had expected, that house caught on fire, scaring but not injuring of the approximately 50 guests on hand watching the draft and waiting to help the 6-1, 304-pound nose tackle celebrate.

“We were downstairs in the living room watching TV as a family and we smelled something a little funny,” Jarrett told The Post and Courier Saturday. “Went upstairs, saw the back wall of the game room was on fire. It was too much to put out with a fire extinguisher, so we kind of had to get everybody out of the house, call the fire department and hope for the best.”

Much of Jarrett’s cherished memories from playing days at Clemson, Rockdale County High School and youth football were lost in the flames.

“Trophies, awards. We had TVs and a pool table, different clothes. It was a lot of stuff,” Jarrett said. “But it’s just material stuff, man. The main thing was getting everybody safe.”

According to a FoxSports.com report, the cause of the fire is thought to be electrical, though it is still being investigated.

Getting selected by the home-state team, and chosen to reunite with a former defensive line mate, helped matters.

“Going to Atlanta definitely lifted a lot of spirits today,” Jarrett said. “We just see nothing but good coming from this. We’re going to stick together as a family and hope for the best.”

Taken No. 137 overall, Jarrett couldn’t hide his disappointment, with or without a personal tragedy.

“The wait was really, really tough for me,” Jarrett said. “I definitely had a good vibe with (the Falcons); every time they were picking, I thought they were about to call my name. I just believe everything happens for a reason. It was definitely tough, but when my name was finally called, I calmed down.”

A three-star recruit out of high school who was a consensus all-ACC first-teamer last fall, the chip on Jarrett’s shoulder throughout college will accompany him to the pros.

“Oh yeah, absolutely, absolutely. It has to,” Jarrett said. “That’s the way I play the game, and it’s been working for me, so it won’t change.”

The Falcons spent the eighth overall pick on Clemson pass-rusher Vic Beasley two days ago. Beasley is from Adairsville, an hour northwest of Atlanta.

Steward to the Bills

In the spring of 2011, the No. 1 national prep recruit via Rivals.com was Jadeveon Clowney. Ranked No. 15 was Sammy Watkins. At No. 13? Tony Steward.

Although two torn ACL injuries ransacked his career, Steward cobbled together a fine senior campaign and was rewarded Saturday with a sixth-round selection by the Buffalo Bills.

Steward tore one ACL in high school and the other his freshman year of college, in October 2011. He did not start a game his first three seasons, but started 12 games last fall and made 73 tackles, 10 tackles for a loss and 13 quarterback pressures.

“Words can’t describe the feelings running through my body. Buffalo here we come!” Steward wrote in a Twitter message Saturday.

Mirroring Steward’s draft position, last year’s No. 188 selection, Rams cornerback E.J. Gaines, signed a four-year, $2.3 million deal with a guaranteed signing bonus of $107,672.

This marks the third straight year and fifth out of six years that Buffalo drafted a Tiger, following Watkins last year (fourth overall) and safety Jonathan Meeks (a fifth-rounder) in 2013.

Pinion first punter

Leaving school with one year of eligibility remaining, Clemson punter Bradley Pinion was the first specialist taken, picked up by San Francisco in the fifth round. Pinion is the Tigers’ first punter or kicker drafted since the Bears took Chris Gardocki in the 1991 third round, a 24-year span.

However, playing time should be hard to come by in the Bay Area. Punter Andy Lee, a 4-time All-Pro, recently signed a six-year, $20.4 million extension and is under contract with the 49ers through the 2018 season.

New homes

Within the first hour following the conclusion of the draft, three former Tigers signed contracts as undrafted free agents.

Safety Robert Smith, who played at Woodland High, signed with the Indianapolis Colts.

Defensive end Corey Crawford agreed to terms with the Washington Redskins, and quarterback Cole Stoudt did the same with the San Diego Chargers.

Other reports of Clemson free-agent signings included offensive tackle Kalon Davis and defensive tackle Josh Watson to the Broncos, defensive end Tavaris Barnes to the Saints, and cornerback Garry Peters to the Panthers.