The second-term curse is a feature of nearly every successful presidency.

Ronald Reagan had Iran-Contra. Bill Clinton had Monica Lewinsky. George W. Bush had Hurricane Katrina and failures in Iraq. All were dragged down in the home stretch.

Now, thanks to a broken website and a broken promise, Barack Obama is enduring the same presidential hex. And yet, just as Mr. Reagan was saved by victory in the Cold War, rumours of a possibly imminent deal on Iranian nuclear weapons hint at a potential boost to Mr. Obama’s fortunes.

“I don’t think any president has left more popular than he entered, except for maybe John F. Kennedy, for obvious reasons,” said Tim Malloy, assistant director of the Quinnipiac University Polling Institute in Hamden, Ct., which pegs Mr. Obama’s disapproval levels at 54%.

Distrust levels, likewise, are in majority terrain, even among his natural constituency of millennials, for the first time since he was elected in an historic national moment of hope, optimism and reconciliation.

Events, however, have eclipsed the halcyon vision of that honeymoon period. The president of hope and change is now in real danger of bungling his key legacy — a national health plan, known as Obamacare.

“Trust is a muscle — if not exercised effectively, it withers, and if torn, it takes a lot of time and luck to repair,” said Gil Troy, an historian of American politics and presidents at McGill University in Montreal.

You don’t get do-overs in politics

“You don’t get do-overs in politics. [To lose trust is to lose the] essential political insulation he has enjoyed during these tumultuous times.”

Mr. Obama took office promising to remedy Americans’ disillusionment over the Iraq war and the stockpiled weapons of mass destruction that were never found. But a review of “trust” polling in the past few months shows he has “virtually the same numbers” as George W. Bush at the same time in his second term, said Mr. Malloy, a former reporter for NBC and CBS.

“We asked questions about how’s he doing on foreign policy, immigration, federal budget, health care, economy and terrorism, and the only thing he had in the plus column was a ten percent-plus rating for terrorism. Everything else was 15 points south,” said Mr. Malloy.

Starting at around 60%, where they stood steady since 2008, Mr. Obama’s “trust” numbers plunged 10 points in May, after renegade security analyst Edward Snowden revealed the U.S. was engaged in massive online surveillance of its own citizens and world leaders.

A steady climb in the summer back to the mid-50s suggested domestic outrage was cooling. Then, last month came a disaster on the home front, a personal pocketbook scandal that trumped any top-level cyber-shenanigans.

Related

The abject failure of the rollout of Obamacare sent those numbers plunging, crossing into majority distrust in the last week or so. The curse, at last, is come upon him.

Not only did Mr. Obama promise something that turned out to be false — everyone who wished to keep their current health plan would be able to — but the website to register new users in the federal plan failed miserably, leaving some people with no coverage at all.

Though the technical problems might well be fixed in short order, Brand Obama is damaged.

Prof. Troy said trust has two aspects: faith in a president’s competence and in his personal integrity. Both have been damaged by the Obamacare fiasco.

“The website glitches and the promise of better health care for millions of people, when you promise that and it doesn’t happen, that goes right into the American home,” said Mr. Malloy.

“People who needed health care tried to get it, were told they’d get it, and couldn’t get it. They may eventually get it, but this is something that affects your kids, affects your income, it’s an American home issue. So when it didn’t happen, people took it personally.”

The easy charm of “No Drama Obama” has carried the president through tough times, just as Mr. Reagan’s folksiness did, but personal appeal only goes so far.

“Obama has had a longer and luckier run [than recent presidents]. He is a sober, straightforward type, broadly respected, in marked contrast to Clinton’s charming and needy sloppiness. He has enjoyed tremendous personal support from the American people, even when they have questioned his policies. The Obamacare threatens to undo all that good work and goodwill,” said Prof. Troy.

He described the “credibility gap” for American presidents as a phenomenon that arose in the 1960s, as media became hyper-critical, the electorate became more informed and presidents like Richard Nixon violated trust on a historic scale. Modern presidents therefore “suffer from trying to govern in the age of exposure.”

In Mr. Reagan’s case, he oversaw the end of the Cold War — a mixture of good diplomacy, shrewd strategy and historical good fortune — which allowed him to end on a high note. He remains an icon for Republicans, especially in comparison to the most recent crop of aspiring leaders.

For Mr. Obama, there seems to be a similar potential, as talk builds of an Iranian nuclear deal. After the debacle of chemical weapons in Syria, in which Mr. Obama’s “red line” was violated with no consequences, there is a clear appetite for a major global page-turner. But the possibility poses the question: Do big foreign policy successes fix home issues? The answer, as ever in politics, is maybe.

Killing Osama bin Laden was a high point, perhaps the highest, of the Obama administration. A deal on Iran would be a similarly welcome moment for Democrats.

Obamacare was going to be his legacy

“He needs a win. These are the worst ratings he’s ever had with us. A monumental foreign policy triumph right now sure would be welcome, because on the domestic front, he’s got real issues,” said Mr. Malloy.

But foreign policy, even war, is not often the prime motivator at the ballot box, where health care and the economy tend to trump all other considerations.

“Pulling off an Iranian deal somehow will certainly lead to articles talking about how he shored up his credibility, but it won’t be the kind of boost that Reagan got for winning the Cold War,” Prof. Troy said.

Aiming too high, especially on the nuclear file, also carries its own particular dangers, which in hindsight could make the Syrian debacle seem like a minor hiccough.

“Obamacare was going to be his legacy. It may still be. They could right the ship here. Six months from now, maybe we won’t be talking about this anymore,” Mr. Malloy said.

“The other side of the coin for the president right now is that the stock market just went through 16,000 [on the Dow Jones Industrial Average] for the first time. People’s 401Ks [pensions] are turning around. Houses are starting to sell. The job picture is better.

“I’m not saying this [trust problem] is a glitch, or something that’s going to go away in a few weeks, but the economy has gotten better since the president became president. His supporters will say he took something that was going over a cliff and saved it.”

Still, the damage has been done by the second-term curse.

The good ship Obama still lists, and as Prof. Troy put it, “There is no excuse for blowing the website of your signature piece of legislation in the age of Facebook, Twitter and Google.”

National Post

• Email: jbrean@nationalpost.com | Twitter: JosephBrean