Enrollment on the federally run exchange in Tennessee (Photo: Created with Infogram)

The mix of people who selected BlueCross BlueShield of Tennessee plans on the federally-run exchange is similar to past years, leading the insurer to expect a third straight loss in 2016.

In total, 166,425 people selected BCBST plans during open enrollment; across the state, 268,867 selected plans from all four carriers.

The Chattanooga-based insurer didn't see changes in either the age or gender make-up of enrollees.

"At this point we weren't necessarily looking for a big shift. It's experience. We're getting a better grasp of what the population is like," said Michael Eiselstein, director of insured products and exchanges.

During the course of open enrollment, which ran from Nov. 1 to Jan. 31, federal officials with the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services said they were seeing more of the coveted "young invincibles" — people ages 18 to 34 — sign up. Younger members are generally healthier and less expensive to cover so insurers had hoped to see more in their membership pools.

For BCBST, however, the percentage is right around the 2015 number: 26 percent.

Fifty-one percent of enrollees are 45 or older.

The average age is 42.

More than half, 53 percent, are female.

A similar mix of members mean the insurer is facing another year of losses, despite an average rate increase of 36.3 percent for 2016. The individual exchange has hit BCBST's bottom line. It's lost about $300 million in two years.

BlueCross BlueShield of Tennessee (Photo: Logo)

"We expect to be in a loss position in 2016 as well," said Roy Vaughn, vice president of corporate communications.

Although it's still in the process of reviewing data to determine what's needed in rates for 2017, Vaughn expects it to be "on the order of magnitude" of 2016.

The not-for-profit insurer is "committed to trying to make it work" but its products or geographic areas of coverage may have to change as it tries to set rates that cover medical costs, Vaughn said.

"I don't want to characterize this as we're stepping back — we're not. At the same time we have to take a pragmatic view. If we can't achieve a sustainable model then we can't offer this coverage to anyone," said Vaughn.

Insurance Commissioner Julie Mix McPeak indicated early in the legislative session she expects rate requests to come in on par with those requested in 2016.

Tennessee has had among the lowest premium costs on the exchange despite having one of the costliest, highest risk members.

BCBST received the second highest average increase from the Tennessee Department of Commerce and Insurance for 2016. Community Health Alliance received the highest average increase but entered into voluntary run-off in October and is no longer offering plans. The four insurers offered premiums in the same range, unlike the first two years when there was one carrier with the cheapest plan.

As rates go up so, too, do the federal subsidies. Many don't feel the full effect of a rate increase. Last year 83 percent of BCBST enrollees received a tax credit. This year it's 87 percent.

The number of enrollees will drop in the coming months. Some people select more than one plan and later decide which to drop while some just don't pay the first premium at all. Still, others may move into Medicaid, Medicare or a group plan.

Eiselstein estimates they lose about 3 percent a month, a similar number to attrition on the individual market before the ACA. BCBST had 164,000 enrollees after 2015 open enrollment ended but was covering about 143,000 by Nov. 1.

Overall this was the smoothest enrollment in terms of working with federal officials and technology, Eiselstein said.

The insurer is trying to educate its enrollees on what their benefits are, such as understanding the network.

"We believe this market has a long term potential for us. We know we've got to get it to a sustainable model," said Vaughn. "We're working hard to do that."

Reach Holly Fletcher at 615-259-8287 or on Twitter @hollyfletcher.

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/1oSqTGK