LAKEWOOD — Young German Ken Roczen put together consecutive top-two finishes Saturday to edge out James Stewart Jr. for the 450cc title in the 10th American Motorcyclist Association Pro Motocross Championship event at Thunder Valley Motocross Park.

Roczen, 20, won the second moto. He was runner-up to Stewart in the opener.

“I’m riding good right now and feeling strong,” said Roczen, who has lived in North America for only 3½ years but does not speak with an obvious German accent. “Coming into the second moto, I got a much better start and made some changes on the bike that made it easier to ride.”

Stewart, who had won in 2007 and 2008 at Thunder Valley, finished third in the finale, 30.6 seconds behind Roczen and 6.5 seconds behind runner-up Ryan Dungey. Roczen and Dungey are KTM teammates, and Stewart rides for a single-bike Suzuki team.

PHOTOS: Thunder Valley Lucas Oil Pro Motocross Championship 2014

“I was able to hold on to it. I felt great,” Stewart said of the first moto, in which he led all 17 laps. “First couple laps (in second moto) were sketchy for me, made some mistakes that got me behind. … But in general, I was really happy with both motos.”

Dungey, who finished fourth in the opening race after spinning out while running second, ended third overall. He was looking for his fourth overall title at Thunder Valley but still has a series-most three.

“We definitely pushed hard,” Dungey said of his most recent effort at Thunder Valley.

Ryan Villopoto and Eli Tomac, last year’s 250 class winner, are injured and did not defend their titles.

Blake Baggett won the 250 title Saturday, finishing fourth and first in the 16-lap motos. Justin Bogle was second with two podium finishes (third, second). Jeremy Martin, who won his fifth consecutive 250 moto in the opener at Thunder Valley, was sixth in the finale and third overall.

Roczen, from Apolda, Germany, led for 15 laps Saturday — all in the second 450 moto, as Stewart led flag to flag in the opener. Roczen surpassed Lap 1 leader Trey Canard on the third lap and slowly ran away from Canard, Dungey and Stewart.

After three events and a combined six motos, Roczen leads the standings with 141 points. He also was the event champion the previous week in Sacramento, Calif., winning both motos. Dungey (129) and Stewart (111) round out the top three in points.

Andrew Short of Colorado Springs had a good event, placing sixth and ninth for an overall finish of eighth. He is 13th in points.

Mike Chambers: mchambers @denverpost.com or twitter.com/mikechambers