The 22-year-old singer-actress spoke about her sexuality in the October issue of Elle UK, telling the magazine , "I'm very open about it — I'm pansexual. But I'm not in a relationship. I'm 22, I'm going on dates, but I change my style every two weeks, let alone who I'm with."

Amateur singer and professional nudist Miley Cyrus feels there is something about her that it is important that we all know: that she is " pansexual ."

Cyrus spoke about identifying as gender fluid and her open view of sexuality last month in Paper magazine. "I am literally open to every single thing that is consenting and doesn't involve an animal."

I'm surprised Miley is limiting herself. The way things are going, I think in ten years her behavior will look conservative. But why pansexual? Isn't that just a fancy word for "bisexual"?

Evidently, according to the article, bisexuals have sex "only" with men and women. Pansexuals sleep with men, women, transgendered men, transgendered women, and other in-between people who can't figure out what they've got in their pants.

But this confuses me, because I thought "transgendered" women were the same gender as women. Isn't that what Bruce Jenner wants everyone to think? This definition implies that there is somehow a difference between a woman and a man with a penis who calls himself a woman, which the media has been telling us for months are one and the same.

I think liberals are just trying to be stylish and think up new names for things. There are heterosexuals, and there are homosexuals. You can call homosexuals pan, or fluid, or this, or that, but it all amounts to the same thing.

Personally, given her appetites, I think Miley Cyrus should be called not pansexual, but a pandemic sexual, if she's "changing her style" every two weeks. She talks about it as casually as one would talk about eating Italian one night and Chinese the next, which shows how confused she is and why we shouldn't teach kids in school to be confused like her.

This article was produced by NewsMachete.com, the conservative news site.