A parade of zombies packed the 16th Street Mall Saturday in a twisted pre-Halloween exploration of death and conformity and disease.

The annual Zombie Crawl drew residents of all ages, tourists and bewildered Chinese students.

Stalking the hundreds, if not thousands, of walking corpses, legions of would-be zombie slayers carried toy weapons, leading to chases up and down alleys. Musicians played horns and drums and a bloodied ex-entrepreneur sold brains on a stick.

“We have an infection. But this is a living city. And zombies are walking among us,” software engineer Jon Jongepier, 31, said through his thick fleshy face paint beneath the D&F clock tower, towing a bloody corpse.

“It’s ebola!” Hailey Deweese, 21, shouted in her bloody zombie nurse’s attire, drawing nervous laughter. A temp worker, she’s been tracking the news of that virus.

“We can control it through quarantine. But the nurses didn’t take precautions,” Deweese said.

Billed as one of the nation’s largest zombie crawls, the Denver event appears to be growing in popularity every year.

“This defies everything. It is fun because of that,” said Kham Shem Toure, 15, strolling past Taco Bell as a masked superhero.

Lord of the Rings-themed wise man William Lebrun, 61, stood before a line of zombies at a stoplight and declared: “You shall not pass!”

But they did. And the revels continued through the afternoon and on into the evening, barely stopping for a mass performance of Michael Jackson’s “Thriller” dance .

The people shrieking, laughing and crawling along the mall seemed to be playing with notions of immortality and death, said Bob Valdez, 56, parading in costume with his daughter, Vanessa, 13, who’d enjoyed a recent “Zombie Day” at her Denver Public Schools middle school.

“We deny death a lot. We hide from death. Maybe this is a way to come to terms with it, to a degree,” Valdez said.

Part of the appeal is “chaos,” said Kyshawn Davis, 18, wearing the red anarchist A on his costume with friends from Rangeview High School in Aurora — all battling against zombies as “survivors.”

“You know, people are so in order all the time. You get to let loose,” Davis said, gripping the sword he made hastily from a swimming pool noodle using duct tape.

“Zombies chase us. This definitely gets your blood pumping.”

Fake blood trickled on the walkways. Mall shuttles were cancelled for the day due to the crowd.

The event felt “a little crazy,” Chinese student at Denver University Tian Le, 21, said, looking on with two fellow students from China. As she spoke, a man in a fuzzy bear suit walked past them lugging a chain saw.

“That,” Le decided, “is cool.”

New Zealand transplant Annabel Reader, 37, a professional street performer, towered over a sea of zombie heads on stilts in a bloodied pale-blue prom dress.

“It’s fun to dress up and get dead,” Reader said. “Now we are the un-dead, coming back” — which eventually has led (thanks to Denver Pavillions merchants who hired her) to “a good livelihood.”