Buy Photo Lily & Madeleine pack the house at the OuterEdge Stage on Aug. 7 during Mile of Music in downtown Appleton. (Photo: Danny Damiani/Post-Crescent Medi, Danny Damiani/Post-Crescent Medi)Buy Photo

Let's get this out of the way right now: Mile of Music isn't going to become the next Coachella, or even the next Country USA.

At least for the foreseeable future, it will remain as a mostly indoor festival that's all about showcasing downtown Appleton and its businesses.

That's music to our ears.

This week, our Editorial Board chatted with Dave Willems and Nathan Litt from Mile of Music about the future of the festival that attracted 50,000 music fans in early August. The organizers are planning for growth with Mile 4 and even into Mile 5 and Mile 6, because who wouldn't want to build on a good thing?

But by growth, they're talking about adding more venues during the weekend festival so the bands with bigger draws will play more times throughout the weekend. They're talking about adding concerts earlier in the week to spread things out a bit. They're talking about possibly adding a second weekend someday.

They're not going to turn the grassroots festival supported by local companies into a corporatized party in a remote field with the world's biggest bands. That's not their brand.

If you enjoyed this year's festival — and even if you think it's the best weekend of the year, as some of us do — you should know that the Mile of Music founders' biggest goal is to keep it free and local.

The future is bright. Music fans and bar, restaurant shop and hotel owners should be thrilled about that. We know we are.

So what can you do to help?

You can go to the shows, and tell your friends and family about how great it is to experience Mile of Music. It's really that simple — the organizers say your attendance is No. 1.

You can support the businesses that support the festival. Whether it's the company executives who give money to make the music happen or those that host concerts during the festival and throughout the year, their work is essential in keeping this a mostly free event.

Constructive criticism is fine; flat-out complaining isn't.

Keep in mind that, as a festival goer, you have the chance to see bands that you'd never otherwise see in Appleton, and you're seeing them without a cover charge. So just go with the flow.

Buy a Music Maker pass. This is the easiest way for you to contribute directly to the future success of the festival. It's not a VIP pass that gets you to the front of the line like at other festivals. It's a badge of honor that lets everyone know you're contributing to the greater good.

Most of all, give the organizers some wiggle room for change. We have faith that they've got the city and the fans' best interests at heart.

After the success of this summer's Mile of Music, we were left wondering what's next. None of us know what Mile 20 will look like, but we do know that we've got Aug. 4-7 blocked off on our 2016 calendars.

Read or Share this story: http://post.cr/1UyGLqN