CHAPEL HILL --- Benton Moss allowed just two hits through eight scoreless innings and Trent Thornton got the final three outs as No. 18 North Carolina completed a series sweep with a 6-0 win over Boston College Sunday at Boshamer Stadium. Korey Dunbar and Tyler Ramirez both homered for the Tar Heels, who allowed just one unearned run over 27 innings against the Eagles in their first conference sweep of 2015. UNC improved to a season-best 14 games over .500 at 29-15 and 13-10 in the ACC.

Moss was outstanding in improving to 6-0 on the year, and the senior right-hander reached two noteworthy milestones on Sunday. With his six strikeouts, Moss became the fourth pitcher in Carolina history to amass 300 career Ks, joining Andrew Miller (325), Alex White (317) and Patrick Johnson (311). The win was also the 25th of his career, a benchmark just nine other Tar Heel hurlers have acheived.

But for a moment it looked like he may not even escape the first. After a five-pitch walk to Jake Palomaki to start the game, Moss went 2-0 to Blake Butera and had a visit from pitching coach Scott Forbes before getting the BC second baseman to fly out to left. Dunbar then threw out Palomaki trying to steal second, and Moss responded with some of his best work of the season. Boston College (22-21, 9-14 ACC) did not get a runner past first until the ninth as Moss held the Eagles in check before Thornton shut the door.

Dunbar's sixth homer of the year opened the scoring in the second against BC starter Jesse Adams (2-3). It was a no-doubter to left center that scored Ramirez, who added his sixth longball of the season in the fifth.

Logan Warmoth's two-run single in the third pushed the Carolina lead from three to five, and provided plenty of support for a Tar Heel pitching staff which has allowed just one earned run over its last 34 innings dating back to Wednesday.

Justin Dunn worked three scoreless frames in relief of Adams, but the Eagles were unable to threaten in the late innings a week after sweeping Georgia Tech in Chestnut Hill.

UNC has won a season-best six in a row ahead of Tuesday's non-conference tilt against UNCG. That game - a 6 p.m. start at Boshamer Stadium - is the final contest before a 7-day break for final exams. The Tar Heels will host UNC Asheville on May 5 in a game that was rescheduled after being rained out on April 15.

-per GoHeels.com