Crested Butte’s venerable Mountain Bike Hall of Fame and Museum — a repository of fat-tire history and a shrine to the pioneers who first pedaled off-road — is moving to California.

“There is sadness but there is gladness,” said Don Cook, who, with his wife Kay Peterson-Cook, has curated Crested Butte’s knobby-tired temple since 1997, when the previous volunteer curator retired. “The history won’t go away from here. It just won’t be present on Elk Avenue as it has been.”

Don and Kay were not necessarily growing weary of their 550 to 600 hours of annual, unpaid work managing the hall of fame and its 13-foot by 13-foot museum in the back of the Crested Butte Mountain Heritage Museum. But the call earlier this year from the mountain-bike pioneers out in Marin County was enticing.

A cadre of late 1970s Hall of Famers — Joe Breeze, Otis Guy and Marc Vendetti — were planning the Marin Museum of Bicycling in Fairfax, Calif. They had an entire floor that could support the Mountain Bike Hall of Fame and Museum — a space ten times bigger than the Crested Butte space. Millions of visitors walk and ride across the Golden Gate Bridge into Marin County every year.

And mountain biking — while it thrived in Crested Butte, driven by off-roading tinkerers who merged ten-speeds, single-speed paperboy cruisers and motorcycle parts into stout Frankenstein bikes in the early 1970s — was birthed in Marin County.

“This was an opportunity for the museum to be visited by millions more people in a town that is responsible for the sport of mountain biking. We couldn’t stay in the way. It would be selfish and self-centered to try to keep it anchored here,” Cook said. “What is the best scenario for the history of this American-born sport? A lot of the roots and cause of mountain biking came from Fairfax.”

Landing the Mountain Bike Hall of Fame and Museum is a coup for the Marin County riders who have spent years dreaming of a place to acknowledge the region’s role in mountain biking, which has grown from a handful of adrenaline junkies in Northern California to 40 million annual participants.

“It seemed like a perfect fit to have the hall of fame here,” said Marc Vendetti, who was among the first cyclists to push balloon-tired clunkers up the slopes of Marin’s Mount Tamalpais and then race down rutted fire roads. “Everyone here is really excited. The town council and the local chamber are really behind it. It will be a celebration of cycling, really. We hope to create a place for cycling that can help promote not just the sport but the cycling lifestyle.”

The move certainly leans the decades-old argument over the birth of mountain biking toward California. But don’t discount Crested Butte just because of the museum move, Cook said.

Don’t forget that all those pioneering California riders trekked to Crested Butte every year in the 1970s and 1980s to race in the Pearl Pass Tour to Aspen, which celebrates its 37th year this weekend and is recognized as the oldest mountain-bike tour in the world.

“They had the technology but we had the terrain and they knew it. They all came out here to ride and they recognized that our terrain makes better equipment. They had their clunkers, which were good for braking and controlled downhill but they would have stayed clunkers had it not been for Crested Butte. Crested Butte will always have its place. It was the first destination for mountain biking.”

The Cooks will now focus more attentively on their restaurant, Donita’s Cantina.

“It’s a changing economy for ski resorts and mountain towns,” Cook said. “It’s just super lean and we’ve been lean since 2001. It’s time to do what we probably should have done many years ago and focus our entire brainpower on our restaurant. I’m very grateful though. I would never trade what we’ve done. We’ve taken this as far as we could and now it’s time to hand it off.”

Jason Blevins: 303-954-1374, jblevins@denverpost.com or twitter.com/jasontblevins