Healthcare providers are going to play an important role in bringing mHealth to the forefront over the next five to 10 years – but they'll have to take charge of the projects, rather than waiting for others to take the lead.

"It just needs to be made a more precious part of the delivery continuum," Ahmed Albaiti said in his opening keynote at Sunday's Mobile Health Symposium here at HIMSS15.

Albaiti, founder and CEO of Medullan, said clinicians have to be the industry's disruptors – much like Amazon is upending the online shopping industry, Uber is changing transportation and Nest is reworking the home monitoring space. To do so, they need to focus on the critical issues of patient engagement, interoperability and feedback loop measurement.

It isn't going to be easy, though. The mHealth app market is still primarily consumer-facing, and wearables are fighting their way through questions of accuracy and reliability. What's more, those markets are still dominated by single-function devices and solutions, which cater to limited populations. To gain favor with providers, those apps and devices must become multi-functional.

And they can't be siloed. Albaiti pointed out that too many new products are focused on doing everything from beginning to end, when they should be looking to integrate with other platforms. Mobile health solutions need to be interoperable, he said.

Albaiti's keynote, delivered to a crowded room of providers, academics, consultants, vendors and developers, touched on a wide range of topics, with the overriding theme that mHealth as a term is becoming outdated. Comprised primarily of three categories –apps, connected devices and wearables – the industry as a whole is moving closer to the "Health Internet of Things."

While connected devices have seen the most growth and success for providers, wearables and apps will eventually move to the fore as technology improves. In time, he said, mHealth will reach beyond predictive analytics and take on prescriptive analytics – figuring out what's going to happen and taking steps to solve or improve it.

Add interoperability to that equation, and you get a health system that's working together to solve issues in real time, and head off crises before they occur.

"We're working toward knowing who the patient is, knowing where they are and knowing what really matters," he said.