Pa. Senators Casey, Toomey test bipartisan alliance

Off Road Politics connects Washington with Main Street hosted by Salena Zito and Lara Brown PhD. Exclusive radio show on @TribLIVE Podcasts Loading... Email Newsletters Sign up for one of our email newsletters.

WASHINGTON — President Obama's threatened veto of the Keystone XL oil pipeline, the Republicans' first big push in controlling Congress, can't discourage Pennsylvania's senators.

Democrat Bob Casey and Republican Pat Toomey say they have work to do, and they'll get it done together.

“We just can't get mired in a rut. We need to move on to the next thing,” Toomey said during a joint interview last week with the Tribune-Review.

As the 114th Congress convened in snowy weather that snarled traffic and tested tempers, the two laid out their plan to work together on matters that impact their home state and the country.

They've done so before — to prevent closure of the 911th Airlift Wing in Moon, to save Delaware County refineries, to expand the Gettysburg historic site, and to bring disaster assistance to the East after Hurricane Irene in 2011 and Superstorm Sandy in the following year.

Records show Casey of Scranton and Toomey of the Lehigh Valley voted together about a third of the time last year.

They support such issues as expanding national energy policy, repealing the medical-device tax in the Affordable Care Act, and backing certain infrastructure projects.

They split when it comes to one big topic: comprehensive reform of the tax code, which Toomey pushes.

“I think that will be a little harder,” Casey said. “It's much bigger, and an overarching issue. Getting substantial agreement, even between two senators from the same state, is probably going to be difficult.”

Still, he said, “I think we should pursue it. We have to put on the table what are the two or four things that would kick-start the economy, and one of them would be tax reform.”

Dutiful relationship

The White House said Obama would veto legislation to authorize the Keystone XL when Republican leaders set priorities for taking control of both chambers of Congress. The proposed TransCanada Corp. pipeline would move up to 830,000 barrels of oil a day from Canada to refineries on the Gulf Coast.

Casey, a minority senator for the first time since taking office in 2007, disagrees with the president's opposition to the project. Although Obama asked him not to, he broke Democratic ranks once before to vote to authorize the pipeline.

Casey considers his relationship with Toomey, who arrived in 2011, a dutiful one: “It's something you have to work at, and try — as we have been able to do — to develop a relationship and trust each other.”

Toomey said he would rather make a difference than make a point.

“To get anything accomplished in the Senate, you have to have bipartisan support,” he said. “Very seldom does either party have 60 votes” to pass a bill.

Both men hold out hope for passage of legislation that hits shared, enduring interests.

“We could waste time focusing where we disagree, or we could do what I think we do instead — look for where there is common ground,” Toomey said.

Neither foresees action in this session to reform immigration policy, despite Obama's executive order that granted an estimated 5 million undocumented immigrants temporary relief from deportation. A bill to enhance border security might pass the Senate and House, they said.

“I would be able to support a bill that increases the caps on H1B visas,” Toomey said. “These are people who come from around the world, to come to our colleges to get a great education, and just when they are ready to contribute to our economy, we kick them out.

“That's an area where there has historically been bipartisan support,” he said.

Elections, games

Though neither Casey nor Toomey ran for re-election last year, they were keenly aware of voters' dissatisfaction with Congress. And the outcome elevated Toomey, a member of the U.S. House from 1999 to 2005, to the majority for the first time in his Senate tenure.

“The message wasn't too much of a difference than the one I faced in my 2012 re-election — basically, ‘You folks need to work together,' ” Casey said.

Casey beat Armstrong County businessman Tom Smith, a Tea Party Republican, that year by nearly 10 percentage points.

Toomey's first re-election contest is next year. To date, his only declared challenger is Democrat Joe Sestak, a former congressman from Chester County; Toomey beat Sestak by 2 percentage points in 2010.

Pennsylvania's senators sit on the Senate Finance Committee, a rare occurrence for a state, given its purse-string power.

“Arguably, finance is the most sought-after committee in the United States Senate because the jurisdiction is so sweeping,” Toomey said, noting the committee affects policies for health care and education, two significant Pennsylvania industries.

“If Sen. Casey and I can agree on policy, and it's good for Pennsylvania, he can work that issue on his side in a way that I can't, and I can work it on my side in a way he can't. We are much more likely to reach a consensus in the committee.”

These two do get competitive — when it comes to softball.

Don't ask Toomey the score from last year's staff softball game, but Casey will gladly supply it: 17-11, a come-from-behind win for Casey and his staff. They're two and two for four years.

“What a game we will have this year,” Toomey said.

Salena Zito is a Trib Total Media's staff writer. Reach her at szito@tribweb.com.