The Eye

Leonardo DiCaprio Attended Rihanna's Star-Studded 27th Birthday Bash, Sources Say

SIGN UP TO RECEIVE THE LATEST NEWS FROM FASHION&STYLE

(Photo : Getty Images/Michael Loccisano, Jason Merritt) Leonardo DiCaprio reportedly partied at a 27th birthday bash for Rihanna.

Rihanna celebrated her 27th birthday with a star-studded bash Friday night in Beverly Hills, Calif. Leonardo DiCaprio reportedly attended the "Stay" singer's party, which was also attended by celebs such as Naomi Campbell, Mick Jagger, Beyonce, Jay-Z, Russell Simmons and Paris Hilton.

There have been rumors swirling for weeks about Rihanna and the 40-year-old "Wolf of Wall Street" actor being romantically linked. A source told People that the two didn't act like a couple at the party, but there were some flirty moments throughout the night.

"They weren't couple-y but they would flirt and dance so definitely a little magic there," the source said. "They were definitely flirty and dancing, but not over the top."

Recent reports claim it's really DiCaprio's friend Richie Akiva (owner of 1OAK nightclub in New York) who the songstress is dating. Akiva was also in attendance at the party on Friday night. According to OK magazine, the two met while vacationing in St. Barth's over the New Year's Eve holiday.

A source told US Weekly that the celebration, held at businessman Jim Goldstein's home, included elaborate balloon decorations spelling out Rihanna's name and a three-tier leopard print cake with a Hello Kitty topper. The source said, "Naomi Campbell was right next to her when she blew out the candles."

Model Angela Martini posted a video on Instagram from the celebration revealing the moment Rihanna blew out her candles:

Hilton posted a selfie with Beyonce and her sister Nicky:

Rihanna posted a message on Instagram on her special day:

27 years ago, my mother gave birth to her very first child at the tender age of 27! Life is never a piece of birthday cake, but I feel special that I was chosen by my Father in Heaven to make it here! And each year that goes by I am more grateful! Every day we wake up, means we get another chance at life....to live what we've learned and to discover even more, to be good to other people and to know that you are a part of their smile! I cherish these days, and I pray that God will spare my life to see many more! #Feb20

SIGN UP TO RECEIVE THE LATEST NEWS FROM FASHION&STYLE

© 2015 Fashion & Style.com All rights reserved. Do not reproduce without permission.