Ralph Nader on Thursday blasted Democratic presidential front-runner Hillary Clinton Hillary Rodham ClintonOvernight Finance: GOP faces dilemma on spending bills | CEOs push Congress on tax rules | Trump talks energy Judge seals all video interviews in Clinton email case State aide thought Clinton email was for ‘family and friends’ MORE over her ties to Wall Street and other wealthy special interests.

“Hillary the hypocrite ought to open up on Broadway,” he said during a Vimeo interview with artist and activist itstheGADFLY.

ADVERTISEMENT

“At the same time she’s denouncing big money corrupting politics, she’s taking big money corrupting her politics,” added Nader, who sought the White House five times under three different political party affiliations.

“She says one thing to voters and she does exactly the opposite in terms of her campaign cash sources. This is the problem with Hillary Clinton: She wants it both ways.”

Nader also accused Clinton of longstanding coziness with Wall Street, citing her history of paid speeches before major financial firms.

“Well, Hillary is basically the favorite candidate of Wall Street,” he said of the former secretary of State. "They’re pouring money into her campaign. She reciprocates. Hillary the Wall Street promoter, she gets money from Wall Street and yet she can come out on that stage and say exactly the opposite and get away with it.”

Nader additionally charged that Clinton’s past record in public service offers evidence she would not lead an accountable Oval Office.

“She’s anything but direct and clear,” he said. "What kind of White House is she going to run with that kind of tradition of secrecy? A secret White House usually becomes an illegally operating White House.”

Nader said Sen. Bernie Sanders Bernie SandersBoxer: Sanders appeals to young voters with grandpa effect The Trail 2016: Interleague play Clinton laughs off idea of Trump-Sanders debate MORE (I-Vt.), Clinton's rival for the Democratic nomination, offers an attractive alternative to Clinton.

“Sen. Sanders doesn’t give the paid speeches to Wall Street firms or big commercial trade conventions,” he said. “That’s a matter of public record. The contrast couldn’t be greater between Hillary the hawk and Hillary the Wall Street promoter and the populist Sen. Bernie Sanders."