If you go Highlights: Prairie dogs, good birding, large cottonwoods, riparian and agricultural surroundings Distance: 1.2 miles one-way Difficulty: Easy Access: From the Diagonal Highway (Colorado 119) turn east on Independence Road. The parking lot is in 0.2 miles on the south side of the road.

Huge cottonwoods uprooted by the September flood lie with their roots in the air, and windblown plastic bags snag in the shrubs. We think of the subtitle of Robert Pyle's book "Wintergreen: Rambles in a Ravaged Land."

Like Pyle, we search for beauty in the midst of ravage.

So as we slogged through the mud on Cottonwood Trail, we rejoiced in the emerald glitter on a mallard's neck, in a flicker's whickering call, and in the sight of two tiny upside-down nuthatches heading down a massive cottonwood trunk.

We laughed at the prairie dogs throwing their paws in the air and squeaking their shrill alarm and admired a red-tailed hawk attracted by the rodents. What began as a drudge-trudge became a delightful discovery of a trail we had never walked before.

Cottonwood Trail, a multi-use trail on Boulder County Open Space in northeast Boulder, connects Independence and Jay roads. There is no parking on Jay Road, so start from the parking lot west of privately owned Hayden Lake just south of Independence Road.

Advertisement

Take a look at Hayden Lake through the dense shoreline trees. Sometimes geese and ducks dabble and gabble on the water. Cross the road and head north on the gravel trail that is a segment of the Longmont to Boulder Regional Trail, or LOBO.

The trail curves around a large prairie dog colony to the west with views of the foothills farther west. Fourmile Canyon Creek Ditch and a gallery forest of cottonwoods and willows lie east of the trail. In a short distance the trail approaches the Diagonal Highway and the Burlington Northern Railroad Line. Surprisingly, noise is not particularly disturbing, except for the short section that runs close to the highway.

A sturdy cottonwood beside Cottonwood Trail lifts its branches to the sky (as many nearby trees lift roots to the sky). (Glenn Cushman/courtesy photo)

As you veer north away from the highway, you may see cattle grazing in the agricultural fields to the east. Historically this area was farm and ranch land, and livestock are still used for weed control.

We saw no wildflowers in early March, but we did see the red and green leafy rosettes of filarees (non-native geraniums) and soon their tiny magenta blossoms will brighten the edge of the trail. We'll have to return to discover what else blooms here and to check on the regeneration of the denuded banks of the creek. Perhaps we'll come back in October when the cottonwoods turn butter-yellow. Or, in summer to look for the snapping turtles that have been reported near Jay Road.

When you reach Jay Road, retrace your route to the parking area. From here you can continue south on a paved path, also part of the LOBO Trail, that is suitable for wheelchairs. This section passes west of Hayden Lake and the airport and east of the NCAR Foothills campus. It goes through several residential areas and connects with the Wonderland Creek Greenway at 47th Street.

At the end of our walk we noted broken bottles along the road and thought again of Robert Pyle rambling in a ravaged land and of Terry Tempest Williams who wrote "Finding Beauty in a Broken World." Yes, we decided, you CAN find beauty in a ravaged land or a broken world.

Ruth Carol and Glenn Cushman are the authors of "Boulder Hiking Trails," published by Graphic Arts Books.