Fixed-rate mortgages are cheaper than ever thanks to the record low Bank Rate, plus the fact that lenders have access to cheap funding on the wholesale markets.

A year ago most commentators were saying rates had fallen as far as they would go. But 2014 proved them wrong.

Now, though, there is less conviction. All the signs point to rates remaining low well into 2015: inflation is down, wage growth is modest and lenders are keen to attract new business. Some brokers expect rates may even edge down further as a result of this competition.

But rates won’t stay low forever and there are a number of external factors that could push them up.

Lenders raise money on the capital markets, buying money at a certain rate – the “swap” rate – for a certain time period. These swap rates reflect expectations of future interest rates and inflation.

Shorter-term fixed rates are closely aligned to the market view of inflation. If inflation is expected to remain low, the return on Government bonds – “gilt yields” – and, in turn, swap rates will stay low, keeping mortgage rates down.

When inflation rises, borrowers can expect mortgage rates to follow.

Longer-term fixes tend to be more reflective of market expectation for Bank Rate. If lenders think interest rates will rise, longer-term fixed rates will push up.

For mortgage rates to rise next year, Bank Rate or wholesale funding conditions will probably change. So what could trigger this?

1. Strong sentiment for Bank Rate rise

The market currently expects it will be some time before the Bank of England pushes up Bank Rate. Some are forecasting this will not happen until 2016 at the earliest.

But we’ve seen how quickly market sentiment can change. In summer this year the market expected an imminent rise and mortgage rates rose (see graph, below right). When the markets reversed their view, rates fell dramatically to their current, new lows.

Capital Economics has been one of the more accurate forecasters. Senior UK economist Samuel Tombs said: “Swap rates are pricing in interest rates remaining at 0.5pc until early 2016, but I think it is likely that the MPC will act sooner. If the economic recovery maintains its pace and wage growth starts to strengthen, then I think Bank Rate could rise in the second quarter of next year.”

2. Rise in inflation

Inflation is well below its 2pc target and is expected to fall below 1pc this month.

It is likely to remain low for some time, but if this changes and the market predicts a rise, this would be reflected in higher gilt yields and swap rates, which in turn would push up the cost of fixed‑rate mortgages.

3. Global financial issues

Ray Boulger, of mortgage broker John Charcol, said the main risk of mortgage rates rising was that some unexpected financial trauma would occur, resulting in markets seizing up as they did in 2008 after the Lehman collapse.

He said a resulting lack of wholesale funds would force lenders to put their rates up and tighten their criteria, reducing the number of loans they approved.

“The risk of a global financial problem is now significantly higher, as is evidenced by the Russian rouble going into free fall this week,” he said.

4. Increased regulation

When regulators force lenders to comply with new or more stringent rules, it pushes up their costs, which has an impact on rates.

The EU Mortgage Directive, for example, which will introduce a small number of mainly administrative changes for lenders, must be implemented by March 2016. It is not expected to be too onerous, however, as the UK already introduced strict new lending rules in April this year. But it could still have an impact.

Changes to the amount of money lenders must hold in reserve, known as “capital adequacy”, would also push up their costs and could in turn trigger rate rises.

5. Uncertainty

The market hates uncertainty and there are a number of factors – the general election, the eurozone crisis, the falling oil price – that could make it jittery in 2015.

David Hollingworth, of London and Country, another national mortgage broker, said this could push up the cost of wholesale funding, resulting in higher mortgage rates.

Calculator: The impact of rate rises on your mortgage

But savers should not be too hopeful

For savers, any increase in Bank Rate would be welcome, as historically this has led to an increase in deposit rates.

But the crisis has broken this link, partly because lenders are still doing comparatively little mortgage business and thus have less appetite to raise finance through deposits.

Most savings analysts do not expect a widespread improvement in rates when Bank Rate climbs.

But there are some bright spots in the savings market. Earlier this week, Secure Trust launched a market-leading two-year bond paying 2.33pc, bucking the wider trend of falling deposit returns.

Far more importantly, next month the long-awaited Pensioner Bonds for over-65s will be launched by National Savings & Investments.

The three-year version pays 4pc and the one-year 2.8pc. A maximum £10,000 can be invested in each per person, and the returns – payable at the end of the term only – are taxable.

These Pensioner Bond rates are substantially higher than the rates applying to bonds issued by banks and building societies and in most cases pay more than the best cash Isas. This is even when tax at the higher 40pc rate is taken into account.

And while traditional savings rates continue to disappoint, current accounts from “new” banks eager to attract custom have offered high returns. Santander pays 3pc on up to £20,000, Nationwide pays 5pc on up to £2,500 and TSB pays 5pc, also on sums up to £2,000.

>> The best of Telegraph Money once a week: sign up to our newsletter