THE REPUBLICAN Party civil war between purists and pragmatists is not over: the viciousness of the 2014 party primary season proves that. But defeats for Tea Party-backed populists on June 24th confirm a big development. The party’s business-backed “governing” wing has remembered how to fight, and fight rough.

Not for the first time in history, the lowest blows flew in Mississippi. Senator Thad Cochran—a genteel, big-government Republican and four-decade Washington veteran—broke every rule of Deep South politics and asked black Democrats and union members to cross party lines and cast votes in a Republican Party run-off contest. (Under Mississippi law party primaries are effectively open to all registered voters, though the Republican run-off of June 24th was not—in theory—open to anyone who had voted in an earlier Democratic primary on June 3rd.) It worked, just: Mr Cochran won by about 6,700 votes, or less than two percentage points. A hefty turnout in mostly-black counties helped Mr Cochran beat off Chris McDaniel, a compromise-scorning state senator and former radio talk-show host.

The McDaniel campaign was sidetracked for a time by the arrest of a supporter who had sneaked into a retirement home to film Mr Cochran’s wife, who has dementia. McDaniel backers more recently called foul over leaflets sent to black neighbourhoods touting Mr Cochran’s support for food stamps and bashing Mr McDaniel as an opponent of Obamacare (while leaflets in white districts touted Mr Cochran as a conservative who voted “more than 100 times” against Obamacare, whose seniority nonetheless guaranteed Mississippi federal cash, notably for education).

In defeat Mr McDaniel talked darkly of “irregularities” at polling places and questioned the legitimacy of a Republican contest won with votes from Democrats: a loaded statement in a state where almost 90% of whites vote Republican and over 90% of blacks vote Democratic.

The comeback by the 76-year old incumbent—who at times on the campaign trail appeared weary and unaware of recent news events—marked a sharp defeat for the government-bashing Right. Outside groups attacking Mr Cochran as a Washington insider and Obama-enabler had descended on the state, spending an estimated $7m backing Mr McDaniel in the run-off. Business groups and Republican leaders in Congress poured about $4m into TV ads (including a round-the-clock broadcast of an endorsement by a local American football star) and a ground campaign.

Pragmatists scored a second win in a senate primary in Oklahoma. Representative James Lankford, a booming-voiced second-term congressman and Southern Baptist youth-camp director, beat off a Tea Party rival who had attacked him for voting to raise America’s federal debt limit as part of broader budget agreements. His opponent, T.W. Shannon, a part-black, part-Native American former speaker of the state House, had been backed by such conservatives as Sarah Palin (“The Democrats accuse us of not embracing diversity? Oh, my goodness, he is it”) and Senator Ted Cruz of Texas. By any objective standard Mr Lankford is very conservative. His crime in Tea Party eyes lay in trying to make government work. It helped greatly that the popular incumbent, Senator Tom Coburn, who is retiring after illness, expressed disquiet at attacks on Mr Lankford.

Party leaders have not had 2014 all their way: they are still reeling from the primary defeat in Virginia on June 10th of Eric Cantor, the House Majority Leader, by a little-known professor. (Mr Cantor cast himself as a conservative outsider while seeking Washington power, a balancing act too far.) Many activists still loathe party leaders. But they no longer have a monopoly on ferocity. Establishment gloves are off.

Dig deeper:

America’s Republicans are a big success and a worrying mess