The original owner of two Colorado Steak ‘n Shake restaurants says in court papers that the popular chain cheated him out of $2 million he was due when it took over the locations.

Restaurateur Thomas Caruso says the Indiana-based eatery last year intentionally blocked negotiations for the sale of Steak ‘n Shake stores in Centennial and Sheridan by foreclosing on the troubled owners who bought the franchises from Caruso in late 2012, according to documents filed in U.S. District Court in Denver.

This allowed the company to buy two well-established locations at far below their market value, Caruso writes in a brief intended to help the franchisees who say Steak ‘n Shake forced them out.

Steak ‘n Shake Enterprises eventually forced the restaurants’ owners, the Baerns family, to sell the locations for less than a third of what they agreed to pay Caruso, who was still owed much of the sale price.

The Baernses, through two companies they set up for the deal, paid $1.5 million for each store, Caruso says in the court filing, and financed $2.7 million of the total with Caruso.

The two were the first Steak ‘n Shake restaurants in Colorado. The Centennial location opened in 2011 and the Sheridan restaurant in 2012.

It didn’t take long before there was trouble between the new franchisees and corporate headquarters.

Steak ‘n Shake eventually sued the Baerns family in 2013 in federal court because they refused to sell menu items required by the chain. The family countered by saying it had been misled into believing the business was more profitable, that Colorado was an expensive territory and that they could only make money by running the business their own way.

A judge agreed with Steak ‘n Shake and ordered the locations to remove the chain’s name and identifying logos. That meant the franchisees were forced to violate land leases that restricted the locations to be only Steak ‘n Shakes.

Caruso, in attempting to salvage his original sale, offered to broker a new sale and had two interested buyers, both of whom were already Steak ‘n Shake franchisees, Caruso says in court papers.

The chain refused to allow it, Caruso said, because “(Steak ‘n Shake) believed that (the franchisees) could not handle running the two stores.”

With little hope to get things running again, the Baernses accepted Steak ‘n Shake’s offer to buy the stores at $475,000 each. Although Caruso received much of that money, the Baernses still owe him about $2 million more, an amount he was awarded last year in a separate lawsuit he filed in Arapahoe County district court.

“Steak ‘n Shake interfered with the sale of the restaurants not because it believed that the two exiting franchisees couldn’t handle running the restaurants,” Caruso’s court brief says, “but rather to give Steak ‘n Shake a distinct economic advantage when it purchased the restaurants for itself.”

Lawyers for Steak ‘n Shake had no comment about Caruso’s allegations, but said they would be filing a response in court.

The case is slated for a July trial.

Both restaurants have been operating under Steak ‘n Shake corporate leadership since late 2013.

David Migoya: 303-954-1506, dmigoya@denverpost.com or twitter.com/davidmigoya

.