Comedy Whatever presents Doug Stanhope When: Thursday, April 10. Doors open at 7 p.m. Show starts at 8 p.m. Where: Alchemy Tavern, 7 S. Joachim St. Tickets: $25. Purchase at the door or at brownpapertickets.com/event/583230 More information: 251-441-7741

MOBILE, Alabama -- Caustic comedian Doug Stanhope will be "hemorrhaging (the same) violent vulgar rage that I always have," when he brings his "Last Gasp" tour to Alchemy Tavern on Thursday, April 10.

And he doesn't want any naive audience members to be shell-shocked by his shtick.

"If you know what I do it won’t disappoint," Stanhope, 47, said via phone from a tour-stop in Daytona Beach. "If you don’t know what I do I recommend you watch a few clips before you shell out the money because it ain’t for everyone."

For 24 years, the foul-mouthed, beer-swilling comedy cult hero has been spewing his manic, uninhibited insights into politics, religion, substance abuse, celebrity and more controversial topics.

"The New York Times" called Stanhope's no-holds-barred comedy "an acidic stew of prickly hostility, elaborately articulated self-loathing and righteous anger."

And who doesn't like a self-loathing stew?

We recently chatted with Stanhope about Bieber, Obamacare and kicking butts.

He swore a lot during the interview, so I replaced most of the curse words with "darn."





Q: Are you at all familiar with Mobile?

A: I have not played there, so I’m looking forward to it. I always look forward to breaking in a virgin town. I don’t venture out much. I'm not a guy with a lot of interests who likes to go out and explore the local flavor. I don’t know what I'm missing in Mobile…maybe some Katrina wreckage. Tragedy is always interesting. But I couldn't give less of a darn about local barbecue.





Q: Why is this tour called "The Last Gasp"?

A: It’s just, after so many years of doing this that’s always how you feel. Like Jesus Christ, am I still on the darn road?





Q: You are known for being a defiant smoker. What would it take to make you quit?

A: I kind of have quit. After the Super Bowl, I put myself into a rehab of my own making to quit smoking. I just stayed at home without any cigarettes. If you don’t have cigarettes, you can’t smoke. It’s that easy. I've been cheating before and after shows, but I've cut down about 90 percent.





Q: How long have you been a smoker?

A: Thirty-some years, since 1980.





Q: What convinced you it was finally time to stop?

A: My wheezing would wake me up. It’s almost like a darn train whistle. I couldn’t get through a podcast without pausing to hack up wet phlegm flubber.





Q: You complain about Millennials quite frequently. Why do they annoy you so much?

A: This generation sucks. They’re soft. It’s a really tepid, weak, boring generation. When you look at Justin Bieber getting into all this trouble. Like he’s a troublemaker. He’s not throwing TV sets out of hotel windows. Oh yeah, he got drunk and he sped. He got caught spray painting something. That’s the out of control guy.





Q: Amy Winehouse wasn't hardcore enough for you?

A: She’s not ours though. They still get down across the pond in the UK. They still do real drugs.





Q: What are your feelings on the Affordable Care Act, more commonly known as Obamacare?

A: I don’t give a darn. I don’t go to hospitals. I don’t get check ups. That’s just asking for trouble. If I had promised my girlfriend I’d go to wine country with her parents, and then I thought, 'oh darn why did I say that?', I might go to a doctor hoping to have something wrong with me. I’m sure with the lifestyle I've led, if I went to a doctor, they’d find something.





Q: What do you think about everyone being required to have health insurance?

A: I think it’s (bogus);same as car insurance.





Q:What if you got in a wreck and the other driver didn't have insurance?

A: Then they'll be working for me for the rest of their life.





Q: Do you have any tour rituals?

A: We hit thrift stores in every town we go to, as many as we can. I have a fondness for 70s over-the-top Rodney Dangerfield in "Caddyshack" kind of clothes. My tour manager will start pulling thrift stores up on the phone as soon as we hit our first exit and we’ll tool all over,hitting the Goodwills, etc, etc. Sushi and thrift stores, those are two things we look for in a town.





Q: Sushi? You really have turned over a healthy new lifestyle leaf.

A: Just from quitting smoking, I've already gained 10 or 12 pounds, so I’m trying to eat healthier. We got a NutraBuliit and I'm eating my veggies and fruits mixed into smoothies everyday. I almost never do drugs anymore. I don’t hang out after shows, because when you try to go out it’s just an endless series of pictures. You can’t even talk to people anymore. They just want another picture with another friend. And then they say oh that didn’t come out quite right... I’ll sit and have a beer with you, but I'm not here just to pose for pictures.

For more about Doug Stanhope, visit http://www.dougstanhope.com/





Stanhope in action. WARNING: PROFANITY