Print Email Font Resize Font Resize Local News Fort Morgan Dog Park now open New area has off-lease areas for small, big dogs within Gateway Park,

Theresa Tournai, left, and Judy Ewertz brought their dogs (Ewertz's 8.5-year-old English bulldog Marty and Tournai's mutts Granger and Astro) to Fort Morgan's new Dog Park for its grand opening Friday afternoon. The Dog Park, which is a fenced off area within Gateway Park in southeast Fort Morgan, has separate areas for small and big dogs to run around and play off-leash. (Jenni Grubbs / Fort Morgan Times) Mayor Terry McAlister, right, chats with City Clerk/Public Information Officer John Brennan, left, and Community Services Director Josh Miller after the ribbon-cutting for the fenced-in, off-leash facility visible at far right. The city offered coffee, hot spiced cider and cookies for those who attended the grand opening Friday afternoon of Fort Morgan's new Dog Park within Gateway Park. (Jenni Grubbs / Fort Morgan Times) If you go What: Fort Morgan's new Dog Park When: Open dawn to dusk daily. Where: North end of Gateway Park, 19600 Gateway Ave. in southeast Fort Morgan. Cost: Free Dog Park rules: Rules are posted on a large sign at the park, or online at: http://cityoffortmorgan.com/DocumentCenter/View/3989" title="cityoffortmorgan.com">cityoffortmorgan.com/DocumentCenter/View/3989 The Fort Morgan Chamber of Commerce holds a ribbon cutting Friday afternoon for the city's new Dog Park at Gateway Park in southeast Fort Morgan. Pictured, from left, Chamber Director Jade Spotz, City Clerk/Public Information Officer John Brennan, Chamber Executive Director Cheryl Sanchez, Parks Foreman Jerry Reese, Parks worker Jorge Rico, Parks Superintendent Doak Duke (holding the giant scissors), Community Service Director Josh Miller, Mayor Terry McAlister, Chamber Director Kathy L'Heureux and Chamber Director Julie Glenn. (Jenni Grubbs / Fort Morgan Times) More info: Call the Parks Department superintendent at 970-542-6311. With chop of a really big ceremonial scissors, Fort Morgan opened its new Dog Park Friday afternoon. The Dog Park is a 270-foot-by-77-foot area that sits within Gateway Park in southeast Fort Morgan. It's is the only park in the city where dogs are allowed to be off leashes. It includes a large fenced in area with three areas: the staging entrance, where owners/handlers can take leashes off or put them back on; a space for smaller dogs to run around and play; and a large area for large dogs to really get running. And Friday afternoon, a large black dog named Lighting got to do just that. Community Services Director Josh Miller brought his Lighting to the new Dog Park for a first off-leash go. "I think it's a good thing, and it's something that's been missing for a long time," Miller said, adding that he and Lightning were likely to spend quite a bit of time there. "It's big enough that the dogs can run and get a lot of exercise." The 7-year-old black Labrador Retriever had a blast retrieving plastic discs thrown for him by different people, including Parks worker Theresa Tournai and 11-year-old Brody Hamer. Brody Hamer, 11, tosses a plastic disc for his dog Lighting as his father Ty and brother JP, 14, watch Friday afternoon at Fort Morgan's new Dog Park within Gateway Park. Community Services Director Josh Miller (not pictured) brought Lightning, his 7-year-old black Labrador retriever, to the city's new Dog Park for its opening, and the Hamers wanted to play Lightning. (Jenni Grubbs / Fort Morgan Times) Wiggins resident Judy Ewertz also came by for the Dog Park opening. She brought Marty, her 8.5-year-old English Bulldog to play in the small dogs area. Marty was joined Friday afternoon by Granger and Astro, Tournai's little mutts. "I think it's nice," Ewertz said of the new Dog Park. "I may be a little hesitant, but that depends on the dogs that are here." She said she could see Marty and her spending more time there, but that would involve some travel for them, since they live in Wiggins. "But it's nice for him to spend time with other dogs," she said. The Fort Morgan City Council did make creating a dog park a goal for 2014 and budgeted for it, and that goal has now been achieved. This fire hydrant is a play apparatus within the fenced-off area for large dogs at Fort Morgan's new Dog Park, which officially opened Friday afternoon within Gateway Park in southeast Fort Morgan. The city donated the old hydrant, which was damaged when a truck driver hit it, according to Ware Resources/Utilities Director Brent Nation. (Jenni Grubbs / Fort Morgan Times) City Parks Department staff created the Dog Park, according to Parks Superintendent Doak Duke. "We poured all this ourselves," he said of the concrete walkways and the staging area in the fences, which the Parks workers also put up. "It's all ADA compliant, too. It's a big job, and these guys did a lot of work on it, but it turned out good." Parks Foreman Jerry Reese and Parks workers Tournai and Jorge Rico were some of the people who did that work. "We helped build it, so we like it," Reese said, grinning. "I think they put it in a pretty good spot, and it turned out nice." Fort Morgan Mayor Terry McAlister said he thought the new Dog Park was great. Fort Morgan's new Dog Park, which opened Friday within Gateway Park, has stations, like the one shown here, where pet owners can get bags to clean up after pets and then dispose of the bagged waste. One big part of the city creating the Dog Park is a dependance upon the animals' owners to clean up after them, according to city officials. (Jenni Grubbs / Fort Morgan Times) "I think it's something we promised the people we would do," he said. "If I know this council, when the people ask, things get done. I've seen people come and use it already. I like the little (waste) pickup bags too." Those bags can be found at stations in both the areas for large and small dogs, with a sign, a box for the bags and a trash can below. The city is counting on people who bring their dogs to the Dog Park to clean up after the animals. Also present at the grand opening ceremony Friday were Fort Morgan Chamber of Commerce Executive Director Cheryl Sanchez and chamber directors Kathy L'Heureux, Julie Glenn, Jade Spotz and Jeni Elrick. Sanchez said she thought the Dog Park was a good addition to the city and yet another amenity that could help draw businesses and workers to Fort Morgan. And more people — and their dogs — started showing up not long after the opening ceremony. Ty Hamer brought his sons, 11-year-old Brody and 14-year-old JP, over to the Dog Park to check it out. While they have three border collie mixes at home, they did not have them with them, so the boys played with Miller's dog Lightning. Brody Hamer threw the red, plastic disc for lightning several times. "It's nice," he said of the Dog Park. "It looks really fun. Looks like they're having a blast." The mayor agreed that it was a fun place for dogs and their people. "Dogs like to run and this is the perfect place for it," McAlister said. Jenni Grubbs: jgrubbs@fmtimes.com, Twitter @JenniGrubbs or tout.com/jennigrubbs