Coldest morning of winter hits Wisconsin; Hayward men charged with importing, selling synthetic drugs; 13 more state news stories

Wisconsinites woke up this morning to their coldest morning of the winter.

It was 32 below at 5 a.m. in Land O'Lakes in Vilas County near the Upper Michigan border. Fortunately for those folks, there was no wind, and thus no wind chill.

Rhinelander and Manitowish Waters were not as fortunate. They had 40 below wind chills. Most of the state has some kind of breezes of up to 15 mph in Milwaukee where the state's warmest actual temperature of seven below made it feel like minus 28.

About 30 customers of the state's four largest electric utilities had power outages as of 5:30 a.m. They were in Oconto and Shawano counties.

The National Weather Service had wind-chill advisories out until 9 a.m. for parts of northwest Wisconsin -- and until noon for the rest of the state.

In Milwaukee, authorities said a 40-year-old woman was found dead on a sidewalk on the city's north side. She had a body temperature of just 80 degrees when she was found. The medical examiner's office is trying to determine if the cold weather caused the death.

Officials say frostbite and hypothermia are possible after exposure to these types of temperatures.

Highs today are expected to be in the single digits above zero statewide. Snow is due in tomorrow, along with a warmup to the teens and 20's.

---------

Hayward men charged with importing, selling synthetic drugs

MADISON -- Two Hayward men were indicted Wednesday by a federal grand jury on charges that they conspired to import a synthetic drug from China and distribute it across northwestern Wisconsin.

Michael R. Moreno, 39, and Paul R. Heidbreder, 56, allegedly possessed and distributed the drug Alpha-pyrrolidinovalerophenone (also known as Alpha-PVP), a synthetic cathinone that is classified as a Schedule I controlled substance.

The indictment alleges that the men developed a distributor source in China and had the drug shipped to addresses in Hayward, Oconomowoc and Dubuque, Iowa, from March to July 2014.

Paying $900 per 500-gram shipment, the men allegedly sold the drug at a price of $100 per gram, according to a news release from the U.S. Attorney's Office for Western Wisconsin.

The indictment charges Moreno with six counts related to the possession of Alpha-PVP; Heidbreder is charged with three counts. Each count carries a maximum of 20 years in prison.

The charges were the result of an investigation by the Drug Enforcement Administration, Wisconsin Department of Justice, Hayward Police Department, Sawyer County Sheriff's Office and Sawyer County District Attorney's Office.

--Forum News Service

---------

Former police lieutenant admits to burglaries in 7 counties

A former Waupun police lieutenant has pleaded no contest to crimes committed in seven Wisconsin counties.

Bradley Young, who's now 45, is expected to be sentenced sometime in April after he admitted to burglaries throughout the state.

Many of those break-ins did not come to light when Young was arrested after a two-day crime spree in 2013. That spree included several break-ins, and it had authorities revisiting other burglaries that were unsolved.

As part of a plea deal, the state agreed to reduce Young's charges to a single count of burglary in each of the seven counties where the crimes occurred. Prosecutors in Fond du Lac, Dodge, Green Lake, Marquette, Waupaca, Waushara and Burnett counties all agreed to suggest a total of ten years in prison.

Green Lake County Judge Mark Slate said the 10-year sentence seems low based on the fact the Young's victims have submitted requests for over $100,000 in restitution. Slate said he would make the final call on the officer's sentence, and the state would seek money from Young's pension to pay the restitution.

Young told officials he committed the crimes due to financial troubles, some of which was spurred by gambling. He resigned from the Waupun police force after 22 years.

During the crime spree, officials said Young stole a pickup truck in Green Lake and crashed it after a chase in Barron County. He later broke into a cabin near Spooner where he was surrounded by officers and gave himself up.

----------

About 206,000 Wisconsinites sign up for Obamacare

The number of Wisconsinites who signed up for Obamacare is 58% higher than a year ago.

Federal health officials said yesterday that almost 206,000 Wisconsin residents either newly enrolled for plans offered by the federal purchasing exchange or renewed their existing coverage.

The open enrollment period ended early Monday for coverage that begins in March. Just over 130,000 Badger State residents received coverage from the Affordable Care Act in the first year of the exchanges. They included those not covered by private insurance or by BadgerCare or other Medicaid programs.

----------

Walker hires foreign, domestic policy advisers

Gov. Scott Walker has hired advisers to help him bone up on foreign policy as he considers running for president next year.

It was just a week ago when Walker refused to touch foreign policy questions asked by members of a prestigious British think tank.

His national political group Our American Revival says Walker has brought in Mike Gallagher to advise him on international hotspots and Kristin Jackson to work on domestic policy. Gallagher is a staffer with the U.S. Senate's Foreign Relations Committee. Jackson has served as an aide to former Florida congressman Connie Mack. She most recently worked for a Washington communications and public relations firm.

Walker has also hired a senior adviser in New Hampshire, home of the nation's first presidential primaries early next year.

Our American Revival confirmed Wednesday that Walker has hired GOP consultant Andy Leach. He's been working on New Hampshire campaigns for the White House since 1992.

Michael Bir will handle day-to-day operations for Walker in New Hampshire.

The governor plans to make his first visit to that state March 14 when he will speak at an event put on by the New Hampshire GOP.

New Hampshire is the second state where Walker has started creating a campaign operation. Iowa is the first.

---------

Jury awards hunter $2,500 for improper arrest

A federal court jury in Madison has awarded $2,500 in damages to a deer hunter who claimed that a Department of Natural Resources warden arrested him for no legitimate reason.

The arrest stemmed from an altercation between Warden Bradley Biser and hunter Mitch Rooni in 2005 when Rooni and a friend registered three deer at a gas station at Brule in far northwest Wisconsin.

According to court documents, the warden asked Rooni how many deer he took, and when Rooni didn't answer, Biser loudly said that the hunter didn't like the DNR.

Rooni denied it and said it was people like Biser that he didn't like. The two got into a fight. The hunter was hauled off to jail, and a disorderly conduct charge against him was later dismissed.

Rooni later filed a federal lawsuit claiming that his civil rights were violated. A judge threw it out, but the federal appeals court in Chicago reinstated it, saying that “deer hunting is serious business” in Wisconsin.

That resulted in Rooni's recent trial in which jurors agreed that the warden lacked probable cause for an arrest and acted with “willful or reckless disregard” for the hunter's rights.

---------

Baldwin confirms firing aide; VA plans hearing on Tomah VA problems

U.S. Sen. Tammy Baldwin (D-Wisconsin) has finally confirmed that she fired her former deputy state director -- almost a month after the deputy was let go during the controversy over problems at Tomah's VA Medical Center.

Meanwhile, the House Veterans Affairs Committee has agreed to hold a hearing in Tomah to take testimony on the alleged over-prescriptions and other problems that reportedly led to three patient deaths over the past several years. Four Wisconsin congressional members asked for the hearing. A date was not set.

Baldwin had her Washington attorney, Marc Elias, issue a statement yesterday about Marquette Baylor's firing. The senator's Milwaukee office director was let go Jan. 22. The attorney said it was because “her long-term performance on a range of issues did not meet with the senator’s expectations for effective constituent service.”

Baldwin used her campaign fund to hire Elias. He confirmed that Baylor was offered a severance package, which she rejected. The statement did not disclose details, but earlier reports said the severance package was in the five-figure range and required Baylor to stay silent on her earlier contracts with a whistleblower about the alleged problems at Tomah before they came out in public last month.

It was reported yesterday that Baylor has her own lawyer looking into the possibility of a lawsuit over her termination. Baldwin has been under fire for not pushing for congressional action after a VA investigation last year turned up the alleged drug over-prescriptions at Tomah. She called for investigations only after the Center for Investigative Reporting exposed the issue.

---------

Woman loses control of SUV while drag racing and plunges into river

Police said a 25-year-old woman was drag racing on a street in Milwaukee when she lost control and plunged 70 ft. into an ice-cold Menomonee River.

It happened just before 6 a.m. on the long 27th Street viaduct. Officials said the woman's SUV drove over a concrete barrier and landed in a canal where the vehicle was partially submerged. A 19-year-old female passenger escaped to a riverbank at that point.

The driver was trapped inside the SUV. Firefighters pulled her out and revived her. She was hospitalized in critical but stable condition at last word.

The passenger was treated for exposure to the cold and was later sent home.

Milwaukee police continue to investigate. They're not sure yet whether drugs or alcohol had anything to do with the incident.

---------

Former Madison chancellor supported autonomy, say lawmakers

Two top Republicans say UW-Madison Chancellor Rebecca Blank should act more like a previous chancellor who supported autonomy on campus in exchange for a cut in state funding.

Legislative Joint Committee on Finance co-chairs Alberta Darling and John Nygren issued a statement Wednesday that accused Blank of bringing “Washington politics’ from her former Obama administration post.

They noted that former chancellor Biddy Martin supported Gov. Scott Walker's similar but smaller budget plan in 2011, which would have cut $125 million in state funds to the Madison campus in exchange for letting it spin off from the rest of the UW System.

Walker's current budget measure would cut $300 million from all 26 UW schools in exchange for freedom from state bureaucratic rules plus the power to set tuition.

For opposing that, Blank was accused by Darling and Nygren of playing politics with the university.

The 2011 funding cut was never approved, and Martin left amid heavy legislative criticism. She became the new president of the much smaller but private Amherst College.

Blank issued a statement yesterday expressing support for the autonomy plan and highlighting what she called “positive” talks with lawmakers. However, Blank said the UW remains concerned about the impact of the proposed state funding cut, and she'll work to get it reduced.

---------

Inoperable smoke detectors may have played role in fatal fire

Authorities said smoke detectors did not appear to be working when a duplex fire killed an elderly brother and sister in Mosinee a week ago.

Mosinee Fire District Chief Josh Klug said Hershel "Fred" Bauman, 75, had physical limits which could have made it hard for him to escape the flames. He and Neatha Carwile, 68, died in the blaze, which occurred last Thursday.

The chief said Carwile was caring for Bauman when the fire began in the upper part of a duplex. Investigators believe it started in the kitchen, but the cause remains under investigation.

Two adults and a grandchild in the lower part of the duplex managed to get out safely.

---------

Menominee chairman still hopes Walker will see the light on casino plan

Menominee Tribal Chairman Gary Besaw hoped Gov. Scott Walker would have an "epiphany" overnight and approve the tribe's Kenosha casino.

But there's no sign it will happen on this, the final day the federal government would allow such an approval.

On Tuesday, Walker said he would not meet with Indians who had walked for five days from their home base at Keshena in the hopes of making a final pitch in Madison. At a rally yesterday, a police officer stopped Besaw at the door to Walker's office and told him no one was available to meet with them. Besaw thanked the officer and turned around, saying he was dismayed.

Other tribal members rode buses to Madison where they played drums, yelled and held signs reading, “It's more than a casino, it's our future.”

At the Capitol, the tribal members were joined by Kenosha area lawmakers who said the casino would bring thousands of jobs and lots of new tourists to their back yard.

Walker has said it might open the state to hundreds of millions of dollars in payments to the Potawatomi tribe, which was given an exclusive operating zone for its Milwaukee casino in its last state gaming compact. Walker officials defended their boss yesterday, saying he has studied the Menominee project extensively, has met with tribal leaders and had his administration chief meet with Menominee officials at least 15 times.

Tribal lawmaker Craig Corn said that even if the casino is never built, his group stood up for its future and its children.

---------

Bank teller accused of prompting boyfriend to rob customer

Prosecutors said a bank teller told her boyfriend about a customer who had just made a large cash withdrawal and he later robbed the customer at gunpoint.

Kevin Lipscomb, 31, and Andria Noel, 23, are both charged in Waukesha County with felony bank robbery.

Authorities said Noel alerted Lipscomb that a woman had just taken $61,000 out of her account with Anchor Bank. Officials said Lipscomb later confronted the female customer at gunpoint at her home in Menomonee Falls, where he threatened her and demanded the money.

Media reports said a police dog alerted officers to a latex glove at the crime scene, and it was found to have Lipscomb's DNA.

The bank has not commented on Noel's job status, saying the matter is under investigation. She's in jail under a $25,000 cash bond with a hearing on motions set for tomorrow and a preliminary hearing a week from Friday.

Lipscomb is jailed under a $100,000 bond with a preliminary hearing also set for next Friday.

---------

Senate committee endorses Walker ally’s hospital appointment

A national Walker volunteer is one step closer to being confirmed to the state board that runs the UW Hospital.

The Senate's Committee on Health and Human Services voted 3-2 Wednesday to endorse Gov. Scott Walker's appointment of Andrew Hitt to the UW Hospital and Clinics Authority Board. Both Democrats on the panel voted no after their party questioned whether the appointment was appropriate.

Hitt previously worked four years for Walker's administration before taking a job in the private sector in January working for a senior living services company.

His appointment was questioned because he's the treasurer for Our American Revival, the national tax-exempt group Walker created last month as he considers a run for the White House in 2016. Hitt said his role with the Walker group is extremely limited. He said it involves “administrative paperwork.”

---------

Board asked to give final approval to state’s largest conservation purchase ever

The state Natural Resources Board will be asked next week to complete the largest land conservation purchase in state history.

The panel will be asked to spend almost $2 million as the Department of Natural Resources’ share of a $5.6 million purchase of easement land. The U.S. Forest Service would pick up the rest of the cost.

It's the second phase of an acquisition that would protect almost 22,000 acres from future development at the Brule-St. Croix Legacy Forest in far northwest Wisconsin.

The first phase was conducted in 2012 to preserve land owned by Lyme Timber Company, which manages it for timber production. That would continue while the new land would add to recreation opportunities next to the Brule River State Forest.

The land has almost 40 lakes and ponds, and the easement includes eight miles of snowmobile trails.

If the purchase is approved this month, Douglas County will have conservation easements on almost 66,000 acres of land in which the state will have paid almost $17 million.

The purchase would not be affected by Gov. Scott Walker's state budget proposal to freeze land purchases under the state's Knowles-Nelson Stewardship Program starting July 1.

---------

Walker defends evolution stance, lack of college degree

Gov. Scott Walker went on Fox News Tuesday to respond to national news stories questioning his stand on evolution and his lack of a college degree.

Walker -- a possible 2016 Republican presidential candidate -- told Megyn Kelly he does not regret shying away from answering the now-famous question about evolution last week. He told a forum at London's prestigious Chatham House it was not proper to address the topic.

Walker then told Kelly, “I think God created the earth. I think science and my faith aren't incompatible.”

The governor was also asked about dropping out of Marquette before he could get his degree and whether it makes him unfit to be president.

Walker then took a slap at President Obama, saying: “We've had an Ivy League-trained lawyer in the White House for the last six years who was pretty good at reading off a teleprompter, but (has) then done a pretty lousy job leading this country.”

Walker said he'd rather have a “proven” fighter, referring to the 2011 battle over his Act 10 public union bargaining limits and a subsequent recall election which he survived.