The Tribune’s All-Hillsborough County Baseball Team was selected by correspondent Jarrett Guthrie based on regular- and postseason statistics. The all-star team selected by the county’s public school coaches was strongly considered.

Player of the Year

Kyle Tucker, Plant

Only a junior and the brother of former Plant standout and current Houston Astros minor-leaguer Preston Tucker, he will return to terrorize opposing pitchers for one more season.

*****

Coach of the Year

Kris Wilken, Bloomingdale

Guided the Bulls to the Class 8A state championship game despite being 8-7 at one point in the season and finishing as the district tournament runner-up.

*****

First Team

Tyeler Checkley, King, Sr., P: The Lions’ ace and St. Thomas University signee went 10-2 with a 1.56 ERA and 71 strikeouts for the region finalists.

Logan Crouse, Bloomingdale, Jr., P: The slider machine posted a 9-2 record, a 0.63 ERA and a county-best 116 strikeouts, leading the Bulls to a Class 8A state runner-up finish. The Florida State commit scored 15 runs and had 11 RBIs.

Alex Faedo, Alonso, Sr., P: The Florida signee went 6-2 with a 0.58 ERA and 68 strikeouts, while hitting .282 with 15 RBIs.

Jake Woodford, Plant, Jr., P: Florida commit went 10-1 with a 0.43 ERA and 73 strikeouts for the Saladino Tournament and district champion Panthers.

Luis Medina, Tampa Prep, So., C: Led the Terrapins to a district title and region final berth with a .443 average, 29 RBIs, 11 doubles and three home runs.

Stephen Chamblee, Plant, Sr., IF: The shortstop and pitcher, who is a Florida Atlantic signee, hit .385 with 14 runs and 18 RBIs, while posting a 7-2 record with a 1.14 ERA and 52 strikeouts.

Kevin Merrell, Steinbrenner, Sr., IF: The shortstop and South Florida signee hit .464 with 26 runs, 13 RBIs and 21 stolen bases.

Paulie Russo, Tampa Catholic, Sr., IF: The South Florida commit was a slick-fielding shortstop who hit .342, scored 21 runs, drove in 18, with two home runs and 17 stolen bases.

Paxton Sims, Durant, Sr, IF: The University of Tampa signee as a first baseman hit .351 with 23 runs, 18 RBIs, eight doubles and six stolen bases.

Bubby Terp, King, Sr., IF: The third baseman and Emory University signee hit .452 with 27 runs, 28 RBIs, five home runs and nine stolen bases.

Alex Hanson, Steinbrenner, Sr., OF: The center fielder and Eastern Michigan signee hit .457 with 24 runs, 17 RBIs, nine doubles and 18 stolen bases.

Nelson Maldonado, Jefferson, Jr., OF: The Dragons’ offensive leader hit .432 with 25 runs, 26 RBIs and four home runs for the district champions.

Kyle Tucker, Plant, Jr., OF: Verbally committed to Florida, the Panthers center fielder led the county with a .415 average, 34 runs, 35 RBIs and nine home runs.

Garrett Wright, Durant, Sr., OF: The center fielder and College of Central Florida commit hit .418 with 22 runs, 16 RBIs and 16 stolen bases.

Troy Bacon, Sickles, Jr., UT – The shortstop and pitcher has verbally committed to Florida and hit .351 with 17 runs and 17 RBIs, while going 7-2, with a 1.01 ERA and 70 strikeouts.

Matt Hodges, Tampa Prep, Jr., UT: Hit .348, with 29 runs, 21 RBIs, three home runs and 14 stolen bases, while going 2-0 with five saves, a 1.65 ERA and 35 strikeouts.

*****

Second Team

Ryan Anderson, Brandon, Sr., P

Dante Bosnic, Berkeley Prep, Sr., P

Jordan Norman, Jefferson, Jr., P

Kasey Radke, Jesuit, Sr., P

Ryan McCullers, Jesuit, Sr., C

Jose Ciccarello, Alonso, Fr., IF

Jose Cuellar, Jefferson, Sr., IF

Randy Oliva, Gaither, Sr., IF

Austin Sullivan, Brandon, Sr., IF

Cooper Dickens, Plant, Jr., OF

Xavier Rodriguez, Sickles, Sr., OF

Conrado Skepple, Bloomingdale, Jr., OF

Kennie Taylor, Jesuit, Jr., OF

Donnell Taylor, King, Sr., OF

Jonathan Diaz, Jefferson, Sr., UT

Matt Vaka, Plant, Sr., UT.

*****

Honorable Mention

Alonso: Andrew Abbott, Ryan Fernandez, Ryan Mejia, Kevin Nunez. Armwood: Jimmy Blake. Bayshore Christian: Conner Brown, Evan Courtney, Evan Holland, Jordan Martin, David Santiago. Berkeley Prep: Nicholas Kavouklis, Casey Keller, Anthony Pellegrino, Justin Thomas. Bloomingdale: Jamie Calloway, Austin James, Ryan Kelley, Danny Lorenzo, Josh Mote, Daylon Owens, Doug Sandberg. Brandon: Troy Linderman, Antonio Velez, Drayden Williams. Brooks-Debartolo: Brandon Furr, Tremayne Hopps, Xavier Mills. Cambridge Christian: Ryan Block, Tyler House, Devin Lopez, Henry Mesa. Carrollwood Day: Bryce Benedict, Colin Campbell, Jordan Ramus, Jack Syron. Chamberlain: Austin Ferlita, Dakari Highsmith, Francisco Quinones, Allan Radice, Chad Reeves. Durant: Bryce Gainer, Corey Hamm, Luke Heyer, Tyler Long, Jacob Scolaro, Jonah Scolaro, Jake Sullivan. East Bay: Tyler Blaisdell, Darius Sillart, Alex Wilson. Freedom: Anthony Grampietro, Coleton Morgan. Gaither: Jose Cadenas, Austin Chase, Blake Hodgens, Tyler Tyson. Hillsborough: Rodnie Bernard, Tim Elko, Chris Figueredo, Jared Jensen, Diamond Johnson, Jesus Vega. Jefferson: Jony Gonzalez, Tyler Jones, Alejandro Martinez. Jesuit: Danny Lastra, Nick Ortega, Ronnie Ramirez, Michael Sandborn. King: Drew Grubb, Jose Lopez, Michael Taylor. Lennard: Jackson Tetrault. Leto: Jonathan Alverez. Newsome: Devin Cerrato, Daulton Donini, Adam Gregorich, Evan O’Brien. Plant: Jake Bak, Ryan Ellis, Carter Leslie, Zach Rose. Plant City: Ryan Boyd, Peyton Collins, Trey Matthews, Connor Slagill, Dalton Wingo. Riverview: Garrett Bye, Justin Farmer, CJ Lowe, Angel Morales, Jeff Shapiro. Robinson: Darius Autry, Charlie Cole, Tommy Craparo, Patrick Kiszla. Seffner Christian: Rett Hobbs, Joshua Mendoza. Sickles: Grant Baker, Nik Dague, Levi Gilcrease, Shane Haight. Spoto: Kelvin George, Chris Chatfield. Steinbrenner: Mijon Cummings, Chase Debonis, Gideon Dunn, Ryan Fatzinger, Brennan Garcia, Cole Gordon, Andrew Lindsay. Strawberry Crest: Austin Boatright, Matt Collado, Flabio Garcia, Mark Moclair, Jeffrey Murray, Jake Ralyea. Tampa Bay Tech: Isaiah Arroyo. Tampa Catholic: Kyle Barber, Joseph Burruezo, Jordan Butler, Roland AJ Chacon, Reeves Martin, Jordan Santos. Tampa Prep: Nick DeTringo, Matt Fulton, Sam Martin, Watson Ransom; Wharton: Tristan Deluna, Drew Ehrhard.