Rockets' five-run sixth ends up being too much for the Knights

On an afternoon the North Henderson High baseball team honored assistant coach Alex Suder for World Down Syndrome Day, the Knights almost came away with a big win over A.C. Reynolds.

After the Knights took a 3-2 lead in the bottom of the fourth, the Rockets exploded for five runs in the top of the sixth and held on the rest of the way for a 7-5 win.

"We just didn't execute when we needed to," a disappointed North coach Justin King said. "My guys are a bunch of fighters, and we'll have to learn to execute against those guys. They will be in our conference soon, and we have to learn how to finish against them."

King was referring to the new conference alignment, which will take effect in 2017. North will be put in a conference with current Mountain Athletic Conference schools like A.C. Reynolds, Asheville, Erwin and T.C. Roberson.

The Rockets (5-2) got on the board first with two runs in the top of the second inning. One run trotted home on a called balk that King protested, and the other run was on an RBI single by Griffin Mease.

Adolpho Correa-Pena got the North rally started in the bottom of the fourth when he reached on an error. Bryce Banks was hit by a pitch, and Ivan Rodriguez followed with a sacrifice bunt to put runners at second and third. Correa-Pena scored on a wild pitch ACR starter Josh Dotson, and Jason Williams and Kyle Decker hit back-to-back RBI singles to give North (5-3) the 3-2 lead.

That's when the Rockets answered with the big five-run sixth inning. All of those runs came with two outs, with the most damage done by Dotson's two-run double off reliever Rodriguez. No ACR batter had more than one hit.

The Knights kept fighting in the bottom of the sixth by adding two more runs to cut the lead to 7-5. Correa-Pena led off with a double and later scored on a fielding error, which was how Banks reached first and advanced to second. Hunter Stackhouse then hit an RBI single to plate Banks for North's final run.

The only North hitter with multiple hits was leadoff man Kyle Decker, who finished 2-for-4.

In honor of Suder and World Down Syndrome Day, North players and fans were encouraged to wear lots of socks, and they did. In between innings, Suder came up to bat and hit an inside-the-park home run, as both North and ACR fans cheered.

"Fans, Alex Sluder was born with Down Syndrome and has taught us a thing or two about his love of life and the people in it," North public address announcer Tim Lolley said after Sluder dove safely into home plate.

Coach King was happy for all of the fans and players showing their support of Suder.

"We love Alex. We want him to know that we support everything he does. These guys are there for him a lot, and he's there for them," King said.

North will be back in action at 4:30 p.m. today at home against Christ School.