On the eve of what could be a four-month media marathon covering the Aurora theater shooting trial, Denver TV stations on April 26 alerted viewers about what to expect and explained journalistic philosophies. Clearly news executives are shaping coverage plans with audience sensibilities in mind.

Channel 9 posted a video online, narrated by anchor Kyle Clark, advising the audience the station will not carry graphic images from the trial, will not go wall-to-wall on days when nothing unexpected happens. The goal, Clark said, is to keep viewers informed, not overwhelmed.

Setting the gentlest tone, Channel 9 warned about “complex and often mundane psychological issues and terms” that will make the trial difficult to follow. Mundane? That’s difficult to believe ahead of this intensely scrutinized case. Sanity evaluations will be at the heart of the trial.

Competitors took a more direct, less cushioned approach.

KMGH-Channel 7 promised live coverage everyday on the 7News app and livestream. The station posted, “7NEWS’ decision to livestream the movie theater shooting trial and provide daily context is driven by a similar, fundamental belief: Justice deserves to be transparent.”

KCNC-Channel 4 News Director Tim Wieland said in a staff memo (published online), the station will use sensitivity in approaching coverage decisions, including the use of the defendant’s name (only sparingly).

“There is no doubt that some elements of this trial will be difficult for us to report,” Wieland wrote, “and for you to watch. While we will absolutely take care not to unnecessarily report gory or inappropriate details, our job at the end of the day is cover the news. I suspect that view won’t assuage the feelings of some of our viewers, but I do want you all to know that every decision that goes into our coverage is not made capriciously.”

Regarding the “no notoriety” request from families of victims, asking that the media avoid using the name of the defendant, KDVR-Channel 31 responded with awareness but no promises. “We’re not taking it lightly,” said News Director Holly Gauntt on the station’s website, “we can’t make the promise that we’re not going to say his name because I think in reporting this story inevitably we’ll need to do thorough coverage and we will limit as much as we can and we will certainly be aware of their concerns.”