Health This App Could Help Friends And Family Prevent Suicides CREDIT: Shutterstock

More than 800,000 people around the world commit suicide each year, according a United Nations report released last month. A United Kingdom-based organization, however, wants to curb its prevalence with an app they say will put friends and family of the depressed on notice.

Once downloaded, the app touted as Samaritans Radar will send alerts to users’ email addresses when their Twitter followers tweet phrases designated as words commonly used in difficult times — like “help me,” “tired of being alone,” “hate myself,” or “need someone to talk to.” Samaritans Radar will also help users contact anyone they’re concerned about at any time.

“Samaritans Radar is in its infancy and won’t get it right every time,” the organization said in a statement on Wednesday. “It’s not good at sarcasm or jokes yet! But there’s a way for you to give feedback on whether a Samaritans Radar alert was correct, so the service improves for everyone.”

In the mental health field, there’s no relationship more conspicuous than that of depression and suicide. According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 90 percent of people who take their own lives often suffer from depression, proving it harmful if not treated immediately. Traumatic events and the stresses of change can bring forth depressive disorders, ultimately distorting one’s feelings, actions, perceptions and triggering a mental disorder.

For teenagers and adolescents, who may stand to benefit the most from an app like Samaritans Radar, the stakes are even higher. Suicide counts as the third leading cause of death among that group, according to a January CDC report, and more than 10 percent of adolescents develop a depressive disorder before the age of 18. On college campuses, which are working to improve mental health services for students, suicide rises to the top cause of death.

Samaritans Radar has elements of the collaborative care model, a mental health care strategy that connects family members of the depressed with mental and physical health services. That’s especially important considering the fact that a persistent stigma surrounding mental health issues prevents many people from feeling like they can talk about it or seek help.

The new tool comes on the heels of other innovations that tackle depression and provide people with the tools needed to improve their mental health. One Pennsylvania city, for example, installed a mental health kiosk in grocery stores that allows people to screen for potential issues by using a touch screen. Some researchers have found that regular text messages can help people manage their chronic mental health conditions. And some therapeutic video games can help people cope with negative emotions.

Issues of depression and suicide made national headlines earlier this year, after comedian Robin Williams committed suicide. His death helped bring more attention to the public health issue; calls to crisis hotlines have increased, and more people have offered to volunteer as mental health advocates.

There has also been some recent progress in connecting more people to the care the need. The health care industry has seen a significant increase in the use of mental health services among young people who stayed on their parents’ insurance as part of the Affordable Care Act.

If you need help, the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline is available 24 hours a day at 800-273-8255.