Gov. Mike Pence is staying out of Indiana's race for the U.S. Senate to replace Sen. Dan Coats, but said he might endorse a presidential candidate. (Photo: Robert Scheer/IndyStar)

WASHINGTON — Gov. Mike Pence is staying silent on the GOP Senate primary battle, but said Saturday he may put his thumb on the scale in the presidential contest.

“I may well endorse,” the Indiana Republican said in an interview while attending the National Governors Association’s winter meeting in Washington, D.C. “If I felt strongly that there was a particular individual that would be the best standard bearer for our party, I might weigh in.”

The situation is tricky for Pence who likely doesn’t want to offend any voters by his choice. But because Pence is up for re-election in November, he may be considering which Republican presidential candidate’s name he wants above his on the ballot.

Pence said his first hope is that the nominating contests for both parties are still going on when Hoosiers vote May 3, one of the last primaries in the process. The 2008 contest between Barack Obama and Hillary Clinton, in which both Democrats campaigned hard for Indiana’s votes, was a “great civics lesson” for Hoosiers, Pence said.

The Indiana Election Commission voted 2-2 Friday to keep the nominating contest going in the GOP race for Senate. Both the Indiana Democratic Party and GOP candidate Marlin Stutzman had challenged whether Republican Todd Young had gathered enough signatures from voters to qualify for the primary ballot. The Election Commission’s split decision means Young will stay on the ballot, although Democrats are considering whether to challenge the commission’s decision in court.

Stutzman’s challenge had been criticized by some Indiana Republicans, including retiring Sen. Dan Coats, who called it self serving and unfair.

Pence declined to say whether he shares that criticism.

“I consider both men to be good friends and good leaders,” he said of Stutzman and Young, “and I’ll leave that decision to Republican primary voters.”

Contact Maureen Groppe at mgroppe@gannett.com or @mgroppe on Twitter.

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1TySutm