Topics: DAME, Homeschooling, Social News, Life News

This piece originally appeared on DAME

Homeschooling gets a bad rap. After all, perhaps the most well-known homeschooling family right now is the Duggars. Among some circles, they were often touted as a homeschooling success story. In the wake of revelations concerning eldest son Josh’s sexual abuse of his sisters, we’ve learned that the organization providing curriculum and support to the Duggars and other conservative Christian homeschooling families has rather extreme problems of its own.

Duggars aside, a chorus of adults who were homeschooled as children have raised concerns about their own educational histories, telling stories of abuse, neglect, and serious gaps in academic opportunity.

More from DAME: “What Happens When Women LITERALLY Fight Back?”

Horror stories like these are catnip to the media, naturally. And for those whose only exposure to the idea of homeschooling comes from what they see on TV or in magazines, it’s pretty easy to assume that most families who homeschool their kids are either religious extremists or hard-core control freaks (or, more than likely, both).

“We only see the bad homeschoolers in the media,” Sandy says. “We are a very misunderstood group of parents.” Sandy, the mother of one child, lives in upstate New York. She bristles at the assumptions other people make about how she educates her son, with whom she’s just embarked on a second year of homeschooling; yet she understands where they’re coming from.

“I think homeschoolers are perceived to be religious types who don’t want kids exposed to the world—that’s how I perceived homeschool before I looked into it,” she says.

“I know that my own impression of people who homeschooled was not that positive before I took the step,” says Andre, an Illinois father who took his youngest son out of middle school, taught him at home for a few years, and then returned him to public school for high school.

“Quite honestly, I am not bothered by media portrayals of homeschooling because frankly, they are not referring to people who look like me,” says Shautel, an African-American mom who homeschools her children in Nashville.

By most measures, homeschooling is on the rise in America. The U.S. Department of Education says that 3.4 percent of K-12 students were homeschooled in the 2011-2012 academic year, and the government’s own data suggests that number will go up. And the reasons parents are choosing to educate their kids at home seem to be changing as well, with the number of non-religious homeschoolers growing at a faster rate than those who cite religious reasons.

Good-bye, modest attire and daily Bible instruction; hello, experiential learning, hands-on field trips, and college courses. The new homeschoolers are educated, involved, and fed up with what they see as a broken system of public education. Unlike the Duggars, they aren’t attempting to shield their children from a sinful world—they are opting out of institutional education in an attempt to better prepare their children for the world we’re all living in.

Some of their kids have been remarkably successful. A recent article in Boston magazine profiled some of that city’s homeschooled youngsters, starting with a newly minted Harvard freshman. And it’s exhilarating to read about what some of these homeschooled kids are doing. Andre’s son built a composter as part of learning about science. Denise, who homeschools her son in Georgia, has connected with a group of homeschoolers in an enrichment program that includes speech lessons with a trial attorney, and drama taught by the head of the local theater company. For Sandy, the freedom to ignore the public-school calendar has brought the flexibility to travel with her son, visiting historic sites and museums, a kind of rolling field trip. The author of a Massachusetts homeschool blog, Off Kltr, touts the opportunity to engage in “holistic parenting,” which for her family includes lots of park time and library time (and sounds pretty heavenly to this overscheduled mom).

It’s easy to relate to why these families have opted out of their local schools. “Our decision to homeschool our child came after observing, first hand, a public-school environment that was focused more on administrators filling their own agendas rather than meeting the needs of each child,” says Denise, who felt that while the public system placed a lot of emphasis on help with special needs, it was too easy for “average Joe” kids to fall through the cracks.