SYRACUSE, N.Y. - Here's a look at where U.S. Rep. Dan Maffei and challenger John Katko stand on some of the issues in their campaign for the 24th Congressional District seat.

THE BIOS

Katko: Republican Katko, 51, of Camillus, is making his first bid for public office. He retired from the U.S. Justice Department in January after a 23-year career as a federal prosecutor. Katko served as chief of the organized crime division in the Northern District of New York. The Fairmount native is married to Robin Katko. The couple has three sons, Sean, Liam and Logan. Katko also will appear on the Conservative Party and Independent Party lines on the ballot.

Maffei: Democrat Maffei, 46, of Syracuse, is completing his second term in Congress. This is his fifth campaign for the Syracuse-area congressional seat. He won twice in presidential election years in 2008 and 2012, but lost in 2006 and 2010. Prior to seeking office, he spent a decade working in Congress for U.S. Sens. Bill Bradley, D-N.J., Daniel Patrick Moynihan, D-N.Y., and Rep. Charles Rangel, D-Harlem. The Syracuse native is married to Abby Davidson Maffei. The couple had their first child, a daughter Maya, in July. Maffei also will appear on the Working Families Party line on the ballot.



Katko: Supports lowering and simplifying the federal tax rate for businesses, and providing tax credits for businesses to train new employees, closing the skills gap. He has not proposed a specific tax rate. He wants to require the federal government to consider costs to small businesses before enacting new regulations. He supports making permanent the federal research and development tax credit that expired at the end of 2013.

Maffei: He supports an across-the-board tax rate for businesses in the mid-20 percent range, down from the current top rate of 35 percent, and closing tax loopholes. He introduced legislation to provide a business tax credit for companies to defray the cost of training new employees. Voted for a House bill that would require federal agencies to consider the potential costs and benefits of new regulations. He voted to make permanent the research and development tax credit. He views exports and building new infrastructure - including rail, port and airport improvements - as a key to economic growth in Central New York.



Katko: Opposes President Barack Obama's proposal to raise the federal minimum wage from $7.25 to $10.10 per hour. Supports unspecified incremental increases over time. He cites a Congressional Budget Office report that found the higher wage could result in the short-term loss of 500,000 jobs nationwide with the higher wage.

Maffei: Supports the proposed minimum wage increase to $10.10 per hour, which would occur in increments over several years. Supports linking the increased wage with tax breaks for small businesses to ease the burden of the higher costs.

Related video: Maffei, Katko talk about the minimum wage

MEDICARE

Katko: Opposes Republican Rep. Paul Ryan's plan that encourages future recipients under age 55 to buy private health insurance using government-funded vouchers. He says benefits should not be reduced for current retirees or those nearing retirement under any circumstances. But he is open to the idea of reducing costs by cutting future benefits for younger people entering the workforce.



Maffei: Opposes the Republican plan to reform Medicare for future recipients, saying it is a "sacred trust" and it would be wrong to issue government vouchers or ask seniors to purchase their own private insurance. Supports allowing Medicare to negotiate for lower prescription drug prices with drug companies, a move that he says would save more than $150 billion over 10 years.

SOCIAL SECURITY

Katko: He opposes any decrease in benefits for seniors currently receiving Social Security payments, or those nearing retirement. Opposes raising the cap on the amount workers are taxed on their earnings by Social Security. Opposes any proposal to privatize Social Security with investment accounts.

Maffei: Opposes any plans to privatize Social Security or cut benefits for any age group. He opposes any increase the retirement age for future recipients. He supports increasing the long-term health of Social Security by raising the cap on the amount workers are taxed by Social Security on their earnings. In 2014, workers don't pay Social Security tax on earnings of more than $117,000.



Katko: Opposes the Affordable Care Act, or Obamacare, but would not vote to repeal the law unless it could be replaced with a viable alternative. Favors working in a bipartisan manner to come up with a plan that offers health care coverage for all "but it has to be much less government focused" and more market driven. Supports keeping some popular aspects of the law, including requirements for coverage of people with pre-existing conditions and allowing children to remain on their parents' policy until age 26. Opposes a medical device tax included in the original law.

Maffei: Supports making changes to improve the Affordable Care Act passed by Congress in 2010. He opposes any efforts to repeal the law. Maffei opposes the 2.3 percent excise tax on medical device manufacturers and has written legislation to repeal that aspect of the law. Opposes cuts in federal reimbursement payments to hospitals that care for the uninsured. Supports giving businesses more time to comply with the law's mandates.

NATIONAL DEBT AND BUDGET DEFICIT

Katko: Supports an immediate end to deficit spending to help eliminate annual budget deficits and reduce the $17.5 trillion national debt. He would have voted against the December 2013 bipartisan budget deal, but opposes fiscal brinkmanship that threatens default. Supports crackdown on waste and fraud at federal agencies, and deep spending cuts at some agencies including the Department of Education.

Maffei: Supports balancing the budget by closing corporate tax loopholes, eliminating tax breaks for oil companies, and reducing money spent on "nation building" overseas. Voted for the December 2013 bipartisan deal for a two-year federal budget, rolling back sharp spending cuts caused by sequestration.

Related video: Katko, Maffei talk about the national debt

IMMIGRATION REFORM

Katko: Opposes a bipartisan immigration reform bill that passed the U.S. Senate by a 68-32 vote in June 2013. Disagrees with provision to provide a path to citizenship for the

11 million immigrants in the United States without legal status, but does not want to deport law-abiding, productive workers. Opposed a federal plan to send hundreds of immigrant children to Syracuse for temporary housing while they await deportation.

Maffei: Supports the bipartisan immigrant reform bill that passed the U.S. Senate in June 2013. Supports increased security at borders as a condition for reforms. Opposes general amnesty, but supports a path to citizenship for immigrants with skills needed in the United States. He says it's up to the community to decide on a federal plan to send hundreds of immigrant children to Syracuse for temporary housing while they await deportation.

Contact Mark Weiner anytime: Email | Twitter | Facebook | 571-970-3751