I recently joined the corps of the disillusioned and disenfranchised who suffer from burdensome, ever-increasing premiums in the wake of the Affordable Care Act.

I am in need of life-saving health care and am the victim of a change in insurance coverage that occurred with too little advance notice to prepare for it. Specifically, after about six years on Medicare as a kidney dialysis patient, I learned in mid-December that on Friday, Jan. 1, I would become one of several hundred Nevadans under 65 who will lose supplemental health care insurance, aka Medigap coverage.

Because so relatively few people are affected by this change, it’s not garnering headlines. But to those of us who are affected, it means the world.

The reason boils down to a standoff between the only Nevada provider of supplemental care insurance for those under age 65 — Anthem Blue Cross Blue Shield — and the American Kidney Fund, which has long paid the soaring premiums for the disabled but is now taking a stand against a premium hike of about 15 percent by no longer paying for such policies.

That leaves it up to those in my situation to bear the total cost for Medigap coverage. I can’t afford it because it will devour about one-third of my Social Security disability check.

Insurers say such premium increases, which are occurring around the country, are essential to their survival because there are too few younger and healthier enrollees to contribute to an insurance pool that relies on their premiums to pay the medical bills for those who are older or sickly.

Every American with end-stage renal failure, regardless of age, qualifies for low-cost Medicare, which pays 80 percent of medical bills. While the law requires that Medicare supplemental care be offered to Medicare recipients 65 and older, Nevada is one of 20 states that does not require that it be offered to those under 65.

In Nevada, only Anthem offered a plan to cover that 20 percent gap. (It stopped offering it in 2012 but allowed those like me who already were enrolled to keep the coverage.)

Very poor Nevadans of any age qualify for state Medicaid, which will pay the other 20 percent, but I do not qualify for Medicaid. For me and others in my situation, the American Kidney Fund paid the Anthem premiums, to the tune of $522 a month. But when Anthem announced the cost would increase to $600, the kidney fund said it would no longer pay.

Fortunately, the dialysis provider cannot deny life-saving treatment for unpaid balances. So it will have to write off 20 percent of the bill and take 80 percent from Medicare as payment in full.

But now I will have to limit my doctor visits and refuse some necessary and expensive medical tests because I cannot afford the 20 percent medical bills from my primary care physician, cardiac specialist, endocrinologist, blood diagnostic centers, imaging centers, hospitals, etc.

I cannot get angry at the American Kidney Fund for taking a stand. That fund has been a wonderful lifeline for so many years. And I concede that insurance companies have a right to make profits, or certainly not to lose large sums on policies they were not even required to offer in the first place.

Las Vegas Medicare independent insurance agent Rae Rocco said potential actions — such as a federal cap on supplemental health insurance premiums or the Nevada Legislature passing a law mandating insurance companies operating in this state offer Medigap to those under age 65 — are not out of the question. But regulators have to tread lightly because such mandates might prompt more insurance companies to get out of the health business.

But when individuals are faced with either paying thousands of dollars a year in premiums or winding up with thousands of dollars in medical debt, it is a case of picking one’s poison. All things considered, having a mound of unpaid — and virtually uncollectible — medical bills seems to be the best of two horrible choices.

Ed Koch was a Las Vegas Sun reporter from 1984 to 2009.