Jersey City Medical Center has nearly completed the process of joining the St. Barnabas Health system and Medical Center officials said joining the state’s largest healthcare provider will allow the Jersey City hospital to continue growing, expanding and adding services.

“A larger system has the ability to purchase supplies at better rates and negotiate with insurance and other providers from a position of strength, as well as avoiding duplication of services,” spokesman Mark Rabson said Friday. “There are very few standalone hospitals today.”

The Community Health Care Assets Protection Act requires New Jersey non-profit hospitals to submit an application to the state Attorney General’s Office and receive the AG’s approval before its acquisition by another non-profit hospital. CHAPA was designed to provide transparency, oversight and to ensure the acquisition is in the public interest.

The AG’s office has deemed the application complete and a public hearing on the matter was held on Jan. 9 at the Boys and Girls Club where a representative of Jersey City Mayor Steven Fulop read a statement endorsing the acquisition of the Medical Center by St. Barnabas Health.



After passage of the Affordable Care Act, “It quickly became evident that in order for Jersey City Medical Center to survive, prosper and have the ability to continue to provide a robust health care service to its community a strategic partner was essential,” President and CEO of Jersey City Medical Center Joseph F. Scott said.

Scott said “It quickly became apparent that the cultures and the mission, vision and values of our systems were aligned. The proposed transaction will further support Jersey City Medical Center and Liberty HealthCare System’s mission of enhancing life.”

Barry H. Ostrowsky, president and CEO of Barnabas Health, said acquiring the Medical Center should strengthen healthcare delivery and enhance continued stability and growth at the Medical Center and its affiliates and have a positive impact on continued access to services in the urban communities they serve.

“JCMC is an outstanding regional medical center, with exceptional leadership and professional staff, and widely recognized clinical services,” Ostrowsky said. “The proposed transaction should help to ensure that JCMC can continue its mission to serve the healthcare needs of its community.”

Although termed an “acquisition,” the Medical Center is actually “joining the St. Barnabas Health family” and it is not being purchased, Rabson said. If the acquisition is approved, two members of Liberty HealthCare’s board will sit on the St. Barnabas board and vice versa.

The public can still send written comments on the acquisition to the AG’s office.

Rabson said it is hoped AG will make its final decision soon.

St. Barnabas has numerous facilities across the state.