Oh, Canada. (Photo: File)

OK, so a lot of you are facing a tough choice. You can't stand either of the candidates vying to be the leader of the free world. The one seems like a reasonable facsimile of a human being and the other looks like a talking yam with less charisma.

Recent polls have shown that the two candidates are the most unlikable in American history since Warren G. Harding ran against some guy who was even more unlikable than Warren G. Harding.

It's understandable. It was bound to come to this, given the state of our politics in this country, where being a sociopath is a pathway to success.

And it's causing a lot of angst among the electorate, regardless of their place on the spectrum from left to right. Who do you vote for when the choices are so terrible?

There is some evidence that a lot of you are seeking an escape hatch.

One that leads to America's northern suburb, Canada.

After each primary, as Donald Trump secured the Republican nomination and Hillary Clinton continued her inexorable march to the Democratic nomination, Google gets a spike in searches for "moving to Canada."

It doesn't seem to matter which candidate you dislike the most, the one thing that unifies Americans, apparently, is the belief that Canada would be a safe haven from the excrement show that this election has become.

It's a very common thing. After Barack Obama was elected, a lot of conservatives threatened to move to Canada. After George W. Bush was appointed to the office by the Supreme Court, same thing, except for liberals. In either case, there wasn't a huge uptick in emigration to our neighbor to the north.

Or to any other place. Rush Limbaugh, for example, said if the Affordable Care Act passed, he'd move to Costa Rica. He didn't. In 2012, some supporters of Mitt Romney threatened to move to Australia. They didn't. A tech company did a kind of survey and found that the most popular destinations for those seeking political asylum included England, France, Ireland, Jamaica, Norway and Hawaii. (Hate to break it to some of you, but...oh, never mind.)

But Canada always tops the list. Proximity plays a role in it, as does the perception that Canada is kind of like America Lite.

But this time, considering the fear and loathing for both candidates, perhaps Canada should brace itself for an influx of people, depending on who wins, driving Priuses or Ford F-150s flying Confederate flags.

We always pick Canada because it seems like a nice place. It has a reputation for being nice anyway. It's seems nice and quiet. Kind of peaceful. Full of friendly people. Sort of like a really big version of Minnesota, except colder. I read once that in the U.S., 36 degrees is considered cold. In Canada, it's summer.

But there is a lot more involved in moving to Canada than just packing your bags and showing up at the border pretending to understand the rules of hockey.

It can be a difficult process. And it takes some work.

For instance, you really do have to understand the rules of hockey. There's a lot more to it than guys skating around chaotically and whacking one another with sticks. It's a nuanced and graceful sport in which guys skate around chaotically and whack one another with sticks.

And maybe curling, a sport that combines the skill of shuffleboard with the excitement of sweeping the kitchen floor.

Now, learning about the sports culture is important, as is learning about the pop culture. While it is true that Canada gave us four-fifths of The Band and Joni Mitchell, it has also given us Triumph and Nickelback. (And Rush. Can't forget Rush.) So it appears you will have to develop a taste for Nickelback's music, which would involve poking holes through your frontal lobes with a pickaxe.

You'd also have to learn the language. Canadian is different than English. The differences are subtle, and you could probably catch on. To play it safe, just tag "eh?" onto the end of every sentence you utter.

A lot of Canadians speak French so you could run into a language barrier. Overcome that obstacle as you would when you encounter any other non-English-speaking person, by speaking very slowly and loudly. Works every time.

Then there is the food. Canada, of course, has a diverse culture and offers a lot of choices, cuisine-wise. But there are a few things you should know. They eat cod tongue, beaver tails and something called pemmican. Pemmican is dried moose meat, pounded into a powder and mixed with melted fat.

Yum.

And, for some reason, Kraft Macaroni and Cheese is considered a treat.

Then there is poutine, for example. It is a dish made of French fries and cheese curds smothered in gravy. So it's probably a good thing that Canada has universal health care so you can get that cardiac bypass after ingesting poutine.

Now, that's something that conservatives probably won't like about Canada, universal health care. They don 't seem to like it. And if that dislike is strong enough, conservatives should consider relocating to a country that conforms more to their ideology. Somalia, maybe.

There are a lot of other things that you have to watch out for if you do decide to relocate north. Canada is infested with moose and elk. Here, you hit a deer with your car and you're looking at a few grand of damage. There, you hit an elk and you're looking at taking advantage of the health care system.

You also have to look out for hostile (or at least passive-aggressive) Canadians. A lot of our neighbors up north aren't too excited about a threatened influx of Americans. A Canadian, blogging on Quora, wrote, "Don't run to us whenever something goes wrong in America. We don't want to be your second choice. Fix yer damn country, America, and don't act like you have the right to live in mine until you've figured your own (stuff) out."

Maybe Canada should think about building a wall.

Mike Argento's column appears Mondays and Fridays in Living and Sundays in Viewpoints. Reach him at (717) 771-2046 or at mike@ydr.com.

Read or Share this story: http://on-ydr.co/1Viaj0n