Topics: From the Wires, News

BEIRUT (AP) — The decision by Lebanon’s militant Hezbollah group to join the civil war in neighboring Syria and fight along President Bashar Assad’s forces was a historic and moral “mistake” toward the Syrian people, a leading Lebanese politician has said.

The harsh criticism by Walid Jumblatt, who leads Lebanon’s minority Druse sect, reflects his increasing pessimism about the bloody conflict next door, now in its fourth year.

Although he leads a minority sect, Jumblatt is a pillar and a mainstay in Lebanese politics and is often referred to as the country’s “kingmaker” because of his small bloc’s track record of tipping the balance during key votes in parliament.

“Hezbollah intervened in Syria and did not care about the Lebanese (public) opinion,” Jumblatt told The Associated Press during a recent interview at his home in Beirut. “This is a historical and moral mistake toward the Syrian people.”

Hezbollah’s fighters openly entered the fight in Syria in May 2013 and were instrumental in helping Assad’s troops push back rebels and re-capture strategic towns and rebel strongholds along the border with Lebanon and near Syria’s capital, Damascus.

This turned the tide in the conflict, giving Assad’s forces the upper hand against the rebels seeking to overthrow the Syrian leader, who last week won a third seven-year term in a presidential election derided as a farce by the opposition.

Now, the Syrian civil war will be “very long,” Jumblatt said. Instead of fighting in Syria, he said Hezbollah should have focused on archenemy Israel.

“I say that the guns should be directed toward the Israeli enemy,” Jumblatt added.

Jumblatt — whose Druse are like Assad’s Alawites, an offshoot of Shiite Islam — has been known for his shifting loyalties. His history with Hezbollah has been both complex and full of U-turns.

After the 2005 assassination of former Lebanese Prime Minister Rafik Hariri, Jumblatt sharply criticized Hezbollah and the Syrian government, which many in Lebanon blamed for the killing. Damascus denies it was behind Hariri’s slaying.