"We found an initial inverse association between consumption of pectin and the levels of some microbial groups, contrary to what we expected because pectin has been associated with a prebiotic effect in several studies," says González.

"However, subsequently we found that this association was due to the high correlation between the intake of pectin and flavanones, as both compounds come from the same food."

The study's indication that white bread has some potential health benefits isn't news to everyone.

Heather Van Vorous, the founder of HelpforIBS.com and the creator of Heather's Tummy Care line, has long been a proponent of white bread over whole wheat for those who have been diagnosed with Irritable Bowel Syndrome.

"[W]hite bread is a great soluble fiber staple [which] is key for an Irritable Bowel Syndrome diet, not just for the prebiotic effect confirmed by this study," says Van Vorous. "White bread is missing the insoluble fiber bran of whole wheat bread [and] insoluble fiber is a dietary trigger for many IBS symptoms."

According to the Whole Grains Council, 60% of Americans eat a whole-grain food at least once in two weeks, but white bread still dominates as people's choice. Overall, whole wheat is supposed to be more nutritious as it is much higher in fiber, vitamins B6 and E, magnesium, zinc, folic acid and chromium than its white counterpart.

However, this doesn't completely close the case that whole wheat bread is necessarily always the healthier choice over white as manufacturers often add a lot of extra salt and sugar to whole-grain breads, undermining its nutritional value. This is because the bran in wheat bread contains something called ferulic acid, which tends to give wheat bread its less-than-alluring smell and taste when compared to white bread. So, some manufacturers try to compensate by including more additives to override the ferulic acid. As a result, a loaf of "whole grain" or "whole wheat" bread can sometimes have double the amount of grams of sugar and calories than a loaf of white bread.

Wheat bread also tends to cost more on average than white bread.

As of 2011, the Whole Grains Council was stating it whole grain products were about 25% more. In addition to containing more nutrients, whole-grain bread is often costlier, because it tends to rise more slowly when it bakes, which means a lower throughput on production. It also often has a shorter shelf life than many varieties of white, which can lead to a higher percentage of waste.

Yet the price of white bread also can fluctuate widely in parts of the United States.

In March 2013, Bureau of Labor Statistics reported that the price paid for white pan bread increased while the price for whole wheat bread decreased. Namely, the national average retail price of white pan bread increased a penny per pound in the South and Northeast. Yet overall, white is still the cheaper option in most cases.

Whether you prefer white or whole wheat bread, white bread might be a good choice if you are on a very tight budget or suffer from a sensitive stomach. At least, it doesn't seem white bread is wholly deserving of its bad reputation.

"Yet another evil food turns out to be an angel in disguise," says Van Vorous.

--Written by Laura Kiesel for MainStreet