Our public officials not only were incompetent ... but appear to have lied to the federal government ...

The Pioneer Institute will publish a scathing report on Monday about the state's management of Massachusetts' troubled Health Connector website under former governor Deval Patrick.

The Pioneer Institute is a conservative think tank that has been critical of the Affordable Care Act and Massachusetts' implementation of it. The report is based on accounts from two primary whistle-blowers, conversations with other officials and reviews of internal audits, which are public documents.

The report finds that Massachusetts officials failed to hold CGI, the technology company contracted to build the website, accountable for shoddy work and missed deadlines. It did not provide CGI with adequate resources or proper state leadership. State officials apparently misrepresented the progress of the website to the Health Connector board and the federal agency overseeing Medicaid, according to the report.

Jason Lefferts, a Health Connector spokesman, said state officials received a copy of the report late in the day Friday. He referred questions about it to Gov. Charlie Baker's office.

Baker's office declined to comment on actions taken by the Patrick administration. "When it comes to the Health Connector, the Baker-Polito administration's sole focus is fixing the broken system it inherited so that people can access the health care they need," said Baker spokeswoman Elizabeth Guyton. "The administration is cooperating with the subpoena regarding the Health Connector's difficulties dating back to 2010."

It was reported last week that the U.S. Attorney has subpoenaed documents from the Health Connector, indicating that there is some sort of federal investigation.

After the site launched in October 2013 and customers were unable to use it to enroll in health insurance, Patrick, a Democrat, fired CGI and brought on new state leadership. But the Pioneer report argues that the Patrick administration minimized the state's mismanagement.

Josh Archambault, the study's author and Pioneer's senior fellow in health care, said the study points to "the level of complete incompetence and mismanagement" on the part of the state and "how across the board poorly things were run from the beginning."

The report finds that there were problems as far back as 2012. "The fall of 2012 was marked by unchecked shoddy work by CGI Corp., missed deadlines, and insufficient resources," the report states.

The report pointed to problems including gaps in the state's contract with CGI and a lack of resources. For example, MassHealth workers sent CGI documents to their home computers because the outdated word processor on their work computers could not open them. State officials regularly skipped meetings with CGI. There were meetings where no one took minutes, so the same issues were later revisited.

As work continued, CGI continued to miss deadlines, the report found, but state officials did not properly address what this meant for the final project and how to adapt to new deadlines.

A whistle-blower told the Pioneer Institute that in the run-up to the launch of the site, the state team working on the project knew it would not operate correctly. Most of the site had not been tested. "We were waiting for people to recognize how bad this was, because we had done everything we could to escalate. We were always told to be quiet, it doesn't matter, don't say anything," the whistle-blower said, according to the report.

By the summer of 2013, state officials knew they may not be able to get the site fully working even by December – although customers needed health insurance by Jan. 1. None of this was revealed to the public.

The state finally added staff to the project in June 2013, but there continued to be missed deadlines. It became clear that more and more features would not be ready on time, while features that would be ready had defects. Problems continued after the launch in October.

"Behind the scenes, the post-launch period was characterized by cascading delays and no workable schedule for establishing a fully functional website," the report found.

The report also contained new allegations about the transition period between when Patrick fired CGI and when a new company, Optum, took over. Although the state paid CGI to transfer codes and knowledge to Optum, the report said there was no unfinished code, and Optum scrapped most of the unfinished work.

The Pioneer report suggests that in presentations to a federal agency, state officials may have overstated the progress of the exchange and may have "cheated" on a test required by the federal government related to the ability of the state site to connect with a federal hub.

"Our public officials not only were incompetent from a managerial perspective, but appear to have lied to the federal government to cover up mistakes made by both the state and CGI," the report stated.

Archambault said, "In at least two instances we uncovered, what we told the feds was either in direct conflict with internal audits or highly improbable given what was being said in the audit and what whistleblowers said was happening at the time."