Beatboxing aficionado Biz Markie knew he had to clean up his act after he was diagnosed with type 2 diabetes. And at 385 pounds, his weight was a good start. Three years later, the rapper has just capped off a dramatic 140-lb. weight loss; and at his current weight of 244 lbs., he’s looking to knock another 30 off.

"I looked up in the mirror and said I had to make a change if I was going to continue to live,” the 49-year-old rapper told the Los Angeles Times. Back in 2005, Markie lost 40 lbs. while competing on VH1’s Celebrity Fit Club. However, he admits to gaining the weight back after the show ended. Markie decided to set another weight loss goal after accepting a bet from celebrity friends Will Smith and Magic Johnson.

With his 50th birthday coming up in April, Markie has dropped 140 lbs. and hopes to cut out another 30 as he looks to control his blood sugar and cholesterol levels. "They be seein' me, I lost the weight, and I didn't have to use lap band surgery or whatever," he told the NY Daily News. "They see that I did it, and they know I was the greedy, greasy person. So if I can do it, anyone can do it."

Although guilty of satisfying his sweet tooth once in a while, he has adopted a healthy and organic diet, dependent on fruits, vegetables, and whole grains. The Yo Gabba Gabba! comedian attributes his weight loss success to diet, exercise, and switching sugar-filled soda for zero-calorie Zevia, sweetened by stevia. "Instead of me drinking a soda that's got 70 sugars in it, it has no sugar and it's sweeter. It's like God said, 'Yo, we need you on earth a little longer!'" Markie told the NY Daily News. "I take it on the road, I take it everywhere. I would have a Zevia IV if I could."

Losing five to 10 percent of body weight is an overweight person’s first step to avoid type 2 diabetes, the Mayo Clinic reports. Thirty minutes a day of moderate physical activity can effectively lower blood sugar levels by pushing sugar from the blood into cells. Of course, the most important step for monitoring blood sugar levels is diet control.