KUSA was once again named station of the year when the Colorado Broadcasters Association handed out 2013 “awards of excellence” on March 8 to local broadcasters.

While KUSA also picked up awards for best weatherperson (Kathy Sabine), best public affairs program (Kyle Clark’s on the floods), best investigative reporting (by Jeremy Jojola, Anna Hewson, Nicole Vap), and general assignment report (“Coal Creek Damage,” by Chris Vanderveen and Chris Hansen), perhaps the biggest upset was the number of awards earned by rivals.

KDVR, in particular, scored in several major categories: the station took the award for best regularly scheduled newscast for “FOX 31 Denver News at 9” (Ed Kosowski, Maureen Capasso and Dana Dieterle were honored). KDVR’s Jeremy Hubbard was named best news anchor. Hubbard’s extended report on Afghanistan, produced with Noah Skinner and Joshua Maranhas, won for best news series. Mark Meredith’s coverage of the Black Forest fire won the breaking news category. Fox31 also scored the award for best documentary, for the “Day of Infamy: A Return to Pearl Harbor” report by Hubbard, Sean Towle and Joshua Maranhas.

Entrevision’s KCEC was honored with several awards including spot news reporting for “Incendios,” (Juan Carlos Gutierrez, Mario Galarza) and best sport reporting (Luis Canela).

In the public TV realm, Rocky Mountain PBS won best mini-documentary for KRMA’s “Arts District,” by Lisa D. Olken, Carrie Saldo, Daniel Mercure, and best public affairs special for ” Losing Ground: The Cliff Effect,” by Cynthia Hessin, Laressa Watlington and the I-News Team.

On the radio side, KOA again won station of the year. KOA also was honored for its public affairs program, “Front Range Focus” by Lori Lynn Barker, and “850 KOA Colorado Morning News” with Steffan Tubbs and April Zesbaugh won best regularly scheduled newscast.

For noncommercial radio, Colorado Public Radio’s KCFR won best mini-documentary for “How a student lost and found hope” by Dajina Bell, Jenny Brundin, Kelley Griffin and Judith Smelser; and best news special for the “March on Washington 50th Anniversary” by Ryan Warner, Jenny Brundin and Elaine Gran.

Not all local affiliates enter all categories; some stations are more heavily invested in entering the CBA competition.

Joanne Ostrow: 303-954-1830, jostrow@denverpost.com or twitter.com/ostrowdp