"Ouch!"

Ah, yes, the wonderful sounds of summer when some insect gets you right in the neck, knee, ankle or more personal part of the anatomy.

Forget the bugs in the Obamacare website, the capital (and White House) obsession. The Environmental Protection Agency on Wednesday unveiled a proposal to deal with real bugs. It might potentially give us greater confidence when popping into Walgreen's, CVS or elsewhere to get insect repellent:

"EPA is seeking comment on a repellency awareness graphic for producers of skin-applied insect repellent products to voluntarily place on repellent product labels," according to the Federal Register notice. "This is part of a voluntary, ongoing effort to enhance public health information on, and to improve the clarity of, pesticide product labeling for consumers."



"Under this effort, producers of skin-applied insect repellent products can seek to use a standardized repellency awareness graphic that will clearly communicate to consumers the estimated number of hours mosquitoes and/or ticks are repelled by a product when used as directed. With this notice, EPA is also seeking comment on a guidance document that describes the recommended criteria and processes for companies to voluntarily request the use of this graphic."

It turns out that the EPA did focus groups and an online survey. You weren't contacted? Well, here's what it says it found:

"During the focus groups and survey, consumers indicated that they wanted information about which types of insects are repelled and the number of hours those insects are repelled. Most consumers were aware that mosquitoes and ticks can carry potentially dangerous diseases, and they wanted to know how long they may be protected from those pests. Consumers also responded that they would like this information to be clear, concise, and in large print on product labels."

"EPA intends for the repellency awareness graphic to address these consumer needs. The repellency awareness graphic is intended to be displayed prominently on participating products for quick and easy identification by the consumer. Prototypes of this graphic were presented to the consumers participating in the focus groups and national survey, with consumers indicating that they understood the meaning of the information in the graphic, and that they would be likely to look for this graphic when shopping for skin-applied insect repellents."

And there's this:

EPA is making available information on a Web page for consumers (http://www.epa.gov/pesticides/insect/repellency-awareness.html) that describes the graphic and how to interpret as well as providing examples of the graphic. In the future, EPA will be launching a new, detailed Web page on insect repellents. "

Good luck in getting to the website. Might be same folks who did healthcare.gov.