OKLAHOMA CITY — Nuggets coach Brian Shaw admitted before Sunday’s game against the Oklahoma City Thunder that it was time to start seeing other players on the floor.

And that includes new additions Will Barton and Joffrey Lauvergne.

“I’ve been trying to think about how I’m going to do the rotation,” Shaw said. “With the position we’re in pretty much out of the playoffs, I’ll start to look to cut back some of the minutes of our regulars and start to take a look at some of those guys and give them an opportunity to get some experience on the floor.”

Barton, who was acquired in last week’s trade with Portland, already has a pretty bold label from Shaw after just one practice. Shaw called him the most athletic player on the team.

“I definitely look at it as a good opportunity,” Barton said. “It’s just about jelling, getting chemistry and putting things together and go out there and competing. Hopefully, we play together and get some wins.”

It didn’t take long for Barton to show off his athleticism with an emphatic dunk in the second quarter.

Lauvergne signed as a free agent Wednesday and scored his first NBA points with 7:42 left in the first half on free throws.

Nuggets waive Claver, Robinson

Two pieces of Thursday’s trade with Portland were officially waived before Sunday’s game.

Forwards Victor Claver and Thomas Robinson were let go, the Nuggets announced in a release.

They were acquired alongside Barton and a lottery-protected 2016 first-round draft pick from Portland in exchange for Arron Afflalo and Alonzo Gee.

Lawson returns after suspension

Nuggets point guard Ty Lawson returned from his one-game suspension, and Shaw was hoping his return would boost the offense.

“Well I think we saw the other night in Milwaukee, we couldn’t get any penetration, couldn’t get in the paint at all and we had to settle for taking a lot of 3s,” Shaw said. “So, having him back definitely increases our ability to get out in transition a little more and be able to get in the paint.”

Lawson was suspended from Friday’s game due to an unexcused absence from practice.