Based on election spending in 2009 and 2011, big dollars are going to be spent to control Denver’s seven-seat Board of Education this November. Four seats are up for grabs:

• At-large: Barbara O’Brien, Michael Kiley and Joan Poston;

• District 2, southwest: Rosario C de Baca and Rosemary Rodriguez;

• District 3, central: Mike Johnson and Meg Schomp; and

• District 4, northeast: Landri Taylor and Roger Kilgore.

If history is any prediction, fewer than 120,000 of Denver’s 441,000 registered voters will cast ballots. However, national special interests and a handful of local heavy hitters will write five- and six-figure checks, hoping to steer the outcome of the low-turnout elections.

In my view, the campaigns are a waste of resources. Neither Denver’s students nor long-term solutions to the district’s challenges are served.

I know most of the candidates and respect all of them for their willingness to take on the thankless and quixotic civic work of a volunteer school board member. Thankless, because board members are not paid, do not have the expertise, and are not properly supported to grapple with the complexities of a billion-dollar public institution. Quixotic, because the battle between so-called reformers and so-called traditionalists is irrelevant to the real issues facing Denver students and their families: Nearly 70 percent of DPS students qualify for free or reduced lunch.

In Denver, measurable student outcomes for every grade and subject remain below state averages. Higher-income students perform better than lower-income students, regardless of school type, grade level and curriculum. Though a bigger percentage of DPS graduates are attending college, an even larger percentage require remediation.

The marked increase in DPS enrollment does not reflect substantial improvement for a majority of students. Growth has more to do with Denver’s publicly funded and rapidly expanding preschool program.

District stats can be manipulated to support nearly every point of view. However, several facts are irrefutable: Low-income kids continue to trail behind.

Denver’s families would be better served if the fractious Board of Education could find areas of agreement.

Perhaps air conditioning for every school and a 12-month calendar is the right starting place.

Some 86,000 DPS students are housed in 156 buildings citywide. Of those, 72 schools (and other administrative structures) are air conditioned. The 2012 DPS bond of $466 million included $25.5 million for “heat mitigation” for 84 schools. But central air conditioning, enjoyed by DPS administrators, will not be added to every school building. Cost estimates are upwards of $300 million.

The traditional nine-month school year has been around since our economy was primarily agrarian and children were needed to work the fields. Year-round, multi-track schooling is educationally and financially smart. Buildings are used year-round because students are never out of school for extended periods.

Teachers can offer more instruction because students forget less during shorter breaks. Working parent households aren’t challenged to find summer child care. The per-pupil cost decreases with year-round schooling despite increased operating costs.

When you get the bricks and sticks right, the heart, mind and soul will follow.

Civic activist Susan Barnes-Gelt can be reached at BarnesGelt@gmail. com or @SBGTweets.