"These findings indicate that more than 7 in 10 Americans don't feel like Obamacare has been worth it," said Bankrate.com insurance analyst Doug Whiteman.

"Despite this law moving forward, there seems to be some deeply entrenched and rather strong opposition," Whiteman said. "It doesn't seem like there's a lot of good news for the Obama administration. They still have a lot of work to [do to] win people over."

But the survey also found that the percentage of Americans who lack health insurance was just 11 percent, the lowest rate since Bankrate began asking that question last August. Last summer, 15 percent of respondents reported not having health insurance, Whiteman said.

Read MoreRetire early due to Obamacare? Maybe not



And 23 percent of respondents who had employer-sponsored health insurance told Bankrate that they are more likely to retire early or otherwise leave their jobs because of aspects of Obamacare that dilute the advantage of job-linked coverage. Just 8 percent said they were less likely to leave their employer as a result.

The Congressional Budget Office earlier this year predicted that the equivalent of 2.5 million jobs could disappear by 2024 as a result of people leaving the workforce or reducing hours worked due to Obamacare's effects.

The public's generally negative or neutral view the ACA's impact as measured by the survey comes weeks after the White House proudly announced that more than 8 million people had enrolled in Obamacare individual insurance plans sold on the government-run health exchanges. That was 1 million above original projections made for the plans, which take effect for the first time this year.

In addition to those plans, which are often subsidized by the government, Obamacare bars insurers from discriminating against people with pre-existing medical conditions, mandates that plans cover a set of "essential health benefits" at no extra out-of-pocket cost and allows states to expand Medicaid eligibility to all poor adults. The law also mandates that people under age 26 be allowed to be stay on their parents' insurance.

Read MoreWhen staying healthy forces you to break the law



The health-exchange sold plans, as well as similar policies sold outside the exchanges and expanded Medicaid eligibility, have been credited with pushing the uninsured rate of Americans to record low levels.

But Whitman said those benefits apparently haven't been enough to overcome overall persistent negative public opinion about the ACA, which has also been found in other polls besides those of Bankrate.

A Bankrate survey last month found that 45 percent of respondents said they believed Obamacare should be repealed; 44 percent said it should be maintained.