By Patrick McGovern

journal staff writer

A Bronx man who strangled a senior citizen in his North Bergen home two years ago cried and shook in a Jersey City courtroom yesterday morning as he was sentenced to 25 years in prison.

Thomas Lopez, 35, was visibly shaken during his sentencing before Hudson County Superior Court Judge Joseph Isabella. Lopez's attorney, Mary Ciancimino, tried to comfort him, but the judge was not so sympathetic.

While Ciacimino pleaded for a reduced sentence of 18 years in the aggravated manslaughter of Carlos Restrepo, 69, on Aug. 12, 2012, and one count of theft, Isabella gave him 20 years for killing and five years for the theft. The sentences are to run consecutively.

Lopez, who pleaded guilty in June, must serve at least 85 percent of the 20-year sentence.

"I want to apologize to the family of the victim," he said. "I didn't intend to hurt anybody."

His attorney told the judge there were mitigating factors in the case, saying that Lopez endured physical abuse as a child; and that he "reached a tipping point" when he was in Restrepo's Second Avenue home on Aug. 12 after the two had met in Times Square and traveled back to North Bergen that day.

"He didn't handle the situation the way he should have," Ciancimino said.

Authorities say Restrepo was strangled that day, but his body was not discovered until a week later, Aug. 19, after neighbors and family had not heard from him.

Members of Restrepo's family did not attend the hearing, but Hudson County Assistant Prosecutor Michael D'Andrea read aloud from letters written by his family.

"Excuses and regrets are not enough to bring back his life," Restrepo's daughter said in a letter. "I ask for the maximum sentence."

"My husband was a great man," wrote Restrepo's wife. "I love you forever, Carlos."

Lopez, whose image was captured in surveillance camera in North Bergen, was charged a month after the killing.

Lopez's family, including his mother, attended the hearing and shouted words of encouragement before and after Lopez was sentencing.

"I love you," said one family member. Another, upset that a news photographer was present, threatened to break the photographer's camera.

"Don't look at the camera," another family member shouted to Lopez.

D'Andrea dismissed the mitigating factors presented by the defense.

"The facts are clear," said D'Andrea. "He didn't intend to kill him, but kill him he did."