With the end of the school year approaching, Rutgers has introduced a contingency plan in wake of its Internet woes

With the end of the year nearing and its Internet issues continuing, Rutgers has introduced a contingency plan. (Photo: ~File photo) Story Highlights Rutgers Internet services have been compromised since shortly after 10 a.m. Monday.

OIT and Rutgers police are working with the FBI and Office of Homeland Security and Preparedness.

Authorities are trying to determine the source of the attacks.

With the end of the school year approaching, Rutgers administrators told faculty members to prepare contingency plans and also offered suggestions in the event Internet woes persist.

In a message sent Friday to New Brunswick faculty, Chancellor Richard Edwards said that Rutgers is continuing to experience disruptions to its network systemwide.

"IT (Information Technology) teams on our campus and across the university are working diligently and around the clock to correct the situation and to stabilize the system," the chancellor wrote. "While we are optimistic that our IT teams will resolve this situation soon, we are confronted by the realities of the academic calendar. It is prudent to be prepared for the possibility that the network will remain challenged into next week, which may pose problems for our students as they complete their assignments and prepare for — and take — final exams, particularly online exams. Fully online and hybrid courses are even more adversely affected."

Internet issues have plagued the university since shortly after 10 a.m. Monday. In a facebook post Thursday night, the Office of Information Technology said (OIT) said "DDoS attacks are ongoing and persistent."

A distributed denial of service attack, or a DDoS attack, is a malicious attempt to make a server or a network resource unavailable to users, usually by temporarily interrupting or suspending the services of a host connected to the Internet, according to Incapsula.com. A DDoS attack uses many computers and many Internet connections, the website said.

"Over the past several days the OIT has been implementing a multi-faceted approach in response to the recent technical difficulties," according to Thursday's post.

In its latest post at about 4:30 p.m. Friday, OIT said "network services have been performing reliably throughout the day."

According to officials, OIT and the Rutgers Police Department are actively working in consultation with the FBI and the Office of Homeland Security and Preparedness to investigate the source of the attacks.

No additional information could be provided due to the ongoing investigation, officials said.

On Wednesday, the FBI confirmed that they have been assisting Rutgers with its cyber issues, but would not disclose any further information.

In his note to faculty, Edwards said all of the academic deans join him in asking faculty, who rely on the network for online exams and final projects, to prepare contingencies.

"If you intended to offer an online examination, please consider the option of providing a paper exam instead," he wrote. "We understand that this will require scheduling appropriate examination space and the scheduling office and the offices of each academic dean will make every effort to assist you. You might also consider providing an alternative final assignment, like a short paper. We understand that there are many reasons that you may not choose to substitute with a traditional blue book exam or alternative assignment."

For example, students may have to rely upon online resources —such as Sakai and eCollege —to access their course materials, and if those resources cannot be provided, they may not have the information that they need to complete coursework and/or exams, he wrote.

"If you choose not to give a traditional blue book exam or alternative assignment, you can give final grades based on the work that has been done to date," Edwards wrote. "If a student is not satisfied with that result, the student should have two options: the student can receive a "Pass/Fail" grade or take an "Incomplete" and take the exam when it becomes feasible to do so."

In classes that have project deadlines, he asked faculty "to be flexible and give students an extension when the delay is caused by the disruptions of the network outages, and we ask in particular that you offer special consideration for those students who are poised to graduate this May."

Edwards asked faculty members, who believe the proposed solutions will not work for their course, to contact their academic dean's office.

Edwards also said that the timeline for assigning final grades is still in effect.

"Should the online grading system be unavailable when final grades are due, a paper alternative will be provided," he said.

In late March, a cyber attack interrupted Internet service at the university. The Internet was slow and sometimes not available on campus during the weekend.

Spokesman E.J. Miranda said at the time there was no evidence that any confidential information was compromised.

Officials said updates will be provided by email, on Facebook at https://www.facebook.com/RutgersIT and the RutgersIT Blog (https://rutgersit.rutgers.edu). The next update is scheduled for about 10 a.m. Monday.

Read or Share this story: http://mycj.co/1zzx8nq