WASHINGTON — It’s a position everyone can relate to: four friends start a job, they each make a name for themselves, and before you know it three of them are running for president of the United States.

Well, perhaps not everyone. But at least Sen. Mike Lee.

Three of the Utah Republican’s closest allies in the Senate — Ted Cruz of Texas, Rand Paul of Kentucky, and Marco Rubio of Florida, are running for the Republican presidential nomination.

Lee said he hopes “to be of service” to each of them, but he’s not planning to endorse any of them any time soon, he said Friday at a breakfast with reporters hosted by the Christian Science Monitor.

“I’m not inclined to endorse any one of them at this point because I can’t endorse one of them without un-endorsing one of the others. At this point, I don’t see any reason to do that,” Lee said.

Lee’s endorsement could prove valuable in the primaries, as candidates look to shore up their conservative credentials. In the previous Congress, Lee had the highest score of any lawmaker from Heritage Action, a conservative advocacy group.

Lee is Cruz’s closest ally in the Senate, and he was elected to the upper chamber in the same cycle as Paul and Rubio.

After Cruz made his announcement on March 23, Lee released a statement that said “the most important thing for conservatives to focus on in the presidential race is not the candidate we run, but the agenda we run on.”

Lee said he hoped his party would nominate someone who is “principled, and positive, and proven.”

“Someone who’s not afraid to admit why he or she is a conservative. Not afraid to demonstrate that commitment to conservative principles,” he said.

At the Iowa Freedom Summit in January, the first major event for would-be 2016 conservative contenders, Lee described his ideal candidate as “not necessarily the guy who just shouts the word freedom the loudest. He’s not necessarily the guy who dials up his criticism of the president to 11 or 12.”

In assessing the strengths and weaknesses of Cruz, Paul, and Rubio, Lee praised the Texas senator’s “passion” and “approach to constitutional issues.”

“Ideologically I share a lot in common with Ted Cruz. I like his passion. I like his dedication to conservative principles and his willingness to fight even when it’s hard,” Lee said.

But Lee also noted that “some of those same characteristics have been characterized by some as a weakness, as an Achilles’ heel for him.”

Lee supported Cruz in instigating the government shutdown over Obamacare in October 2013. On the campaign trail, Cruz has said that he and Lee were “punished” for the episode, as party leadership pressured PACs to cut off their funding.

On Friday, Lee downplayed those claims.

“[Cruz] may have felt more of a difference at the time than I did, you’d have to ask him. I’m not aware of any conspiracy to shut us out of anything. I’m not aware of any one person or one group of people who has the ability do that,” Lee said.

Lee also heaped praise on Paul and Rubio — the former for his 13-hour filibuster over the Obama administration’s drone strike policy, and the latter for his ability as a speaker.

Although Cruz, a collegiate debate champion, is well-known for his speaking ability, Lee said that Rubio could be the best orator in the Republican field.

“At least among the current field of presidential candidates, I don’t know if we have any other candidate who is as good as Rubio is at communicating, delivering a speech, and inviting the audience into kind of an emotional journey as he speaks,” Lee said.

Rubio has not officially launched his campaign yet, but he is expected to announce his candidacy on April 13 in Miami.

Lee said that Rubio could be hurt by his involvement in the bipartisan Gang of Eight, which devised a set of comprehensive immigration reforms in 2013. His role in crafting the legislation could “concern” the conservative primary voter base , according to Lee.

And Paul’s views on foreign policy, which some view as radically isolationist, could be a liability according to Lee. Not to mention that Paul’s positions are often linked to his father’s, former Texas Rep. Ron Paul, who sought the GOP nomination in 2008 and 2012.

Lee said that the elder Paul’s “idiosyncratic” views could could be a “challenge” for his son to overcome.