The North Carolina legislature obviously did not think about how their new Bathroom Law would be enforced. The new North Carolina Law bars people from using public restrooms that do not align with the gender on their birth certificate. Proponents of the law say it protects privacy but critics describe it as a thinly veiled attack on transgender people.

Upon being asked how this new law would be enforced, a spokesman at the Raleigh Police Department said, “That’s a very interesting question. We don’t have police officers sitting at public bathrooms all day long.”

Susan Danielsen, a spokeswoman for the local police department said, “We would respond if we received a complaint. It’s not like we would be standing guard at bathrooms.”

At the Wilmington Police Department, spokeswoman Linda Rawley said the law struck her as strange. “So that means people have to go to the bathroom with birth certificates? Yeah, that was curious to me.”

At the Asheville Police Department, spokeswoman Christina Hallingse noted, “We’re not checking birth certificates. We just don’t have the police power to be able to do that in bathrooms.”

Since the law was enacted on March 23, 2016, police departments across the state have been working to determine how they will enforce it. In addition to restricting bathroom use, it bans anti-discrimination protections based on sexual orientation. “Our staff, particularly our attorney’s office, is trying to figure out what it all means,” says Damien Graham, another spokesman for the Raleigh Police Department. “We haven’t mobilized our police force in any kind of different way. We’re still digesting.”

Public universities like Western Carolina University and the University of North Carolina are also assessing the law to determine how it will affect university policies, spokespeople from both universities said.

Can police patrol public restrooms? Can they demand birth certificates, or some other form of identification, from those accused of violations? In the law, “these are all completely open questions,” says Cathryn Oakley, senior legislative counsel for the Human Rights Campaign, an LGBT advocacy group.

“The bill was passed by the state legislature in less than 10 hours and then signed by the governor that very same night with very little debate and it’s incredibly poorly drafted, leading to all kinds of consequences. The lack of enforcement guidance in the legislation also suggests it’s not motivated by solving a real problem,” Oakley says. “If it was, they would have spent more time understanding and actually addressing a problem. Instead they passed a law that is a political statement.”

Some police departments were still checking with their attorneys this week to determine whether they could arrest an individual who used the wrong bathroom.

But even before police officers are called to the scene, there may be room for mishap. Without law enforcement on guard, it will likely be up to bathroom patrons to report a problem if they see someone enter the room who does not appear to belong there.

One of the many issues with this sort of law is that looks can be deceiving. Hormone therapy and sex reassignment surgery allow many transgender women to look like biological women. How will an officer or bathroom patron know that the person does not belong in that particular restroom? And if a transgender woman is forced to use a male public restroom, it could present an even bigger safety issue as well as a bigger issue for officers to deal with.

North Carolina is the first state to pass a law restricting bathroom use by transgender people, but lawmakers are considering similar bills in several other states, including South Carolina, where a Republican state senator has introduced a so-called “bathroom bill.”

Mississippi’s governor also enacted a law that allows businesses to deny service to gay customers on religious objections, prompting New York Governor, Andrew M. Cuomo to ban nonessential state travel there. The backlash has been greater in North Carolina, where PayPal announced it was canceling a $3.6 million investment. More than 120 business leaders around the country have signed a letter objecting to the state’s new law.

“It is catastrophic to the business community and public perception of North Carolina,” said state Republican Rodney Moore, a Democrat who voted against the measure. “There is absolutely no way to enforce this law, as it relates to the enforcement of the bathroom provisions. It is an utterly ridiculous law.”

“There are no enforcement provisions or penalties in HB2. Its purpose is to restore common sense bathroom and shower management policy in public buildings, not to pick out people to punish,” Republican Dan Bishop, a co-sponsor of the legislation wrote in a statement.

“But that doesn’t mean people won’t be affected,” Oakley, of The Human Rights Campaign says, “Some transgender people in the state have stopped using public restrooms altogether. They’re terrified, and that’s enough to keep them away even if it means enduring physical discomfort. The law really puts a fine point on this concern that you are not safe in a bathroom.”

Source: We Asked Cops How They Plan to Enforce North Carolina’s Bathroom Law

Join the Discussion