Former Florida governor Jeb Bush gets out of an Uber car as he arrives at Thumbtack on Thursday, in San Francisco. (Justin Sullivan/Getty Images)

SAN FRANCISCO -- After hopping out of an Uber car and getting a 30-minute tour of Thumbtack, a Web site that helps customers track down and negotiate deals with service professionals, Jeb Bush got asked a series of questions he doesn't normally entertain.

One guy asked about gun control. The former Florida governor defended his state's gun laws. Another man asked about discrimination against gay and lesbian workers. Bush said it should be left up to state governments to pass anti-discrimination laws. Another woman asked about women's pay issues, and Bush said that current equal pay laws should be enforced.

Considering that 83 percent of San Francisco's voters selected President Obama in the 2012 election, it's perhaps no surprise that one woman asked Bush: "Which, if any of Barack Obama’s qualities you’d seek to emulate as president?"

"Well, if I could speak like Barack Obama, if I could light up a room like he does -- you know, charisma’s not a bad thing," Bush told the crowd as they laughed. "It’s a pretty effective tool to take to be able to take the message to a broader audience. And he is gifted beyond belief in that regard."

"Ideologically, I don’t share much of a philosophy with him, but I don’t ascribe bad motives," he added. "I think his heart is in the right place, I just think his policies are wrong. I admire him for the skills to be elected and reelected in the kind of turbulent times he ran. And I admire his skills of communication, which are an important part of leadership."

[Jeb Bush, a ‘nerdy’ tech guy, tries to woo Silicon Valley]

Bush then steered into more familiar territory, criticizing Obama for supporting policies that he said made it difficult for Democrats and Republicans to work together, including the Affordable Care Act, the Dodd-Frank financial regulations and the 2009 economic stimulus program.

"I think his legacy will be squandered" by his support for those proposals, Bush said.

While he's in California, Bush is also raising money for his campaign. He made stops in Los Angeles, Pasadena and Santa Barbara on Tuesday and Wednesday; held a fundraiser Wednesday night in San Francisco; and is also attending an afternoon fundraiser in Silicon Valley. Thursday night, he's holding a fundraising event in Lake Tahoe, before campaign events Friday in Carson City and Las Vegas, Nev.