Edinburg, TX (WATE)

From WATE

It was a sad goodbye for a Texas police agency.

Argo, a K-9 officer with the Hidalgo County Sheriff’s Office, was put down, but not before deputies honored the dog with a Last Call, given to those who pass in the line of duty. The video was posted to the sheriff department’s Facebook page along with the words “We forever remain your humble servants.”

According to the sheriff’s department, “Argo was diagnosed with bone cancer, but refused to let it slow him down. Only after the pain became evident to his partner and the cancer was found to be all over his body and terminal, was the hard, painful, but loving decision made to end his suffering.”

The German Shepherd was born in 2006 in the Czech Republic. Deputies said he began training with the sheriff’s office in 2009 and is credited with taking thousands of pounds of dangerous drugs off of streets, as well as the apprehension of many dangerous felons.

Several days have passed since the final radio call was given for HCSO K-9 Argo. Our hearts our still heavy for the... Posted by Hidalgo County Sheriff's Association on Wednesday, October 14, 2015

General {{Title}} Remove Change News General Courts Web Only Crime Outdoors Events Center Non-Homepage Boredom Busters Pipeline Positively KELOLAND Technology Hunger Affordable Care Act Shops Flooding Remembering 9/11 Drought JazzFest Spring Storm Honor Flight Spencer Anniversary

DoApp Health News Business News Sports

Agriculture Markets Livestock Crops Politics

HealthBeat Cancer Children's Health Heart Health Wellness & Nutrition General Health Beat Women's Health RX Resources What's Going Around OTC Diabetes Recalls Dental Health Men's Health

Politics South Dakota Legislature Budget Congress Taxes General Local Campaign President US Senate New Laws US House Iowa Ballot Issues Local Races Minnesota Gubernatorial

Education Funding College Elementary High School Pre K School Supplies Middle School

Sports Professional College High School Sports Zone Headlines Summit League Tournament Olympics

Business Industry Your Money Matters Development Gas & Energy Legislation Economy/Stocks Employment General Health Care Technology Education Funding Tourism Banking/Finance Housing Transportation Insurance Meetings & Events Retail & Restaurants All Industries On The Move Shops Agriculture

Featured Stories Eye on KELOLAND Inside KELOLAND

Weather Snow Forecast Records Rain Flooding Drought WX Corner General

World News

Investigates GEAR UP

Sponsored Done

© 2016 KELOLAND TV. All Rights Reserved.