LOUISVILLE -- The evacuations of people from Boulder County mountain communities continued Saturday and included more than 85 children and 14 adults who were airlifted after being stranded at the Cal-Wood Education Center near Jamestown.

Bonnie Dannelly, left, hugs her daughter Makayla, right, after she got off the bus at Fireside Elementary in Louisville today. Makayla was one of over 80 Fireside fifth graders who were trapped above Jamestown at Camp Cal-Wood since this week's flooding began. ( MARK LEFFINGWELL )

The group of Fireside Elementary fifth-graders and 14 adults were airlifted by Chinook helicopters and flown to Boulder Municipal Airport, then bused to the Louisville elementary school at 845 W. Dahlia St. where parents, friends and family awaited.

The group was at Cal-Wood for an outdoor education session, but was stranded after floodwaters compromised the roads Wednesday night. The group had access to shelter, sanitation, heat and food, said Briggs Gamblin, spokesman for Boulder Valley School District.

Dustin Sagrillo, 34, who was one of the stranded parent volunteers, said he and a group of fathers spent hours shoveling trenches and clearing debris while other parents cooked food and lead activities with the children.

"The kids were having fun either way," he said.

As Trevor Wolf stood next to his parents on the lawn of Fireside, the 10-year-old closed his eyes, exhaled and gave a big smile.

"I'm so happy," Trevor said.

Trevor, whose "I went to Cal-Wood with my school" shirt was modified with a marker to say "I survived Cal-Wood with my school," said the experience was not scary and he and classmates were able to do some hiking in the rain.

The best part about the ordeal, he added, was riding in the dual-rotor Chinook to Boulder.

Paige Kirkman, whose daughter Marin was among the Cal-Wood evacuees, expressed joy that her daughter was home.

"I knew that they were in good hands," Kirkman said, noting the parent volunteers and staff members. "I just kept thinking that, 'They're in good hands; they're safe.'"

"Plus, the kids got a helicopter ride."

The National Guard so far has evacuated about 150 people out of Jamestown by helicopter and about 500 people were evacuated out of Lyons. The two towns have been cut off from help in the early days of the flood.

Boulder County Sheriff Joe Pelle said that among those evacuated from Lyons on Friday were a young couple expecting a baby. The woman's water broke at 10:30 p.m. Friday night, shortly after crews were able to get her evacuated.

"There are some personal stories that came out of this that make this very, very rewarding," Pelle said of the evacuation efforts.

Responders on Friday were using at least 12 aircraft -- including Black Hawk and Chinook helicopters -- to retrieve people from the Jamestown area and to perform reconnaissance, said Dan Dallas, incident commander of the Rocky Mountain Area Type II Incident Management team dispatched to Boulder County.

About 230 people across Boulder County were unaccounted for -- meaning their family or friends have not been able to make contact, Pelle said.

Camera Staff Writer Mitchell Byars contributed to this report.Contact Camera Business Writer Alicia Wallace at 303-473-1332 or wallacea@dailycamera.com.