Tallahassee - Citing costs associated with the federal Affordable Care Act, Jacksonville-based Florida Blue is canceling 300,000 individual policies.

Florida Blue, the state’s largest health insurer, says the move is to offset the new health care law’s requirement that things like maternity and newborn care, mental health, substance abuse services, and emergency services be covered by individual and small market plans.

Kaiser Health News reported that many canceled plans from Florida Blue, and other insurers across the country, fall short of the requirements laid out in the Affordable Care Act, commonly referred to as ObamaCare. The organization says many were purchased after the law was passed in 2010, so insurance companies knew they would be temporary policies.

Impacted Florida Blue customers will be notified by mail.

“We will provide our members recommendations for new plan options, and encourage them to contact us so we could help determine their best course of action,” Mark Wright, a Florida Blue Spokesman, said in a statement.

Wright said officials who could answer specific follow-up questions were not in the office.

As a result, information related to the amount the cancellations will save the company, how many people have enrolled in company plans through the Affordable Care Act, and updated numbers on how much the company thinks the new law will cost was not available Tuesday.

During spring’s legislative session, Florida Blue lobbyists told lawmakers they thought the Affordable Care Act would cost the company $110 million.

In September, the Office of Insurance Regulation estimated that ObamaCare would boost Florida Blue premiums by 31 percent under Obamacare, or $118-per-month. That’s slightly less than the 35 percent overall increase the office estimated would occur under the new health care law.

Those state numbers did not include income-based federal subsidies offered through the plan. It’s estimated that 3.2 million of Florida’s 3.5 million uninsured will be eligible for the subsidies.

During the legislative session, Florida Blue lobbyists used the uncertainty under ObamaCare as a key message when lobbying on key issues.

That led to the defeat of a proposal to ax an insurance industry tax. Florida Blue estimated that plan would have cost it $32.5 million. ObamaCare was also the stated reason Florida Blue used when pushing language that allowed it a new type of expansion, company officials said. That restructure would allow the company to own other not-for-profit insurers and corporations in Florida.

Figures filed with the Office of Insurance Regulation show that Florida Blue claimed $3.7 billion in gross annual direct premiums in 2012. That accounts for 29 percent of the state’s health care market.

Since opening Oct. 1, the online marketplaces created under ObamaCare have been wrought with problems. Many consumers have said they have not been able to access the site, while others report long wait times. People must enroll in an insurance plan by Feb. 15, or face a penalty.