Watch the latest video at video.foxnews.com

More and more Congress members are speaking out about John Boehner’s lack of leadership as the embattled congressman struggles to keep his job as Speaker of the House.

I will not vote for John Boehner as #Speaker of the US House. I will vote for an alternative Here’s why: http://t.co/psR7SHO7Bh — Steve King (@SteveKingIA) January 5, 2015

Proud to stand with my friend @SteveKingIA as he joins us in announcing he will vote for a new Speaker! http://t.co/ciroXuLqcv — Ted Yoho (@RepTedYoho) January 5, 2015

Reps. Louie Gohmert, R-Texas and Ted Yoho, R-Fla., announced this weekend that they would challenge Boehner for the job.

Rep. Steve King, R-Iowa, didn’t say who he would support , but it will definitely not be the current speaker. He made his reasons crystal clear in an op-ed published Sunday, which says, in part:



At each crisis point of conflict between President Obama and Congress, we have been admonished by our Speaker to take the high road, to pick our battles, to wait for a better time to fight on better ground. As a product of hook, crook, and legislative shenanigan, ObamaCare was passed. The American voters elected 87 Freshmen Republicans to the House of Representatives, every one pledged to repeal ObamaCare. Then, our soon to be Speaker told us we would not and could not use the Constitutional “power of the purse” to block implementation of ObamaCare. By order of the Speaker, my amendment to do so was placed on ice, citing “procedural reasons.” But we had John Boehner’s statement to rely upon, speaking of ObamaCare on Nov 5, 2010: “Well, there’s a lot of tricks up our sleeves in terms of how we can dent this, kick it, slow it down to make sure it never happens. And trust me, I’m going to make sure this healthcare bill never ever, ever is implemented.” By October of 2013, Congress had caved in to the demands of the president and fully funded the operations of ObamaCare.

The question remains, how many other members are in agreement with King? On Sunday, Reps. Paul Gosar of Arizona and Dave Brat of Virginia also announced they were looking for another speaker, bringing the list to nine.

The nine members who have declared their opposition to Boehner, according to Fox News, are Jim Bridenstine, R-Okla., Louie Gohmert R-Texas, Ted Yoho, R-Fla., Paul Gosar, R-Ariz., Steve King, R-Iowa, Dave Brat, R-Va., Marlin Stutzman, R- Ind., Water Jones, R-N.C., and Thomas Massie, R-Ky.

King punctuated his statement like this:

Then, I will be asked to put up a vote for John Boehner for Speaker. I know the pattern of his strategy and actions for the past 12 years to the point where I can predict the results. I am convinced Congress will not be allowed to restore its Constitutional authority under his Speakership and by refusing to do so, cannot call upon the courts to do so. How then, can I take an oath to the Constitution and put up a vote for John Boehner, almost in the same breath? We need a Speaker who will help us all keep our oath, including his own, to the Constitution, not one who has consistently blocked our efforts to keep ours. I will vote for an alternative candidate for Speaker. I can’t vote for John Boehner again.