Later in the story, AP provides some important background on Colorado's cake wars:

The bills heard Monday afternoon come as two Colorado bakers face discrimination complaints, but from two different perspectives.

One suburban Denver baker is embroiled in a legal fight over a judge’s order that he serve gay couples after he refused to make a cake for a same-sex wedding. The baker, Jack Phillips, owner of Masterpiece Cakeshop, has argued that providing that service would violate his Christian beliefs.

In another case, a Colorado man filed complaints against three bakeries that refused to make a Bible-themed cake with religious scripture. One of the bakers, Marjorie Silva, owner of Denver’s Azucar Bakery, said she refused to make the cake because she considered the Bible scripture and images the man wanted to be hateful toward gays. Those cases are being reviewed by Colorado’s Civil Rights Division.

The man who filed the complaints against the three bakers, Bill Jack of Castle Rock, said in written testimony read to lawmakers that Colorado’s current anti-discrimination law “abridges the right of free speech and artistic expression of all bakers, florists, photographers, and other business owners who are compelled to participate in activities that their creed instructs them violates their sincerely held beliefs and consciences.”

The AP report isn't terrible. It attempts — it seems to me — to present both sides in a fair manner.

But here's why I'd characterize the AP story as "too hot": It focuses on the controversy, but the wording and details impress me as too imprecise.

Terms such as "punishments," "discrimination" and "complaints" are used in the lede. However, I'm not sure the story adequately explains what those words mean in this context.

AP seems to boil down the proposals to such broad, general statements that the specific meaning may be lost. (I do feel for the reporter trying to put together such a complicated story on deadline and fit it within AP's word count restrictions.)