A man who was injured last week when a section of road washed out near Broomfield is recovering at a local hospital after surgery.

Chase French, 27, of Niwot, an electrician, received multiple fractures in his neck and back, said Nancy Hammond French, his mother.

He had surgery Friday at Exempla Good Samaritan Medical Center in Lafayette, where he is under intensive care.

“He is improving a little bit every day,” Nancy French said. “They’re getting him up, he’s going to take a walk and sit in a chair.

“Yesterday he took two 40-feet walks,” Nancy French said Monday, followed by a short laugh — part relief, part apprehension.

Chase French was driving to work Thursday morning southbound on U.S. 287 when he got a call from a foreman who told him work was off because of the weather. He turned east onto Dillon Road, so he could turn around and head home, when he came upon the washed-out road.

Chase French braked his green Ford F-350 pickup truck, but it toppled into the raging water, where a white sedan had already crashed.

The truck hit the water, but the impact was soft enough that the airbags didn’t deploy, Nancy French said.

He unbuckled his seat belt, to be ready for a quick exit. He grabbed his cell phone and dialed 911. Chase French was on the phone with 911 for 45 seconds when a second pickup truck drove off the washed-out road and slammed into his Ford. The airbags were triggered this time. He was thrown across the cab, which knocked the eyeglasses off his face and the phone from his hand.

Chase French crawled out of his mangled truck, scrambled back up onto Dillon Road and walked back to U.S. 287 so he could flag down help.

“He was afraid another (driver) might go over and into the water,” Nancy French said.

At U.S. 287 he spotted first-responders and pointed them toward the wrecks.

“He told them: ‘Look for my tail lights,’ ” Nancy French said.

The two other drivers were not able to get out of their vehicles on their own. They were eventually rescued, pulled out by emergency workers.

The day of the crash, Chase French walked back to the wash-out from U.S. 287 and was interviewed by a sheriff’s deputy. After the initial adrenaline rush of the crash wore off, pain started kicking in.

He was taken to the hospital where his severe injuries were diagnosed. He underwent surgery on his neck to stabilize it.

“On one hand you could consider him really unlucky,” Nancy French said. “On the other hand … we’re just really thankful he is alive.”

Chase French, a 2005 graduate of Boulder High School, is an avid outdoorsman who enjoys, hiking, backpacking and fishing.

Nancy French said she hopes that her son’s active lifestyle, physically demanding job, and relatively young age, combine to aid Chase in his recovery.

“He’s a strong guy,” Nancy French said. “It’ll be a long recovery. We’re hoping it will be a full recovery. We’re looking forward to helping him.”

Kieran Nicholson: 303-954-1822, knicholson@denverpost.com or twitter.com/kierannicholson