Thousands of Oklahomans will be left without access to needed medical care as a result of cuts the state Health Department must make to balance its budget, leaders said Tuesday.

Overall, Oklahoma is projected to be short $412 million by the end of the current fiscal year, which has meant state agencies have had to cut their current operating budgets to ensure the state ends the fiscal year with a balanced budget.

In response to the current state fiscal crisis, officials at the Health Department told the agency's board Tuesday that the agency must cut $4.2 million dollars by the end of June.

The proposed cuts include eliminating money to pay for several preventive health programs, including cutting money that helps open new federally qualified health centers — safety net clinics that especially serve low-income and rural Oklahomans.

The agency also will cut about $2.5 million in state dollars paid to these health centers for the care they deliver to Oklahomans who are uninsured and can't afford to pay them. Last year, that money paid for 15,000 visits of uninsured patients who received primary care, mental health care and dental services at federally qualified health centers across the state.

"They're uninsured adults largely, throughout the state of Oklahoma, and there's no other resource to pay for their care," said Julie Cox-Kain, senior deputy commissioner at the Health Department. "It's unfortunate, and I think people will forgo primary care needs, and that is likely to cause people to be more sick and have to seek care in emergency departments."

The agency also will:

•eliminate $500,000 that helps pay for the cord blood bank at the Oklahoma Blood Institute, a service that helps people who need stem cell transplants;

•eliminate dental health education services, including programming at schools that educates children about oral health;

•and cut $200,000 from the colorectal cancer screening program, half of the program's budget. Under the colorectal cancer screening program, uninsured residents who can't afford the typical $1,200 that a colonoscopy costs get a free screening. And in some cases, these residents are already symptomatic, Cox-Kain said.

"People who are uninsured — they have absolutely no source to pay for this," Cox-Kain said. "Some of them are symptomatic for colon cancer and need to be screened, and when they're in there, they do what they always do with colonoscopies — they remove polyps and precancerous lesions, and if you can identify these things early, you can prevent color cancer from occurring. ... Think about how many of those people may actually come down with colon cancer and think about what the costs will be for having to treat someone. ... That's going to be a tragedy for their families."

Cox-Kain said she wasn't sure whether the state accepting federal money for Medicaid expansion — a key provision of the Affordable Care Act that opens Medicaid eligibility to thousands more low-income adults — would help with the state Health Department's budget crisis, but that state leaders must find a way to provide preventive services to low-income residents.

"I think us looking at ways to invest in prevention and to make sure that people can at least get the preventive services they need is something we have to continue ... to talk about, even in bad times like these," Cox-Kain said.

State leaders also project a revenue shortfall of at least $1.3 billion for the 2017 fiscal year.

County agencies

Health Department leaders are preparing to have a smaller budget in the next fiscal year, with the recommendation to close five to seven county health departments.

Cox-Kain said they haven't determined which county health departments they will close. Considerations do not include Oklahoma City-County Health Department or Tulsa Health Department, which are managed by independent boards.

"It's going to lead to counties more rural in nature, but again, they still provide thousands of services in these (county) health departments we're looking at closing. And that's most likely going to mean thousands of people who aren't going to get access to services," Cox-Kain said.

The agency will also cut funding for contractors of the Oklahoma Child Abuse Prevention program, which provides support and training for high-risk families.

And the agency has offered an incentive to retirement-eligible employees to retire this year, which will result in the elimination of about 90 positions.

Cox-Kain said, overall, she worries that the cuts will mean Oklahoma, a state that has some of the worst health outcomes in the nation, will lose some of the progress it has made over the years in public health.

"I just hope that these cuts don't result in those negative downstream effects, but we're at the point now where we're cut to the bone, and we're having to eliminate these services, and I fear there will be serious consequences," Cox-Kain said.