Topics: AlterNet, Dick Cheney, War, War on Terror, WWII, News, Politics News

This article originally appeared on AlterNet

Usually August is back-to-school month, when kids pick up their shiny new books and head to class. But this time it looks a bit more like back-to-war. The war profiteers will be hatching new schemes to cash in on misery and you and I will be picking up the tab.

Whoopie! We’re all gonna pay…

As the crisis in Iraq unfolds, it’s worth thinking about the tremendous cost of fighting. The loss of life is the most devastating price, but the loss of all the productive things that could have been done with the money — from teaching our children to repairing our infrastructure to giving our seniors a bit of security after a life of hard work — is nothing short of catastrophic.

Here’s a look at some of the mind-blowing costs of war.

1. Most expensive war ever fought: World War II (1941-1945).

Coming in at somewhere between $4 and $5 trillion, the second World War tops every other war ever fought in U.S. history for its incredible expense. (It also wins the prize for number of humans slaughtered and number of nations involved.)

This costly war began with Nazi Germany’s blitzkrieg against Poland in 1939, and quickly engulfed Europe. At first, the U.S. was neutral, but committed to war in 1941 following the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor. Over the course of the four-year war, 16 million U.S. troops were deployed on two fronts, battling Germany and Japan.

The Brookings Institution gives a summary of U.S. weapons expenditures:

All bombs, mines and grenades — $31.5 billion

Small arms materiel (not incl. ammunition) — $24 billion

All tanks — $64 billion

Heavy field artillery — $4 billion

All other artillery — $33.6 billion

Manhattan Project — $20 billion

2. Second most expensive war ever fought: post-9/11 “war on terror.”

They told us invading Iraq would be short and cheap. That’s not exactly what happened. The U.S. has poured more money (including the ongoing cost of medical treatment) into the controversial “war on terror” than any other conflict except WWII. By some estimates, the price tag has already reached $4 trillion and may eventually outstrip the cost of the second World War, particularly in the wake of the recent Iraq political crisis and U.S. airstrikes against militants in Iraq.

Nobel Prize-winning economist Joseph Stiglitz, author of The Three Trillion Dollar War, has commented that the war has already had a negative effect on the U.S. economy, making it harder to respond to the downturn and invest in things like vital social services, infrastructure and education. If Republicans boost their numbers in Washington this year, you can bet on budgets set to increase military spending and shred the social safety net, actions that will further destabilize the economy.

3. Most expensive weapon ever built: the F-35.

Costing a jaw-dropping $400 billion, the F-35 fighter jet is the U.S. military’s most expensive and highest priority weapon. The aircraft, which has been in development since the 1990s and has hit multiple cost overruns and delays, is meant to service the Air Force, the Navy and the Marines. The U.S. has plans to buy over 2,400 of the jets over the next several decades from manufacturer Lockheed Martin.

Winslow Wheeler, a former GAO staffer who directs the Straus Military Reform Project at the Washington, D.C.-based Project on Government Accountability, said the program could well end up in a “death spiral” of rising costs, which leads to fewer orders, which then, in turn, produces higher costs.

As Time magazine put it, the jet has become the “poster child for Pentagon profligacy.”

4. Half of what the federal government spent on the Civil War enriched war profiteers.

War. What is it good for? Lining the pockets of war profiteers.

When the Civil War started, a lot of people across the country thought it would not last long. It ended up going on for four years and involved vast numbers of soldiers that had to be fed and outfitted. The U.S. government did not have the money to pay for the war, which cost a billion on food and supplies (a huge sum at the time). So it turned to various finance schemes, including raising taxes, massive bond sales, borrowing, and printing money.