LANSING, MI -- Michigan may end up spending an additional $100 million on road maintenance this fiscal year as a result of an unusually harsh winter that has officials fearing one of the most expensive pothole seasons in recent history.

The Senate Appropriations Committee is considering a supplemental spending bill that would tap a reserve fund in order to help state and local road agencies that are struggling with exorbitant winter costs.

Michigan Department of Transportation Director Kirk Steudle is predicting "one of the biggest pavement breakups that we've ever seen" as under-road ice begins to melt in coming weeks. MDOT already is over budget on winter spending, including plowing and salting costs, meaning the department will have less money left for spring and summer work.

Sen. Goeff Hansen (R-Hart), testifying before the appropriations committee on Tuesday morning, said that local road agencies are dealing with the same problems as the state, leaving many "on life support." He made the case for additional road maintenance dollars for counties, cities and villages.

"Roads all over the state are crumbling from the frost and upheaval," Hansen said. "They're looking at rain this week on top of that frozen ground, and that's not going to help. We have to have something to put in those potholes. We know they're coming."

Muskegon County Road Commission Managing Director Ken Hulka joined Hansen at the hearing, telling lawmakers that his agency has already spent $2.1 million on local road operations this winter, up from $1.6 million last year and just $936,000 in 2012.

"That means my summer budget is gone," Hulka said. "There's nothing I can do to recoup that."

At the state level, MDOT budgeted around $88 million for trunkline maintenance, basing that figure on a five-year average, but the department now expects to spend $117 million this year.

"When the potholes pop, we're going to fill them," Steudle said last week. "But we're going to be filling them with the summer budget. We're spending the summer budget, whether it's salt overages or fuel overage or filling potholes."

Michigan Gov. Rick Snyder's 2015 budget proposal includes a $40 million increase for highway maintenance -- which the state uses year-round for activities such as snow plowing, pothole repairs and vegetation control -- along with $254 million in one-time general fund spending on roads and bridges.

But the current cash crunch is for fiscal year 2014, which ends September 30.

The road maintenance amendment to the supplemental spending bill, proposed by Sen. John Pappageorge (R-Troy), would distribute $100 million to the state trunk line fund, county road commissions, cities and villages.

The money would come from the Road and Risks Reserve Fund, which lawmakers created last year to deal with unexpected costs. The state already earmarked $115 million of the initial $230 million appropriation for road and bridge projects.

The Senate Appropriations is expected to vote on the supplemental spending bill on Thursday.

In addition to the road money, the legislation proposes more than $250 million in general fund appropriations for various state departments, including $73 million to make up for expected savings the state lost out by delaying implementation of the "Healthy Michigan" plan to reform and expand Medicaid eligibility under the Affordable Care Act.

Democrats continue to criticize their Republican counterparts for voting against immediate effect on Medicaid expansion in late September, a move that cost the state millions a day in federal funding and delayed expanded access for hundreds of thousands of residents until April.

The mid-year spending proposal would also direct an additional $114 million in general fund dollars to the Department of Human Services to make up for unexpectedly low revenues from the state's new Health Income Claims Assessment tax, which replaced an older use tax model in 2012.

The HICA tax is used to fund Community Mental Health agencies, which provide mental health and substance abuse coverage to Medicaid patients.

Jonathan Oosting is a Capitol reporter for MLive Media Group. Email him, find him on Google+ or follow him on Twitter.