During an interview with Charles Krauthammer last night on "The Kelly File," host Megyn Kelly again broached the subject of impeachment over President Obama's executive actions ordering government agencies to either ignore or violate existing US laws. Kelly said during the segment that impeachment may be the only option. "That's why some say that Republicans have no choice but to call out [President Obama's] perceived lawlessness and do something as politically unpopular as impeach him," the Fox News anchor said to Krauthammer.

Kelly's guest, Pulitzer Prize-winning author and editor Charles Krauthammer, agreed with Kelly that the president has committed several impeachable offenses, but believes it may be too late in Obama's presidency to begin proceedings to remove him from office. "Look, I believe it [granting amnesty to illegals through an exectutive action] is an impeachable offense," Krauthammer told Kelly.

Krauthammer also said he believes Republicans should have impeached President Obama over his power grabs long ago.

"If the circumstances were different, if we were at the beginning of a presidency, if we hadn't had years when the Congress has been supine and unresponsive at other grabs of their authority by the executive, like Obama unilaterally changing Obamacare after it was passed about 30 times with no response from the Congress, the same as Obama essentially re-writing some of the drug laws." Krauthammer continued.

"This idea of prosecutorial discretion is really a travesty. It is intended for extreme cases. For a case where you want to show mercy for an individual or two where it's unusual incident, unusual circumstances and you say, okay, we're going to give this person a pass. It was never intended to abolish a whole class of people subject to a law and to essentially abolish whole sections of a law. And that's exactly what's happening here."

Kelly responded to Krauthammer's comments by saying, "I have to tell you, as somebody who practiced law for 10 years, it makes my brain freeze up. That's not the way the sysytem is designed."

"Well, that's the way the system is in Venezuela," Krauthammer replied.