Brewery staff, beer organizations introduce women to industry jobs

By the numbers Here is a look at each brewery's employee count, women employees. 12Degree Brewing: 11, 3 300 Suns Brewing: 6, 4 Asher Brewing Co.: 7, 4 Avery Brewing Co.: 96, 25 Bootstrap Brewing: 5, 2 Boulder Beer: 58, 20 BRU Handbuilt Ales & Eats (including restaurant): 18, 6 Crystal Springs Brewing Co.: 14, 8 FATE Brewing Co.: 93, 36 Finkel & Garf Brewery: 3,1 Front Range Brewing Co.: 10, 4 Gravity Brewing: 6, 3 J Wells Brewery: 5, 1 Left Hand Brewing Co.: 97, 22 Liquid Mechanics Brewing Co.: 3, 1 Mountain Sun Pub & Brewery (including restaurant): 50, 22 New Planet Beer Co.: 3, 1 Odd13 Brewing: 8, 4 Oskar Blues Brewery (all Boulder County locations): 171, 33 Powder Keg Brewing Co.: 10, 6 Pumphouse Brewery (brewery only): 4, 1 Sanitas Brewing Co.: 5, 0 Shine Brewing Co.: 7, 3 Southern Sun Pub & Brewery (including restaurant): 60, 25 The Industrial Revolution Brewing Co.: 4, 2 The Post Brewing Co.: 76, 27 Twisted Pine Brewing Co.: 28, 10 Upslope Brewing Co. (both locations): 40, 10 Very Nice Brewing Co.: 4, 2 Vindication Brewing Co.: 2, 1 Walnut Brewery (including restaurant): 46, 21 West Flanders Brewing Co. (including restaurant): 34, 17 Wild Mountain Smokehouse & Brewery (including restaurant): 23, 12 Wild Woods Brewery: 4, 2 Total: 1,011, 339 From Oct. 30 through Nov. 10, Times-Call reporter Whitney Bryen conducted an online survey of breweries in Boulder County. The survey asked how many employees each brewery has, how many are women, what departments women work in and if hiring women is a priority. Related • Women make up 34 percent of Boulder County employees. • Left Hand's first female brewer paves the way. • Boulder County brewery owners embrace feminine touches. • No one can stop Twisted Pine general manager.

If you go What: The Collaboration of Pine Brewing Co. and The Pink Boots Society When: Noon to 6 p.m. Saturday Where: Twisted Pine Brewing Co., 3201 Walnut St, Suite A, Boulder Cost: $25, or $35 with a t-shirt More info: twistedpinebrewing.com

Brewery job board www.barleysangelscolorado.com

This story is part of a monthly series highlighting the women behind Boulder County beer.

Jody Valenta was barely old enough to drink beer when she left her job at Ben & Jerry's to become the general manager at Boulder's Twisted Pine Brewing Company.

Two colleagues had just been hired at the 12-year-old craft brewery and recommended her for the position.

Valenta was 23 when she traded in her ice cream scoop for a pint in 2007.

"I didn't know anything about beer when I started," Valenta said. "But the core of managing is relationships with people and helping your staff grow, and that translates to any industry."

During the past seven years, Valenta, now 30, has helped grow the brewery from a 600-square-foot taproom to a 2,000-square-foot taproom and restaurant.

General Manager Jody Valenta talks with Kelly Poirier (not pictured) before the Ale House opens Thursday at Twisted Pine Brewing Co. in Boulder. (Matthew Jonas / Longmont Times-Call)

Valenta runs the brewery's day to day operations from beer production to the restaurant, even balancing the company checkbook.

Managing employees and business responsibilities were roles that Valenta was prepared to take on when she accepted the job. But the brewing industry brought on some unexpected responsibilities.

Valenta is among the minority in Boulder County breweries, where women hold about 34 percent of jobs in the industry, according to a survey conducted by the Times-Call.

Of the county's 1,011 brewery employees, 339 are women and even fewer women hold management positions like Valenta, according to the survey, placing additional pressure on women in leadership roles to pave the way for others.

'Sex is not a barrier'

Boulder County's brewery employees have been welcoming and open-minded since Valenta joined the industry, she said, making it easy for her earn respect from her male peers. She has never felt uncomfortable or unwanted, Valenta said, but as the industry's popularity grows she fears that stereotypes and assumptions are creating the illusion of barriers that don't exist.

"I think many of the barriers for women are them thinking there's an old boys club and not trying to get in," Valenta said. "But sex is not a barrier to working in craft beer."

About 35 percent of Twisted Pine's employees are women, and 60 percent of those women hold leadership roles in the company's ale house and marketing, sales and event planning departments, Valenta said.

Brewery's CEO and co-owner Jean Lund said she does not seek out women employees but is happy to have a diverse team that works well together.

Many area breweries are small businesses, which require strong teamwork and flexible employees, regardless of gender, Lund said.

"Everyone has to be able to do everything," Lund said. "There is a lot of overlap in positions and skills and responsibilities, and it doesn't matter what your job title is or if you're male or female. It's about the team."

And while gender is immaterial to Twisted Pine's day to day operations, Lund and Valenta hope to close the gender gap by inspiring and encouraging other women interested in industry jobs.

Alpha Queen

Toward their mission of promoting women in beer, Twisted Pine is hosting a benefit Saturday for the nonprofit Pink Boots Society, which supports women beer professionals.

The Collaboration of Twisted Pine Brewing Co. and The Pink Boots Society will include tours of the Boulder brewery led by Twisted Pine employees, the tapping of Alpha Queen double IPA brewed by two women employees, tastings and pairings.

Denver bottlecap artist Amanda Willshire, whose work can be seen in breweries across the Front Range including Longmont's Left Hand Brewing Co., will have some of her art on display at the event.

Pink Boots Society liaison Nicol Winkler said while the benefit supports women in the industry, the event is open to the public, including men and women.

"Twisted Pine has some incredible women in leadership and we want to highlight that," Winkler said. "But we also have an end goal of support for everyone in the industry."

Tickets to the event are $25, or $35 with a t-shirt. All of the proceeds from ticket and t-shirt sales will go to the nonprofit along with 10 percent of restaurant and taproom sales Saturday.

The event t-shirts feature a quote that sums up how Valenta feels about the barriers women face entering brewing industry.

"It says 'the question isn't who's going to let me, it's who's going to stop me,'" Valenta said. "We have an enormous responsibility to motivate women who are interested in beer and show them that they can do this."

Wanted: brewery jobs

Barley's Angels Colorado, a group that hosts monthly beer tastings and activities for women in Boulder County and Denver, is also aiming to help women overcome the industry's entry barrier.

The group launched a brewery job board on their website Jan. 1, which lists brewery jobs in the Denver, Boulder County and Northern Front Range region, eventually expanding statewide and possibly nationwide, said director Deb Cameron.

There are currently three volunteers scouring brewery websites for openings to add to the board, but Cameron hopes as the board develops that breweries will submit positions directly to Barley's Angels by emailing barleysangelscolorado@gmail.com.

There are 28 jobs on the board this week including positions at Avery Brewing Co., Boulder Beer, Fate Brewing Co., Echo's Erie location, Left Hand Brewing Co. and Oskar Blues.

The job board is public and available to men and women, Cameron said.

"Our goal is to educate women about beer and the sometimes best way to learn about beer is to work for a brewery," Cameron said.

By making it easier for women to find positions, Cameron hopes the board will encourage more applicants to overcome the assumed obstacles that Valenta and her Twisted Pine colleagues are disproving.

"This job is fun and enjoyable and welcoming, and I would encourage any woman interested in a brewery job to go for it," Valenta said. "All it takes is the motivation to try, and I think women will be surprised at how open-minded people in the industry really are."

Whitney Bryen: 303-684-5274, wbryen@times-call.com or twitter.com/soonerreporter