Up here in the Commonwealth (God save it!), we have a congressman named Steve Lynch who represents the district in and around South Boston that was once represented by the late, great Joe Moakley. Lynch is a conservative Democrat, an anti-choicer who also dabbles in law-and-order rhetoric. He opposed the Affordable Care Act and voted for the Iraq War. He made a run for the Senate when John Kerry got bumped up to Secretary of State and got beaten like a drum by Ed Markey. Nonetheless, Lynch is a decent skin who has evolved on gay rights much in the same way the president has. He's going to be elected as often as he wants to be, and he's in no way a drag on the rest of the delegation.

Advertisement - Continue Reading Below

So why is he standing up at a press conference with a bunch of congresscritters in thrall to Lyndon Fking LaRouche?

According to Jones' friends in the Lyndon LaRouche movement, which has claimed knowledge of some contents of those 28 pages since at least 2009, those duplicitous friends are Great Britain and Saudi Arabia. "We know exactly who did it: It was done by the British monarchy," said LaRouche, the conspiracy theorist and perennial candidate for president. "The British monarchy set the whole thing up. That's the guilty party, and that's what the cover-up is all about." LaRouche has suggested for years that Britain controls the world's political economy and international drug trade using strategies - such as funding terrorists to destabilize nation-states - developed by medieval Venice. Jones and Lynch pressed for months to gain access to the redacted documents - which are left blank in the published report. Jones has appeared on the LaRouche PAC's radio program and has addressed the LaRouche movement's Schiller Institute. LaRouche's website contains a number of links to documents suggesting 9/11 - as well as the Sept. 11, 2012, terrorist attacks in Benghazi, Libya - was funded as part of the ongoing Al Yamamah weapons-for-oil deal set up by the British aerospace company BAE Systems and the Saudi government.

Most Popular

Look, I think we ought to know what's in those 28 pages, too. I think they're still redacted simply because they will embarrass people, and that's not a good enough reason. But I don't think the Queen is behind the plot, and Steve Lynch ought not to stand up at press conferences with crazy people. Of course, in Southie, they'll believe just about anything when it concerns the Brits, so maybe this was a career move.