Bob Lloyd (Photo: Courtesy of the Lomira School District)

Editor's Note: School superintendents from the Fond du Lac area will be sharing their thoughts once a month on The Reporter's opinion page.

Education is the foundation for the informed citizenry required in a democracy.

It is, therefore, vital to support the entirety of our educational system, both public and private, by creating a stable funding formula that is safeguarded from the volatility of the political climate.

We need to learn from history. The vast majority of Wisconsin does a tremendous job of educating children, but every two years we hold our breath as politicians decide our fate based on politics, not what’s best for our State. Let me provide an example, the Lomira School District is projected to receive nearly six percent less in state aid than last fiscal year based on an increase in property values, less enrollment, and general state aid remaining flat.

It would be difficult to find an individual that does not agree regarding the importance of education for a vibrant and growing economy. The over-funding of education when one party is in control and under-funding when the balance shifts needs to stop. This legislative system of funding is not fair to our taxpayers who cannot plan because they often see drastic shifts in property tax payments. It saddles our school boards with the impossible task of raising taxes to the levy or cutting programs.

Last and most importantly, it negatively impacts our children who are often caught in the crossfire of a broken system. Finding a system that is more equitable and predictable for all schools will require a bi-partisan effort. Let’s urge our legislature to use the next two years to figure this out so history does not continue to repeat itself.

The recent budgetary conversations focusing on teacher licensing, budget cuts, voucher schools as well as the numerous other unfunded governmental mandates create distractions in education that have made it difficult to focus on the core values that make a school district excel. From a personal perspective, I feel extremely fortunate to lead a group of committed educators who have endured life-altering changes since the implementation of Act 10. As a district, we have worked collaboratively in order to maintain the trust necessary for any organization to succeed.

As a result, the Lomira School District was recently able to pass a $24 million referendum and the school community is extremely excited about our future. Staff in the Lomira School District truly works hard to meet the individual needs of each child and understand that a new building is not as powerful or as meaningful as relationships.

As we continue to prepare our students for their future, we are excited as a district to implement Project Lead the Way (PLTW) curriculum for all students in grades K-8. These inquiry-based lessons will foster problem solving skills for real world scenarios. Better opportunities to be college and career ready have also been created in our high school with new and updated science and technology labs and increased course and teaching partnerships with the area colleges.

The Lomira School District is extremely proud of our children and the programming provided by staff with support from our community. In many cases, it takes years to create and fine tune programming, only to see that the integrity of the program is compromised by a lack of funding. For this and the previously stated reasons, our public needs to contact representatives and demand that they work in a bi-partisan fashion in order to create a systematic approach to funding education.

Read or Share this story: http://fondul.ac/1MP6dWr