88 Flares Filament.io 88 Flares ×

Ted Nugent, the Motor City Madman and Texas transplant, just can't stay out of the headlines. Only a few days after his “apology” for using Nazi propaganda rhetoric to describe the President, calling him a “subhuman mongrel,” the Nuge goes on Dennis Miller to explain how it is actually the Obama Administration that is destroying America by using Nazi techniques. Basically he turns the tables and says, 'who's the Nazi now?'

He told Miller that Obama was using an incrementalism that mirrored “people like jack-booted thugs, like the Brownshirts,” and that he was exploiting “the power struggle between the different races” with his policies towards the IRS and under Obamacare.

See what happened when Nugent visited CNN last night below the jump…



Sometimes the best way to combat Right-wing radicalism is to just put it on display unfiltered, and that's exactly what we've seen from Ted Nugent. Republicans thought they hit the jackpot with their base, and maybe they have, but they are feeling the heat radiating from a guy who is just unapologetically politically unsavvy.

Ted has made it clear that his thoughts are the worst you can imagine about the President, but he swears it is nothing to do with race. He seems to believe it. He told CNN's Erin Burnett that his “whole life is dedicated to my black heros, my black musical heros.”

Burnett had been grilling him extensively over his comments and pressing him over whether they were based on racist ideology and he responded forcefully that, “I have not a racist bone in my body. That's the Saul Alinsky propaganda ministry run amok,” and took it home with, “I'm a black guitarist from Detroit — get over it.”

In the midst of his epic 'I'm not a racist' rant he also managed to take credit for “getting Piers Morgan's ass thrown out” adding that he would will “do the same with Don Lemon and Wolf Blitzer” when he could.

During the intro Erin Burnett did not reference the fact that he had recently campaigned with Greg Abbott but focused on the more broad embrace that he has seen from the GOP. At this point, and I realizing I am setting myself up here, I don't expect any serious statewide or national figures running to share the state with The Nuge. The reason isn't necessarily because of his views, but that he is a true wild card that can not stay on message. You can't write the script for him because he will come out and say, 'they wrote this script for me.' That is exactly what has happened every time Nugent is pressed on his apology — he reiterated that his inflammatory language isn't helpful to his friends running for office. But, not long after his acknowledgement he is back at it, and sometimes with in the same diatribe. He told CNN in the same interview:



“I have never seen such political discourse in all my life and yes i do apologize for being part of that political discourse because greater men than myself have advised me that that kind of street language in a volatile interview as you played earlier is not appropriate when we're trying to get some upgrade here in America. But I can not put in to adequate terms the condemnation that I feel and so many Americans feel that this President's fundamental transformation of this country is indeed the distinction of the American dream of being compensated based on being the best you can be. The concept of social justice and economic equality is truly bizarro. The President is a bad man. I want to encourage Americans to be the best that they can be, not to be compensated for the not trying.”

You can follow me on Twitter at @joethepleb.