4276989

The Daily Caller’s Alphabet of Racism trudges inexorably forth with yet another slew of racist stuff the world must know about. Here are seven things beginning with the letters ‘J’ and ‘K’ that someone, somewhere has deemed racist.

Joking about Obamacare is racist according to an obscure leftist website called Salon. In October 2013, the minor site charged that Ted Cruz was practicing “GOP dog-whistle politics at its finest” when he suggested that “Nigerian email scammers” have “become a lot less active lately” because they have “all been hired to run the Obamacare website.” The bloggers at Salon contended that “it’s a short hop from Nigeria to Kenya” and, consequently, Cruz was somehow alluding to conspiracy theories about President Obama’s birth in Kenya. The distance from Kenya to Nigeria is actually about 2,000 miles, but, presumably, for Salon’s geographically-challenged writers, Africa is just one big piece of land filled with people who have black skin.

A radio talk show named Mark Thompson called kitchen cabinets racial after 2012 Republican presidential candidate Mitt Romney used the phrase at an NAACP convention. “To talk about being in the kitchen and not talk about an African-American actually being in your cabinet is really not a good metaphor to use with African-Americans,” Thompson complained bitterly, according to Right Wings News. Political foes of President Andrew Jackson coined the term in the 1830s as an insult to his close circle of advisers. Later presidents including John F. Kennedy, Lyndon Johnson and Ronald Reagan were also said to have kitchen cabinets.

In April, professors Syracuse University and DePauw University called the cartoon film “Jungle Book” racist and demanded that the Walt Disney Company make a different version of the beloved movie which depicts a society of apes. Disney has plans to film a live-action remake of the 1967 flick, which concerns an Indian boy, Mowgli, who is raised by wolves in the wild and finds friendship in a bear and a panther. Popular songs from the original movie include, “The Bare Necessities” and “I Want To Be Like You.” The later musical sequence has occasionally provoked controversy among critics who have insisted that the apes who perform the number are meant to represent a racist view of black people. (RELATED: Prof: Disney’s ‘Jungle Book’ Was Racist, Should Be Sanitized For Remake)

“The King and I” is racist because it allegedly includes racial stereotypes that modern audiences could find offensive, according to The Boston Globe. “[T]he arrogant core of this ’50s musical has been left with that benighted age’s worst stereotypes, from cunning, scheming Asians to noble, heroic Westerners,” explains an obscure Washington Post staff writer. “Worst of all, it presumes the innate moral superiority of the fabulous British (who, after all, invented imperialism and the heroin trade) and depicts their Asian wards as hopeless children desperately in need of guidance.”