President Obama presents Oprah Winfrey with the Presidential Medal of Freedom at the White House on Nov. 20. (Photo: Mandel Ngan, AFP/Getty Images)

Commentary writer Mark Joseph took issue with Oprah Winfrey for suggesting opposition to President Obama stems largely from racism ("No, Oprah, it isn't racist to oppose the president"). Comments from Twitter and Facebook are edited for clarity and grammar:

It's good to read truth and common sense in this column. Racism is a dead argument.

— @CalTexAzBoy

This commentary is a joke, right? As an African American, the thought that anyone would believe our country is not racist is as far-fetched as believing that Santa Claus is real.

— Mark Wilson

Regarding Joseph's column: Yes, America is racist. That he wasn't racist as a child indicates it's not innate.

— @mschingler

The point of the commentary is that most people have grown up in a time when people didn't judge others on their skin color. It is getting better.

At the same time, there's more to do as far as the healing process. Racism is not gone. But people defend the president by bringing race into the picture. His race has nothing to do with it for me.

— Wil Brander

It's amazing to me that white people still believe that their experience is the only experience that matters. They believe that if they do not see something, then it never happened.

Racism does exist. It exists in both directions. It is wrong, and nothing will change until both sides have the courage to admit that the problem has not gone away. In fact, it is getting worse and is driven by frustration on both sides.

— Kevin Jacobs

Letter to the editor:

America has been very good to Oprah Winfrey. She has amassed billions as an African-American woman. Yet, she wants to paint many Americans as racist because they don't give a mixed-race president, twice elected, enough fealty.

Oprah just doesn't get it. It's not because President Obama is of color that he sees his approval rating dropping. It's not disrespect; it's disapproval because of his incompetence, disengagement and dishonesty.

Bob Guerin; Marathon, Fla.

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1b7j8Cg