Good morning. Here are some of the stories we're following today:

1. South Carolina Braces for More Rain After Historic Downpour

Parts of South Carolina were preparing for another three inches of rain Monday on top of the debilitating rainfall that caused deadly flooding throughout the weekend. Experts were calling the rain totals — which exceeded two feet in some areas — a "1,000-year flood event." Read more in WEATHER.

This is not a game. Stay home! pic.twitter.com/hqFdgJ2deE — Michael Wukela (@MWukela) October 4, 2015

2. Will Supreme Court Rulings Lean Right This Term?

The U.S. Supreme Court term that begins Monday could produce big victories for the right. Based on previous rulings, the court's conservatives seem prepared to deal a blow to public sector unions, restrict the use of affirmative action and allow religiously-affiliated organizations freedom from Obamacare's contraceptive insurance coverage requirements. Read more in NEWS.

3. Doctors' Group Denies Taliban Were Firing From Hospital

Doctors Without Borders refuted claims that Taliban fighters were operating in an Afghan hospital that was bombed by U.S.-coalition forces Saturday, leaving 22 people dead. "In any case, bombing a fully functioning hospital can never be justified," the aid group said. Read more in NEWS.

4. Wrenching Details Surface in Oregon Shooting

Witnesses of the shooting that left ten dead (including the gunman) and nine injured at Umpqua Community College described a gunman who showed little sympathy for his victims. Christopher Harper-Mercer shot a woman in a wheelchair, a man who said it was his son's birthday and a woman who told him she was sorry for whatever happened to him, according to those in the classroom. Read more in NEWS.

Play Facebook

Twitter

Google Plus

Embed Gunman Spared a 'Lucky One' To Deliver A Message to Police 2:48 autoplay autoplay Copy this code to your website or blog

5. Hillary Clinton to Unveil Plan for New Gun Restrictions

Democratic presidential front-runner Hillary Clinton is set to unveil a gun control proposal Monday that would tighten the rules on gun-show and online sales of firearms. Under her proposal, victims of gun violence would also be allowed to sue gun manufacturers. Read more in NEWS.

6. 4 California Students Arrested in High School Shooting Plot

Four students were arrested Friday in Tuolumne, California, after police discovered a "detailed" plan to "shoot and kill as many people as possible" at a local high school, the sheriff said. Other students at Summerville High School heard the students talking about the plot and told school staff. Read more in NEWS.

7. American Apparel Files For Bankruptcy

Teen clothing retailer American Apparel filed for bankruptcy protection on Monday. The struggling company listed assets and liabilities of between $100 million and $500 million in its bankruptcy filing. Read more in BUSINESS.

Nightly Spotlight: Cassette Tapes Make a Comeback

First, music-lovers seeking nostalgia were buying up records, now some are looking for, or listening for, cassette tapes.