The Luzerne County Flood Protection Authority’s controversial levee fee can legally target only some county residents and will remain intact, a county judge ruled Wednesday.

The Municipality of Kingston and six individuals sued the authority in 2009, alleging the roughly 14,000 properties in 12 communities along the Susquehanna River are unfairly targeted by the fee, which supports a levee system that benefits all residents of the county. The authority countered that it has every right to charge a fee to properties directly protected by the levee, which it maintains are those that fall within the 1972 Hurricane Agnes floodplain.

In his ruling issued Wednesday afternoon, Luzerne County Judge Richard M. Hughes III cited the Municipalities Authorities Act, which says, in part, that “Every authority may exercise (the power to) fix, alter, charge and collect rates and other charges in the area served by its facilities at reasonable and uniform rates ... ”

The question of what constitutes the “area served by its facilities” is one of the pivotal points of the case, he wrote.

Kingston Mayor James Haggerty argued that the authority’s facilities channel runoff and divert water in a way that benefits all residents of the county, not only those in the floodplain. Therefore, everyone in the county gets a direct benefit from the system and should pay an equal fee, he claimed.

The judge found that the definition of “area served” is ambiguous, but that Kingston failed to meet its burden of proving that the authority abused its power, as required by law.

“There are a number of possible definitions of the ‘area served’ by the authority’s facilities; urging that one of these definitions is ‘obvious’ does not make it so,” Hughes wrote. “In the absence of specific language in the ordinance creating the authority, it is impossible to interpret ‘area served’ broadly (as have plaintiffs) or narrowly (as has the defendant). The burden is on the plaintiffs to show that defendant has been arbitrary or capricious or has committed manifest abuse of discretion in its defining the ‘area served by its facilities’ as the Agnes floodplain. This court finds that plaintiffs have not met that burden.”

The ruling means the levee fee will remain in force.

It comes as the authority on Tuesday filed more than 800 liens against property owners who have failed to pay the fee on time this year, according to court records.

Records at the prothonotary’s office show Northeast Revenue Service on Tuesday filed 835 liens against delinquent property owners. Authority Executive Director Christopher J. Belleman said the bills were mailed Oct. 1 and the fees were due within 60 days. By the first of December, the authority imposed a 10 percent penalty and filed the liens Tuesday, he said.

Belleman said about 1,000 of the 14,000 impacted properties change hands in a given year, and that many newcomers are simply unaware they must pay the fee.

“Most of the people in the area are aware it’s being used for the maintenance and operation of the 16-mile flood protection system, and I think most people are on board with the fee,” Belleman said. “I’m seeing less and less liens having to be filed every year.”

The fee, which was enacted in 2009, ranges from $46.85 for residential properties worth less than $100,000 to $676.44 for commercial properties worth at least $750,000.

Some notable entities on the lien list this year include Kingston and the Wilkes-Barre Area School District. Court records show liens were filed against Kingston for $340 each on a couple of properties on Main Street.

Kingston did not intentionally disregard the fee, Haggerty said before the ruling came out Wednesday.

“A fee’s been implemented,” Haggerty said. “It’s legal until a court says otherwise.”

He didn’t know for certain what had happened, but said the properties might be the result of the municipality’s seizing several blighted properties in that area and tearing them down.

Those fees were likely imposed in error and will be corrected, Belleman said. Federal and state governmental agencies, including local subdivisions, are exempt from the fee, he said.

School districts, however, are not, he said.

Court records show Wilkes-Barre Area owes $836 each on three properties it owns, including Meyers High School and Coughlin High School.

The liens will be removed when the fees are paid, Belleman said.

570-821-2058, @cvjimhalpin