It was June 2001 when “Jane Dee” checked into Massachusetts General Hospital at her own insistence. The 64-year-old woman, who had suffered from severe depression for 17 years, wanted to be hospitalized to ensure she didn’t drink away her fear of what was planned for the next day.

When she awoke, she couldn’t help but think about One Flew Over the Cuckoo’s Nest. The Jack Nicholson movie and its gruesome depictions of electroconvulsive therapy ran through her mind as she walked to the basement procedure room to get her own, far more modern version of “shock” therapy in hopes of driving away the depression.

Story Continued Below

Almost immediately, she felt better—lighter, happier. She and her husband were able to celebrate their 38th wedding anniversary that night in awe of the complete turnaround.

Jane Dee, though, was no ordinary patient. She had tried—sometimes unsuccessfully—to keep her history of depression and drug and alcohol abuse out of the public eye during her husband’s political career. Now that her husband was out of office, she had an even bigger secret: shock therapy.

The couple quickly found that electroconvulsive therapy was massively successful at treating severe depression. But it suffered a huge public relations problem: It developed a horrible reputation in the middle of the 20th century when it was used without today’s patient safety protections, it was stigmatized through pop culture and there was no one willing to talk publicly about its effectiveness.

Within a few years of that first treatment, Kitty Dukakis—the wife of 1988 Democratic presidential nominee Michael Dukakis—decided she didn’t want to be anonymous anymore. Together, Michael and Kitty decided that they had a platform to advocate a medical treatment that, despite its massive image problem, is widely credited with saving lives and setting patients once crippled with depression on the road to happy and productive futures.

In the process, the Dukakises have found themselves to be the unexpected champions of one of the most controversial and misunderstood—but highly effective—procedures in modern medicine.

***

Throughout Michael’s nearly three decades in elected office, he was the star of the couple. He served a record three terms as governor of the commonwealth of Massachusetts; his one run for the presidency still haunts the Democratic Party as a winnable failure.

But now, nearly 25 years after he finished his third term as governor, it is Kitty who is drawing the crowds, Michael boasts in an interview with POLITICO in his office at Northeastern University, where he teaches political science. He says he was struck by the role reversal at a fundraising dinner for a Cambridge health care association in April, where they were both given an award for their contributions to universal access to health care and reducing the stigma of mental illness.

“It was a big crowd; they raised a lot of money and Kitty got a standing ovation for about five minutes,” he explains during an interview this summer in his office, where he sits under a sign advocating for his Massachusetts universal health care bill, which he signed in 1988—decades before Congressional Democrats passed the Affordable Care Act in 2010. “Not me—I got polite applause. I’m serious. It’s pretty extraordinary.”

Kitty does have quite a story to tell. It was during Kitty’s junior year of college, years before she met Michael, that she began sneaking her mother’s “diet pills”—a 1950s era euphemism for amphetamines, or speed.

That grew into a two-decade habit that she kept secret through a short-lived first marriage, through meeting and marrying Michael in 1963, through the pregnancies of three children and through four miscarriages. It wasn’t until 1974—shortly before Michael won his first election as governor of Massachusetts—that he stumbled upon the pills and asked her to stop.

She did stop for a little while, but the addiction quickly and quietly returned. It wasn’t until a successful visit to rehab eight years later that she finally kicked the pill habit.

But with the pills gone, alcohol slowly began to take their place. That’s not uncommon; mental health experts say many patients with depression subconsciously self-medicate with drugs and alcohol, just like Kitty did.

Throughout her husband’s governorship, she drank but it was rarely problematic. When his 1988 presidential campaign got serious, she turned to alcohol to deal with the pressures of the race. The mounting demands of a campaign and the fear of actually becoming First Lady hit her shortly before the pivotal New Hampshire primary. “I was petrified at the prospect of his winning the Democratic nomination, not to mention the presidency,” she wrote in her 2006 book. She cancelled two trips before the Ohio primary and said she had the flu. Sitting in her house alone, she drank enough to send herself into a stupor.

Kitty Dukakis, here in an empty airport in 1988, has a new campaign she's fighting for. | Getty

She bounced back for the general election, but alcohol was a constant companion on the campaign trail. Her staff was instructed to leave vodka in her hotel room each night after a day of campaigning. She set up a routine: down a single shot, close the bottle and go to bed.

That measure of control vanished after the crushing, lopsided election defeat. Then-Vice President George H.W. Bush won 40 states, having convinced voters that Dukakis was a dispassionate, wonky academic. Two days after Election Day, Michael went back to the Massachusetts statehouse to resume his duties as governor. But Kitty, with her packed campaign scheduled done, began binge drinking. She drank every day, a little more each day.

More than 25 years later, Michael still remembers the day he came home, searched through their Brookline home and couldn’t find her. “Finally, I went up to the third floor and I saw what looked like was a bunch of rags on the floor,” he says now. “It was my wife, completely passed out on the third floor. How she got up there?—Jesus, it was horrible.”