Researchers estimate that 42 million Americans consider themselves runners or joggers. Of those, about 18 million are millennials. They grew up familiar with the appeal of running and have fully embraced the sport as a lifestyle phenomenon. Add in their relationship to technology and their strong sense of community, and they are a force the running industry must reckon with.

But what does running and competing mean to them? A new study tried to figure that out.

The Millennial Running Study, released in February and sponsored by Running USA and RacePartner with research by Achieve, surveyed 15,631 people born between 1980 and 2000 who have finished a race, asking about their motivations for running.

The primary reason is clear: Millennials run for their health. Amy Thayer, the study’s lead researcher, said that’s a key finding because this generation struggles with obesity. To counter that threat, millennials run — to lose weight and get in shape.

“Running is the most economical way to get the most bang for their buck,” Thayer said. “From there, the motivation was to continue on to do more so that it has become a lifestyle.”

The survey found that three-quarters of respondents considered themselves fit but that only 51 percent were content with their fitness level. Seventy-three percent of respondents were women, a telling statistic: While races used to be almost evenly divided between men and women, now about 60 percent of finishers are women.

In addition, the study found that 76 percent of those surveyed run throughout the year and are active in other forms of exercise, such as weightlifting (49 percent) and “outdoor activities” (43 percent).

This research shows that being a runner — in the journey to being fit — is part of a millennial’s identity.

Thayer said she was surprised by how dedicated millennial runners are to races. The study found that half of respondents signed up for races at least three months in advance.

“They are very deliberate and intentional, not only in the timing of their event but in the events they select,” Thayer said. And they are motivated first and foremost by the challenge, something Thayer said event organizers have to understand to reach them.

The desire for quality experiences bodes well for major races such as the Boston and New York City marathons. Yet Thayer thinks millennials should look to smaller races that are well organized and can offer the challenges they want.

In short, as millennials embrace change, they are forcing the running industry to do so as well.

“Clearly, we have to do business the way millennials want to do business because they’ve been served so well through the iPhone and Xbox and the way they consume electronic media,” said Andy Coccari, chief product officer for the Leukemia & Lymphoma Society, which raises money through its Team in Training program. “We’ve really had to open up the aperture in terms of what they can achieve.”