Many are surprised to find out that they may qualify for an exemption. Short Term Major Medical Insurance Plans are a great option for financial protection during that period in case the unexpected happens.

Nations Insurance Solutions announces Hii, a Short Term Major Medical Insurance Plan (STM). Combining Hii's 20-year experience in administering and underwriting STM, Hii plans are designed for consumers who want protection from the financial impact of an unexpected claim but does not qualify for a government subsidy.

Benefits of Hii include affordability and broader network access versus the standard ACA plans that are mostly HMOs. It also features an office visit copayment, copayments for prescription drugs and up to $2,000,000 coverage limit per policy period. “One of the most common questions asked on our website, http://www.NationsInsuranceSolutions.com, is am I going to be penalized,” said Carmelo LaFauci, Director of Operations of Nations Insurance Solutions. " Many people are very lost when it comes to the new insurance rules." The Congressional Budget Office analysis found that 87% of Americans will be able to claim an exemption. That exemption rate is higher than the CBO had previously thought.

Consumers can choose a monthly pay option for their short term medical needs, or a pre-payment option for up to 180 days. These plans are not designed to replace Obamacare coverage, but to bridge the gap between the high prices of ACA, ObamaCare, and not qualifying for government subsidies. Making it an affordable major medical insurance option. Enrollment for Hii can be done entirely on-line with the help of a licensed insurance agent, or by calling 1-855-680-3846. For more information on Hii, please visit https://www.hiiquote.com/quote/index.php?Plan_ID=19&code=A11180010000000.

About Hii:

Health Insurance Innovations, Inc. (HII) is a market leader in developing innovative health insurance products that are affordable and meet the needs of millions of health insurance plan shoppers. HII partners with best-in-class insurance companies for its product development. Hii's insurance products are sold through thousands of independent, licensed insurance agents across the nation. Hii's data-centric paperless business model is facilitated by its Consumer Division that provides real-time data used to identify opportunities and underserved needs in the health insurance market.

About Nations Insurance Solutions:

Nations Insurance Solutions is a Multi-Line Full Service Insurance Agency with more than 10 years experience in all 50 states. The Agency offers Health, Medicare Supplements/Advantage, Dental, Life, Accident, Cancer, Home, Renters, Auto, Motorcycle and Commercial. Contact Us at 1.855-680-3846. "The Choice is Yours."