Little-known power of Congress needs 'best practices' that reduce the potential for mischief and the appearance of favoritism.

U.S. Service Academy Information Fair on Sept. 2 in Bowling Green, Ky. (Photo: Joe Imel for USA TODAY)

In a turbulent world, few things are more important to U.S. national security than the quality of its military officers. Yet the nation's system for identifying the leaders of tomorrow is a 171-year-old relic from a bygone era of political patronage.

This corroded pipeline is grounded in the annual nominations made by members of Congress to the country's four elite service academies, which prepare future officers for the Army, Navy, Air Force and Merchant Marines.

REP. BARBER: Merits over politics

A USA TODAY special report, published last week, detailed a process that produces many outstanding candidates but is overly secretive and open to political influence, lacks consistent standards and oversight, and produces geographic balance at the expense of racial diversity.

Although the report didn't find widespread "pay to play" abuses, some nominations went to the children of well-connected families and contributors. Lawmakers aren't about to give up this valuable perk, so the least they could do is implement a set of "best practices" that reduce the potential for mischief and the appearance of favoritism:

Be transparent. The nominations are made by taxpayer-paid public officials. The recipients receive taxpayer-paid educations valued as high as $487,000, in return for a five-year service commitment after graduation. Yet fewer than half of members of Congress released all or part of their nomination lists to USA TODAY, and the service academies refused Freedom of Information Act requests for the names of nominees. Why all the secrecy about a high honor?

Set up arms-length screening. Some members do everything themselves, which holds the highest potential for corrupting the process. Others delegate to staff. The most confidence-inspiring system involves establishing an independent panel of retired officers to screen and interview applicants.

Give the academies more discretion. Lawmakers can designate a "principal" nomination, also known as "the golden ticket," who must be admitted as long as he or she meets certain academic, medical and fitness standards. Or they can simply submit a list of "competitive" nominations, an approach that gives admissions directors the flexibility they need to assemble diverse classes.

Reject contributions. The members of Congress who disclosed their nominations have accepted more than $171,000 in campaign contributions from the families of students they've nominated to the service academies over the past two years. To avoid even the appearance of a conflict, lawmakers should return all such contributions.

Rather than reduce Congress' role, some lawmakers are seeking to expand it. Rep. Bennie Thompson, D-Miss., wants to require congressional nominations for the Coast Guard Academy. Never mind that the Coast Guard academy has never needed congressional appointments to attract top candidates.

The four military academies would also undoubtedly get along fine without politicians playing admissions officers. As long as Congress stays heavily involved, though, it ought to take steps to ensure the system's integrity.

USA TODAY's editorial opinions are decided by its Editorial Board, separate from the news staff. Most editorials are coupled with an opposing view — a unique USA TODAY feature.

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1utvb48