Wichita police are adding to the list of armed robberies they are investigating after four more businesses were robbed Friday evening and early Saturday morning.

The first robbery happened around 8 p.m. Friday at ABC Discount Liquor at Maple and Tyler Road. Sgt. Troy Nedbalek said a man entered the store, pointed a handgun at the clerk and demanded cash.

The suspect is described as standing 6 feet tall and weighing 180 pounds. He was wearing a red Kansas City Chiefs hoddie, tan pants, white shoes, blue gloves and a white and black face mask.

An hour later, a man with a large kitchen knife robbed the Family Dollar at 936 South Woodlawn, near Lincoln. Nedbalek said the suspect held the knife to two clerk, threatening to cut on of them if the other didn't give him the cash from the register.

The suspect in that robbery was wearing a dark grey hoodie, blue bandanna, black pants and black shoes. He left on foot from the business.

Fast forward to about 12:15 Saturday morning. That's when a masked man entered through the back door of the Wasabi Japanese Restaurant at 912 East Douglas, just west of Washington. Sgt. Nedbalek said the suspect had a silver revolver and stole money from the cash register and tip jar before leaving through the same back door.

The robber is a man in his 20s, standing about 5-foot-10 and weighing 200 pounds. He wore a navy blue hoodie, gloves and had a mask covering his face.

Lastly, at around 2:30 Saturday morning, another masked man robbed the Casey's General Store at 3520 North Woodlawn, which is just east of K-96. Nedbalek said the suspect entered the store, walked behind the counter and ordered the clerk to open the register. He got away with cash and four cartons of Newport cigarettes.

The suspect is described as a stocky man in his 30s standing about 5-foot-5. He was wearing a charcoal-colored hoodie and grey sweat pants.

No injuries were reported in any of the robberies.

Sgt. Nedbalek said there is no indication that these robberies are connected. Anyone with information is asked to call 911 or Crime Stoppers at (316) 267-2111.