The argument in Congress against delaying flood insurance rate increases goes something like this: People who own homes on or near the water are rich, and they don't deserve or need the federal government to keep premiums affordable. That's flat out wrong.

Massive increases in flood insurance premiums are hitting middle class families from Galveston to Luling to Staten Island and thousands of other communities along the nation's coastline and inland waterways. And Congress is responsible. Members gave no consideration to whether policies would be affordable when they passed the Biggert-Waters Flood Insurance Reform Act of 2012.

It is clear now, though, that costs will be out of reach for thousands of Americans. In Luling, one homeowner said her premium is predicted to increase 1,600 percent from $500 to an estimated $8,000. Her home, she said in a note to Louisiana Sen. Mary Landrieu, is "not a beachfront mansion."

Our state's congressional delegation has been pushing for months to get the rate increases delayed. There is broad bipartisan support in Congress for that, yet some Senate and House members are blocking a vote on the issue.

Sponsors of a Senate bill that would delay most increases for four years said Thursday they will try again after the holidays to get a vote on the legislation. This time they will attempt a cloture motion, which would require 60 votes to block a filibuster. If that works -- and we hope it does -- the legislation would still need House approval.

It was extremely disappointing that the matter wasn't settled before Christmas. But perhaps the extra time will allow opponents of the delay to understand the devastating impact Biggert-Waters will have.

The Luling homeowner told Sen. Landrieu's office that the 1,600 percent increase would be "a life altering, financially crippling increase. And who exactly will buy my home knowing that the flood insurance will be so high?"

Sen. Landrieu's office is gathering other such stories, and they are a poignant and persuasive argument for Congress to act.

A woman in Slidell is worried about selling her home. "I am about to list my Slidell home for sale and will live full-time in New Orleans. The uncertainty of flood insurance costs will likely make my home very hard to sell, much less to recoup what I paid for it. This will not only affect my finances but the future of my children. I fear that the projected increases in flood insurance rates will essentially bankrupt me, my family and my town."

A Baton Rouge homeowner is facing those problems, too. "I accepted a job in TN. I thought my house would sell and I'd be able to provide a similar or better home to my family. I have a neighbor who wants to buy my house so their aging parent can live close to them, but they have withdrawn their offer since they found out how much the flood insurance will be. I withdrew my offer on the house in TN since I can't sell my house," he said.

"The flood insurance rate hike on this single property not only dramatically affects 1 family, but it affects 3 families -- my family, the family I want to buy from, and the family that wants to buy my house," he said.

Each of these owners included a photo of their home. There are many words that could describe them: nice, pretty, well-kept, homey, inviting.

But they are not the palatial mansions that some proponents of Biggert-Waters describe as the downfall of the federal flood insurance program.

There are similar examples in other communities of middle class homeowners who are under threat from the premium hikes.

In Tampa, Pinellas Property Appraiser Pam Dunbov said: "The truth is this flood insurance problem is affecting people with very modest incomes ..." Her data shows the median value of homes hit with dramatically higher rates is $132,245 and two-thirds of the houses aren't on -- or even within sight of -- the water, according to The Tampa Bay Times.

"If you can't get flood insurance because you can't afford it, you can't get a mortgage," Florida Sen. Bill Nelson said Thursday. "If you can't get a mortgage, there are a lot of folks who can't buy a house. And by the way, those who need to sell their houses, they can't get the buyers."

That is the heart of the matter. And if Congress doesn't do something about it, you'll have to be rich to afford flood insurance.

To share your flood insurance concerns, email a photo of your home to Sen. Landrieu's office at MyHomeMyStory@Landrieu.Senate.gov or tweet a photo with the hashtag #MyHomeMyStory to @SenLandrieu