Not long ago, we all knew what the 2016 Republican presidential primary was going to be about: a “battle for the soul of the GOP,” in which the establishment faced off against the Tea Party base for supremacy. After all, that fight has been going on throughout the Obama presidency, leaving the political field strewn with casualties and the party consumed by resentments running in both directions.

But as Donald Trump’s candidacy has revealed, it’s actually more complicated than that. Trump has moved out to the front of the Republican pack by assembling a large group of supporters that resembles the Tea Party in some ways, but is completely different in its motivations. And the rest of the party — particularly Jeb Bush, who was supposed to be the establishment’s candidate — can’t figure out what to do about it. In the last day or two Bush and Trump have traded nasty web videos (and wasn’t it about time this race got a little mean?), and they show how these two candidates have a completely different understanding of the electorate to which they’re appealing.

Let’s start with Jeb’s:

After trading jabs with his competitor for the Republican nomination for president on the campaign trail, candidate Jeb Bush posted an ad showing Donald Trump in a series of television interviews. (Jeb Bush)

The message here is that Trump isn’t a real Republican, for reasons partisan (he calls himself a Democrat at one point), ideological (he has taken stands on abortion, health care, and taxes that aren’t conservative), and personal (he said nice things about Bill and Hillary Clinton). And finally, the video opens and closes with Trump saying “I lived in New York City in Manhattan all my life, so my views are a little bit different than if I lived in Iowa.” Horrors! (Jeb, on the other hand, learned his down-home rural values on long tractor rides through the corn fields with his pappy.)

So who is this supposed to appeal to? People who care a great deal about the Republican Party, and for whom it’s very important that candidates agree with them on the key issues that form the core of conservative ideology. In other words, it’s an appeal that comes right out of that establishment/Tea Party conflict.

Now let’s look at Trump’s video about Jeb. As you might expect, he’s playing an entirely different game, and none too subtly:

Republican presidential candidate Donald Trump released this video via social media criticizing his opponent Jeb Bush for a comment he made referring to undocumented immigrants' move to the U.S. as an "act of love." (realdonaldtrump/Instagram)

In fairness, we should note that this is misleading and unfair, since it gives you the impression that when Jeb talked about “an act of love,” he was referring not to undocumented immigrants coming to America, but to criminals killing people. In any case, while Jeb’s message is that Trump isn’t a real Republican, Trump’s message is that Jeb loves illegal aliens who are coming to kill your daughter.

Trump’s message is targeted at voters who either don’t care much about ideology and party loyalty, or care about it less than they do about the threat of immigrants. He has an entirely different understanding of the Republican electorate, one that so far seems pretty accurate.

As important as the anti-immigrant rhetoric is to Trump’s campaign, its heart lies in a slightly different place. If Trump is right, then the real source of discontent with the GOP’s leaders isn’t that they’ve been insufficiently conservative, which was the basis of the Tea Party’s attacks on the establishment and its occasionally successful efforts to oust incumbent members of Congress. And it isn’t that they’ve been impractical and unrealistic, which is the establishment’s belief about the Tea Party. Trump is banking on the idea that the real source of discontent with the party’s leaders is that they’re ineffectual. They can’t get anything done, whether it’s non-partisan goals like keeping jobs in America or partisan goals like repealing the Affordable Care Act. They said they were going to destroy Barack Obama, and they didn’t; instead they talked a lot, shut down the government, held 50+ votes to repeal the ACA, and delivered essentially nothing of substance to their voters.

As just one data point, in the latest Quinnipiac poll, 69 percent of Republicans said they disapprove of the job Republicans in Congress are doing. It’s only one poll, but that’s a stunning level of contempt; as a point of comparison, only 37 percent of Democrats in the poll disapprove of the job Democrats in Congress are doing.

Anyone who knows anything about government understands that it’s absurd to believe that Donald Trump will just blow into DC and solve every problem the country faces through the force of his indomitable will. But Trump has figured out that with the right messenger, bombast can be more appealing than ideological fealty. Yes, he’s appealing to nativist and xenophobic sentiments, but he’s also arguing that he’ll succeed precisely where the GOP as a whole — establishment types, Tea Party types, all of them — have failed in recent years, because unlike everyone else he can supposedly “get things done.”

You have to be pretty naïve to think that Trump can do that when no one else can. But he’s answering a question that candidates like Bush aren’t even asking, which may explain why the race looks the way it does right now.