The guests and topics in local public-affairs programming this weekend:

Bob Graham, the former Florida governor and U.S. senator, talks to "Metro Center Outlook" at 9 a.m. Sunday on WUCF-Channel 24. Diane Trees hosts. Graham discusses offshore oil drilling and its effect on the country. Another topic is the 2010 BP oil spill; Graham is co-chair of the National Commission on the BP Deepwater Horizon Oil Spill. "Although we are in the process of beginning to shift away from fossil fuels, even the most aggressive person supporting sustainable energy would agree that it's going to be a long transition and that deep-water petroleum and natural gas are going to be part of that bridge from where we have been to where we likely may be a generation or two from now,” Graham says.

Orlando Mayor Buddy Dyer talks to John Brown on "Orlando Matters" at 7 a.m. Saturday on WRBW-Channel 65. Dyer discusses how gay marriage will affect Central Florida. He also examines the upcoming "Ultimate I-4" project and explains how the city plans to make it a smooth transition for commuters. Another guest is Chuck Whittall of Unicorp, and he discusses his plans for International Drive.

Mike Holfeld looks at the Affordable Care Act at 8 a.m. Sunday on WKMG-Channel 6. The deadline is nearing for people to secure coverage for 2015, and the program explores tax implications for people who got coverage in 2014. The guests are Anne Packham, marketplace exchange project coordinator at Primary Care Access Network; Haley Helms, manager of 2-1-1 at Heart of Florida United Way; and Dave Oslin, who worked with a navigator to get health insurance for his wife, who is bedridden with a serious illness. Before the Affordable Care Act, she couldn't get coverage due to a pre-existing condition, WKMG said. But now he has gotten her covered, and they are receiving a premium tax credit.

Ybeth Bruzual and "Political Connections" examine President Barack Obama's State of the Union address at 11 a.m. and 8 p.m. Sunday on News 13. Her guests are analysts Lou Frey, Dick Batchelor, Michelle Ertel and Jeremiah Jaspon. The program uses PolitiFact's Truth-O-Meter to rate claims from Tuesday night by Obama and Sen. Joni Ernst, R-Iowa, who gave the Republican response.

William Brownfield, assistant secretary of state, is John Bersia's guest on "Global Perspectives" at 9:30 a.m. Sunday on WUCF. Brownfield discusses the U.S. government's efforts to fight against international drug trafficking. He heads the U.S. Department of State's Bureau of International Narcotics and Law Enforcement Affairs. "We have learned the hard way that it is impossible for the United States of America to manage international criminal threats if it does not have competent, trained, resourced partners in the countries from which those threats are coming," Brownfield says.

WFTV-Channel 9 will preempt "Central Florida Spotlight" this weekend. But a repeat with local hero Joe Kittinger will be shown at 3:30 p.m. Sunday on sister station WRDQ-Channel 27.