Stan Selman, owner of Club Paris restaurant in Anchorage, provides insurance for all his employees, but he said payments are bringing him close to a breaking point. Al Jazeera America

Specialty care in Alaska can cost four times the U.S. average, and primary care can cost up to 30 percent more. A day in the hospital can cost up to 50 percent more, according to a 2011 study by the Institute of Social and Economic Research.

In Alaska, premiums for individual coverage rose nearly 60 percent from 2001 to 2012, according to data from the Federal Medical Expenditure Panel Survey.

As the costs continue to rise, some are pinning the blame on the Affordable Care Act (ACA), or “Obamacare.”

Democratic Senate incumbent Mark Begich voted for the Affordable Care Act. Now campaign advertisements for Republican challenger Dan Sullivan link Begich to “Obamacare” whenever possible, using it as a way to align him with President Barack Obama, whose approval rating in Alaska is one of the lowest in the country.

Begich, for his part, has highlighted his disagreements with the administration, saying that he has problems with the way the ACA was rolled out and even calling himself a “total thorn” in Obama’s behind. More recently, he has begun embracing the law while saying that it could use some improvements, such as allowing insurance companies to offer cheaper plans than currently permitted. Alaska is one of 19 states in the country that chose to let the federal government manage the health insurance market under the ACA.

For Selman, the ACA is just another factor that contributes to the soaring cost of insurance in the Last Frontier.

Sheila Hestes, a server at Club Paris, discovered this when she had to undergo major surgery. “You get that itemized bill, and it’s $25 for aspirin. They rent you a blanket for $12 a day,” she said. “You know, it adds up, and it adds up, and it adds up.”

Health care’s high costs in Alaska are due to a combinations of factors, according to Mouhcine Guettabi, an assistant professor and a co-author of a report about employer-sponsored health insurance in Alaska at the Institute of Social and Economic Research at the University of Alaska at Anchorage. “The simplest one of them being that Alaska is isolated,” he said. “It has thin markets, less providers and isolated communities that are hard to get to.”

High insurance premiums are caused by a different although related set of factors, he said. The price of insurance premiums is negotiated by firms and depends on, for example, the profile of the employees and the size of the firm.