A 1905 postcard from the hotel. (Photo: Courtesy Weird NJ)

Near the middle of Atlantic County is the small city of Egg Harbor City. Begun in 1855 by a group of enterprising Germans as a refuge in the pine and oak woods where Germans could enjoy the heritage of the fatherland, it has its share of weird things and happenings.

It's a city where it took a world war to get it to stop recording its official records in both German and English; where the U.S. Civil War changed the focus of industrial transportation from the river to the railroad, but still has an official harbormaster; and the urban myths like the "lady of the lake" and the grave of Sibbel Shaler and her children. But many feel that nothing is weirder than the Neutral Water Health Spa and its founder Dr. Charles Smith.

In a promotional book entitled "The Fountain of Youth," his story supposedly begins about November 1836, before the founding of the city, when Charles Smith and some hunting friends were returning from duck hunting in the Great Bay area. They were returning to Salem and decided to explore the upper reaches of the Mullica River. They came across a freshwater brook from which they drank and filled their canteens. Smith, evidently wishing to remove the mud and odors of the bay, decided to bathe in the sweet, refreshing waters as well. On their trek home, the men reportedly were filled with stamina and energy gained from the water they brought with them. Later, Smith tried to find the brook again, but to no avail.

A panoramic view of the serpentine pools. (Photo: ©Weird NJ/Mark Moran)

In 1859, through an advertising campaign of the Gloucester Farm and Town Association, Smith finally learned the location of his sweet, cedar water brook was in the German settlement of Egg Harbor City. During this time period, health spas were coming into vogue in the United States, with each one touting their own special abilities to refresh, relieve and even heal various maladies.

People heard about the great European springs of Bath, Vichy and Weisbaden and the United States spa at Stafford Springs, Connecticut, but Smith did not come to the Egg Harbor City, citing business conditions and poor accommodations (the main street in the business section of the city still had many tree stumps in it then). Dr. Smith continued to look for a suitable spring for his dreamed about health resort. By 1870, he finally settled on a spring about 5 miles from New Brunswick that provided some of the restorative qualities he desired. He continued operation here until pressure from several physicians claiming his bathing in the spring was polluting their drinking water. Dr. Smith finally decided to relocate to that sweet brook of yesteryear.

When he came to Egg Harbor City is not exactly known today, but he came before Common Council in January 1900 to present plans for a sanitarium that he said would make the city famous. Within 6 years it became a reality.

People even enjoyed the pools in winter. (Photo: Courtesy Weird NJ)

First, he bought property in the 500-block of London Avenue and convinced the city to raise the level of the surrounding streets about 6 feet. He then built a diversion tunnel for the water that flowed through his property and cleaned out the surrounding swamp, followed by the construction of a 650 feet long serpentine waterway with concrete and brick walls at the turns to forestall erosion.

To house the people that would come to his spa, he built a large three-story hotel and several outbuildings, including a modest home for himself. There was the circular, glass-enclosed drying house where the "patients" would walk until their woolen "bathing suits" were dry. A four-story observation building that looked like a Dutch windmill, reportedly supplied with steam heat, where the patients could take a break from the heat and look out at the surrounding countryside and maybe catch a glimpse of that other resort at the end of the railroad, Atlantic City. There was a mill with a waterwheel that powered an herb mill, a carpenter shop and a pump that moved water to a nearby storage tank. Changing rooms were at the ground level of the hotel and there was a separate changing building that contained a large tub used for a milk bath on one end. Later, a larger dormitory and a "vapor house" were built for the increasing number of clientele coming from New York, Baltimore, Pittsburgh and places both far and between.

A map of the resort. (Photo: Courtesy of Weird NJ)

All of this was to provide for that regimen that Dr. Smith claimed could cure arthritis, gout, infirmities of age, women's problems, prostate problems and many more maladies of the time. The main focus was the healing waters in the serpentine creek that were between three and five feet in depth. The patients would enter the creek at the far side of the property and walk against the current followed by walking in the drying house, and these walks were to be taken regardless of the season of the year. The stream's water, presumably taken upstream from the wading section, was also used in the preparation of Dr. Smith's various potions as well as a special cocoa drink made from the bean shells. (Local brewer Christian Atz was already brewing Cedar Water Beer.) Dining was part of the cure, and individual menus were prepared for each patient that relied heavily upon fruits, vegetables, no salt, fowl, fish and cheese for protein. He also planted numerous pine trees, which were believed to cleanse the air and surroundings. (Anyone for natural Pine-sol?!)

Today, one might not feel Dr. Smith was all that weird, but just try and figure out how old he was using his own words. In various articles and official records he offers his birth year as 1776, about 1800, and about 1830s. In one court appearance he requested help due to his advanced age of 122 years! Even so, he was ever the optimist. In 1913 he took out a 50-year lease on property at the City Lake Park where the "grand old gentlemen" would hold a "pic nic" for the children.

Patients wading into the water at the resort. (Photo: Courtesy Weird NJ)

Eventually the Pure Food and Drug Act of 1918 is said to have caused the demise of the curative water health spas. In 1923 Dr. Smith passed away in Clementon at the obituary-listed age of 87. or 106, depending on which newspaper you read! Today, only his "vapor house" (now the Roundhouse Museum) and his serpentine cedar-water wading creek remain and are registered as a New Jersey State Historical Site.

Weird NJ magazine, "Your Travel Guide to New Jersey's Local Legends and Best Kept Secrets," can be found on newsstands throughout the state and on the web at www.WeirdNJ.com. Further detailed information can be found through the website: www.ehchs.org or the Egg Harbor City Historical Society's Facebook page.

Read or Share this story: http://on.app.com/1Eb7N0m