ANN ARBOR, Mich. -- Full implementation of the Affordable Care Act’s national health insurance expansion could result in many more elective surgical procedures in the next few years based on how utilization changed after an earlier insurance reform in Massachusetts.

78740342.jpg ACA could lead to additional 465,934 elective surgeries by 2017.

The potential effect of the ACA on surgical care is not well known.

A University of Michigan Health System study published in this week’s JAMA Surgery examined its possible effect by analyzing the Massachusetts insurance expansion and utilization of discretionary and nondiscretionary surgical procedures.

“Our collective findings suggest that insurance expansion leads to greater utilization of discretionary inpatient procedures that are often performed to improve quality of life rather than to address immediately life-threatening conditions,” says Chandy Ellimoottil, M.D., a research fellow in the U-M Department of Urology.

“Moving forward, research in this area should focus on whether greater utilization of such procedures represents a response to unmet need or changes in treatment thresholds driven by patients, providers or some combination of the two,” he says.

Ellimoottil and U-M colleagues Sarah Miller, Ph.D., John Z. Ayanian, M.D., and David C. Miller, M.D., Ph.D., compared the state inpatient database from Massachusetts and two control states -- New Jersey and New York.

The database review identified adults who underwent discretionary procedures such as joint replacement and back surgery and nondiscretionary procedures such as cancer surgery and hip fracture repair from 2003 through 2010. The transition point for insurance reform was July 2007.

A total of 836,311 surgical procedures were identified during the study period. Insurance expansion was associated with a 9.3 percent increase in discretionary surgery in Massachusetts and a 4.5 percent decrease in nondiscretionary surgery.

Authors estimate the ACA could yield an additional 465,934 discretionary surgical procedures by 2017.

Ayanian is the director, and Miller a member, of the U-M Institute for Healthcare Policy and Innovation.

###

Reference: “Effect of insurance expansion on utilization of inpatient surgery,” JAMA Surgery, July 02, 2014. doi:10.1001/jamasurg.2014.857.

Funding: This study was supported by grant K08 HS018346-01A1 from the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality; by an Astellas Rising Star in Urology Research Award from the Urology Care Foundation; and by grant T32 DK 7782-14 from the National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Disease, National Institutes of Health.