The Republic | azcentral.com Sat Dec 14, 2013 10:22 PM

Arizona licensed midwives, their clients and health officials have spent the past year updating antiquated state regulations and are claiming some significant victories.

Starting this summer, women who have previously had a Caesarean section will be permitted to give birth at home with a midwife. And the North American Registry of Midwives is now overseeing the training and certification of Arizona midwives instead of the state, which now just handles licensing.

But the industry’s biggest battle lies ahead and won’t be solved this legislative session.

During their work over the past year, said midwife Wendi Cleckner, they learned that state law makes it a felony for midwives to provide medications to their patients — even to save the woman’s life.

Medications commonly used by midwives include vitamin K to help a newborn with blood clotting, antibiotic ointment to prevent eye infections in newborns, Lidocaine to numb an area for stitches, and Pitocin to control a mother’s heavy postpartum bleeding.

The statute, which is separate from the section of the law dealing with midwives, conflicts with the state’s rules and those of the national certification agency. Both of those allow midwives to carry and administer certain medicines.

For midwives to legally provide the medicines they’ve used in the state for decades, they want the Legislature to change the statute.

They had hoped to introduce a bill when the session begins in January, but this week decided to delay the fight for a year.

“As we started to meet with legislators and hear from people in politics, there were some interesting factors that came up: It’s election season next November; there’s some ongoing infighting among legislators due to ‘Obamacare,’ ” Cleckner said. “We did not find people willing to support us.”

Cleckner said the group determined it didn’t have the support for the legislation this year.

“It was really disheartening, but we’re hoping we can continue talks,” she said. “This will give us more time to talk to legislators.”

Arizona is one of 27 states to allow certified professional midwives to deliver babies. Among those states, it’s one of two that do not allow midwives to carry and dispense medications. Midwives deliver about 1 percent of the babies in Arizona.

Last year, at the request of patients, the Legislature established an advisory committee to overhaul the state’s rules on midwives.

“We had a bunch of stakeholder meetings,” said Arizona Department of Health Services legislative liaison Colby Bower. “The (Caesarean) stuff got a lot of play like, ‘Oh, we totally loosened our rules.’ But overall, our new rules have really provided a more regulatory framework.”

For example, he said, there are new informed-consent requirements to assure midwives are clear with their patients about what’s permitted under midwifery and some of the risks.

The group also looked at updating the rules on medications.

Bower said the rules allow midwives to administer certain medications in an emergency, after they’ve called 911 and if they have a standing written order from a physician.

“Many things were outdated since our rules hadn’t really been gone through in about 20 years,” Cleckner said. “And medicine changes pretty quickly.”

As they began to work on updating the state’s list of authorized drugs, they discovered the conflicting state statute: “We came to the conclusion that it’s a felony for midwives to obtain, carry or administer any of the drugs written into our rules.”

Bower said the midwives wanted to change statute so they would be allowed to carry and administer certain medications without needing a standing order from a doctor.

“I think they would be the first to tell you it’s difficult to get such an order from a physician,” Bower said. “They were looking to change that.”

Such a bill requires the support of the House and Senate health committees of reference. The midwives had put their proposal on the calendar for Tuesday’s hearing and then withdrew it at the last minute.

“I think they were counting their votes,” Bower said. Two of the legislative members are physicians.

Cleckner said they will try again next year.

“We are asking for the very basic medications that all midwives globally should have access to,” she said.

In the meantime, Cleckner said Arizona midwives must decide whether they will continue to carry and provide medicines knowing they could be charged with a felony.

“Every midwife is different in what they will choose to do,” she said. “But a lot of midwives want to practice safely, and safely means having emergency drugs.”

She said a healthy mother having a low-risk pregnancy and textbook labor and delivery can start losing large amounts amounts of blood right after the birth.

“A woman can lose her entire blood volume in three to four minutes,” she said.

She said midwives are not asking for anything beyond what they believe their job is.

“We’re asking for lifesaving things,” she said. “It’s vital that midwives carry these.”