While justices heard arguments in the latest case dealing with the Affordable Care Act, Texas woman Delma Limones spoke at a rally outside the Supreme Court Wednesday about the case’s potential impact on women in Texas.

Limones, 22, is a student at Texas State University living in Austin who hasn’t had health insurance for the past four years. She said even the plan she could get through the university was too expensive.

She purchased a health insurance plan on the federal exchange with help from an applications counselor at Planned Parenthood.

“With the subsidy it motivated me to go ahead and get it because it was something I could finally afford,” Limones said.

The subsidies that make health insurance plans affordable for people like Limones are at the center of King v. Burwell.

The question is whether insurance plans obtained through federally run exchanges qualify for subsidies.

A section in the law says that the subsidies are available for people who enroll in plans through exchanges “established by the State.”

The government argues that this applies to any exchange, whether it’s run by a state or run by the federal government for a state. Opponents argue that the subsidies aren’t available to people who purchase health insurance through an exchange set up by the federal government.

Texas is one of 34 states that chose not to set up its own exchange and 1.4 million residents could lose their subsidies if the court rules in favor of the plaintiffs.

Planned Parenthood, citing data from the Department of Health and Human Services, said Limones is one of 562,546 women in Texas who would lose their affordable plans.

Limones said if that happens, “I would probably have to forgo getting insurance,” because the cost of her plan would double.

Limones wasn’t the only Texan speaking at a rally about the case Wednesday. Reps. Louie Gohmert, R-Tyler, and Joe Barton, R-Arlington both spoke at a rally for opponents of the Affordable Care Act.

Barton said in a statement that he’s confident that the Supreme Court will strike down the subsidies. “When that falls, in all probability the entire law will fall and then it will be our job in the Congress to come up with a conservative alternative,” he said.

Texas Attorney General Ken Paxton also weighed in on the case in support of the states challenging the Affordable Care Act.

“I am hopeful that this lawsuit will ultimately free Texans from the bureaucratic burdens of this unjust, unaffordable and failing law,” Paxton said in a statement.