A man who knew a little something about basketball used to live in a diminutive house in downtown Denver, less than a half mile from where the NCAA tournament was playing out the past three days.

Dr. James Naismith — who originated basketball, became the physical education director 110 years ago at the Denver YMCA and earned his medical title in Colorado — certainly would have appreciated how Georges Niang has advanced the game.

Allison Niang, who sat in the front row behind Iowa State’s bench on Saturday afternoon, surely loves her son’s effort, energy and élan — and the college degree he will get in a few weeks.

“It’s been a great, long journey for us all these years,” Allison said after Georges and the Cyclones defeated, first, Iona, then Little Rock on Saturday to advance to the sweetest of sixteens for the Niangs. “I’m so proud of what Georges has accomplished.”

This is Niang’s fourth season in Ames, Iowa. The first three ended in pain — one, literally. His freshman season, Iowa State lost in the second round. Last season, the Cyclones fell in the first round. When he was a sophomore, Georges couldn’t play when the Cyclones reached the round of 16 because of a broken foot sustained in the tournament opener. “I could only watch then, and the guys kidded me about not earning the right to be there. This year I’ve definitely earned the right,” he said after scoring 55 points, with 12 rebounds, in two games at The Can.

Little Rock coach Chris Beard said of Niang: “He’s as good as advertised. He’s going to play on TNT next year (in the NBA). He’s a super player.”

Niang dominated in Denver. Years ago in the tournament in the same building, we witnessed phenomenal rebounding performances by a collegian named Kenneth Faried. We know where he ended up. I told Allison the 6-foot-8 Niang could be drafted, too, by the Nuggets.

“Is that why you asked me if I enjoyed being in Denver this week?” Allison laughed. While in college, she met and married Sidy Niang, an emigrant from Senegal, but they separated when Georges was 5 and after father joined the U.S. Merchant Marine.

Niang could have turned turn pro following his junior year, but mom and son agreed he would return to finish what he had started. “Actually, when I came back, it wasn’t much of a decision. What Iowa State has given me, I could never walk away from a place like that,” Niang said.

Especially with that new, improved body.

Before the foot injury, Georges had been a power forward. Think Charles Barkley. “He got up in the 260s,” Allison said. During the summer when he went home to suburban Boston, Georges became a fitness freak. While he was dropping body fat and 40 pounds, his mother got into the act. She lost 20 pounds working out alongside him. Now, both are in excellent shape. “It was a collective effort,” he said Saturday. “My mom had sacrificed her happiness to go along with me. I can’t thank her enough. She’s my rock, my backbone.”

Led by Niang, the Cyclones cruised past Iona by 13 and Little Rock by 17. In a tournament that has seen more weird-and-wacky endings than “Cloverfield” and “10 Cloverfield Lane,” Iowa State was eating pork tenderloin. “We weren’t favored in either game,” said coach Steve Prohm, in his first year at Iowa State.

Well, Coach, you were a No. 4 seed. But top seeds have been spit out all over the floor during March Preposterous.

Niang was having none of that, though. “Georges is a special person,” his coach said. “I think he’s a huge part of the resurgence, the renaissance of Iowa State basketball. He’s the winningest person in school history. He just represents the game the right way. The last two games, he’s been unbelievable.”

Georges obviously received a standing ovation when introduced at his last home game. But, get this: In his final appearance at Kansas, Georges also was given a standing O after the game.

“I was there, and those Kansas fans were terrific to him,” Allison said. “He was embarrassed because he didn’t want to take away from the Kansas seniors’ night.”

Georges was the class president in high school, the classy presence at Iowa State.

On the floor in his college career, he transformed from power forward to powerful guard. In the first half against Little Rock, he would dribble outside the arc and touch his right elbow. He was calling his own play. In five trips, he got nine points — and ended up making 11-of-18 shots, 3-of-3 beyond that arc.

This year Georges Niang has been a candidate for the Naismith award.

Figures, given how he played the past two games down the street from where the good doctor who invented basketball once lived.

Woody Paige: woody@woodypaige.com or @woodypaige