Megan Sarbough performs with a group from Dance Dimensions during the 2013 Festival on Main in Longmont. ( Times-Call file )

The Festival on Main is always a major community affair. But for Dance Dimensions Studio, which has put on performances at the festival since the event started 15 years ago, it's a family affair.

Louise Leise founded Dance Dimensions Studio 30 years ago. Leise's two daughters, Amanda and Tiffany, grew up in the studio, performing at the Festival on Main themselves. The two girls, now adults, left to pursue their own dancing careers but are now back in Longmont, running the studio.

If you go What: Festival on Main When:6 p.m. to 10 p.m. Friday, Aug. 28 Where: Downtown Longmont, on Main Street Cost: Free More info: festivalonmain.com

"I started teaching there when I was 12," Tiffany said of her experience in the studio. She danced professionally for 15 years but has been back in the area teaching ages 9 to 18.

Amanda just returned to Longmont this past year and has been involved with the studio for the past three months.

The Festival on Main is a big moment for the Leise girls and their dancers.

"It's one of our favorite events to perform at," Leise said. "The fest is one of our favorite performances that we do. We put the stage right in front of the studio."

The studio, at 638 Main St., has been involved with the festival since its inception, 15 years ago. Leise said the company chooses to have performances every year not only to promote the studio, which sits on Main St right at the heart of the festival, but to put a spotlight on the talented dancers.

"I think a performance opportunity," Leise said. "It's also a chance to give back to the community, which is important to them too."

This year the studio will have perform performances during the festival, all routines that have been choreographed by Amanda and Tiffany.

"I love that the kids have the opportunity to perform before everything starts rolling (for the next season)," Amanda said. "It's a good way to close the previous year in a community based event."

The performances will feature all competition routines from 2015. One of the dancers this year is also a Leise family member, Tiffany's 13-year-old daughter, Mia. Mia has performed at the festival every year since she was 5. Her favorite style of dance is tap, but this year will be performing hip-hop, musical theater and a contemporary dance.

Dance Dimensions Studio students rehearse in preparation for a performance. (Duane Leise / Courtesy photo)

"I get to spend time with my teammates and there's no pressure." Mia said of the festival performance. "It's not a competition, we get to perform for people who aren't judging us. I look forward to it every year."

Kimberlee McKee, the executive director of the Longmont Downtown Development Authority, said that the dance performance has been a main draw for the festival since its inception.

"Each year the dancers draw a crowd by showcasing innovative choreography through a variety of dance," McKee said. "It is a fun, crowd-pleasing enhancement to the festival."

McKee said that the Festival on Main "is a time for everyone to come together" and Dance Dimensions Studio exemplifies that ideal.

"Dance Dimensions Studio has been an anchor of downtown for 30 years," McKee said. "The years of experience and inspiring kids in our community through dance is a highlight of the festival every year."

While the festival is a chance to perform, for Dance Dimensions Studio it means more than just that.

For one, it's good exposure for the community at large.

"Lots of time, the people (watching) do not know the different styles of dance, and it exposes the audience to everything, from hip hop to ballet to contemporary dance," Leise said. "There are kids that decide that is something they would like to try."

It is also a chance to highlight the growing arts community in Longmont.

"I think Longmont is starting to become more arts infused, so it is nice to have our kids perform for the public," Tiffany said.

But most of all, like the rest of The Festival on Main, it's just a lot of fun.

"It's a great performance," Amanda said. "I'm stoked."

Isa Jones: 303-684-5274, jonesi@timescall.com or twitter.com/theisajones