Buy Photo NJDOT crews mark and cut down trees along Route 34 Tuesday, Oct. 20, weeks after a rotted tree killed a motorist. (Photo: LISA KRUSE/ASBURY PARK PRESS STAFF PHOTO)Buy Photo

COLTS NECK - State workers are cutting down trees alongside Route 34, following the death of a Tinton Falls woman who was struck by a tree during a nor'easter.

Crews from the New Jersey Department of Transportation started marking and clearing trees last week along Route 34 in the area where a 100-foot tall Tulip Poplar fell through the roof Oct. 3 and killed 46-year-old Stacey Weathers, who ran New Jersey's chapter of the Leukemia and Lymphoma Society. They cut five trees that were deemed unhealthy from that area.

"While the tree that fell and struck the driver was not in the Department’s right-of-way, NJDOT officials felt it was imperative to remove any trees that pose a potential hazard to drivers," said Kevin Israel, NJDOT spokesman, in an email.

Buy Photo The scene of a fatal accident along Route 34 in Colt Neck is shown Tuesday, October 6, 2015. Stacey Weathers was killed here when a 100-foot tall Tulip Poplar fell through the roof of her car on October 3. (Photo: THOMAS P. COSTELLO)

After they cleared the first set of trees, crews identified others farther down on Route 34 on NJDOT property that needed to be cut down. Workers marked nearly two dozen Tulip Poplars and Ailanthus trees to remove.

The Tulip Poplar that killed Weathers had rotted, Police Chief Kevin A. Sauter told the Press. It also damaged a guard rail on the highway.

Buy Photo The scene of a fatal accident along Route 34 in Colt Neck is shown Tuesday, October 6, 2015. Stacey Weathers was killed here when a 100-foot tall Tulip Poplar fell through the roof of her car on October 3. (Photo: THOMAS P. COSTELLO)

A second tree fell in the early hours of Oct. 14 across the street from where Weathers was killed near Clover Hill Road, Sauter said. Officers shut down the roadway for an hour and dragged the tree out of the way with a department military vehicle, until crews from NJDOT and Jersey Central Power & Light arrived.

Israel said NJDOT does not have an arborist and he could not determine what made the trees unhealthy, but confirmed the damage was not storm-related.

Steph Solis: 732-643-4043; ssolis@gannettnj.com

Don't miss a thing Download our apps and get alerts for local news, weather, traffic and more. Search "Asbury Park Press" in your app store or use these links from your device: iPhone app | Android app for phone and tablet | iPad app Don't forget to 'like' us on Facebook!

Read or Share this story: http://on.app.com/1RUktjx