You must enter the characters with black color that stand out from the other characters

Message: * A friend wanted you to see this item from High School OT: http://wral.com/14711371

More on this NFHS offers free courses to keep kids safe 08/01/2014: Meteorologist Nate Johnson talks summer heat and safety

— With final exams over and school out, summer workouts for many high school sports are now underway.

North Carolina is also experiencing its first major heat wave of the summer, and that has some people concerned about the health of athletes who will be working out and practicing in the heat.

"This kind of heat is hard on anybody," said WRAL meteorologist Aimee Wilmoth. "Our bodies will have to work extra hard to stay cool. We haven't had temperatures like this in about two years."

Triple-digit heat is in the forecast for Monday and Tuesday with highs at 100 degrees both days. The head index could be as high as 106 degrees.

Wilmoth says it is important for athletes and coaches to be aware of the signs of heat illness.

"Those exposed to the heat for an extended period if time the next few days need to be extra cautious and listen to their bodies," she said. "Cramps, dizziness, headaches – they're all signs of extreme dehydration."

Hydrating before any physical activity is important. Athletes should drink plenty of water leading up to practices and workouts, make sure they are drinking during activities, and replace any fluids lost after. Carbonated drinks should be avoided.

"Don't wait until you are thirsty to drink. Drink whatever whenever you can, not just during practice," said Wilmoth. "Take breaks when the opportunity is there and get in the shade if possible. Take cool showers after practice. If you have the option to wear light-colored jerseys, do it.'

Wilmoth said another important step to take is to apply sunscreen. While sunscreen can help prevent things like skin cancer, it can also help keep you cool.

"Wear sunscreen. Our bodies have to work harder to cool down burned skin," Wilmoth said.

With many teams scheduled to have consecutive days of practices, workouts and 7-on-7s, monitoring hydration and heat illnesses from day-to-day is important.

"Prolonged exposure to the heat does have a cumulative effect," Wilmoth said. "This will certainly be a trying week for anyone who must spend many hours outdoors. Our bodies simply aren't used to this kind of heat."

There isn't much relief in sight either. Wednesday's forecast high temperature is 98 degrees. Thursday and Friday both have forecast highs of 96 degrees.