Here's the thing Carolyn Sithong would like you to do when you think about aging in place: Don't get hung up on the "aging" part. Instead, focus on "place."

"I realize there's a real stigma with ageism. Nobody wants the things in the home that are visual reminders that I'm old — grab bars, things like that," she says. "But we change our homes all the time. We paint our walls a different color; we add on a room. Why not do it when we need it the most, which is when we're older?"

Sithong, a licensed occupational therapist in the Orlando area and an aging-in-place specialist certified by the National Association of Homebuilders, will give a presentation on an AARP program called Home Fit at a free seminar.

"At Home After 50: Learn What You Can Do Now to Make Your House a Home for Life," will run from 9 a.m. to 12:30 p.m. on Oct. 17 in the Dwyer Room of The Senior Friendship Center for Healthy Aging, 1900 Brother Geenen Way in Sarasota.

Sithong approaches home modification as the key to creating a healthy environment. And she wants people to notice how they move through that environment. If you put your hand out to touch the wall when you get into the tub, for instance, it's a sign you might be ready for that grab bar.

"Traditionally, we think of healthy homes in terms of things like carbon monoxide and lead paint," she says. "But doing things that make you happy keep you healthy. When you stop doing those things as you get older, sometimes it can relate to a physical barrier in the home."

If you love to cook but have started ordering out because it's too hard to stand at the stove, for example, "there's nothing wrong with you. It's the environment you live in."

Sithong says she is usually called in to consult with a family who is in crisis mode — after a fall, say, or when surgery is needed. She has found that homeowners can be resistant to change after 20 to 40 years in one place. They're emotionally attached to the familiar surroundings.

"What those feelings of comfort and security do," she says, "is shadow the actual barriers in your home. I ask people to take off the blinders and think about what it is they're not doing anymore, and why."

The seminar is sponsored by AARP and The Friendship Centers; refreshments will be provided. To reserve a spot, call 556-3268.

FALL INTO MEDICARE

If this is October, that means the open enrollment period for Medicare is almost upon us. I'll have more about what's new in this space next week. In the meantime, you can attend a workshop next Wednesday presented by Aging in Paradise, "What's New & Cost-Effective with Medicare — Latest Trends and Hidden Costs." Local health insurance pro Donna Blizman will cover details and answer questions from 1 to 4 p.m. at the Longboat Island Chapel, 6200 Gulf of Mexico Drive on Longboat Key. For information, call 383-6493, email donnadunio@aginginparadise.org or visit the website.

ELDERS GET OUT

I rarely do this, but I thought you might like this excerpt from a newsletter, "Human Values in Aging," written by Harry "Rick" Moody, a gerontologist on the board of Sarasota's Institute of the Ages. He is expected to visit for a lecture this winter:

"On Sunday, Sept. 22, I joined 300,000 others in N.Y. City for the 'People's Climate March,' the largest environmental demonstration in human history. I was there as board president of Gray Is Green, the national senior conservation corps, joining with other aging groups, including the Gray Panthers, Raging Grannies, and Elder Activists, marching under a banner that asked the question: 'What will be our legacy?'

"... What I found most inspiring is that whenever the elders' groups walked past, two groups of bystanders cheered: the gray-hairs, who saw their own cohort marching, and young people who said, we've been waiting to see more elders joining in this effort. It is a fitting sentiment expressed in one of the banners on the march: 'To change everything, we need everybody.'"