Gov. Bill Haslam’s Insure Tennessee proposal to expand health coverage to the working poor shares similarities with Indiana’s Healthy Indiana Plan. (Photo: File)

The Tennessee General Assembly is set to debate Insure Tennessee less than a week after a similar plan from Indiana won final federal approval — making the special session pivotal for not only Tennesseans but people around the country tracking the success of the health-care proposals.

Gov. Bill Haslam's Insure Tennessee proposal to expand health coverage to the working poor shares similarities with Indiana's Healthy Indiana Plan that make them a litmus test of sorts for the many states that have not expanded coverage for people making up to 138 percent of the federal poverty level.

"People have been laser-focused on Indiana, Tennessee and Utah," said Paula Torch, senior research analyst at Avondale Partners in Nashville.

If Tennessee joins Indiana in successfully designing and implementing a waiver program, then governors in other Southeast states could see an opening, she said.

Tennessee and Indiana bring more credibility to expanded coverage than other states — including those that are Republican-led — because each opted to create state-specific programs, Torch said. If both states are successful then it could trigger a "domino-like effect" among other states waiting to expand their coverage options, she added.

There are 22 states that have not expanded coverage through Medicaid programs or waiver proposals, although Tennessee and six other states are currently in negotiations with federal officials, according to the Kaiser Family Foundation. Many of the states are in the Southeast and only three of the 22 are controlled by Democratic governors.

Setting Coverage Trends

The push to empower patients to make healthier decisions is evident in the flexibility of marketplace exchanges but also a component in the two coverage expansion plans that are being pitched .

Both Healthy Indiana and Insure Tennessee create incentives and otherwise encourage participants to take control of their health. That personal accountability could also entice other Republican-led states to create their own plan for providing low-income residents with health care instead of simply expanding their current eligibility Medicaid program.

Deciphering what type of plan the federal government is willing to accept is still trial and error. Indiana's Healthy Indiana Plan was approved Tuesday by Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services although the state had to compromise on a few features.

For instance, CMS rejected a work requirement that was built into the expansion plan. The federal agency did however say that the state could administer a program that encourages work, but it couldn't change access to coverage. The work requirement has been attractive to the Republican governors of Alabama and North Carolina who each have said that they would support an expansion that had a work requirement.

"We're now digging into the details on what Indiana got," Dr. Wendy Long, Chief Medical Officer for the Bureau of TennCare, told legislators in an information session on Wednesday.

Both Tennessee and Indiana proposed penalties that would "lock-out" or disenroll a participant who fell behind on paying for their coverage. Federal health officials rejected having a 12-month lockout period in Indiana's proposal, but agreed to a six-month period.

Haslam's team is still working on details of Tennessee's disenrollment component. But Will Cromer, director of policy and research in the governor's office, recently told lawmakers the administration would likely require participants to pay outstanding bills before they could re-enroll.

Federal health officials also rejected capping the number of participants and implementing premiums that would cost more than 2 percent of a participant's yearly income.

"Our model definitely shifted as we evaluated our options." said Long, adding that at one point the administration considered buying coverage on the exchange.

Insure Tennessee is designed as a two-year pilot. "We feel very comfortable that we can end coverage for this population" if needed, Cromer told legislators who were concerned about whether the state could end the program.

Federal health officials sent a letter on Tuesday confirming the state's ability to end the program. The governor may need legislative approval to adopt the plan but, according to the information panel, it would be an administrative decision on whether to end Insure Tennessee.

Taking the industry's temperature

The tone about Medicaid expansion in investor conversations has gotten more positive as states have shown progress in working with the federal government on structuring plans that meet both the state's needs and the federal requirements, according to analysts.

"We have very strong views that, as this year progresses, more states will move further along with Medicaid expansion," said Darren Lehrich, managing director at Deutsche Bank.

Hospital operators support expanding coverage because it increases the number of patients that have health insurance. In states that have not expanded coverage to people who are Medicaid eligible, many hospitals — particularly those in rural areas — have not seen the uptick in insured patients promised under the Affordable Care Act.

The expansion considerations in the remaining states are a way to bring more people onto coverage rolls no matter what the June outcome of the King vs. Burwell Supreme Court case about tax subsidies on the federal exchange. Even if the court rules that credits are available only on state exchanges, people eligible to buy insurance on the federal exchange make above 138 percent of the federal poverty level, which is above the threshold for Insure Tennessee.

"Our view is that every state is going to expand Medicaid in the next four to five years when it's all said and done. It's just a matter of time," Wayne Smith, president and CEO at Community Health Systems, said a recent health-care forum in Nashville.

Supports Insure Tennessee

Mary Ayers, Nashville retiree

Mary Ayers, a Nashville native who retired in August, is starting to navigate the next phase of her life without health insurance. Ayers, 62, , falls in an insurance gap — she's no longer covered by an employer-sponsored plan, but she's three years from becoming eligible for Medicare.

"I think it's ridiculous that when you retire early that you don't have anything to fall back on," said Ayers, who retired from Evergreen Life Services, a Haughton, La.-based provider of services for people with intellectual and developmental disabilities in seven states.

Insure Tennessee would be a lifeline to medical coverage until she qualifies for Medicare at 65. Ayers said that people in situations similar to hers should be able to "go to the doctor and not have to cancel" an appointment because they don't have the money to pay for services. "I really would love to see it pass."

-- Holly Fletcher

Against Insure Tennessee

R. Stephen Richards, Nashville businessman

As the president and CEO of Richards & Richards, Richards understands the costs of covering health insurance for employees. But the longtime businessman says the benefits of paying all health-care costs for his 55 employees at the records management and shredding company far outweighs the financial price tag.

"If I take care of them, they're going to take good care of my customers," Richards said.

By accepting a component of Insure Tennessee that opens the door for employers to cut the amount they pay for employee health insurance, Richards argues he wouldn't have the same company. He said the move might save him money, but he doesn't want a government subsidy — especially one tied to the Affordable Care Act (Richards calls it "Obamacare" and "a disaster.")

"I'm disappointed in Bill Haslam for pushing this," said Richards, who has contributed to Haslam's campaigns in the past. "I'm surprised. I hope that it fails. I think there's a better way to do it."

-- Dave Boucher

Why people say Insure Tennesse is like "Obamacare"

The federal funding for the governor's health proposal is available thanks to the Affordable Care Act. Other states that have used the money have done so in order to pursue a "traditional Medicaid expansion," providing federally subsidized health care coverage to a larger subset of the working poor.

The population eligible for Haslam's Insure Tennessee — those who earn up to 138 percent of the federal poverty level — is the same population served by "traditional Medicaid expansion" through the Affordable Care Act.

While one part of the plan offers vouchers to cover some of the the costs of employer-provided insurance, the second option under Insure Tennessee is essentially an expansion of an existing Medicaid program operated by a state agency, TennCare.

How Insure Tennessee is not "Obamacare"

The Affordable Care Act created a slew of changes and programs related to health care. The option for states to expand Medicaid eligibility is part of the federal law, but it's not the same as the health insurance exchanges or business and personal mandates that opponents of the law typically blast when they refer to "Obamacare."

Unlike "traditional Medicaid expansion" through the Affordable Care Act, both Insure Tennessee health-care options require co-pays, premiums, healthy choices and other similar components.

Haslam is adamant the plan won't cost the state any money. Many other states that have expanded health coverage will pay as much as 10 percent of the cost of the new program once federal funding decreases; Tennessee hospitals have agreed to pay for that part of the program cost if Insure Tennessee becomes law.

Health insurance options for Tennesseans

Employer-sponsored: Roughly 40 percent of the people in the state have employer-sponsored plans. Coverage can vary because employers can design different plan options with insurance providers.

As premiums for spouses rise — in some cases the monthly premium goes up 300 percent — some people are looking for spousal coverage on the federal marketplace or foregoing coverage and potentially paying a penalty.

Federal marketplace: The number of Tennesseans who buy health insurance on the federal exchange that was created under the Affordable Care Act is still relatively small but it's growing. Open enrollment runs through Feb. 15, but the number of those who have signed up as of Jan. 16 — 184,486 — already tops the 151,352 people who got coverage in 2014.

There are four carriers that offer a total of 85 plans in Tennessee on the federal exchange. Not all plans or carriers are available statewide.

Medicare: A federal program run through the U.S. Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services that provides health care for people 65 and older.

TennCare: Tennessee's version of Medicaid — a federally subsidized health-care program for people under 65 — which includes coverage for children, pregnant women, women with children and people with disabilities. The program is open to the poorest people who lack access to care via other avenues.

Insure Tennessee: Gov. Bill Haslam's creation, the two-part plan potentially covers up to several hundred thousand Tennesseans who make up to 138 percent of the federal poverty level.

The Volunteer Plan would offer vouchers to people who need assistance affording employer-sponsored health coverage.

The Healthy Incentives Plan is a two-pronged program:

For those who earn between 100 percent and 138 percent of the federal poverty level, there would be monthly premiums and co-pays. The plan offers "Healthy Incentives for Tennesseans" accounts, where people can save and earn credits through healthy behaviors and disease management choices. This bracket would be subject to disenrollment for falling behind on premiums for 60 or more days. Medical providers could also refuse service if a patient has outstanding medical bills.

For those who earn below 100 percent of the federal poverty level, there would not be premiums or co-pays for office visits. They would also be able to earn credits for the "Healthy Incentives for Tennesseans" accounts.

Source: Department of Health and Human Services, TennCare, Insure Tennessee waiver proposal

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/1CP4MUN