HBO host Bill Maher wasn’t too keen on California’s high taxes several months ago, but the liberal show host is back on the Golden State bandwagon, lauding California during Friday night’s “Real Time with Bill Maher,” particularly for its aversion to the NRA, which on the West Coast stands for “nuts, racists and a**holes.”

During his “New Rules” segment, Maher praised California for leading the country to a modern, liberal nation. The HBO host noted the state’s ranking in largest global economies — 8th — and touted that once the Golden State makes a charge, the rest of the country follows suit, referencing the state’s ability to pass gun control legislation before Congress.

“You know it’s so ironic. The two things conservatives love the most, the free market and states rights, are the two things that are going to bend this country into California’s image as a socialist fag-topia,” Maher said. “Maybe our constipated Congress in Washington can’t pass gun control laws, but we just did. Because we don’t give a s**t about the NRA. Out here that stands for nuts, racists and a**holes.”

But Maher didn’t stop there. He continued, taking a shot at Sen. Ted Cruz (R-Texas), who launched a 21-hour “filibuster” earlier this week to protest the Affordable Care Act. Cruz’s speech won him admiration from the voters, but Maher saw it differently, comparing the Tea Party darling to Miley Cyrus and saying a filibuster is the “political version of twerking.”

“I was thinking the other night, he reminds me of Miley Cyrus, Ted Cruz. Because he is not afraid to incur the wrath of even some of his fans for the greater good of drawing attention to himself,” Maher said.

Cyrus gained notoriety for her performance at the “MTV Video Music Awards” last month for her “twerking” and suggestive dance moves.

“I really think that a filibuster is the political version of twerking. And for those people who say, ‘Ted Cruz, he hung himself.’ No. Just like Miley Cyrus, she came out the winner in that. Everybody said, ‘oh, she’s ruined her career.’ She’s on the cover of Rolling Stone, her records are outselling anybody else’s. I think Ted Cruz is going to be the winner too,” Maher said.

Check out Maher’s segments below. Caution: NSFW