Salinas >> Monterey County is contemplating a record $1.2 billion annual budget for the 2015-16 fiscal year. And that doesn’t include the county Water Resources Agency’s spending plans.

Assistant County Administrative Officer Dewayne Woods said the decision to separate the agency’s recommended $22.5 million budget from the overall county spending plan, for the first time in recent memory, was an attempt to shine more light on the agency’s operations. The agency is being charged with taking the lead on crucial water supply projects including possibly serving as the Salinas Valley’s groundwater sustainability agency.

“This offers more transparency with the issues they’re going through, especially around the drought,” Woods said.

The agency’s budget will be considered by the Board of Supervisors during this week’s budget hearings, set to start at 9 a.m. Tuesday at the County Government Center in Salinas.

Always officially an independent legal entity created by legislation, the agency is overseen by the Board of Supervisors of the Water Resources Agency, along with an appointed board of directors. County officials have also played a key role in nudging the agency toward fiscal balance in recent years.

This year’s agency budget, still deeply affected by the impact of the drought and the absence of hydroelectric plant revenue, has cut its use of reserves by more than half — from about $3.7 million to about $1.68 million — as it moves toward balancing its spending with revenue.

“We’re bringing things more into balance,” agency general manager David Chardavoyne said.

However, the budget doesn’t include specific spending on key water projects, including the Interlake Tunnel, Salinas River diversion permit work, Salinas River maintenance and management support, and Groundwater Sustainability Act compliance, among other priorities.

The agency reported those efforts would cost more than $20 million over the next five years, including $4.6 million in the upcoming fiscal year. The supervisors directed agency officials to hire a financial consultant to explore funding options for its share of the work.

Last week, Supervisors Dave Potter, Simon Salinas and Fernando Armenta went on a whirlwind tour of local state legislators and other state agencies in a quest for water project funding, among a series of other issues.

Meanwhile, the county’s overall budget reflects a $126.5 million spending increase and would require spending $39.5 million in reserves to balance the spending plan despite a $131.6 million increase in revenue.

Advertisement

Much of the additional cost comes from adding 194 new positions to the county payroll, for a total of 5,034, most of them in the Health Department and Natividad Medical Center. The Health Department is adding 110 positions to expand its behavioral health program and health clinic capacity to serve an increasing number of clients enrolled in Medi-Cal managed care under the Affordable Care Act and those newly insured through Covered California. The county hospital is adding 76 positions for its Level II trauma center and expanding family practice residency program.

While government reimbursement is up and property tax revenue has rebounded to pre-recession levels, Woods said the county’s “recovery period” is also met by more rapidly rising costs.

The county is also allocating about $13.2 million for the jail expansion and juvenile hall projects, replacing aging vehicles such as sheriff’s patrol cars averaging 141,000 miles, tenant improvements for the Schilling Place office complex and Government Center, renovation of the Old Courthouse’s east and west wings and removing portables on the Government Center campus.

Despite the imbalance between costs and available funding, the county appears to have managed to avoid all but a few layoffs by tapping about $13 million in increased discretionary revenue.

While county parks’ Lake San Antonio operation is facing closure and the loss of a dozen positions, half of them filled, new parks director Mark Mariscal announced last week that the department had cut the number of layoffs to two as a result of retirements and filling vacancies.

Jim Johnson can be reached at 726-4348.