Nuggets center Jusuf Nurkic on Saturday night had some extra flare that ignited the Pepsi Center crowd and sparked his team. He “posterized” former Denver forward Nene with back-to-back dunks in the fourth quarter to light the fire behind a 116-100 comeback win over Washington. .

The young Nuggets have taken to heart coach Michael Malone’s message of finishing strong as they ended their seven-game homestand 5-2 and are on their first four-game winning streak of the season.

It was a much-needed strong second half from Nurkic that turned the game around for the Nuggets (28-38), who fell behind by double digits in the third quarter. He began to impose his will in the post and finished with 17 points.

“He deserved what he got tonight,” Malone said. “It has not be easy for Nurkic. I admit that wholeheartedly. It’s been a rough go for him at times. This is not the season he anticipated with the injury hasn’t gone his way. But how he’s been lately — his state of mind, his work ethic, his commitment — allowed him to have a positive impact.”

Denver trailed 89-85 before Nurkic’s dunks sent the Nuggets on a 18-2 frenzy for which Washington (30-35) had no answer. Denver outscored the Wizards 41-17 in the fourth quarter.

The Nuggets’ bench played the majority of the second half, outscoring the starters 75-41. Forward Darrell Arthur and guard D.J. Augustin each finished with 17 points.

“Tonight I give all the credit to the bench,” Malone said. “They were terrific. We held them to 28 percent (shooting) in the fourth quarter.”

Forward Joffrey Lauvergne took an elbow to the eye while trying to prevent Washington’s Otto Porter, who led all scorers with 23 points, from an easy layup late in the third quarter.

Trainers tended to Lauvergne on the ground for a couple minutes before he headed to the locker room with a towel over his eye. He was diagnosed with a right zygomatic contusion with laceration and did not return. Malone said after the game that Lauvergne had a “huge gash” on his eye.

The Wizards went on a 12-1 run in the third quarter, jumping ahead 74-63 after Denver center Nikola Jokic picked up his fourth foul and headed to the bench. Nurkic also was limited to 4½ minutes in the first half because of foul trouble.

Denver shot a fiery 54 percent from the field in the first half but only held a 52-50 lead because of 16 turnovers that led to 18 points. Washington had seven first-half turnovers.

Former Nuggets center J.J. Hickson finished with 10 points in his first meeting against Denver since the team released him last month. Point guard John Wall had 19 points and 11 assists.

Guards Emmanuel Mudiay and Gary Harris combined to score 14 of the Nuggets’ first 16 points. Will Barton had 14 points.

It’s a long shot, but the Nuggets’ streak has put them on the edge of playoff contention. They are five games back of the Mavericks (33-33) for the eighth seed in the West with 16 games to play.

Cameron Wolfe: cwolfe@denverpost.com or @CameronWolfe