Cara Kroll may have managed the original PT’s Coffee location only for five months, but for those who knew and worked with her, she left a large hole in their lives.

“I was horrified when she died,” Classic Bean owner Juli Earl said. “It was like losing one of my own children.”

Cara Kroll worked for Earl for more than a decade at the 722 S. Kansas location when she left to manage the PT’s location at Barrington Village. Earl said she had known Kroll since she was young, and had even employed her as a babysitter for her two children. Earl said her husband called her in tears and read Kroll's obituary to her over the phone.

“She was like a third daughter to me,” Earl said.

Maragaret Provost, Cara Kroll's cousin and best friend, said the re-naming of the original PT's location would elicit mixed reactions from Kroll if she were still alive.

"She would be so embarrassed to be the center of attention," Provost said. "But, she would be so tickled to see her name in lights."

She said Kroll was so proud to become manager of the coffee shop, even though she was sad to leave The Classic Bean and the friends she had made there. Provost said her cousin was hoping to become partner with her uncle at PT’s.

“She was just one of those people who just made me happy,” Provost said.

Provost is the stepdaughter of Jack Brier, the current owner of Cara's Cup. Brier was a partner with PT's owners Jeff Taylor and Fred Polzin, but in 2012, the men decided to part ways.

"We wanted to take the business in a different direction," Taylor said. "It was the best five years to learn business with Jack."

Taylor said the two-year gap between changing the name from PT's to Cara's Cup was intentional and he was glad to learn Brier had decided to honor Kroll with the name change. Taylor said the most difficult part of selling the original location to Brier was walking away from the business he and Polzin had run for nearly 20 years. He said he worked with Kroll for a short time when she left The Classic Bean to run PT's.

“She was awesome to work with,” Taylor said. “I was out of the country when she died, so I couldn’t make it back in time for the funeral.”

For Kroll’s father Joe, he said the name change was an honor for him and said it would be an honor for his daughter, too.

“From the earliest age, Cara was a hard worker,” Joe Kroll said. “She was easy to raise and very even-tempered. She and I were very close.”

Joe Kroll said Brier contacted him back in November and told Kroll he was seriously considering naming the coffee shop after his daughter. Joe Kroll said he was one of the first people in line when the store was officially rebranded and was very excited.

According to Kroll's obituary, she went into St. Francis Hospital on Aug. 6, 2012, with massive blood clots. She died two days later.