Of course it's OK to ask, "Is It Just Me?" No question is too small for The Bottom Line.

Q: "Recently, I called Safelite AutoGlass to purchase a new windshield. The sales lady quoted a price, and I not only accepted, but made a date for it to be installed at my home later that week. Then she asked me for my credit card number, and I refused to give it over the phone. I told her I would pay cash, and she said that they still need a number. I then said, 'It's hard to believe that a company would refuse a cash payment,' and hung up. Can they refuse cash?"

Robert D. Mann, Columbia

A: Technically, Safelite did not refuse a cash payment. The company says it would have accepted cash if the windshield had been installed.

"We ask for the credit card information in order to hold the appointment time for the customer, which can be in very high demand, especially after storms," says Melina Metzger, a Safelite spokeswoman.

The Coinage Act of 1965 empowers U.S. coins and currency as "legal tender for all debts, public charges, taxes and dues." Though cash is a valid and legal offer of payment, a private business is not required to accept it as payment for goods or services. A gas station might refuse large-denomination bills or a city bus might accept only coins, not bills. ConnecticutTransit buses, for example, accepts $1 bills but passengers are asked not to deposit $5, $10 or $20 bills into the fare box. (Bus operators and fare boxes do not make change.)

Believe it or not, pennies and nickels weren't legal tender until the late 1800s. Coinage Acts (1873 and 1879) made them legal tender for debts up to 25 cents. Other coins were legal tender for debts up to $10. That was the law until 1965.

Safelite says it does not store any credit card information — it's run through a processor that converts it to a reference number called a token that the company can later use to charge a customer if needed.

"We adhere to very strict policies to protect customer data so the customer can trust their credit card information is safe and secure," says Metzger.

Metzger says Safelite will now book Mann's appointment without a credit card, but it's too late. Mann found another installer.

Obamacare And Your Taxes

It's way too early to talk about winter and federal taxes, so let's leave winter out of this.

Most people who purchased health insurance from an exchange marketplace through the Affordable Health Care Act also received advance payments of the premium tax credit sent directly to their insurance provider. The credits make the premiums more affordable.

A life change, whether marriage status or income, affects the premium credit. Depending on the change, your original credit could have been excessive or inadequate — either way, it will change the refund or balance due on your federal tax return.

Other reportable changes:

>> Having a child, adopting a child or placing a child for adoption.

>> Pregnancy.

>> Getting health coverage through an employer or Medicare/Medicaid.

>> Address.

>> Disability status.

Here's an example from the IRS:

Brian and Catherine, married, claimed their two children as dependents in 2013. Their advance credit payments for 2014, based on that scenario, are $8,535. But in 2014 they do not claim one child and no taxpayer claims a personal exemption deduction for the other. Their premium tax credit for 2014 becomes $5,978, which means they received an excess advance payment of $2,557.

That's their additional tax liability, reduced to $2,500 based on IRS limitations.

Changes must be reported either online (www.healthcare.gov) or by calling 1-800-318-2596. (No mail.)

If you've received too much, the IRS wants it back. For tax-related information, click here.