For the last 20 years, Mainwaring has built call centers from the ground-up and has led outsourced contact center operations all over the world, including North America, Central America, India and the Philippines. In addition to his work at General Dynamics Information Technology, Mainwaring has held Director positions at Capital One, Sears Holdings and Circuit City, as well as VP of Operations at Bank of America.

"Scott has a track record of achievement, building performance-based cultures, setting strategic direction, driving business growth and improving customer satisfaction," said Nuno Valentine, CEO and co-founder. While at Circuit City, he led significant call center customer satisfaction improvements, achieving 14% lift in his first year and 9% in the second. On the sales side, he drove a dramatic 93% and 45% increase in revenue in subsequent years. He also launched and integrated multi-channel capabilities, such as phone, email and chat at GDIT and at Sears Holdings.

Iggbo president and co-founder, Mark Van Roekel said, "I'm thrilled that Scott has joined Iggbo and believe his ability to drive high customer satisfaction while scaling our Help Desk/Customer Care operations will be a huge value to our company."

About Iggbo

Iggbo brings personalized medicine to everyone. Operating in over 120 US cities, with a workforce of over 6,000 blood draw professionals, Iggbo's on-demand platform benefits every vertical of healthcare—from health systems to specialty labs to tele-medicine to mobile diagnostics. With smartphone technology, Iggbo closes the last mile to the patient and reinvents healthcare's service delivery model. Iggbo's phlebotomists perform fixed and on-demand draws anywhere, anytime. Physicians and nurses can order lab tests with the push of a button, patient compliance improves to 97%, and every sample is monitored, tracked, and connected digitally. For more, visit www.iggbo.com.

CONTACT: Paul Spicer, 804-503-9231, pauls@iggbo.com

Photo - http://photos.prnewswire.com/prnh/20160322/346881

Logo - http://photos.prnewswire.com/prnh/20150724/241229LOGO

To view the original version on PR Newswire, visit:http://www.prnewswire.com/news-releases/iggbo-hires-affordable-care-act-executive-to-lead-customer-carehelp-desk-operation-300240792.html

SOURCE Iggbo