The state ethics commission has dismissed a complaint filed by a former Republican lawmaker who claimed a star-studded fundraiser boosting Democratic gubernatorial candidate Jason Carter is “grossly unethical and illegal.”

The ethics agency said in its two-page rejection letter, which Carter’s campaign received Monday, that the event didn’t violate transparency rules because it was soliciting campaign donations for the state Democratic party and not directly benefiting Carter’s campaign.

The initial complaint, filed by former state Sen. John Douglas, was dated July 17 but not submitted until last week. It contended that Carter, a state senator, violated rules barring lawmakers and statewide officers from accepting contributions or pledges for campaign cash while the Legislature is in session.

The fundraiser in question was held March 23 in New York, three days after the legislative session ended, and featured Carter’s grandfather, former president Jimmy Carter, as well as REM front-man Michael Stipe. The invitation is pictured to your right.

Gov. Nathan Deal’s campaign and its allies questioned the timing of the invitation, which was sent out before the session gaveled to a close. The invitation noted that it was “paid for and authorized by Carter for Governor, Inc.” Douglas, now a Newton County commission member, said that was “clear proof” that the event was intended to benefit Carter.

The Carter campaign has argued that the invitations were legal because the fundraiser went to benefit the Democratic Party of Georgia and not Carter’s campaign. The event went forward as planned, though it’s not certain how much money it raised.

Ethics attorney Robert Lane said in the rejection letter that while legislators are banned from soliciting contributions for their campaigns during the session, “there is no such prohibition that prevents a member of the General Assembly from soliciting campaign funds for political parties or non-candidate campaign committees during a legislative session.”

Carter spokesman Bryan Thomas welcomed the news.

“It looks like Gov. Deal and his friends still don’t understand ethics laws after all these years,” he said.