Topics: From the Wires, Entertainment News, News

CANNES, France (AP) — It’s been a gorgeous weekend at the Cannes Film Festival. And the weather’s been pretty nice, too. Film and fashion continue to dazzle at the movie world’s annual celebration of cinema on the Cote d’Azur. Associated Press journalists are on the ground, too, and here’s a look at what they’re reporting:

___

A-LISTER IN AN A-LINE

Natalie Portman is at home on the Cannes red carpet, but her appearance Saturday was her first as director as well as star.

Portman wrote, directed and stars in the Hebrew-language festival entry “A Tale of Love and Darkness.”

She wore an elegant dress from Dior Couture’s spring-summer 2015 collection with an A-line skirt in black-patterned pale blue silk and a black strapless bodice. The look was topped by sleek, pulled-back hair and white diamond De Grisogono earrings.

Portman has received lukewarm reviews for the film, a handsomely mounted tale of a young boy coming of age in the newly formed Israeli state in the late 1940s. Portman plays the boy’s sensitive, imaginative mother in the film, adapted from a novel by Amos Oz.

— Jill Lawless, http://Twitter.com/JillLawless

___

DARK SIDE OF FAME

Celebrity-worshipping Cannes got a sobering reminder of fame’s dark side Saturday with “Amy,” a powerful documentary about the late singer Amy Winehouse.

“I don’t think I’m going to be at all famous,” a teenage Winehouse says at one point in the film by British director Asif Kapadia. “I don’t think I could handle it.”

Winehouse was a global celebrity when she died in July 2011 of accidental alcohol poisoning at age 27.

The sense that the singer foresaw her fate lends extra poignancy to the film, which is getting its world premiere at a Cannes midnight screening.

Musician Yasmin Bey, formerly known as Mos Def, performed at a party before the premiere, along with jazz singer Gregory Porter and new artist Cosmina.

Bey called Winehouse a “dear friend” and “one of the realest” people he had ever met.

“I’m doing the songs that Amy never heard but I know she would like,” said Bey, who sprinkled rose petals on the floor in her honor. “This one’s for you baby girl.”

— Jill Lawless, http://Twitter.com/JillLawless

___

HARSH GREETING

Matthew McConaughey’s remarkable comeback streak in recent years — the so called “McConaissance” — hit a bump at the Cannes Film Festival premiere of Gus Van Sant’s “The Sea of Trees.”

The film, about two men (McConaughey, Ken Watanabe) who find each other in a Japanese “suicide forest,” was greeted harshly by critics and was loudly booed in its initial screenings to Cannes media. Ahead of the film’s official premiere, McConaughey was sanguine about the reaction.

“Anyone has as much right to boo as they do to ovate,” McConaughey told reporters Saturday.

“The Sea of Trees,” which was picked up for U.S. distribution by Lionsgate and Roadside Attractions ahead of the festival, is about a man who wrestles with guilt over a bitter marriage (Naomi Watts plays his wife) and travels to Japan to kill himself.

Variety called the film “a risibly long-winded drama.” The Hollywood Reporter slammed it as “woefully sentimental and maudlin.”