Congressional Republicans have a healthy early-Christmas wish list on Capitol Hill - the end of Obamacare, at least a temporary end to incoming Syrian refugees, and no more federal funding for Planned Parenthood.

In exchange, the White House would get the continued funding of the U.S. government beyond Dec. 11, when a current stopgap funding bill expires.

Nearly one-third of House Republicans have signed a letter calling on party leaders to ensure that a must-pass, $1 trillion spending bill block any use of federal funding to resettle refugees from Syria and nearby countries, the bill's sponsor said on Tuesday.

Scroll down for videos

Newly elected House Speaker Paul Ryan of Wisconsin faces a tough test on his ability to work with President Obama, as the new speaker has named one of his first tasks - funding the federal government - should be one of the few areas on which he and Obama can work together

In the Senate, GOP leader Mitch McConnell of Kentucky faces a fine-threading test as he tries to accomplish top-tier Republican goals with the needs of the three senators in his caucus who are running for president

In all, 74 of the 246 House Republicans signed the letter, which comes after the House voted 289-137 last Thursday for a bill to restrict refugees into the U.S. until stricter scrutiny standards could be put into place.

That was a reaction to the previous week's deadly terrorist attacks in Paris, which were at least partly carried out by ISIS fighters posing as refugees. But it also drew a White House veto threat as well as a predicted blockage by Democrats in the Senate.

In the House as well as the Senate - and including Attorney General Loretta Lynch's own testimony to the House last week - Democrats have said the refugees should be allowed because the U.S. already has a 'robust' screening system that can take up to two years to complete for any one single person.

Thursday's bill urges House Speaker Paul Ryan and other GOP leaders to include a provision in an upcoming appropriations bill that would block President Barack Obama's plan to accept 10,000 Syrian refugees in the next year.

It would represent a major test for Ryan, who has repeated multiple times in multiple national TV interviews that the government funding bill is one of the few areas on which he predicts he and Obama can work together outside of partisan politics.

President Barack Obama will certainly disagree to dismantle his signature domestic achievement - the 2010 Affordable Care Act health care law - but also wants to continue to fund the federal government beyond Dec. 11, when a stopgap funding measure runs out

Ryan's office did not immediately respond to a request for comment on the letter, which argued that Congress must "exercise greater authority" over the refugee resettlement program to ensure the safety of the U.S. public.

'ISIS (Islamic State) has repeatedly declared that they would infiltrate the refugee community that is leaving the Middle East and flooding into Europe. The November 13 attacks in Paris appear to have been a fulfillment of that threat,' the letter said.

In the Senate, Republicans are planning yet another push to obliterate Obama's cherished health care law - the 2010 Affordable Care Act - and block $450 million in annual federal funds to Planned Parenthood.

The Planned Parenthood funding became a lightning rod for social conservatives this year after secretly recorded videos surfaced over the summer that showed agency officials allegedly discussing harvesting fetal tissue.

The group denied any wrongdoing, but congressional Republicans are continuing to investigate.

Despite the certain Obama veto waiting for any Obamacare repeal or de-funding Planned Parenthood efforts, Republicans see the congressional votes as a way to signal their endorsement of the conservative causes.

The path is tricky in the Senate, however, since the chamber was inherently designed to give more weight to the minority party - currently Democrats - than the House.

It also drips with presidential politics, as three GOP senators - Rand Paul of Kentucky, Ted Cruz of Texas and Marco Rubio of Florida - are vying for the 2016 Republican nomination for president, and therefore eager to show off their conservative credentials to primary voters.

Since Obama will remain in the White House until January 2017, the votes also send the not-so-subtle message that the goals could be achieved if Republicans win the 2016 election.

For Senate passage, Republicans will likely turn to a complex legislative tactic that allows a simple Senate majority of 51 votes to pass a bill instead of the usual 60 required to overcome a filibuster.

There are currently 54 Republicans in the Senate. However, for the tactic to be considered allowable by the Senate parliamentarian, it must reduce the federal budget deficit. That means an Obamacare repeal may be off the table because the non-partisan Congressional Budget Office has said repealing the health care law would actually increase the deficit by $350 billion over the next 10 years.

Cruz is one of the few Senate Republicans who could prove to be a stumbling block to the GOP's wish list for Christmas

Rubio could also hold an important card in the all-critical Christmas sweepstakes that will unfold after Thanksgiving

Remaining options are to repeal certain provisions of the health law to undermine it, including its fines against individuals who lack coverage and employers who don't offer it to workers.

Other parts of the law would conceivably remain intact, including some for which repeal would anger voters and jeopardize GOP incumbents' re-election prospects in competitive states like Ohio, Pennsylvania and Illinois.

That includes the statute's expansion of Medicaid and its federal subsidies for lower-earning people buying health coverage.

Senate leaders haven't finished crafting their legislation, and will tailor it to attract votes. Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell, R-Ky., has said it will include an Obamacare repeal and a halt to Planned Parenthood's money.

But some GOP senators reluctant to bar Planned Parenthood's funds might vote 'no.' Moderate Sen. Susan Collins of Maine says she's 'concerned' about the language, and Sens. Mark Kirk of Illinois, Kelly Ayotte of New Hampshire and Alaska's Lisa Murkowski — all facing close re-election contests next year — might find the decision difficult.

On the other hand, three conservative Republicans said last month that the House measure 'simply isn't good enough.' Presidential hopefuls Cruz of Texas and Rubio of Florida, as well as Utah's Mike Lee, said they'd oppose the bill unless it 'fully repeals Obamacare pursuant to Senate rules.'