For decades, culminating with ObamaCare, America’s health care system has increasingly moved away from free-market principles — leading to compromised access to care and higher costs. So when the Hospital Corp. of America Virginia, also known as HCA-Virginia, announced its common-sense proposal earlier this year to construct a freestanding emergency center in New Kent County, I wrote wholeheartedly in support of that private venture to enhance health care in my district.

In addition to improving access to quality health care in New Kent, this center will provide local good-paying jobs and be a boost to the local economy in the wake of the closing of Colonial Downs.

HCA’s proposal was a refreshing and positive change to the landscape: a private, for-profit hospital system believed it was good business to invest non-taxpayer funds in a predominately rural county and, as a result, improve access to quality health care services.

With a decade of legislative service to New Kent county residents and as a leading voice on our House Health, Welfare and Institutions Committee, I have no doubt that this wonderful county needs this valuable investment to improve quality of life, spark economic growth and job creation and, most importantly, save lives.

But after an absurd recent bureaucratic health department recommendation to deny the project, I am concerned not just about this particular project’s approval but for the future of health care in Virginia. Next session, the General Assembly needs to examine and implement overdue comprehensive reform of our system.

***

In a letter to the state health commissioner, Dr. Marissa Levine, on March 31, I endorsed the New Kent proposal, highlighting the positive benefits for my constituents.

Specifically this emergency center would provide greater access to high-quality care as well as CT and MRI imaging services. If you have ever driven I-64 to the beach, the Outer Banks or to the historic triangle, then you can imagine the constant demand on New Kent’s first responders to provide emergency care to motorists in distress.

New Kent is also a critical area on our state hurricane evacuation route. In fact, New Kent Fire-Rescue Chief Richard Opett, writing in a letter in support, noted that his department responded to more than 1,500 calls for emergency medical services last year, an increase from previous years.

A majority of those patients were transported to Richmond-area hospitals, with the transports taking up valuable time and delaying responses for other emergency calls. And when there is a New Kent family in crisis, there is not even a Patient First to visit in the county.

***

Many Virginians may be surprised to learn that health care providers that want to use certain equipment or offer advanced health care services such as MRI or a CT imaging are required to ask the state health department for permission to pursue such business decisions.

This out-of-date regulatory structure is a remnant of a 1970s-era federal law mandating that all states enact a “Certificate of Public Need” (COPN) law. Congress passed this mandate in an attempt to control health care costs for which the federal government was reimbursing health care providers.

A short 12 years later, recognizing that this federal mandate did not work, Congress repealed the requirement for states to adopt COPN laws. Fifteen states, including Pennsylvania, Minnesota and Colorado, have repealed their COPN laws while others kept COPN laws on the books, including Virginia.

As part of its New Kent emergency center, HCA would naturally like to offer MRI and CT imaging services. After all, these essential services are needed to properly treat patients, and without this equipment, patients might have to be transferred to another facility, costing valuable time and risking outcomes.

The initial state review denied HCA’s request, along with similar requests from the VCU Health System and Bon Secours Richmond Health System. According to health department staff, “Most of the primary service area of the proposed project is currently well served by existing providers of CT and MRI and the proposed project would only improve patient access for a small area within eastern (Planning District) 15.”

The Richmond Regional Planning District spans the counties of Charles City, Chesterfield, Goochland, Hanover, Henrico, New Kent, Powhatan, the city of Richmond and the town of Ashland. The staff report stated that the application was inconsistent with the State Medical Facilities Plan (SMFP), last updated in 2009 despite state law mandating its review in 2013. Their perfunctory analysis relies on old data and audaciously suggests that residents can visit another free-standing ER in Chesterfield or one in Goochland.

***

The COPN law also allows competing hospitals and other health care providers to fight one another’s applications for new services, costing more money, while patients continue to wait for access to care. Such barriers to entry do nothing to lower health care costs.

Ask yourself whether the government should dictate to private industry when it is willing to invest its dollars in our communities. Shouldn’t there be more of a free-market process? In due course, legislators must wrestle with this larger philosophical question, which concerns the appropriate role of government.

To that end, in the last session of the General Assembly, I worked with members of our health and budget committees to direct the state secretary of health and human resources to convene a work group that includes health care providers, consumers of health care services, representatives of the business community, and other stakeholders to review the current certificate-of-public-need process and the impact of such process on health care services in the commonwealth — and the need for changes to the current process.

This group should evaluate issues regarding the process by which COPN applications are reviewed and the criteria upon which decisions about COPN issuance are based — as well as the barriers to issuance; the frequency with which applications for a certificate are approved or denied; the relationship between the COPN process and the provision of charity care and the impact of the COPN process on the provision of charity care; and the frequency with which the State Medical Facilities Plan is updated and whether the plan should be updated more frequently.

This thoughtful process is underway and should lead to recommendations for comprehensive COPN reform — because the status quo is untenable and repeal without a blueprint for implementation is unwise.