Fast food wages and benefits

Oceanside, L.I.: The debate about raising the minimum wage from $7.25 to $15 per hour is absurd. The minimum wage is fair for people with minimum skills. Someone flipping my fast-food order is usually a student making spending money or an undereducated adult with little or no job skills. Doubling the rate will just eliminate thousands of jobs that these same people now strive to secure. It’s cutting off your nose to spite your face. Let’s not forget, with the increase in wages, everything across the board will rise. Do you think the skilled laborer making $15 now will want to be paid minimum wage? President “I am a Socialist” Obama is dead wrong, as usual, about this. He’s just doing what he’s best qualified at, being a community activist. Peter Dwyer

Brooklyn: People should boycott Pizza Hut every Thursday for the firing of a manager who closed on Thanksgiving and gave his workers the day off. Joan Defazio

Bratton’s back

Fresh Meadows: The selection of Bill Bratton to be the city’s next police commissioner was a very good choice by Mayor-elect Bill de Blasio. Bratton’s record of service speaks for itself. He has worked in New York City before, as well as serving as the police commissioner of Los Angeles. We welcome him back to the Big Apple and wish him much success in his very important position. Let’s hope that crime levels will continue to drop, as they have under Ray Kelly, the outgoing police commissioner who also did a stellar job. John Amato

Hate by any name

Brooklyn: Councilwoman-elect Laurie Cumbo’s anti-Semitic screed echoes the virulent words of Hitler, Bormann, Goebbels and Heydrich. However, she is in lockstep with Mayor-elect de Blasio, who for 40 years has supported the Sandinistas, whose foundational policies included the ethnic cleansing of the Jews of Nicaragua and the burning of synagogues. Richard Sherman

Punch line

Manhattan: Re Laurie Cumbo: In the early ’70s, when Crown Heights’ Jewish population began to stagnate and dwindle, and its black and Caribbean populations began to soar, how many people of color were knocked out by Jews? Get real, Cumbo. You haven’t served one day in the Council and you have already disgraced yourself. Louie Russo

Better safe

Bronx: While the majority of Black Friday shoppers were purchasing electronics and other discounted items, I bought myself a helmet to wear around the city, just in case this knockout game is for real! Sandy Harris

Stamp of approval

Manhattan: I would like to respond to Voicer Arlene Soto regarding her inability to find Christmas stamps: Perhaps the Postal Service sent out a partial listing of holiday stamps. I went to the post office about a week ago, and they had a very large assortment of holiday stamps displayed on a board. I chose two, one a festive, nonreligious stamp to send out on our Chanukah cards, and the other a lovely depiction of the Madonna and child with the word “Christmas” across the top. Those stamps will go out on the Christmas cards we are sending. I am sure that if you go to the post office, you will find stamps that convey the spirit of Christmas. And please have a very Merry Christmas! Barbara Goldberg

Don’t hide Christmas

Fairfield, Conn.: I couldn’t agree more with Voicer Arlene Soto. Good for her. I was enraged and insulted as well. I did check on the postal website, and there are in fact two Christian religious stamps available. Why are they not advertised? This silent Christian majority better start speaking up. Merry Christmas! Virginia Rabacs

Disparaging words

Flushing: In the continuing war on Christianity, Rush Limbaugh accuses Pope Francis of espousing “pure Marxism.” Why aren’t Ann Coulter, Sean Hannity and all the other right-wing gasbags condemning Rush for his hate speech? Arthur Clements

Family hour viewing

Massapequa Park, L.I.: The Rockefeller Center Christmas tree lighting gets worse every year — now with a no-talent singer like Mariah Carey doing her Mae West imitation. She should cover up. Doesn’t she know kids are watching? Richard Banks

Season’s greetings

Kew Gardens: I am a Catholic and I totally agree with Voicer Robert McKenna. I wish people “Merry Christmas” when I know they are Catholic and “Happy Chanukah” when I know they are Jewish. If I don’t know their religion, then I say “Merry Christmas/Happy Chanukah” to cover both religions. What I would like to know is, why is it OK to say “Happy Chanukah” but not “Merry Christmas”? Barbara Miller

English, please

Medford, L.I.: I agree with Voicer Elizabeth Hughes: People should learn to speak English. There are people who have been here for more than 20 years who can’t. They don’t have to, because this wonderful country provides them with documents and customer assistance in 66 languages. Why should they learn? It’s disgusting. Ida Norris

Kim and Kompany

Manhattan: In addition to Voicer Nicholas Amato’s question, could someone please tell me who on God’s green Earth are these Kardashian creatures who have infested every single medium? They are inescapable, and it’s making my hair hurt and shredding my achy breaky heart. Carol Hopkins

Rockaway’s absent boardwalk

Rockaway Park: I have one question for our President, our governor, our mayor, our mayor-elect and all the other politicians, as well as the Parks Department and Army Corps of Engineers and anyone who has any kind of influence in the forgotten peninsula call the Rockaways: Where is our boardwalk? We are waiting and getting very impatient. It is long overdue that construction begin on the much-needed and much-missed boardwalk. Since Sandy, there have been millions of dollars wasted on the high-in-the-sky lifeguard buildings, when trailers were just fine and could have been taken away at the end of the season. It is about time for someone to recognize our very beautiful peninsula and what we are missing. All the other beaches, including Coney Island, Long Beach and the Jersey Shore, got their boardwalks back! We are told maybe three or four years at local meetings. Stop talking and start pouring! Geri Armellino, Anthony Manza

Vengeance is mine

Brooklyn: To Voicer Suzanne Hayes Kelly: If one of your family members were one of those four people killed on that Metro-North train, you would be the first one to tie the noose so the motorman would hang. Andrew Feinstein

Keep church and state apart

North Syracuse, N.Y.: Cardinal Timothy Dolan has no right to impose his religious beliefs on everyone in America. Many people of different faiths support gay marriage and abortion rights. Our country’s laws should not be based on the Bible. I’m glad Obamacare mandates contraception coverage. No woman should be forced to bear a child against her will. There are enough abused and neglected children in this country already. I’m sorry illegal aliens are not eligible for Obamacare. But people here illegally should not have the same rights as citizens. The American taxpayer should not have to support people who sneak into this country. President Obama, Congress and the courts should never make laws based on religion. Freedom of religion is one of America’s greatest strengths. Linda Wyatt

A sick plan

South Farmingdale, L.I.: Too bad the government cannot be as efficient and fast in creating health insurance as the major insurance carriers are being in canceling policies for people by the millions. This is because the policies cannot meet all the stringent, overburdening requirements of this nightmare of a health-care law. Mike Pedano

Won’t change a thing

Bayside: I love the Boston Red Sox and hate the Yankees. Bringing Jacoby Ellsbury to the Bronx won’t change a thing. I’m sure I can easily learn to hate Jacoby also. Jack Cohen

Track the crooks

Bronx: Voicer Ruth Weiner says retailers should use racial profiling if it helps. Racial profiling is built on assumptions. While security people are following Forest Whitaker around the store, Winona Ryder and Lindsay Lohan are walking out with everything. Jonathan Solomon