Jean Fraser

Jean Fraser announced her resignation as chief of the San Mateo County Health System Thursday.

Fraser, who took over the job in 2009, will leave her post effective July 10.

Fraser, 52, served as chief executive officer of San Francisco Health Plan from 2000 to 2008 after a career path that included stints as a prosecutor for the federal government and the San Francisco City Attorney’s Office.

“Having worked in or around county health care systems for 20 years, and seeing the progress made in the United States and in San Mateo County due to the Affordable Care Act, I now feel I can move on to pursue other passions,” Fraser wrote in a statement to Health System’s 2,200 employees.

Fraser’s job includes oversight of the San Mateo Medical Center and 11 outpatient clinics.

In addition to exploring opportunities in other areas of interest, Fraser will be spending time with her elderly parents who live in another state.

“This was not an easy decision,” Fraser wrote in a statement. “But with most San Mateo residents insured, the Health System’s finances stable and a strong Health System leadership team in place, now is a good time for me to leave.”

Fraser was previously the CEO of San Francisco Health Plan, a county-created health plan providing affordable health coverage to low- and moderate-income families. From 1991-2000, Fraser worked with San Francisco City Attorney’s Office as managing attorney for the team advising the San Francisco departments of Public Health and Human Services.

She holds a law degree from Yale Law School, and a bachelor’s degree from Yale University.

County Manager John Maltbie will begin recruiting immediately for Fraser’s successor. If a successor is not named prior to Fraser’s departure, Health System Deputy Chief Louise Rogers will serve as interim chief.

“Jean has been an outstanding asset to the Health System and the county of San Mateo as a whole,” Maltbie wrote in a statement. “She has provided invaluable leadership, successfully steering the Health System through many challenges like the implementation of the Affordable Care Act and assuming the county’s public administrator program. She is a champion of fair and equal health care for all and she will be truly missed. I wish her all the best in her future endeavors.”