Nick Steele hopes trial will fight back his tumors

Nick Steele, shown here with his mother Stevie Todd, is participating in a Phase 1 "first-in-human" clinical trial in hopes of beating back his chondrosarcoma, a rare form of bone cancer. ( Jeannie Lancaster / For the Reporter-Herald )

Nicholaus (Nick) Steele looks like any other 33-year-old. His ready smile and seemingly good health don't hint at the medical condition that has him fighting for his life. But the Loveland man has a powerful team in his corner.

One year ago, Steele went to the emergency room, thinking he had a torn rotator cuff. The emergency room doctor initially agreed, until an X-ray showed that Steele had a tumor that had grown on his scapula (shoulder blade). The physician sent the X-ray to a radiologist at Orthopedic Center of the Rockies, who confirmed their fears.

"I was shocked," said Steele. "I didn't want to believe it. I went in for a torn rotator cuff, and they came back and said, 'I'm sorry the results are a tumor, and it's cancerous.' There was that moment of disbelief.

"I fell on my shoulder, and it spawned the tumor. I may have had the cancer before, but it took something to get it to metastasize into my shoulder and then to my lungs."

The radiologist referred Steele to Dr. Cynthia Kelly of the Colorado Limb Consultants at Presbyterian/St. Luke's in Denver. Kelly, an orthopedic surgeon, biopsied the cancer and made a diagnosis of Stage IV chondrosarcoma, a very rare type of bone cancer.

"They had to remove my right scapula to get rid of the tumor and the cancer that had gone into my scapula," said Steele, who is in constant pain, when moving his arm.

"The doctor said that she rerouted his tendons," said Stevie Todd, Steele's mother.

Advertisement

"They weren't expecting that I would have the movement that I have," said Steele. "I'm able to raise my arm above my head."

"After he had his scapula removed, he was up walking laps," said Todd. "He lives with his brother. He's done yard work, built decks. Not having a scapula has not stopped him from being him. His strength and his determination amaze me."

Steele was later referred to medical oncologist, Dr. Iona Hinshaw, who began treatment. When the tumors did not respond as hoped, Hinshaw referred him to Dr. Gerald Falchook.

Falchook is the director of the newly opened Sarah Cannon Research Institute in Denver. The institute offers patients Phase 1 clinical trials — commonly known as "first-in-human-trials." The research institute began in Nashville, Tenn. and now has additional facilities in London, Florida, Oklahoma City and most recently, Denver.

The National Cancer Institute notes that, "Clinical trials are research studies that involve people. They are the final step in a long process that begins with research in a lab. Most treatments we use today are the results of past clinical trials."

Phase 1 trials are the first step in testing a new drug on humans and often have a smaller number of participants. If successful, they will be followed by Phase 2 and 3 trials among a larger number of patients.

Falchook recommended that Steele participate in a new first-in-human clinical trial. "It's neat in a way," said Steele. "But I don't think I really had an option," he added. "I wanted to be a part of something. There wasn't anything else out there to offer me."

Falchook, a medical oncologist, was an investigator in over 160 trials while at MD Anderson Cancer Center in Houston, Tex., before coming to Denver this past fall. He noted that, "Early phase, first-in-human drugs are drugs for patients with advanced cancers, patients whose cancers have already spread. They have been told they are not curable and have already had standard treatments.

"My most important goal is to increase access to clinical trials for the patients who need it the most; patients with advanced cancer who have no more treatment options," said Falchook.

"These trials are not for patients who are bedridden, but for those who are still feeling good," he said, as is the case with Steele. Phase 1 trials at the institute are typically open to patients with different types of solid tumor cancers.

Steele recently completed a cycle of seven days on the trial medication. He'll now have three weeks off, and then begin again.

"While he's on the trial, he'll be getting scans every two months," said Falchook. "Either it will show the tumors are growing, and we stop, or if they're shrinking, that's wonderful, and we celebrate. There's also a third possibility that the tumors remain stable. Even that would be wonderful news for him, if we can find a treatment that will stop it from growing."

Steele is grateful to each of the doctors he's had who were aware of recent advances and specialists that could assist him in his journey. To others considering participating in a clinical trial, Steele said, "Do it. Don't be afraid, just because it's a trial. There are fantastic doctors that are behind those trials. Colorado has some of the best doctors in the nation."

"I'm so proud of him," said Todd. "He doesn't let anything get in his way. I have this feeling it's going to work."