They’re the men and women in uniform, sworn to uphold the law and protect the public from crime. (Photo: look_around, Getty Images/iStockphoto)

They're the men and women in uniform, sworn to uphold the law and protect the public from crime.

But advocacy groups say the state lags behind in adopting systems intended to ferret out misconduct and prevent police officers from heading toward criminal behavior themselves.

"New Jersey is 15 to 20 years behind other states on police accountability," said Richard Rivera, a former police officer that helped federal investigators uncover police corruption in West New York who now works as an expert on police misconduct.

The criticism comes after two officers from Jersey Shore this year alone were charged with official misconduct, a third was convicted of beating a handcuffed man and officers elsewhere in the Garden State made headlines for abuses.

And Friday another police officer, this time one with the Tuckerton Police Department, was charged with aggravated assault and official misconduct after authorities accused him of allowing K-9 to bite a woman, then falsifying reports to cover up his actions.

Critics question how agencies across the state handle complaints about their officers, saying police departments often don't give citizens correct information about how to lodge complaints when they have them. The process, they say, also doesn't give allow enough transparency to allow the public to see how well complaints against police are being investigated.

"We don't think police departments have a choice between public safety and accountability. We believe accountability produces more public safety," said Alexander Shalom, a senior staff attorney with the American Civil Liberties Union of New Jersey.

New Jersey has more than 35,000 police officers in 2012, most of whom go to work each day doing their best to protect the public they serve.

"Sometimes police do wrong things. I'm of the firm opinion 99 percent of the cops want to do the right thing," said Glenn Miller, chief of detectives for Ocean County Prosecutor's Office. "That's why you have an internal affairs process, so you can retrain and remediate."

There have been cases that have made the headlines: Asbury Park police officer Keith German was accused of helping gang members, Lakewood police officer Jeremy Felder was accused of trying to cover up an illegal search and former Little Silver police officer Steven Solari was convicted of abusing a handcuffed man and lying about it. German's and Felder's cases are still pending.

But aside from those incidents, how much police misconduct actually occurs? Critics say the public can't actually know because of the systems in place in New Jersey.

"It's something that can't be quantified," Rivera said. "We don't know the depth of it because we aren't monitoring officers properly."

Previous complaints

Often, the cases that make the headlines weren't the first signs of problems occurring by the officers, Rivera said. In many instances, Rivera has found the cases where officers end up criminally charged had lower level internal affairs complaints, Rivera said.

"It's the small things that aren't being captured that lead to bigger things," he said.

Yet, the public doesn't have access to the details of those investigations. And the information it does get does not necessarily paint a clear picture.

Attorney General spokesman Peter Aseltine said in an email that police misconduct is an issue of concern for the office, which is the top law enforcement position in the state and oversees all lower levels of police.

"The police officers who perform their jobs with courage and integrity every day in New Jersey need the trust of the public they serve in order to perform their jobs effectively. When officers engage in misconduct, it undermines the public's faith. In order to maintain the public's faith and trust, we need to ensure that any allegations of police misconduct are properly investigated and addressed," he wrote.

Since 2011, a larger percentage of complaints lodged against police officers in Ocean County have been found to have merit after internal affairs investigations, according to internal affairs reports law enforcement are required to release each year to the public.

About 41 percent of complaints in 2013 were "sustained," meaning the investigation yielded enough evidence to prove the allegation, and the officer's actions violated the agency's policies. In 2011, about 27 percent were sustained.

The increase could be an anomaly, but Miller of the Ocean County Prosecutor's Office said he sees it as a sign police departments in his county are paying more attention to internal affairs complaints, not that there is more misconduct.

"I feel like they are doing more thorough investigations and are looking at them a little bit harder," he said.

Miller said more police departments in Ocean County are pursuing accreditation, a process that requires departments to adopt policies and standards deemed by law enforcement to be the best in the country.

Catchall category

A driving factor behind Ocean County's overall increase in sustained complaints is the increase in sustained complaints for "other rule violations," an all-encompassing category that can include everything from untidiness and tardiness to insubordination and sleeping or being drunk on duty. Most of these complaints come from agencies themselves, records show.

About 63 percent of other rule violation complaints were sustained in 2013, up from about 50 percent sustained in 2011.

But increased attention on lower level complaints helps curb more serious offenses, Miller said. Essentially, if officers know their supervisors are going to be sticklers about uniform violations, it's more likely they be more careful about more serious rules.

"What that does is it signals to officers themselves, 'Hey, they are doing a thorough investigation,' " he said.

Monmouth County averaged about a third of its internal affairs complaints sustained from 2011 to last year. Other rule violations were sustained at a rate of about 56 percent to 63 percent during the three year gap.

Both are on pace with statewide data, where about a third of internal affairs complaints overall were deemed to have merit in 2011 and 2012. About 54 percent in 2011 and 57 percent in 2012 of other rule violations were sustained. Statewide numbers for 2013 are not yet available.

But on the other hand, complaints that data show are more likely to come from the public such as excessive force, illegal arrest, inappropriate demeanor and differential treatment because of someone's race or sex are less likely to be sustained.

Statewide, these types of complaints were found to have merit at rates of 9 percent in 2011 and 8 percent in 2012.

Monmouth and Ocean counties' sustained rates for these types of complaints were higher than the statewide average, but not by much. Monmouth County found merit in these types of complaints 9 to 13 percent of the time over the three-year period from 2011 to 2013. Ocean County ranged from 7 to 11 percent of the time.

But it's also not very clear what those numbers mean for the general public reading them.

Not summarized

The state's internal affairs policy requires police departments to release statistical reports on complaints. It also references providing an executive summary that analyzes the data, but it's not clear whether that's required.

Monmouth and Ocean county prosecutor's offices say those executive summaries are not required. Ocean County produced summaries in 2011 and 2012 that compared complaint numbers department by department, but won't be doing so for 2013 because it's not mandated. Monmouth County did not have executive summaries for any of the years.

When asked to clarify reporting requirements of the policy, Aseltine wrote in an email he was not authorized to interpret the policy. Staff is available to answer prosecutors' or police administrations' questions about the policy, but "there is not anyone else who would interpret the policy in this context," he wrote.

Rivera, the former officer who investigates police misconduct, believes the reports are required under the state policy. At the very least, departments should be analyzing their numbers, he said.

"If you don't know where you are, you don't know where you are going," he said.

Looking at internal affairs complaint numbers alone to calculate police misconduct can be deceiving, because it doesn't capture complaints that don't come in to the department, said Shalom, with the ACLU.

Low complaint numbers may mean little misconduct. But it also may mean the public's complaints aren't being heard, Shalom said. The ACLU conducted studies in 2009 and 2012 where volunteers asked nearly 500 police departments statewide how they could file complaints against police.

The policy maintains that the public can lodge complaints by phone, anonymous and by third-party. It also allows complaints to be filed by juveniles without their parents and undocumented immigrants without fear of immigration officials being contacted.

In both studies, most departments gave volunteers information that contradicted state policy. In response to the 2012 study, the Attorney General's Office started initiatives to provide online training for departments on the policy as well as placards to be placed by phones with the complaints policy.

But still, Shalom said it will take time for the public to feel comfortable filing complaints.

"It doesn't mean the public will start automatically accepting that the police department will investigate," he said. "It will take some time to change."

What will help stop misconduct? An early warning.

Both critics and those within law enforcement tout the benefits of early warning systems. It is even recommended in the state internal affairs policy as a way to reduce a department's liability.

These are procedures that track certain data on individual officers' performances like internal affairs complaints and civil lawsuits filed, motor vehicle stops, use of force, cases rejected or dismissed by prosecutors and evidence suppressed by courts.

Departments that are accredited are required to have early warning system, said Miller, the chief of detectives at Ocean County Prosecutor's Office.

Tracking those numbers signal to supervisors potential issues and allow them to correct them before they become larger problems, Miller said.

But when retraining and other discipline don't work, it can be difficult for police departments to get rid of officers. New Jersey is one of only five states that don't have a way to decertify officers, so problem officers end up moving from department to department and state to state.

"When you have people convicted of crimes, effectively, they are going to be decertified," Shalom said "The problem is a lot of people resign before they plead guilty."

Miller contends the officers that make the headlines are a small fraction of the total.

"Everyone reads about that one. They never read about the other 30,000 cops. And it hurts your credibility, too," he said. "When one is bad, we really all get affected by it."

Susanne Cervenka: 732-643-4229; scervenka@app.com.

Read or Share this story: http://on.app.com/1N2wOPm