By Amy Thurmond, M.D.

Breast cancer is a deeply emotional issue. Nearly all of us know someone affected by this disease, and fear and worry often surround decisions about our own breast cancer screening options.

As a radiologist specializing in breast cancer screening, the patients I see are often anxious to learn the results of their screening as quickly as possible. I meet with my patients immediately after their mammograms to discuss their results, including whether additional screening might be needed because they have dense breast tissue.

Dense breast tissue can raise a woman's risk of breast cancer and make tumors harder to detect on a mammogram. I am proud to work in one of the first states in the country to have passed legislation that requires mammography providers to inform women of their breast density status.

However, as much as I applaud better information for patients and new research developments to improve breast cancer screening, particularly for women with dense breast tissue, it concerns me that some well-meaning efforts to educate are instead leading to confusion for women in my community. In particular, the marketing of certain tests and sensationalist reporting of some scientific studies can create an impression that newer and more expensive tests are always best and should be used for every patient.

As a physician who has spent decades evaluating breast cancer screening technologies for my patients, I'd like to offer some clear information to Oregon women age 40 and older about annual breast cancer screening:

1. Mammography is still a very good test that saves lives. It is affordable, fast and very low risk because the radiation dose used is low and has been getting lower with advances in the technology. Decades of research have shown that for most women, it is also accurate and the only test they may really need.

2. You have a right to ask for a provider who can give you immediate mammogram results, and who, if more testing might be useful, will discuss the pros and cons of all other testing options at your mammogram appointment. Don't pick a follow-up test based on a single ad or assume the most expensive test is always the best.

3. This is your body and you deserve to be fully informed about the risks and benefits of various testing options for you personally. This includes costs such as the price of the test, how long results typically take to get back and the radiation dose you'd receive. An ultrasound secondary screening, for example, is typically covered by insurance, gives immediate results and has zero radiation.

For all cancer screening tests, there is a careful balance between good and bad. It is human nature to assume the latest, most expensive, most complicated, and, yes, most advertised option must be the best, but that is not always true. More is sometimes just more, not better.

•

Amy S. Thurmond, of Portland, is a radiologist.