Mayor Bill de Blasio is asking his health policy team to formulate a plan for how the administration can better reach immigrant communities and connect them to health care.

Led by Lilliam Barrios-Paoli, the deputy mayor for health and human services, the new working group will submit a list of recommendations in the coming months, outlining a plan to better reach immigrants—both documented and undocumented—who are not eligible for traditional health care options like Medicaid and Medicare, nor insurance plans available through the Affordable Care Act.

The working group will include top administration officials, including Health and Hospitals Corporation president Dr. Ramanathan Raju, Department of Health and Mental Hygiene commissioner Dr. Mary Basset, Human Resources Administration commissioner Steven Banks and Mayor’s Office of Immigrant Affairs commissioner Nisha Agarwal.

In an interview with Capital, Barrios-Paoli said the administration will use the working group to focus on reaching immigrants through a partnership with on-the-ground community-based organizations and local consulates.

“We are concerned about access to health care by immigrant groups that are not eligible for traditional Medicaid or low-cost insurance,” Barrios-Paoli said. “There are a lot of impediments. Some of it is that they are not eligible for a lot of the things that other people are eligible for. Health insurance is costly and they don’t make enough money to pay the regular cost, and there are a number of cultural barriers as well. I think that’s a big problem."

The Affordable Care Act bars about 11 million undocumented immigrants nationwide from benefiting from any of its provisions, according to figures provided by the mayor’s office.

New York State was relatively successful in its first year operating a state-run health care exchange, but had less success reaching new enrollees immigrant communities.

The city does not know exactly how many immigrants in the city are living without access to health care. The deputy mayor described it as a “very tough number to arrive at,” citing difficulty in reaching each different group due to cultural barriers such as language and communities’ lack of knowledge about existing programs.

“We do know it’s probably very large, we have a good relationship with different consulates, they’re being very helpful and are calculating those types of things,” Barrios-Paoli said.

Barrios-Paoli said the working group is still in its first phase, holding meetings with local organizations and other nonprofits, such as the Hispanic and Asian federations.

One of the biggest challenges, the deputy mayor said, will be to change the culture among immigrant communities, which often see the doctors and hospitals as the last line of defense when they fall ill.

“[We] are used to the doctor being somebody you go to when you’re sick, and the hospital you go to when you are terribly sick,” said Barrios-Paoli, whose family immigrated from Mexico.

“There is not a lot of prevention in between, and the idea that there is a health insurance product is something that is alien to a lot of people from different countries,” Barrios-Paoli said. “We have to convey that there are other things they could potentially have access to, and they should use."

The group will focus on increasing trust in city government among immigrant communities, and try to raise awareness about preventative care, in part by using the Health and Hospitals Corporation network as a pipeline to distribute information.

“The government is not an entity that [immigrants] like to relate to. They are on unfriendly terms generally, although most of the health care that they do get, they get through the municipal hospital system,” Barrios-Paoli said. “The idea is to use whatever connection they have to the emergency room or to the doctor in the hospital and begin to talk to them about how to prevent disease as opposed to remediating it."

The working group will be divided into four subgroups, each led by a top city official. The recommendations will first be submitted to the mayor, then the City Council and eventually the state.

The administration has not finalized a figure for how much the outreach will cost. Barrios-Paoli said the working group is still conducting a cost-benefit analysis, adding they are hoping to find savings by focusing on preventative care. She also acknowledged it would be a “big expenditure.”

“If we do preventive work, if we work closely with them, if the outcomes become better and better, and they come into the hospitals not as sick as they have been coming in, we can have savings while getting them better health care,” Barrios Paoli said.