EPAY Systems, a leading provider of human capital management (HCM) solutions that help businesses alleviate their HR burden, reduce labor costs, and ensure compliance with labor laws, today announced they have partnered with Seyfarth Shaw LLP to host a webinar. The webinar, Navigating the Affordable Care Act: Takeaways from Year One of Annual Reporting; Best Practices for Year Two and Beyond, will be held at 12:00 p.m. Central on June 2, 2016.

This webinar will cover takeaways from year one of annual reporting as well as what employers should be doing right now to prepare for year two. Relevant information covered in the webinar includes:



Best practices for preparing for 2017 filings

Insights into the IRS’s penalties and appeals process

Answers to questions like what happens next year when the good faith compliance standard goes away and what the future holds for the Cadillac Tax

To register for the webinar, visit: http://www.epaysystems.com/navigating-the-affordable-care-act-webinar/.

About EPAY Systems

EPAY Systems provides completely seamless human capital management solutions that help businesses alleviate their HR burden, reduce labor costs, ensure compliance with labor laws and manage their employees more effectively. The company’s unified suite of technology and administrative services include recruiting and applicant tracking, new hire onboarding, benefits administration, HR management, time tracking, workforce management, payroll processing, tax management, ACA reporting and COBRA administration. Headquartered in Chicago, IL, EPAY Systems delivers HR solutions to over 75,000 worksites across the globe. For more information, visit EPAY at http://www.EPAYsystems.com or call 877-800-3729.

About Seyfarth Shaw LLP

Seyfarth Shaw has more than 850 attorneys and provides a broad range of legal services in the areas of labor and employment, employee benefits, litigation, corporate and real estate. With offices in Atlanta, Boston, Chicago, Houston, London, Los Angeles, Melbourne, New York, Sacramento, San Francisco, Shanghai, Sydney and Washington, D.C., Seyfarth’s clients include over 300 of the Fortune 500 companies and reflect virtually every industry and segment of the economy. A recognized leader in delivering value and innovation for legal services, Seyfarth’s acclaimed SeyfarthLean® client service model has earned numerous accolades from a variety of highly respected third parties, including industry associations, consulting firms and media.