U.S.-based market research firm Transparency Market Research has announced the release of a new market report. The report, based on the global surgical equipment market and titled “Surgical Equipment Market – Global Industry Analysis, Size, Share, Growth, Trends and Forecast, 2013 – 2019”, analyzes the segmentation of the global surgical equipment market by various criteria. It includes the historical statistics regarding the growth of the market in the review period, the present market dynamics governing the growth of the market, and future projections based on data gained from the same. The global surgical devices market was worth US$8.43 billion in 2012 and is expected to grow at a CAGR of 4.2%. The market will total US$11.28 billion in 2019.

Surgical equipment are used for a number of functions during surgical procedures such as making incisions, holding organs and tissues back, grasping certain tissue or skin, providing access to site of operation, coagulation of blood vessels and closing the wound by stitching or stapling. The most commonly used surgical equipment include sutures and staples, surgical handheld instruments (scalpels, forceps, retractors and scissors) and electrosurgical devices. The report on global surgical equipment market studies the current scenario as well as the future market potential for different surgical equipment that are used extensively in various surgical procedures. In this report, the market for surgical equipment has been segmented into three major product types, namely:

Surgical Sutures and Staples

Surgical Handheld Instruments

Electrosurgical Devices

Browse Full Press Release: http://www.transparencymarketresearch.com/surgical-equipment-market.html

The market for surgical equipment has been extensively analyzed on the basis of various factors such as their application in various surgical procedures, worldwide availability, major manufacturers and technological developments. The surgical sutures and staples market has been further segmented into surgical sutures and surgical staples, while the market for surgical handheld instruments has been segmented into scalpels, forceps, retractors and scissors. The market size and forecasts in terms of revenue (USD million) for each of these segments have been provided for the period 2010 to 2019, considering 2010 and 2011 as historical data and 2012 as the base year. This report on surgical equipment market also provides the compounded annual growth rate (CAGR %) for each segment of the market for the forecast period 2013 to 2019.

Of the various products on offer in the global surgical devices market, surgical sutures and staples took up more than 55% of the global market in 2012. However, due to approaching maturation of several regional markets and inapplicability of sutures and staples in minimally invasive procedures, the segment is expected to lose market share to electrosurgical devices in the forecast period. The other major product segment in the global surgical devices market is surgical handheld instruments, the demand for which is expected to remain stable through the forecast period and occupy a minor share of the market.

Apart from determinant factors affecting the growth trajectory of the market, the report also describes the major companies operating in the surgical devices market, business profiles, recent developments, and product catalogs of major players is detailed in the report, providing a comprehensive snapshot of the competitive landscape of the global surgery devices.

Get Free Sample: http://www.transparencymarketresearch.com/sample/sample.php?flag=S&rep_id=183

Owing to advantages such as precise incision, negligible blood loss, decreased post-surgery complications and side effects, quicker recovery span and shorter period of hospital stay; minimally invasive procedures are encountering more demand over almost every medical specialty. Augmented demand for minimally-invasive procedures is prone to trigger market development for electrosurgical devices. Few other factors anticipated to drive market development are continuous addition to surgical procedure numbers, exponential expansion of the elderly population, and technological advances in the zone of product development.

The market for surgical sutures and staples faces noteworthy threat from cutting-edge wound closure materials, such as glues, fibrin, high-strength medical adhesives, and other sealants, as these products are effectively preferred by healthcare providers and surgeons owing to associated advantages, such as decreased blood loss and enhanced clinical results. One of the provisions of the U.S. Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (PPACA) that features an excise duty of 2.3% on medical devices may come across as a restraint for the surgical equipment market, as it will force an additional weight on medical device manufacturers.

The key market players in the surgical equipment market are Ethicon, Inc., Covidien plc, B. Braun Melsungen AG, ERBE Elektromedizin GmbH, CONMED Corporation, KLS Martin LP, Integra LifeSciences Holdings Corporation, Medicon eG, Stryker Corporation, Aspen Surgical Products Inc., and CareFusion Corporation.

Browse the full Surgical Equipment Market (Surgical Sutures and Staples, Surgical Handheld Instruments, and Electrosurgical Devices) – Global Industry Analysis, Size, Share, Growth, Trends and Forecast, 2013 – 2019 Research Report With Complete TOC @ http://www.transparencymarketresearch.com/surgical-equipment-market.html

The global surgical equipment market is segmented as follows:

Surgical Equipment Market, by Product Type

Surgical Sutures and Staples

Surgical Sutures

Surgical Staples

Surgical Handheld Instruments

Scalpels

Forceps

Retractors

Scissors

Electrosurgical Devices

Surgical Equipment Market, by Geography

North America

Europe

Asia-Pacific

Rest of the World (RoW)

About Us:

Transparency Market Research is a global market intelligence company, providing global business information reports and services. Our exclusive blend of quantitative forecasting and trends analysis provides forward-looking insight for thousands of decision makers. Our experienced team of Analysts, Researchers, and Consultants, use proprietary data sources and various tools and techniques to gather, and analyze information.

Contact:

Mr. Nachiket Ghumare

90 Sate Street, Suite 700

Albany, NY 12207

Tel: +1-518-618-1030

USA – Canada Toll Free: 866-552-3453

Email: sales@transparencymarketresearch.com

Website: http://www.transparencymarketresearch.com/