An April file photo of 50 Cent at the Okecie airport in Warsaw, Poland. The 40-year-old rapper filed for bankruptcy this week. Stach Leszczynski/European Pressphoto Agency

Forget the bottles of champagne, designer threads or jewels around his neck: Rapper 50 Cent says it’s not a lavish lifestyle that prompted this week’s bankruptcy filing. Instead, he’s pointing to the more than $20 million that two legal disputes have cost him.

In court documents filed Thursday night, the 40-year-old rapper, whose real name is Curtis James Jackson III, said his bankruptcy filing isn’t “a result of excessive current expenses” but is due to “substantial costs of litigation.”

Specifically, Mr. Jackson lost a dispute over a broken business deal to develop headphones, prompting a judge to award a former partner more than $17.2 million in October, plus interest. (Court papers now peg the value of the award at $18.4 million.) More recently, a jury determined that he should pay $5 million to a woman who said Mr. Jackson violated her privacy by posting a sex tape of her online.

“While Mr. Jackson has substantial assets, he does not have the ability to pay the full amount of these litigation claims and all other asserted claims at the present time,” his lawyers said in the filing.

Mr. Jackson filed for chapter 11 protection on Monday, shortly before jurors were scheduled to determine whether he should pay additional damages in the sex-tape lawsuit filed in 2010 by Lastonia Leviston, rapper Rick Ross’s ex-girlfriend.

Filing for bankruptcy temporarily halts lawsuits, though Ms. Leviston has asked a bankruptcy judge to make an exception and allow her lawsuit to move forward. Judge Ann M. Nevins was scheduled to review that request at a hearing Friday morning.

The verdict in the sex-tape lawsuit, which accused Mr. Jackson of posting the video on his website in 2009 as part of a “rap war” between himself and Mr. Ross, came as Mr. Jackson fights the judgment in the headphone dispute. In that business venture, an entity called Sleek Audio LLC made a deal with G-Unit Brands, Mr. Jackson’s licensing company, to allow Sleek to use Mr. Jackson’s trademarks. The deal fell apart when “Sleek failed to have the headphones ready for commercial production by the February 15, 2011, deadline,” Mr. Jackson’s bankruptcy lawyers said. Sleek Audio’s lawyers later filed an arbitration proceeding against Mr. Jackson, accusing him of stealing the design of the “Sleek by 50” headphones.

In bankruptcy-court papers, Mr. Jackson estimates that his assets are worth between $10 million and $50 million. He hasn’t filed financial documents yet that disclose the value of his business pursuits, which include “artist management, film production, footwear and apparel, fragrance, video games, publishing, headphones and health drinks and supplements,” according to court papers.

Mr. Jackson appeared on the music scene in 2003 with hit rap song “In Da Club.” He has sold more than 22 million albums and acted in films, including the boxing drama “Southpaw,” which will hit theaters soon.

Mr. Jackson had invested in the maker of Glaceau Vitaminwater, which was sold to Coca-Cola for $4.1 billion in 2007. Industry insiders speculate that Mr. Jackson got between $40 million and $100 million from that deal.

His Farmington, Conn., mansion, once owned by boxer Mike Tyson, is reported to have 21 bedrooms, a racquetball court, a home movie theater and an eight-car garage.

But Mr. Jackson’s journey to fame and fortune was famously a long one. In Thursday’s court filing, the rapper’s bankruptcy lawyers reminded the court of his humble origins:

It is easy to forget that Mr. Jackson grew up in proverty [sic] in South Jamaica, a rough neighborhood of Queens, New York. His single mother was murdered when Mr. Jackson was only 8 years old. After her death, he was raised by his grandparents. As a boy, Mr. Jackson dreamed of being a boxer, but by the time he was a teenager, he was caught up in a life of crime. The consequences of that lifestyle were realized in 2000 when Mr. Jackson was shot nine times outside of his grandmother’s house. After recovering from his injuries, Mr. Jackson determined to improve his life and focused on his music, and the rest is music history. In many respects, Mr. Jackson typifies the American dream.

Write to Katy Stech at katy.stech@wsj.com. Follower her on Twitter at @KatyStech