The Coalition of California Welfare Rights Organizations, a Sacramento-based advocacy program for low-income, disabled and elderly individuals and family is now offering help for Medi-Cal eligible individuals and households with high “share of cost” or deductibles that the Medi-Cal recipient must pay before qualifying for free medical coverage.

The current “standard of need” for Medi-Cal recipients is $600. The “standard of need” which has been unchanged by the Legislature for nearly 20 years, is the amount of money that a Medi-Cal recipient is expected to spend on basics such as housing and food. For a disabled retiree with $1,400 in Social Security disability insurance income, this means that the person would be expected to spend $800 on medical care including prescriptions before the Medi-Cal program will pay for any other care needed.

This problem predates the Affordable Care Act, as does the solution created by the California Department of Health Care Services — the Medi-Cal 250 percent Working Disabled Program. This program allows a Medi-Cal recipient with any amount of a share of cost to reduce that payment to a monthly premium of as little as $25 per month by providing evidence that the Medi-Cal recipient is working and has earnings income of as little as $10 a month.

CCWRO has been tasked with providing information and assistance in qualifying for this program through a grant from the California Endowment to a project sponsored by the California Welfare Directors Association serving residents of Yolo, Placer and Sacramento counties. CCWRO is now launching a media-based outreach project after working with Medi-Cal recipients who responded to mailers sent by these three counties to high share of cost households. CCWRO can help expedite applications that it submits on behalf of those who are potentially eligible for the 250 percent Working Disabled Medi-Cal program.

From the first group of clients, CCWRO staff identified the types of Medi-Cal households most affected by high shares of cost: Households where no one receives Supplemental Security Income; single adults between the ages of 50 and 65 (married couples and families with adult children may be eligible depending on the total household income); households with income between $1500 and $2000 from SSDI, private disability pensions, annuities and spousal support.

Many of the people who contacted CCWRO reported the same types of problems: choosing between paying for pricey medications and food; living in shared housing arrangements so that they could focus resources on medication and needed on-going medical care or treatments such as physical therapy; risking utility shut-offs while juggling credit card payments to keep a supply of the most critical medicines they need to have on hand.

The Medi-Cal 250 percent Working Disabled Program supports and encourages the resourcefulness that CCWRO staff observed among the project’s target population. The earnings levels to qualify for the Medi-Cal 250 percent Working Disabled Program are well below the SSDI earnings limit of $1,100 per month so participants will not risk their monthly disability benefits be engaging in work to qualify for the 250 percent Working Disabled premium payments as an alternative to the high SOC.

The project sponsors are the California Endowment, the California Welfare Directors’ Association and the counties of Placer, Sacramento and Yolo. The CCWRO Medi-Cal 250 percent Working Disabled Hotline phone number is toll free 888-773-5260. Calls made to the hotline are returned Monday through Friday between 9:30 a.m. and 5 p.m. For more information contact: Kevin Aslanian, Catherine Takayama or Daphne Macklin at 888-773-5260.