The election season almost is over.

Well, closer to home. That other election will drag on into November.

Runoff winners for Republicans and Democrats will be determined Tuesday, mostly on the Republican side. There is only one statewide Democratic race.

Taylor County residents are deciding as many as four races. Locally, Brad Birchum and Dale Morrison are squaring off for Precinct 3 commissioner, while Harriett Haag and Kevin Willhelm are seeking to become judge of Court-at-Law No. 2.

A greater number of voters are weighing in on who likely will be our next our state senator and, for sure, our next congressman.

In a heated battle for Senate District 24, Republicans Dawn Buckingham and Susan King have campaigned to be their party's candidate to face Democrat Virginia "Jennie Lou" Leeder in the fall. King, the current House District 71 representative, gained the most votes in the primary, but not a majority.

For the 19th Congressional District, Jodey Arrington faces Glen Robertson in an all-Lubbock finale. Robertson polled the most votes in the primary but less than 1,000 more than Arrington and not a majority.

The Reporter-News and its Community Advisory Board have recommended Arrington, King, Haag and Birchum. We strongly believe Arrington and King are the best candidates. The two local races are closer calls, pitting candidates equally qualified to be judge and commissioner.

More than 900 Taylor County residents, on average, participated in the five days of early voting. The final tally was 4,844 ballots cast.

We all have noted the spirit of the presidential election — that's a polite way to put it. It has been contentious at times, perhaps more bully than bully pulpit.

While many have become exasperated at the national process and decried what is viewed as mudslinging and shady tactics, we've seen that in the races that will be determined Tuesday.

Bluster and headline-making accusations have long been a part of the election process. But it seems these tactics have gone too far and gotten too personal. Candidates are relying more on taking down opponents rather than taking them on.

Our mailboxes have been filled with cards of all sizes and shapes. Some examples from recent weeks:

Buckingham: An 8 ½-by-12 inch card with a drawing of King injecting "toxic" Obamacare into Texas.

King: A card picturing Buckingham and Hillary Clinton, saying "both supported current Obama Democrats."

Robertson: A card accusing Arrington of being "courageous" with plans to cut Social Security: "There's nothing 'courageous' about stealing from seniors," it read.

Arrington: The only one we received at home (a 4-by-11 inch door hanger) pictures his family of five ... and Abilene Mayor Norm Archibald giving his support, along with the endorsements of a former governor and coach: Rick Perry and Texas Tech's Spike Dykes.

What are you thinking, Mr. Arrington?

Perhaps our favorite is Gary Gates' mailout that accuses opponent Wayne Christian of being a double-dipper and shows him holding two corn chips dipped in salsa. Included is a definition of "double-dipper." More than anything, it made us hungry. Christian answered with a mailout that accuses Gates of being a six-time campaign loser, taxpayer robber (there's a caricature of Gates in a striped shirt holding two moneybags) and a Houston slumlord.

We've received mailouts picturing terrorists and walls. The fear factor card has been played. A lot.

Both Buckingham and King have been photographed holding guns. A letter-to-the-editor last week stated King at least looks like she could use hers.

Some say it's time that we elect leaders who will take the offensive, say what they think ... and what many others are thinking, too. That's why Donald Trump has been so successful.

Others seek a return to civility in political races. Is that a sign of weakness? No, they say. Just a better way for folks to work together to get something done.

We'll see Tuesday which direction we're headed.