State Wrestling: Majerus third, Siewert fourth

Lake City's Shane Siewert goes head to head with Jackson County Central's Paden Moore during the third place match of the 152-pound Class A bracket Saturday at Xcel Energy Center in St. Paul. Moore won the bout, 9-2, giving Siewert a fourth-place finish to his junior season. (Republican Eagle photo by Kyle Stevens)

Zumbrota-Mazeppa's Joey Majerus rolls Spectrum's Esteban Tiegen back on his stomach after recording two near-fall points during Saturday's Class A, 113-pound third-place match at Xcel Energy Center in St. Paul. Majerus won the match, 11-5, to capture third place for the third time in his career. (Republican Eagle photo by Kyle Stevens)

ST. PAUL – After a controversial no-call in his semifinal match, Joey Majerus tried to find the will to move one with the wrestleback portion of the individual state tournament.

It wasn’t an easy process for the Zumbrota-Mazeppa junior, who escaped further damage in the consolation semifinals with a 7-5, triple-overtime victory over Osakis’ Trenton Coyer. And even after clinching third place for the third time in his career (2011, 2012, 2014), Majerus left the mat with nary a smile. His signature on the 113-pound, Class A scoring sheet was his last act before heading into an offseason that will once again be aimed at being one-match better.

“He showed a lot of character, and that’s what I’ll talk to him about once I’m alone with him,” said Z-M head coach Link Steffen. “I told him, when he lost that semifinal match, sometimes champions are defined in the face of defeat. And how do you respond to that? Joey obviously did very well today. He won two matches after a very tough call, and he beat two very tough kids … Joey really stepped up to the plate when a lot of guys would cash it in.”

In the final match of his junior season, Majerus took control early, taking a 4-1 lead after the first period. With an 8-3 lead after two, it was mostly a matter of not getting caught by an aggressive Esteban Teigen. And with the exception of a late reversal, the Spectrum sophomore had little luck against the cautious, yet aggressive Cougar.

“We knew the kid wrestled in spurts, an explosive-style wrestler where he can score four, five, six points in a matter of five, 10 seconds,” Steffen said. “Joey was able to slow that down and weather the storm. He had four of five of those bursts throughout the match, but Joey’s experience and good technique, he came out of it and never gave up.”

The draw of a state tournament is something a wrestler can do nothing about. Lake City junior Shane Siewert had that reminded to him a couple of times over the weekend.

Siewert ended up taking fifth place in the 152-pound Class A bracket, with losses coming to top-ranked Logan Peterson of Atwater-Cosmos-Grove City in the quarterfinals, and second-ranked Paden Moore of Jackson County Central in the third-place match.

Despite the result, Siewert is keeping in mind that the finish is an improvement on his fifth-place showing in 2013. And facing the top two wrestlers in his class has given the junior Tiger something to aim for over the summer.

“First would have been nice as the overall goal, but it’s improved from last year. So that’s getting better. We’ll set the goal high for next year,” Siewert said.

And to achieve that goal, Siewert said he has to work harder between his ears.

“There’s a few little moves that can help you, but mostly it will just be mental, knowing that you just have to keep going if you want to be better,” Siewert said.