Home /

News /

Philhaven Joins WellSpan to Expand and Enhance Behavioral Health Care across Central Pennsylvania

Philhaven Joins WellSpan to Expand and Enhance Behavioral Health Care across Central Pennsylvania







The need for behavioral health services currently exceeds availability on both a regional and national level. Through integration and education, the recent affiliation between WellSpan Health and Philhaven will improve access to care in Central Pennsylvania.

Photo: Phil Hess, MHA, Vice President of Behavioral Health at WellSpan Health and President of Philhaven

The provisions of the Affordable Care Act have facilitated the integration of mental and behavioral health services into the primary care setting. This paradigm shift presented an opportunity for Philhaven to partner with WellSpan.

“We realized that behavioral health will become a more centralized part of the physical healthcare system moving forward,” says Phil Hess, MHA, Vice President of Behavioral Health at WellSpan Health and President of Philhaven. “The partnership between WellSpan and Philhaven will allow us to provide a holistic approach to care that is spurred by population health.”

The affiliation went into effect Jan. 1 and unites Philhaven’s capabilities with the behavioral health services already in place at WellSpan.

Bringing Behavioral Health to the Community

Philhaven is one of the largest mental and behavioral health providers in the country and has multiple locations throughout the region. With the addition of Philhaven, WellSpan Health delivers care at six hospitals and more than 140 patient care locations in the four-county region. Together, the facilities are uniquely positioned to expand access to care and redefine how patients receive mental health services.

Currently, behavioral health providers practice at 10 WellSpan primary care locations. One of the goals of Philhaven is to enhance access to mental health in the family practice setting by staffing behavioral health providers at primary care locations in the WellSpan Health system. That will allow patients to receive psychiatric assessments for depression and anxiety, as well as any necessary treatments, during routine primary care visits.

Philhaven has also incorporated the concept of open access into its outpatient locations. Similar to an urgent care model, open access enables patients to receive an evaluation at a Philhaven outpatient location without an appointment. This ensures their current needs are assessed in a timely manner and that they are quickly connected to the appropriate level of care.

WellSpan and Philhaven: Serving the Region Now and in the Future The United States has a critical shortage of mental health providers. Mental Health America estimates that the ratio of mental health providers to U.S. residents is 1-to-790. Pennsylvania is ranked among the top 15 states in terms of providing access to behavioral health care, according to Mental Health America. However, there are 128 designated health professional shortage areas in the state for mental health care. Now part of WellSpan Health, Philhaven is working to establish partnerships with local and national organizations that will enhance regional educational opportunities for people aspiring to become psychiatrists, nurse practitioners, counselors and other mental health providers. The organization is developing a behavioral health training program for nurse practitioner students at York College. The possibility of launching a psychiatric fellowship program at Philhaven is also in the exploratory stages. Finally, WellSpan Health and Philhaven both have existing American Psychiatric Association-certified internship programs for master’s-level professionals. This year, Philhaven will host approximately 30 interns. By combining these programs, the hope is to expand the number of interns to upwards of 40 in the next year.

“Open access care allows us to provide a better resource for community family physicians,” Hess says. “This walk-in, triage service ensures patients get care when they need it — not simply when it’s convenient for us — and is an innovative, forward-thinking model.”

In addition, Philhaven offers telehealth services at its main campus in Mount Gretna and at the Prince Street location in Lancaster. The service provides medication management and is available internally to current Philhaven patients. However, WellSpan officials are carefully evaluating the expansion of telehealth capabilities to emergency departments at all of the health system’s hospitals. As the field of telehealth evolves and licensure requirements become less onerous, Hess also hopes to expand telehealth to WellSpan primary care practices.

Streamlining Protocols for Inpatient Care

In Central Pennsylvania, a great need exists for inpatient psychiatric care — a level of care available to patients who present a threat to their own safety or the safety of others.

Philhaven has 103 inpatient beds in its system, and on any given day, it is at roughly 95 percent capacity. WellSpan Health has a 63-bed inpatient unit at WellSpan York Hospital and a seven-bed inpatient unit at WellSpan Ephrata Community Hospital in Lancaster County. These units are also consistently near capacity, with rates averaging above 85 percent, according to Hess.

Philhaven is streamlining protocols for inpatient mental health care in Adams, Lancaster, Lebanon and York counties. While the planning process is in its infancy, current strategies include expanding the unit at WellSpan Ephrata Community Hospital from seven to 15 beds. Need assessments are also ongoing in Adams and York counties.

“We’re looking at requests for care versus the number of beds in the communities and how that’s evolving,” Hess says. “We will also consider national and local statistics about the prevalence of mental illness. These metrics can be applied to regional population statistics to help estimate need.”

In addition, Philhaven is working with community partners, including health systems, schools, pastors and referring providers, to gain a better understanding of community needs.

“Our business model is one in which we consistently work with the community to understand new and emerging behavioral health trends,” Hess says. “We then work collaboratively with our partners to develop services that meet these needs. Our overall goal is to enhance patient outcomes, which will result in a more mentally healthy community.”

For more information about the behavioral health services available at WellSpan Health, visit WellSpan.org. To learn more about Philhaven or the recent affiliation, visit Philhaven.org.

Source: MD News CEO 2016, Central Pennsylvania Edition