The designated grim reaper at Dove Valley has barely cracked his wicked grin.

The bulk of his sinister work will come Saturday as the Broncos set their 53-man, season-opening roster by 2 p.m.

With two more spots added to NFL practice squads this season, the Broncos have two more players they want to sneak through waivers. Thus, general manager John Elway wants to wait as late as possible before he starts contributing to the flood of players who will be placed on the waiver wire Saturday. The waiver claiming period expires at 10 a.m. Sunday, at which point the Broncos can begin re-signing players to their practice squad.

The Broncos can continue to alter their active roster in the days leading up to their season opener Sept. 7 against the Indianapolis Colts at Sports Authority Field at Mile High, and on through the season.

It’s just that Elway, his top two front-office executives Matt Russell and Tom Heckert, and coach John Fox must start working from a 53-man base.

According to NFL sources, at least seven players were trimmed from the Broncos’ 75-man preseason roster Friday. With all due respect to those players — none of the cuts was a surprise.

One involved local star Ryan Miller. Arguably the best offensive lineman in Colorado schoolboy history, Miller was waived before he could complete the unique, but not unprecedented trifecta of playing for an in-state high school, college and pro football team. Miller had led Columbine High School to a state title and was later a starting offensive tackle for the University of Colorado Buffaloes.

The Broncos also cut tight ends Cameron Morrah and Jameson Konz; defensive backs Jordan Sullen and Jerome Murphy; linebacker L.J. Fort; and defensive tackle Sione Fua, a 2011 third-round pick of the Carolina Panthers whom Denver picked up late last season.

The Broncos also will place kicker Matt Prater on the reserve/suspended list and are expected to put defensive end Kenny Anunike on injured reserve after the undrafted rookie suffered a significant elbow injury during Denver’s 27-3 preseason victory Thursday night at Dallas.

That’s nine moves, which puts the Broncos’ roster at 64 players entering Saturday morning. Another 11 players must be cut, a group that figures to include both young players eligible to be brought back on the practice squad if they clear waivers and veterans who were significant Broncos contributors in recent years.

The NFL recently expanded the practice squads from eight players to 10. Practice-squad players make a minimum of $6,300 a week, or $107,000 a year if they stay with the team through a 17-week season. Rookies on the active 53-man roster draw a minimum $420,000 salary.

Mike Klis: mklis@denverpost.com or twitter.com/mikeklis