MASON, Ohio - More than 2,000 people gathered at Kings Island on Saturday to set a new world record and hopefully help save lives in the process.

In the past few years many record-setting efforts have been little more than glorified freak shows. They're often things like "the most live rattlesnakes held in a mouth" or "the most toilet seats broken by a person's head in one minute."

But that wasn't the case at the amusement park in Mason, where a crowd of 2,148 park guests joined forces to topple the record for the most people applying sunscreen at the same time. They bested the record by more than 300 people.

Guinness World Records says the previous record of 1,822 participants was achieved in May by the Ann’s Hope Foundation in Milwaukee, Wisconsin.

While the effort may seem trivial on paper, it was done to raise awareness and money in the fight against melanoma and other skin cancers affecting men, woman and children.

“Skin cancer is the most common of all cancers, with melanoma the most dangerous form of skin cancer," said Don Helbig, public relations manager for Kings Island.

"In topping the record for the most people applying sunscreen at the same time, we were able to create awareness and educate our guests about the need to protect themselves by applying sunscreen when they’re going to be exposed to the sun. That’s what today was all about.”

The initiative on Saturday is part of Kings Island's big picture, summer-long Kicks Cancer campaign to raise awareness for the organization Melanoma Know More and other cancer-related nonprofits.

Organizers of the campaign are working to reduce the impact of melanoma and cancer in general through awareness, education, support and medical research. They also provide assistance to persons affected by the disease.

Helbig said they've just gone over $70,000 for the inaugural season of the Kicks Cancer campaign.

Park visitors can contribute through Aug. 24 by buying a soccer ball for $5 and kicking it into the park fountain on International Street. One person has a chance to win a new 2015 Honda Fit.

Net proceeds from soccer ball sales benefit Melanoma Know More, as well as The Dragonfly Foundation and Pink Ribbon Girls organizations.

The sunscreen used Saturday was provided to all participants courtesy of Panama Jack.