SIGN UP FOR OUR NEWSLETTER

Former Assistant United States Attorney for the Southern District of New York, lead prosecutor of the “Blind Sheik” Omar Abdel Rahman, and author of “The Grand Jihad: How Islam and the Left Sabotage America,” Andrew McCarthy, talked about his NRO piece on Donald Trump and his presidential endorsement of Ted Cruz as a guest on Breitbart News Daily today.

As far as the global firestorm around Trump’s recent comments, McCarthy cited the erosion of First Amendment rights in the United States:

SIGN UP FOR OUR NEWSLETTER

It’s being attacked as hate speech in Europe and elsewhere. You can be prosecuted for what Trump said in these European capitals and that’s a big part of the reason why it’s not possible anymore in Europe to have a full and frank discussion of the facts that you need to consider to have an intelligent national security policy.

“The reason our framers put political speech in the Constitution and made political speech the core of free expression protection is because a functioning democracy has to be able to have full and frank discussions if it’s going to have the right policies and, in particular, have the right national defense policy,” added McCarthy.

He also said he believes what’s happening in Europe with regard to speech is very dangerous and said he hates seeing it in the United States. “There are ways to object to what Trump has proposed without attacking him personally, or immediately going to what his motivations might be.”

McCarthy pointed out that it’s a weak argument to go after someone personally for their opinions, suggesting critics have no solid, or better ground upon which to argue with his ideas.

“It’s the sort of thing the Left does and I hate seeing it on the right,” he said.

McCarthy goes on to discuss terrorism and it’s direct relation to radical Islam at some length in the interview below.

The former prosecutor also recently endorsed Sen. Ted Cruz – Ted Cruz Is the One Candidate Who Can Face down Washington — And Win. McCarthy said he doesn’t understand the rap on Cruz out of Washington that he’s too conservative. “People are hungry for a clear, unapologetic proud American articulation of conservative principles and I think he’s the first guy in a very long time that I think we can rely on for that.”

Reinvigorating American principles will require taming Washington. It calls for restoring the Constitution as a vital limit on government, not a relic . . . or an obstacle. Ted Cruz gets this. Many Republicans talk the talk — we hear it in every election season, right up until it is time to stop campaigning and start governing. Senator Cruz walks the walk. That is why I believe he should be the next president of the United States.

Listen to the complete Breitbart News daily interview below: