The U.S. Supreme Court — offering a tantalizing clue that it sees a compromise in a standoff between faith-based groups and the U.S. government — is asking for ideas on how employees can get free birth control without any help from employers that object to it.

The high court’s order for a new round of legal briefs came Tuesday, less than a week after it heard arguments in a legal challenge to the contraception provision under Obamacare. The challenge was filed by Pittsburgh Bishop David Zubik and other representatives of faith-based groups in Western Pennsylvania and beyond.

“The parties are directed to file supplemental briefs that address whether and how contraceptive coverage may be obtained by petitioners’ employees through petitioners’ insurance companies, but in a way that does not require any involvement of petitioners beyond their own decision to provide health insurance without contraceptive coverage to their employees,” said the Supreme Court order.

The Affordable Care Act requires employers to include free birth control in employee health insurance. While it exempts churches and other core religious institutions that object to that requirement, it does mandate the coverage for employees working for faith-based social-service agencies and schools. That has led to challenges on behalf of such entities as Catholic Charities of the Diocese of Pittsburgh, the Presbyterian-affiliated Geneva College of Beaver Falls and several other organizations around the country.

The act does not require the charities and schools to pay for the birth control coverage — only to submit a notice saying they won’t, which automatically triggers a process in which the insurers take on the cost. But even submitting an opt-out notice makes them “complicit” in what they see as a moral evil, according to the challengers.

“I’m encouraged,” said attorney Mickey Pohl, who represents the Diocese of Pittsburgh in the case, saying it casts doubt that the “mischaracterizlation of this as a simple opt-out was going to be easily accepted.”

The court is “looking for less objectionable alternatives,” he said. “There’s ways of doing this without steamrolling the religious objectors.”

Brigitte Amiri, senior staff attorney for the American Civil Liberties Union, called the court’s request unusual but a “positive sign the court is concerned about taking contraception coverage out of health plans.” The ACLU filed a friend-of-the-court brief in the case in support of the requirement.

“It seems to be narrowing the question,” she said, as to whether there’s “a way the employer could inform the insurance company, maybe through some other mechanism, so that the employees get the coverage.”

With the death of conservative Justice Antonin Scalia, watchers of the ideologically divided court have focused closely on swing Justice Anthony Kennedy as to whether the court splits, 4-4, leaving contradictory rulings in lower courts, or the Obamacare provision is upheld, 5-3.

Justice Kennedy ruled in favor of religious business owners’ objections in the 2014 Hobby Lobby case, but he noted that such businesses didn’t even have the option of the opt-out form and that such a solution might be acceptable.

In the Zubik case, the court gave everyone until April 12 to file initial briefs and until April 20 to file reply briefs. Among the several organizations whose challenges were consolidated into the Zubik case, some are Catholic groups objecting in general to artificial birth control and others are Protestant groups focused primarily on contraceptives they believe can cause early abortions.

Peter Smith: petersmith@post-gazette.com or 412-263-1416; Twitter @PG_PeterSmith.