Overlooked American victim of terror

Teaneck, N.J.: I was heartbroken to read about the murder of U.S. Aid worker Anita Datar in Mali by Islamic terrorists (“Mali hotel horror kills Columbia grad,” Nov. 21). While such a tragic event warranted the front-page coverage it received, that unfortunately begs the question why the murder of an 18-year-old American the day prior was buried on page 25 (“U.S. youth is slain in Israel,” Nov. 20).

Ezra Schwartz was a teenager who had recently graduated from high school in a suburb of Boston and was spending a few months studying in Israel before returning to the states for college. He was murdered by Palestinian terrorists Thursday.

An American life is an American life and Islamic terror is Islamic terror. There should be no difference in coverage or outrage over such atrocities. But it appears the different reactions to the these murders reflects the belief that terrorism against an American Jew in Israel is justified whereas terrorism against Americans in Europe and Asia is not. All terrorism should be equally condemned. Stuart Boyarsky

Fear itself

Manhattan: Thirty governors don’t want Syrian refugees in their states. Why not go further? Some of the terrorists were French and Belgian citizens. Should we also ban those countries’ citizens from coming here? Perhaps these governors would also support placing Syrian Americans in detention camps, since they also might be terrorists. If only these same governors were as vigilant about preventing American “terrorists” such as Adam Lanza and his ilk from getting weapons to use in mass killings. Jeffrey Nelson

The limits of tolerance

Bronx: In these days when people are being murdered in the name of intolerant ideologies and religions, here’s the political philosopher Karl Popper’s succinct guide to tolerance in a free and open society: “Unlimited tolerance must lead to the disappearance of tolerance. If we extend unlimited tolerance even to those who are intolerant, if we are not prepared to defend a tolerant society against the onslaught of the intolerant, then the tolerant will be destroyed, and tolerance with them. . . We should therefore claim, in the name of tolerance, the right not to tolerate the intolerant. We should claim that any movement preaching intolerance places itself outside the law, and we should consider incitement to intolerance and persecution as criminal, in the same way as we should consider incitement to murder, or to kidnapping, or to the revival of the slave trade, as criminal.” Kevin Harrington

Ignorance in action

Manchester, N.J.: I found myself basically agreeing with Voicer James Anastasia when he wrote that security measures at schools, airports and so on have, for the most part, kept us safe. But then Anastasia started discussing the general racial makeup of those who, in his view, require monitoring. And then he lists the challenges he sees to our security: bombings, school shootings, ISIS — and President Obama. Aha, the crux of the matter. That says something not about Obama, but about the intelligence of Anastasia. I look forward to eight more years of his ignorant words about President Hillary Clinton. Charles Morgan

Surrender to terror

Oceanside, L.I.: Making my way into Manhattan, I thought about the Connetquot school board’s decision to cancel planned student field trips to Manhattan and D.C. — a decision that plays right into the hands of the Islamic terrorists. We must be vigilant but not surrender our way of life. I suggest a new name for the school board: the Connet quitters. Peter Dwyer

Flitcraft alert

Plainview, L.I.: Even if Police Commissioner Bill Bratton was right to criticize the Connetquot school district for choosing not to risk their students being killed on a field trip to Manhattan in a very unlikely terrorist attack, he can’t guarantee that none of them would die as a result of being hit in the head by a brick falling from a crumbling building facade — as was 2-year-old Greta Greene — because Mayor de Blasio’s Department of Buildings cannot be counted upon to do the job its workers and officials are paid to do. Richard Siegelman

Paranoid for a reason

Staten Island: I agree with Voicer Perry Dell’Aquila that pedicabs should be banned. The characters that roam around 42nd St. are also a threat. Their costumes have plenty of room to cover a suicide vest. Do I sound paranoid? Absolutely. We are dealing with lunatics who will stop at nothing to kill innocent people for their so-called cause. Maria Musolino

A happier headline

Sidney, N.Y.: Thank you to the Daily News for finally having something positive on the front page (“Heels angel,” Nov. 20) as opposed to the usual bad news, fallen politicians or headline-chasing celebrities. Susan von Kessel

Gambling with the facts

Bronx: What is with the Daily News giving all this editorial space to Op-Eds from lawyers for DraftKings and FanDuel (“Schneiderman’s overreach on fantasy sports,” Nov. 23 and “N.Y., leave fantasy players alone,” Nov. 19)? These people are shills, who will say anything it takes to further their case. I have played in seasonal fantasy leagues for more than 20 years, have a degree in math and can state that daily fantasy sports games are approximately 75% luck. Seasonal leagues are about 50% luck. Dana Elzenbeck

Earth-2 logic

Forest Hills: What alternate universe does Voicer Rick DeMarco live in that he thinks it is even remotely possible that post-presidency, Barack Obama would move to an enemy country and share U.S. intelligence secrets? Whether or not you agree with Obama’s policies, it is safe to say that he loves our country and has spent the last nearly eight years protecting it. DeMarco has a very active and demented imagination. Libby Gurgis

Pathetic pit bill parent shaming

Huntington Station, L.I.: Voicer Patricia Weaver really upset me. To condemn the parents of the little girl who was mauled by the pit bull was heartless. She claims the parents were “stupid” to leave her in the yard. Do she know the exact circumstances? Was she a child once? Did she ever do something her parents warned her not to do? I surely did. Is she a mother? If so, does she or did she watch her child 24 hours a day, seven days a week? Well, if she did, then she is a better parent than me. Being the terrible, and maybe “stupid” parent that I am, I actually let my child go places sometimes! How dare she judge? As to her final remark about the lawsuit: I’m sure the money will make the loss of a beloved child go away. Pathetic! By the way, does Weaver own a pit bull? Nancy Macri Kennedy

Failure to communicate

Staten Island: Just like President Obama failed to educate the public well enough regarding Obamacare, Mayor de Blasio feels he didn’t explain to people well enough his plans for dealing with the homeless. The mayor’s policies on people living in the street, like the President’s healthcare reform, are failing miserably. Blaming those failures on poor communication is a condescending tactic, one increasingly used by elected Democrats. People want to see results, not hear excuses. Robert Prindle

Can you hear us now, Con Ed?

College Point: Can someone from Con Ed explain to the people of College Point why they are two months overdue on a project here where they are jackhammering at 5 a.m. using heavy digging equipment and parking huge trucks all over the streets and sidewalks? The noise is unbearable. They set up all this equipment and the workers work for a little while and then disappear. They keep extending their permit; now they have just extended it again. It is causing traffic and noise and making it dangerous to just walk on the sidewalk or cross the street. Store owners are suffering because their entrances are barricaded. I bet it wouldn’t take this long outside of Gracie Mansion or Mike Bloomberg’s townhouise. Lorraine Nevins

A sure thing

Woodmere, L.I.: It’s still not too late for the Mighty Quinn to win back some “sirignanos” — he just needs to bet against the Nets for the rest of the year. Mike Schmidt

Old news

Carolina,P.R.: I am looking for a feature called something like “How to Draw” that the Daily News cartoon page ran in the 1980s or 1990s. Does anyone remember the name of the series, the artist who did it, and when it began and ended? I collected these as a kid, but have lost them since. Thanks in advance to any Voicers who can help! Heather O’Neill