Posted on by in Local Government

By Caleb Bedillion

Daily Journal

TUPELO – Sewer problems have afflicted residents of the Green Tee Road area for many years – including raw sewage backing into homes and the lingering presence of foul odors – and the Lee County Supervisors are now seeking a federal grant to help alleviate these issues.

“Green Tee has been suffering for years and years,” said District 4 Supervisor Tommie Lee Ivy. “The sewer was never properly put in.”

Officials and residents estimate that anywhere from 140 to 170 homes are impacted by the inadequate sewer infrastructure.

The Three Rivers Planning and Development District is assisting the county and preparing an application for a Community Development Block Grant.

In Mississippi, planning and development districts are regional, independent organizations that provide support to communities and governments.

A successful CDBG application could garner a maximum of $600,000, but there are no estimates yet of how much will be needed to remedy problems in the Green Tee area.

CDBG applications will be accepted in early May, said Teresa Hooker, the Three Rivers project manager working with the county on the application.

CDBG eligibility rules require that at least 51 percent of affected residents be considered low or moderate income.

Gladys Betts, vice president of the Green Tee neighborhood association, spoke to supervisors during a public hearing Monday on the proposed grant application.

Betts has lived in the neighborhood for over 30 years and detailed some of the problems experienced by residents.

“This is a necessity,” Betts said. “It’s become a health problem.”

According to interviews with Betts and other residents, problems include raw sewage backing up into toilets and even tubs and sinks as well as the smell of sewage in homes.

These smells and backups are particularly pronounced after heavy rainfalls, said Dereeser Armstrong, secretary of the neighborhood association.

Betts has lived in the Green Tee neighborhood more than 30 years. In her home, Betts primarily experiences a problem with smells and uses chlorine to combat the problem.

Other homes, though, routinely experience sewage backups, backups that in at least one case ultimately required thousands of dollars in renovation work, Betts said.

caleb.bedillion@journalinc.com

Twitter: @CalebBedillion