Look, I think the last thing you should talk about at Thanksgiving is politics. There’s too much food, too much alcohol, too much football-related disappointment, and generally, far too many relatives you’d rather not see let alone be related to by blood. But in anticipation of the dinner table conversation turning to (what else?) the national healthcare program known as Obamacare, liberal website Think Progress has released a set of talking points designed to silence conservative family members lest they deign to criticize our fearless leader and his signature achievement.

No, I’m not sure they realize that releasing it this early would give people time to Google appropriate responses, but they also assume that the only person opposed to authoritarian governmental policies is somehow over the age of 120, so make of that what you will.

As your family gathers around the table this Thanksgiving, the conversation may get a little heated if your right-wing relatives bring up President Obama’s signature health law. The Affordable Care Act remains both unpopular and misunderstood among the American public — a combination that makes it likely fodder for holiday conflicts. So, if your Tea Party uncle starts making wild assertions about the Affordable Care Act, here are some key points that will help keep your conversation on track.

Their points are as follows:

Obamacare is not causing premiums to rise;

Jonathan Gruber did not expose the “real truth” of the healthcare law

The website is functioning at optimum levels

Obamacare has lowered the rate of uninsured

Businesses have not cut back on hours or coverage

You can arm yourself with a few basic facts that you’ll forget after three glasses of spiked cider, but if you manage to eek in three glasses of spiked cider between spittle-fueled healthcare rants, consider facts unnecessary. In fact, just consider drinking necessary, and leave whatever miserable relative who had to study up for the sole purpose of whomping you in a political argument on a national holiday to use their talking points on unsuspecting children and innocent pets.

As for the alcohol, we recommend a good bourbon, as bourbon pairs quite well with turkey. Woodford Reserve is always a good choice.