Could millions in unpaid medical claims mean trouble for Mount Kisco Medical Group?

The Mount Kisco Medical Group’s building in Poughkeepsie. (Photo: Gannett File Photo)

The Mount Kisco Medical Group is trying to collect millions in unpaid medical claims after the collapse of Health Republic Insurance.

Physicians and the billing department of the region's largest medical group were left in the lurch after one of the state's largest health insurance co-ops shutdown. Health Republic absorbed millions in debt as a result of offering health insurance too low in cost under the Affordable Care Act.

Of the 200,000 patients across the state served by Health Republic, 13,000, or 6 percent, sought services at Mount Kisco Medical Group. Those patients will be or have been transferred to other carriers, said Dr. Scott Hayworth, president and chief executive officer of Mount Kisco Medical Group.

“We feel taking care of patients is our primary responsibility, and we will continue to provide care for all those patients,” Hayworth said.

However, there is little recourse available to the Medical Group to recover those lost funds.

“The physicians directly impacted are obviously very upset,” Hayworth said. “No matter what field you are in, no matter what you do, you live up to your terms of the contract … They expect to get paid for their work.”

The exact amount lost is unknown — bills are still coming in — but Hayworth estimates the total amount is “in the millions.”

“This is a large amount of money. Health care is a very narrow-margin business,” Hayworth said. “As a result, it is a very meaningful amount for the medical group. In the world of managed care, a lot of organizations already discount a lot of money off usual fees, and, as a result, there isn’t a lot of excess profit in the system.”

The group has plans to reach out to federal and state lawmakers to ask them to do “the right thing,” Hayworth said.

The state Association of Health Underwriters on Monday called on Gov. Andrew Cuomo and state lawmakers to use some of the state's estimated $1 billion surplus in extra funds in next year's budget to cover Health Republic’s unpaid bills to providers and brokers.

“Almost every other state covers the providers if the insurance company folds or goes out of business,” Hayworth said. “Most states have a fund in place and other ancillary providers on call. New York state doesn’t, and needs a fund.”

Hayworth said it is “too early to tell” what impact the loss would have on the health provider’s services. Mount Kisco Medical Group has 2,800 employees, who serve 500,000 patients from throughout the Hudson Valley.

“It’s not just money for physicians, but also chemotherapy, vaccines and ambulatory surgery, and a lot of other things which we are not getting paid for,” he said.

Amanda J. Purcell: apurcell@poughkeepsiejournal.com; 845-437-4807; Facebook.com/pojopurcell; Twitter: @amandajpurcell

Read or Share this story: http://pojonews.co/1XWXJ3O