The new loan, from New Century Mortgage, was interest-only at first, so Ms. Johnson’s monthly payment actually decreased a bit, to $4,000. But that did not make it affordable. By her fourth payment, she was falling behind, and after less than a year, she had stopped paying altogether. She spent months trying to persuade the bank to lower the payment.

In January 2008, her loan servicer gave her a loan modification that actually increased her payments to more than $4,500.

Wanting out, Ms. Johnson hired a man named Barry Edmonds to negotiate a short sale with her lender. She began making her mortgage payments to an account he controlled. After more than two years, in May 2010, he instructed her to move out temporarily so he could ready the house for sale, she said, and she left behind furniture, photo albums and a new Jenn-Air oven. When she returned a couple of months later to pick up some belongings, she saw notices that the house was being repossessed. The locks had been changed. Shortly after that, Mr. Edmonds, and some $100,000 of her money, disappeared.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

(Mr. Edmonds was fined in absentia by Maryland authorities for more than $100,000 in Ms. Johnson’s case, and did not respond to attempts to reach him by phone and email and on social media.)

Ms. Johnson described Mr. Edmonds as the malefactor in her story, unaware that virtually every financial entity she dealt with ultimately faced investigations and lawsuits related to predatory lending, foreclosure robo-signing, misleading investors or other abuses. As early as 2007, for example, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation ordered Ms. Johnson’s original lender, Fremont Investment and Loan, to stop making loans that borrowers could not afford, saying that its lending practices “substantially increased the likelihood of borrower default.” One recent analysis suggests that Wall Street will eventually have to pay around $50 billion for the banks’ role in the mortgage crisis, with about $15 billion of that going to consumers in the form of debt relief and other aid.

So far, Ms. Johnson said, she has received nothing except a wrecked credit record.

Hardwood Floors From the Ashes

For two years, 12204 Backus sat vacant, its lawn overgrown and the paint on its garage door peeling. The bank tried to sell it for $265,000, then for $250,000. At one point, Martha and Jonathan Kim, a young couple out house-hunting, peered through a window and saw a mess. “No way we’re buying this house,” Ms. Kim said to herself. “I don’t care how cheap it is.”

But foreclosed homes like this one were attractive to investors with cash. Big fund managers like the Blackstone Group and Colony Capital snapped up 100,000 homes nationwide, according to Green Street Advisors, a research firm. Investors helped prices recover faster, but regular buyers, particularly those with impaired credit, complained that they couldn’t compete.

“When home prices were really high, there was no lending regulation, so the middle class and even the working class were able to buy these homes at very high prices,” said Glenn Kelman, chief executive of Redfin, the online real estate platform that helped The New York Times trace the history of 12204 Backus Drive. “And then, when homes became extremely affordable, the horse was out of the barn and the doors were closed, and they couldn’t borrow.” As late as December, investors accounted for one in five purchases of existing homes, according to the National Association of Realtors.

Photo

Prices in Prince George’s County never fell quite low enough to attract bulk buyers. That created an opportunity for smaller investors, like a construction company called Greenway Homes that moved from construction to flipping houses.

In April 2012, an affiliate of Greenway bought 12204 Backus Drive for $215,000 cash. Two Dumpsters full of trash had to be tossed, and all appliances — except Ms. Johnson’s Jenn-Air oven — replaced, said Traci Barsy, who oversaw the renovation. The company usually makes a profit of 10 percent, said Kate Weaver, the vice president, but she estimated that the return was lower for this house because its size drove up the renovation cost.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

The house received a new roof, air-conditioner, hardwood floors, tile and carpeting, a wet bar in the basement and extras like custom cabinets, upgraded molding and brushed nickel fixtures. When the listing hit the Internet, priced at about $390,000, a friend sent the link to Ms. Johnson. Having sunk her retirement savings into the house, Ms. Johnson was moving from rental to rental, unable to provide a suitable living space for her son. When she saw the photographs, she cried.

The Kims — he a 31-year-old auto parts manager, she a 28-year-old second-grade teacher — saw the listing, too. They had been searching for a house for two years and had tucked away more than $100,000 by living with Mr. Kim’s parents, said Ms. Kim, who calls herself a “hard-core saver.” “I think paying rent is the biggest waste of money,” Ms. Kim said, adding that the couple weren’t counting on increasing home values or even a stable economy.

“We didn’t overextend ourselves like so many people did in the past,” she said. “We would still be able to afford the mortgage payment if one of us lost our jobs.”

Mortgages are roughly seven times harder to get than they were five years ago, according to the Mortgage Bankers Association’s credit availability index, and they show few signs of getting easier. The average credit score of borrowers who receive loans guaranteed by Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac has increased to about 760 from about 720 in 2000, according to Black Knight Financial Services.

Even with their large down payment, the Kims are paying a higher interest rate, 3.9 percent, than if Mr. Kim had had a better credit score, they said.

The couple bought the house in March 2013; the recorded sale price was $381,000. Ms. Kim was initially reluctant to pay so much for a house that had so recently been much cheaper — until she saw the renovation. “It was so beautiful,” she said. Of the investor, Mr. Kim said, “I’m sure they deserve what profit they made.”

In the aftermath of the crash, many have made the argument that public policy overly encourages homeownership. Robert J. Shiller, the Nobel-winning economist (and a contributor to Sunday Business), says that while owning a home may be worthwhile for many reasons, historically, most homeowners have reaped little financial return for their investment.

Chris Mayer, a real estate professor at Columbia Business School, argues that homeownership is its own kind of social safety net, whether or not it is profitable. Homeownership rates, he said, are higher in cities like Charlotte, N.C., where values are fairly stable, than in coastal areas where they consistently climb. “Just by living in your home, you’re saving for your retirement,” he said. “This is a place where I think most homeowners get it right, compared to economists.”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

As for 12204 Backus Drive, Mr. Mayer pointed out that even its lowest price in the crash was about the same as its previous trough, when the first owner sold it, but that its peaks had been much higher.

Despite their travails, all the recent owners of the house aspire to homeownership. The big winners in the boom, Mr. Ramos and Ms. Kim, went on to get burned in the bust, buying a bigger, more expensive house and losing it in a short sale. They are saving to buy again, Mr. Ramos said.

Ms. Johnson, who went into foreclosure, is less hopeful, but would like to own a home. “I do believe in having your own home,” she said. “If you’re paying rent, you’re just helping someone else pay off their mortgage.”

Martha and Jonathan Kim agree, and right now their $1,800 monthly mortgage payment is cheaper than rent would be. But in the house on Backus, more than half the rooms are sparsely furnished and rarely used, and that makes Ms. Kim uneasy.

Seated at her kitchen table, she half-joked about taking in boarders. “Sometimes I feel like we’re wasting money,” she said. “We’re just kind of sitting on too much land.”