NEW YORK — In a major drug bust that drew little attention just a week before Philip Seymour Hoffman’s death, authorities found a sophisticated heroin packaging and distribution operation in an apartment in the Bronx.

There, workers with coffee grinders, scoops and scales toiled around the clock to break down bricks of the drug into thousands of tiny, hit-size baggies, bearing such stamped brands as “Government Shutdown” and, in a nod to the Super Bowl, “NFL.”

The seizure of $8 million worth of heroin was the result of the latest raid on heroin mills hidden behind the doors of New York homes, which authorities say are a sign of a well-oiled distribution network that caters to mainstream, middle- and upper-class customers like the Oscar-winning Hoffman.

Heroin dealers want to find customers with ready cash “who are going to be with them until they die,” said city Special Narcotics Prosecutor Bridget Brennan. “That’s the attitude.”

Tests are trying to pinpoint how Hoffman died, but his body was found with a syringe in his arm and dozens of packets of heroin nearby. Where he got his drugs remains uncertain, but the arrests of drug suspects identified during the investigation suggest he might have visited a lower Manhattan apartment building where a supplier lived.

There’s no evidence that the Bronx operation provided any heroin Hoffman might have bought. But New York has long been known as the nation’s capital of smack, regularly accounting for about 20 percent of the heroin the federal Drug Enforcement Administration seizes every year.

Those seizures have grown by 67 percent in the state over the past five years, a trend Brennan attributes in part to high-volume heroin mills invisible to most New Yorkers but capable of churning out hundreds of thousands of packets within days after a big shipment arrives.

The pipeline starts in Mexico, where cartels traffic Colombian-produced heroin by the kilogram. The wholesalers smuggle the drugs into the United States in trucks, through tunnels dug under the Southwest border and, in one recent case, by molding and coloring the heroin to look like coffee beans.

In the Northeast, the cartels have increasingly supplied Dominican middlemen who rely on a business model for heroin mills that emphasizes discipline and an absence of violence.

A mill found in an 18th-floor apartment in upper Manhattan had a sign that read, “Clean Up After Yourselves — The Management.” At another across the street from Manhattan College in the Bronx, immigrant workers wore school sweat shirts to try to blend in.

Workers can make up to $5,000 a week. They’re also given meals and toiletries to help make it through 12-hour shifts.

The mill operators and workers go out of their way not to disturb neighbors, who might report them to police, or to draw the attention of other criminals.

“Drug dealers are very wary,” said James J. Hunt, the acting head of the DEA’s New York office. “They wouldn’t want word to get out on the street about a mill. They want anonymity.”

20 percent

Percentage of the federal Drug Enforcement Administration’s heroin seizures made in New York City

67 percent

Increase in seizures in New York over the past five years

$8 million

Value of a heroin seizure made in a Bronx apartment last week