President Obama continued his desperate quest to sound the alarm about the December 15 Obamacare deadline by appearing “On Air With Ryan Seacrest” Monday.

In addition to plugging the Affordable Care Act, Obama also spoke about his Christmas shopping during the interview, labeling the first lady “hard to shop for.”

“You know, Michelle is hard to shop for,” the president explained. “She’s very fashionable and she looks good. So, I’m worried about buying her clothes because she’ll, on Christmas Day, look at it and say, ‘That’s really sweet, honey,’ and peck me on the cheek, and then I never see her wear whatever I bought.”

However, Obama called his daughter Malia a “fun” person to shop for because of her interest in movies.

Obama also detailed the tradition during which, on Small Business Saturday, he and his daughters purchase books to gift their relatives on the Christmas holiday.

“Malia, Sasha, and I have a tradition of going to an independent bookstore and buying some books for various members of the family,” he said. “And that’s always a lot of fun and it’s a great way to support small businesses.”

In the spirit of Christmas, Seacrest baited Obama into signing a duet of Mariah Carey’s “All I Want For Christmas Is You.”

“I just want you for my own,” sang an apparently tone-deaf Seacrest, “more than you could ever know, make my wish come true, baby, all I want for Christmas …”

“… is you to sign up for health care at HealthCare.gov,” Obama replied in his usual speaking voice.

Aside from engaging in holiday chatter, the radio host also complimented Obama on his recent “Colbert Report” stint during which the president, of course, attempted to re-sell Obamacare to American Millennials.

“I’m preparing for my next career, laying the groundwork,” Obama laughed. “I’m feeling pretty good about it.”

The president also insisted that he didn’t “rehearse much” for his turn in Stephen Colbert’s chair.

“I’ve got to admit, I don’t rehearse much on these things because I figure, if I’m a little spontaneous, it’ll probably end up being a little bit better, and if I practice it won’t be as fun,” explained Obama. “You know, leave a little room for mistakes.”

When he got around to touting the Affordable Care Act, Obama called his championed health care law a “really good deal for a lot of people who don’t have health care coverage.”

He also alleged that HealthCare.gov — the Obamacare website that endured an atrocious rollout last time around — works “flawlessly” today.

Individuals signing up for health care coverage starting January 1 through Obamacare must sign up by December 15.

In addition to calling in to Ryan Seacrest’s show, Obama also gave interviews to ESPN Radio’s “The Herd with Collin Cowherd” and “Afternoon Traffic Jams with Brian Dawson” on Raleigh NCW QOK-FM last week during which he discussed the Obamacare deadline.

Listen to the full interview below.