French Montana recently spent some quality time with reality TV star Scott Disick while the pair hung out in the Hamptons.

If the rapper and his girlfriend, Khloe Kardashian, decide to take a stroll down the aisle at some point down the road, then Montana will essentially become a part of Disick’s family. Since it’s always a good idea to foster strong, positive relationships with your better half’s friends and relatives, French decided to join Scott for a seafood dinner.

Us Weekly reports that French Montana popped up in one of Disick’s Instagram pics earlier this week. Not only are the fellas striking poses for the camera, they’re also wearing matching bibs. Do we smell a bromance brewing, or is that just the lobster?

Check out the photo of French Montana and his new friend below.

The image came equipped with the following caption: “Gettin’ It.”

Of course, French Montana and his new-found pal didn’t limit their adventures to just the nearest seafood eatery. The Daily Mail reports that the rapper spent some on the water courtesy of Disick’s motorboat. Fortunately for those who care, someone managed to snap a few photos of the bromance as it was taking place. Lucky you!

Here’s how the website describes their attire:

“French donned just a pair of blue swim trunks, flip-flops, a gold medallion chain and sunglasses for the water outing. Scott kept his light blue T-shirt on and also wore swirly black and white boardshorts and sunglasses for the boat ride.”

Here’s more photos of French Montana and Scott together:

Scott & French Montana on a boat in the Hamptons yesterday pic.twitter.com/afCwnq6yGA — Ж Dash Doll Ж (@luvkardashjennx) August 7, 2014

Scott next to French Montana tho.. Scott is beyond pic.twitter.com/1nRO0zKL34 — natasha (@TashHowells) July 27, 2014

At least French Montana has something to keep his mind off sex during Ramadan. The Inquisitr previously reported that he’s currently in the middle of a dry spell, something that Khloe Kardashian doesn’t have a problem pointing out. She’s also not above teasing the poor guy about their lack of intimacy.

“That’s no eating, no drinking, no smoking. Wait—there’s no sex! How’s that been?” Power 105 DJ Angie Martinez asked Kardashian during a recent interview.

Much to French Montana’s dismay, Khloe didn’t have a problem spilling the beans. She said, “So fun. That’s why he’s wearing all white. He’s so pure and holy, he’s virginal.”

Are you surprised French Montana and Scott Disick are hanging out together?

[Lead image via Bing]