It's been a bit of a crazy year for Republican campaigning, to say the least, and while many people have been disappointed by candidates' antics, it's getting pretty hard to surprise the public anymore. (Punches thrown at rallies? Check. Blatant sexism tossed at journalists? Check.) The newest scandal emerged when the National Enquirer alleged that Texas Sen. Ted Cruz has had affairs with five women, which Cruz promptly denied Friday. There's no proof to back the story up, but some people decided to run with the idea of a sexting Ted Cruz in order to tweet hilarious #TedSext jokes. The best #TedSext tweets are such a gold mine that I wouldn't be surprised if some people wanted the rumors to be true, just so that they could keep the joke going.

Cruz did not immediately respond to Romper's request for comment, but Cruz denied the allegations on Facebook:

I want to be crystal clear: these attacks are garbage. For Donald J. Trump to enlist his friends at the National Enquirer and his political henchmen to do his bidding shows you that there is no low Donald won’t go. These smears are completely false, they’re offensive to Heidi and me, they’re offensive to our daughters, and they’re offensive to everyone Donald continues to personally attack.

Business mogul Donald Trump fired back on Facebook, saying, "I have no idea whether or not the cover story about Ted Cruz in this week’s issue of the National Enquirer is true or not, but I had absolutely nothing to do with it, did not know about it, and have not, as yet, read it."

The allegations — which would definitely benefit any Cruz opponents — are definitely disrespectful, but they're not surprising after such a strange week (or month, or year) in the GOP race. As writer Chris Cillizza wrote for his Washington Post blog: "While the reaction Friday morning to the Cruz allegations tended toward surprise and disgust, neither feeling really makes much sense when you consider the context of the broader campaign."

Unfazed, but seeing the fantastic comedic opportunity, the public began to bombard Twitter with hypothetical, politically-infused sexts Cruz might send rumored his lovers.

I wanna patrol your body like a Muslim neighborhood #TedSexts — Ira Madison III (@ira) March 25, 2016

"Girl, I'm about to repeal them panties like they was Obamacare." #TedSexts #cruzsexscandal — Mia McKenzie (@miamckenzie) March 25, 2016

"I'm harder than getting an abortion in Texas." #TedSexts #cruzsexscandal — Mia McKenzie (@miamckenzie) March 25, 2016

Let's snuggle by the fireplace as I burn the resumes of qualified LGBT hires #TedSexts — Ira Madison III (@ira) March 25, 2016

Ted: I wanna ruin you like women's repro rights, girl #TedSexts — I'm a General, weee! (@thewayoftheid) March 25, 2016

Ah, it was a good way to have a chuckle/cry after a disappointing week in politics. The world had to endure attacks on Melania Trump and tweets threatening Heidi Cruz. They had to listen to Trump support waterboarding and banning immigrants. They had to hear Cruz suggest patrols of Muslim neighborhoods.

It's been a heavy week, so — whether the Cruz rumors hold any weight or not — having a laugh at the on-point #TedSexts tweets feels like a nice, lighthearted reprieve from the madness.