Hillary Clinton has been tweeting up a storm (and tweet-storming) lately, wading more into the political topic du jour as she gears up for an expected run for president in 2016.

Clinton, who joined Twitter in June 2013, would sometimes go weeks or months without posting a message. She didn’t tweet at all from Dec. 6 to Jan. 16. Even in February, she sent only four tweets.

But noticeably over the past week, she has been quick to publish her thoughts on a pertinent topic through the medium. On Monday and Tuesday alone, in fact, she posted more tweets than she did all of last month.

A week ago, as controversy about her email habits continued to fester, she criticized Senate Republicans for signing onto a letter sent to Iran’s leadership, directly blasting those “considering running for commander-in-chief”:

GOP letter to Iranian clerics undermines American leadership. No one considering running for commander-in-chief should be signing on. — Hillary Clinton (@HillaryClinton) March 11, 2015

On Monday, she weighed in on the Senate fight over a human-trafficking bill that has been held up because of abortion-related language, the inclusion of which caught Democrats off guard. She also blasted Republican leaders for holding up a confirmation vote on Loretta Lynch, the nominee for attorney general:

Congressional trifecta against women today: 1) Blocking great nominee, 1st African American woman AG, for longer than any AG in 30 years… — Hillary Clinton (@HillaryClinton) March 16, 2015

…2) Playing politics with trafficking victims… 3) Threatening women's health & rights. — Hillary Clinton (@HillaryClinton) March 16, 2015

And on Wednesday, she addressed the release of the House Republican budget. She previewed some general attack lines…

Budgets reflect our priorities. They should help families get ahead, educate our kids, and spark small business growth. — Hillary Clinton (@HillaryClinton) March 18, 2015

Our nation's future – jobs & economic growth – depends on investments made today. The GOP budget fails Americans on these principles. — Hillary Clinton (@HillaryClinton) March 18, 2015

…Singled out her criticism of the cuts to Pell grants included in the budget:

Making college more affordable is an investment in our kids and economic growth. Cuts to Pell Grants hold our kids back. — Hillary Clinton (@HillaryClinton) March 18, 2015

…And gave a hint of how she’ll defend the Affordable Care Act on the trail: