Snowfall may just be the beginning of another round of wintry weather for the Tulsa area this weekend.

Mike Lacey, a Tulsa National Weather Service meteorologist, said that up to 2 inches of snow is possible in northeast Oklahoma this weekend, with about an inch of snow expected in the Tulsa area.

Login required We have used your information to see if you have a subscription with us. So far we have not found one. If you feel you are currently subscribed please click on the button to attempt to find your account. Screen Name or Email Password Forgot? Remember me on this computer Login Screen Name or Email Now I remember! Need an account? Create one now. Back Thank you for reading and relying on TulsaWorld.com for your news and information. You have now viewed your allowance of free articles. Login

You must login to view the full content on this page. Screen Name or Email Password Forgot? Remember me on this computer Login Screen Name or Email Now I remember! Need an account? Create one now.

The snow is expected to start between 6 and 9 p.m. Saturday and end by 6 a.m. Sunday.

"There is potential for travel impact," Lacey said of Saturday night's snowfall, noting that colder temperatures will keep the snow on surfaces, including roadways.

However, Lacey said, record-setting lows are possible in the area Sunday night into Monday morning, when single-digit low temperatures are forecast in the Tulsa area.

Ten- to 20-mph north winds will make the temperature feel like minus-10 degrees in the Tulsa area, with wind chill values potentially as low as minus-20 in far northeastern Oklahoma.

"When parents send kids out for the school bus, it may be a dangerous situation," Lacey said. "Monday morning is going to be brutal."

The current forecast is just the latest of several rounds of winter weather in the area, as well as the rest of Oklahoma, said Gary McManus, Oklahoma Climatological Survey associate state climatologist.

In December, northeast Oklahoma not only experienced a snowstorm and an ice storm, but also it was the 16th-coldest December on record dating back to 1895, as temperatures were 4.1 degrees below normal, McManus said. By contrast, December 2012 was 8 degrees warmer than December 2013 on average.

"Northeast Oklahoma has really borne some of the worst of that cold weather," McManus said.

This winter has been more "active" than 2012-13's winter so far because the jet stream is over the central part of the United States, allowing more storms in Oklahoma's area, he said.

In addition, most of the state is not in a drought now, compared with December 2012, when most of the state had extreme to exceptional drought conditions.

Althea Peterson 918-581-8361

Tulsa's forecast temperatures

Saturday afternoon high: 46

Saturday overnight low: 14

Sunday afternoon high: 22

Sunday overnight low: 7

Monday afternoon high: 19

Monday overnight low: 12

Tuesday afternoon high: 33

Tuesday overnight low: 26

Wednesday afternoon high: 36

Wednesday overnight low: 30

Source: National Weather Service

Wintry weather in Tulsa since Dec. 1

5.1 inches: Total snowfall

0.5 inches: Total ice accumulation

7 degrees: Lowest temperature in December (Dec. 7)

11 degrees: Lowest temperature in January (Thursday)