Dr. Sara Pourheydarian with Dr. Coker Family Eye Care in Louisville provides a free vision exam for William Jones, 11, during the third annual Health and Wellness Fair at Jeffersonville High School hosted by Eastside Christian Church, Centerstone and Community Action of Southern Indiana on Saturday. (By Jenna Esarey, special to The Courier-Journal) July 12, 2014.

Hundreds of individuals and families took advantage of free health screenings, educational information and a bit of pampering during the third annual Health and Wellness Fair at Jeffersonville High School on Saturday.

Eastside Christian Church partnered with Community Action of Southern Indiana and Centerstone to host the free event for families and individuals in need.

Participants could schedule either a dental exam, optical exam or child's medical screening, and take advantage of a spa area offering haircuts and manicures.

"I didn't know about this last year," said Mary Crim as she received a manicure. She came with her sons Noah, 5 weeks old, and Jacob, 12. "It's pretty cool. I don't have time to do my own nails since I had Noah."

The single mother said events like this are a boon for her. "The optical exam is really nice," she said.

An optometrist, a number of doctors and dentists, and others all volunteered their time and services for the fair. Former Army barber Danny Kilgore provided haircuts, along with other volunteers. "I'm wanting to give back to the community," he said. "I'm always trying to give back any way I can."

For the first two years the event was held at Eastside Christian Church, two miles from the high school on Veterans Parkway. It quickly outgrew the space. "We had 1,900 people come through last year," said David Parkerson, outreach minister at Eastside Christian. "We just couldn't handle it. Jeff High is much nicer, we can really spread out and it doesn't feel crowded."

Running from 10 a.m. to 2 p.m., the event drew a large crowd, with people lining up as early as 8 a.m. to reserve their spot in line.

The fair used classrooms, hallways, the library, health office and most common areas of the school.

Vendors representing businesses and organizations providing social services, health care, insurance and other health-related products and services filled the school's gymnasium.

For the first time this year, health and wellness workshops were offered, covering topics such as tobacco cessation, healthy eating, mental health awareness and HIV/AIDS.

Transportation to Eastside's campus was provided for those wishing to take advantage of free clothing and shoes collected by church members.

Just over 500 backpacks were collected by the church, filled with school supplies and handed out to children entering kindergarten through eighth grade during the fair.

"Last year we collected 300 and it was not enough," said Jennifer Coward, director of the backpack operation. "This year if we have any left over we'll donate them to the schools."

After receiving any services, families could pick up a backpack and then head to the cafeteria for a free lunch before leaving.

"I'm really very grateful," said Julia McKinley of Floyds Knobs as she watched her son, Trayton Elliott, 8, receive a haircut. "Trayton is a type 1 diabetic. There was a lot of information we could use for him. I truly am blessed to be given the opportunity to come here."

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1m4xrsS