George Welsh is the Superintendent of the Cañon City School District. (Carie Canterbury / Daily Record)

Colorado's 2014 Superintendent of the Year by the Colorado Association of School Executives is the new Superintendent of Cañon City Schools.

George Welsh began the position July 1, replacing Dr. Robin Gooldy, who retired after 11 years with the district.

"We love the community, we love the climate and we think it's a great place to raise our kids," Welsh said of Cañon City.

Welsh, 50, and his wife, Rebecca Reed, have three grown children, and a daughter, Priscilla, who will start seventh grade this fall.

Welsh brings with him to the district 28 years of experience in education. He taught middle school for nine years in Arizona while earning an Education Leadership degree and completing principal coursework. He then was the middle-high school principal and Athletic Director in Center before acting as the district's superintendent the last 18 years. The district's three schools, and the district itself, became accredited through the state rating system on his watch. While in the San Luis Valley, he also has taught at Adams State University.

Advertisement

For the next several months, Welsh plans to observe the goings on of the district before he even will begin to determine what ideas he may propose to help move it forward. However, one of his immediate goals is to extend lines of communication with the district staff and community members. His weekly communication blog, Echoes from Cañon, available at http://echoesfromcanon.weebly.com is emailed to parents through the student information system. He said he always is happy to arrange time to meet with anyone who may have questions or concerns or simply may want to share an idea.

One area of expertise Welsh feels he brings to the district is in supporting high-quality classroom instruction. His focus in his new role as superintendent is to improve instruction — "Not that's it's bad," he said, "but making it better."

He feels the district has the teaching capacity to bump it to fully accredited, or even accredited with distinction.

"The key I see here is not so much the overall achievement of students, but how much they grow year to year," he said. "My belief is that with processes that include continual improvement and support for teachers — getting them the resources they need, the feedback they need — that as teaching day to day gets a little more effective, we'll show that growth and that growth will improve the district's accreditation prospects."

Welsh's wife worked as a school and public library director in Center, and she now plans to work as a substitute teacher in the Cañon City district. In his free time, Welsh enjoys bicycling, swimming, running and taking part in triathlons.

For more information on the Cañon City School District, visit www.canoncityschools.org or search for Canon City Schools Fremont RE-1 on Facebook. To contact Welsh, email welshg@canoncityschools.org.

Carie Canterbury: 719-276-7643, canterburyc@canoncitydailyrecord.com