You reach a time in your life when it is about helping others..."

NEWARK — Christmas can be a lonely time for those who cannot count on a day spent with family gathered around a tree unwrapping gifts, sharing a festive meal or keeping out of the harsh December chill.

But at Sunrise Care, an adult daycare for the homeless and mentally ill in Newark, today was one full of holiday cheer.

“No one should be alone during the holidays,” said Sen. Richard Codey (D-Essex), who was there to help serve meals. “What better way to show how much we care for these men and women and to let them know they are not forgotten or alone, than to join them on Christmas to bring them a little joy during the holidays.”

On Wednesday, dozens of people were lined up outside the door to receive trays full of steak, mashed potatoes and green beans — and, for dessert, pumpkin and blueberry pie and chocolate cake. Ornaments decorated tables and one woman wore a red cloak and pom-pom-topped Santa hat. Christmas carols filled the air.

“One woman was crying and she said, ‘I never thought I’d be as happy on Christmas,’” Codey said.

Gifts, including hats, coats and toiletries were given out with help from Spread the Purple, a charitable organization that provides resources for those in need.

Sunrise Care serves 110 men and women, including veterans, and provides a variety of pre-vocational classes as well as life skills instruction. Many of the center’s clients come from local shelters and boarding homes.

For Codey, who attended the Sunrise Care Christmas with his son Kevin, the event coincided with the recent creation of the Codey Fund for Mental Health. Launched in late November with $200,000 in private donations, the foundation supports programs for the homeless and severely mentally ill.

When the fund was announced, Codey spoke of hoping to end the stigma associated with mental illness. His wife, Mary Jo Codey, suffered from postpartum depression.

“Our primary aim is to end the stigma associated with mental illness,” Codey said. “It affects more people on a daily basis than cancer or heart disease…it’s an epidemic.”

His wife, Mary Jo Codey, has suffered from postpartum depression.

According to the National Alliance on Mental Illness, about 260,000 adult New Jersey residents live with severe mental health conditions.

In addition to the former governor of New Jersey, 12 volunteers arrived to make Christmas merry at Sunrise Care.

Jack Krafjack, a member of the Bound Brook Elks, said volunteering at Sunrise Care was the true meaning of Christmas.

“You reach a time in your life when it is about helping others,” said Krafjack, who served lunch and dessert.

“My mom suffers from mental illness so today is really special for me,” said Liz Sorensen, a Bound Brook resident who volunteered with her husband, Bob.

Mohammed Naeem, the Founder of Sunrise Care, joined Chef Rashun Brown in the kitchen to prepare the meal.

“We are here to serve those who are less fortunate with dignity,” he said.