Topics: billie piper, Comic-Con, Dallas Comic Con, Devin Pike, doctor who, godzilla, karen gillan, Mitch Pileggi, Sylvester McCoy, the x-files, Video, Media News, Entertainment News

Devin Pike is tired. He was up at 3 a.m. to run the local morning show circuits encouraging even more people to an event that can barely accommodate the estimated 70,000 people already attending. Along with Show Director Ben Stevens, Programming Director Mark Walters, and Volunteer Coordinator Tracy Kelly, Devin struggles to prevent the organized chaos of the Dallas Comic Con from descending into the real thing — and the effort clearly exhausts him.

On the eve of the convention, as I waited in line for a press credential I would never receive,* I met a woman dressed as a S.H.I.E.L.D. Agent who kept referring to “the Director,” and it wasn’t until someone else asked her where “Director Pike” got off to that the reference sunk in — and the comparison is apt, as both are in partially in charge of large, loosely knit organizations that always seems on the verge of falling apart and yet somehow still operate.

*I was told by the media agency running the press that neither Salon nor the Onion have sufficient “reach.” One of their people “looked at the circulation numbers and they just didn’t compete” with those who had been awarded credentials, which could only mean everyone else covering the convention worked for online pornography and kitten photos.

It shouldn’t surprise you, then, that the Director was able to score me a pass* that afforded me access not merely equivalent to, but greater than, that of the press — and one which I quickly, albeit accidentally, abused by following a bald man through a guarded door, almost ending up on stage with “The X-Files”‘ Mitch Pileggi. The door was manned by one of the legion of volunteers who keep the conference’s inherent anarchy in check by dint of a pleasant demeanor.

*Which I not only deserved, but which was absolutely necessary, given that I would be moderating a panel with Haruo Nakajima, Kenpachiro Satsuma, and Tsutomu Kitagawa — three of the men who portrayed the iconic monster “Godzilla” on the silver screen — on Sunday.

After I scuttled out of the spotlight, I asked the woman in charge of this particular door why she let me through. “You looked like you knew where you were going,” she said. “And you had a badge.” I was tempted to reply that the point of badges is to prevent people who look like they know where they’re going from just going anywhere, but she had a point — it’s all about the badges.

And by “badges,” I mean “lanyards.” Around the neck of every attendee hung a lanyard declaring where and when this particular individual could move about the conference. If yours read VIP, you were welcome almost anywhere at anytime — the front of the room, closest to the speaker, or the front of the line, first to acquire an audience. Premium, Deluxe, and Single Day followed suit, in descending order of importance.

The first panel Devin personally hosts is a little running late, which should’ve been expected, given that it was a Q&A session with Sylvester McCoy, the Seventh Doctor. As many of his companions have learned the hard way, trusting the Doctor to show up on time is a fool’s errand, and yet the crowd sat patiently, not the least bit concerned about whether he’d arrive, or what mood he’d be in when he does.

When he finally did, he climbed onto the stage, under the table at which the interview would take place, and proceeded to regale the audience with tales of setting the world record for the number of ferrets a person can stuff in his pants.

“Just out of curiosity,” Devin asked, “what was the record?”

“There was none! We invented it!” he replied.

By the time McCoy’s panel ended, it was 8:15 p.m. I’d been there since seven hours, and had walked the 2 1/2 mile-long concourse at the Kay Bailey Hutchison Convention Center eight or nine times and was, understandably, beyond beat. Devin had been up since 3 a.m. and ran that same stretch countless times “putting out brush fires” throughout the day. I could only imagine how he felt — and it was only Day 1.

On Day 2, I awoke at 3 a.m. to sound of thunder shaking my hotel room at the Dallas Omni. I don’t mean this poetically — I mean I was near the top of a tall hotel in the middle of a raging thunderstorm and the thunder shook the walls with enough force to knock pictures to the floor. This would become a theme.