​

Update at 8:39 p.m.: Parts of Tarrant, Johnson, Parker and Hood counties are under a severe thunderstorm warning until 9:45 p.m., KXAS-TV (NBC5) reported. Rick Mitchell, a KXAS-TV (NBC5) meteorologist, said strong wind, heavy rain and hail was possible.

The tornado watch for several counties, including Dallas, Tarrant and Rockwall, has been extended until 11 p.m., according to the National Weather Service.

New Severe T-Storm Warning for SW Tarrant, N. Johnson, S Parker, & Hood Cty until 9:45PM- here's the track. RS #dfwwx pic.twitter.com/ApYdZajKdF — Remeisha Shade (@RemeishaShade) May 10, 2015

Update at 8:17 p.m.: The tornado watch has been cancelled for Collin and Denton Counties, though Tarrant and Dallas coutnies remain under the watch until 9 p.m.

Update at 7:49 p.m.: A tornado warning has been issued for Hood and Erath counties until 8:15 p.m., KXAS-TV (NBC5) said.

Meanwhile, authorities said one person has been killed after a tornado struck a rural farming and ranch area about 100 miles west of Fort Worth.

Cisco Fire Chief Walter Fairbanks reports the one fatality as authorities are searching homes in Eastland County that were damaged by the twister that hit late Saturday afternoon.

The Eastland County judge, Rex Fields, says some people were unaccounted for but torrential rains were making the initial canvasses difficult.

He says there is “a considerable amount of damage” but the tornado did not strike any heavily populated area.

A 50-county area of North Texas has been under a tornado watch until 9 p.m.

Update at 7:09 p.m.: The Eastland County judge says people are unaccounted for after a tornado struck a rural farming and ranch area of his county about 100 miles west of Fort Worth.

County Judge Rex Fields, who also serves as the county’s emergency services coordinator, says heavy rain still falling early Saturday evening has been making damage assessment difficult. He says there is “a considerable amount of damage.”

He says homes have been lost and authorities are going house to house to try to get a better handle on the situation.

He can’t immediately confirm any injuries or fatalities.

Fields says the tornado Saturday afternoon did not strike any heavily populated area.

A 50-county area of North Texas has been under a tornado watch until 9 p.m.

Update at 6:38 p.m.: At least two tornadoes touched down Saturday in North Texas, as forecasters elevated the risk of severe storms for a large area including Dallas while downgrading it for much of the Great Plains.

The National Weather Service confirmed one tornado was on the ground late Saturday afternoon near Cisco, about 100 miles west of Fort Worth. Josh Wasson, with the Cisco Fire Department, says at least one home has been damaged but isn’t immediately certain of the extent of the damage.

Authorities said one person was killed in Cisco as a result of the severe weather, KXAS-TV (NBC5) said.

Another twister touched down in the town of Burkburnett, Texas, about 15 miles north of Wichita Falls, according to a police dispatcher who declined to give her name due to department policy. She said the town set off its tornado siren just before 6 p.m.

The weather service on Saturday afternoon elevated to “moderate” the risk of tornadoes in the Dallas-Fort Worth metropolitan area and elsewhere across North Texas. Eastland County, which was part of the enhanced zone, was pelted with 3-inch hail as the storm rumbled through.

“As expected, the environment in North Texas is particularly favorable (for tornadoes),” said Bill Bunting, the chief of operations at the Norman, Oklahoma-based Storm Prediction Center.

Storms also brought heavy rain and quarter-sized hail to parts of southwest Oklahoma on Saturday afternoon, but meteorologists said there was so much rain — and so little sun — that the tornado threat there lessened throughout the day. Parts of western Kansas also were bracing for severe storms.

But the threatening skies stretched beyond the Plains states, as twin weather systems stretching from the Carolinas to California produced an unseasonably early tropical storm in the Atlantic and a late-season snowstorm in the Rocky Mountains. Tropical Storm Ana’s forecast track is expected to go near the coasts of North and South Carolina on Sunday.

Meanwhile, up to 5 inches of snow was possible in the Nebraska Panhandle this weekend, and parts of South Dakota could receive between 12 to 24 inches of snow, according to the weather service.

Update at 5:54 p.m.: Forecasters have boosted the possibility of tornadoes for North Texas as a tornado watch was issued into Saturday evening for nearly 50 counties, including the Dallas-Fort Worth area.

A tornado warning was issued late Saturday afternoon for Eastland County, where the area about 100 miles west of Fort Worth was pelted with storms and 3-inch hail.

Josh Wasson, with the Cisco Fire Department in Eastland County says at least one home has been damaged but isn’t immediately certain of the extent of the damage.

The Norman, Oklahoma-based Storm Prediction Center upgraded parts of the watch area to a moderate risk of severe weather. It’s the fourth-highest risk of a five-level prediction range. Other counties are considered in the “enhanced” area, one risk lower. The watch is effective until 9 p.m.

Earlier Saturday afternoon, the Dallas-Fort Worth area’s risk of severe weather has been upgraded to Category 4, on a five-point scale, for moderate risk of large hail and strong winds, according to the National Weather Service’s Fort Worth office.

Tornadoes could develop in a few places, but meteorologist Lamont Bain said he doesn’t expect severe weather to sweep through all of North Texas.

“Some areas won’t even see a thunderstorm,” he said. “…We definitely want people to be alert.”

Original post:

The National Weather Service in Fort Worth is warning of a potential for severe thunderstorms in North Texas this afternoon.

That could mean hail, damaging winds, possibly tornadoes and a “big threat” for flash flooding, said Jennifer Dunn, a meteorologist for the National Weather Service.

Most of North Texas — including Dallas and Tarrant counties — is under a tornado watch that is set to expire at 9 p.m.

But NBC 5 Meteorologist David Finfrock says he’s most worried about the flash flood watch that is in effect through Monday morning.

Rainfall in the last six weeks, and especially this week, may put an end to the drought area lakes have experienced in the last four years, Finfrock said.

“We’ve really had a change in our luck. … It takes a flood to end a drought — that’s what appears to be what’s happening right now,” he said.

Expect more rain tomorrow — sorry, mom — and early next week.

The Associated Press contributed to this report.