Last week, hospitality guru Danny Meyer announced that starting in November, his New York-based restaurant group would abolish tipping and raise menu prices to compensate employees, causing a seismic tremor across the nation’s restaurant industry.

His announcement led to speculation as to whether it’s the beginning of the end of tipping in restaurants.

Just about every city can point to at least one independent restaurant that has embraced a no-tipping policy. Here in Pittsburgh, it’s Bar Marco in the Strip District, and its sibling, the Livermore in East Liberty. The practice was implemented in April.

Bar Marco pays servers and cooks $35,000 a year for a 40-hour work week, plus health care and quarterly profit shares of a couple hundred dollars.

Co-owner Justin Steel says the new practice is working just fine.

The key, he said, is education.

“It’s part of the greeting at the restaurant,” he said. “So customers understand that each dish is around 20 percent higher than it was with tips, so as to compensate 11 full-time staffers, five in the front of the house and the rest in the kitchen.”

For guests, there’s no line on the check to leave a tip. And it’s the first statement on the restaurant’s website, below the logo and the address.

Since the changes have taken place,some employees have stayed, although many others have moved on to new restaurants that have incentivized pay in other ways.

“The system we have implemented is not for people who need flexibility in their schedules,” he said.

No other Pittsburgh restaurant has followed suit.

Tipping is a particularly American practice, with supporters who argue that it allows diners to reward especially good service and it keeps servers motivated.

But whether that’s a reality has recently become the subject of heated debate. Few occupations pay a low base wage and require workers to hustle for tips to earn a living. Many argue that it demeans servers and requires that they put up with cases of harassing behavior just to get paid.

Tipping came about during Prohibition to make up for lost wages. In the 1960s, Congress voted to allow tipped workers to be paid 50 percent of the federal minimum wage, which led to the initial drop in servers’ wages. Then in 1991, an amendment uncoupled the tipped minimum wage from the federal minimum wage, which has kept salaries to just over $2 an hour.

As a minimum wage hike has become a hot button topic, a handful of states has equalized tipped and non-tipped workers. But Pennsylvania is not among those states — servers here make as little as $2.83 an hour before tips.

Although some Pittsburgh-area restaurant owners express a desire to make the switch to no tipping, they fear their profits will take a hit.

“I am against tipping, but as a small business owner I have yet to come up with a reasonable way to end it at Dinette,” said chef owner Sonja Finn, who added she has a small profit margin and no safety net at her East Liberty restaurant.

“If I get rid of tipping and raise prices, then I fear people will compare my price to places where tipping still exists and decide Dinette is too expensive. If I add a service charge, I fear customers might think it presumptuous to put it at 20 percent, so I would need to put it probably at 18.5 percent,” she said. “But my servers consistently are at 21 percent, so how would I make up the difference in pay?”

Management in a couple of restaurant groups has said that the switch to no tips is impractical for businesses that now have to follow the Affordable Care Act. The cost of health care and employee compensation is a tally many business aren’t prepared to pay.

That’s why many people are shocked by Mr. Meyer’s decision: With the size and scope of his operation, the costs must be significant. For one, his restaurants will no longer qualify for tax credits on tipped income, which, he told The New York Times, earns the group more than $1 million a year.

Union Square Hospitality Group has pulled in 25 James Beard awards and includes Union Square Cafe, The Modern in the Museum of Modern Art in New York and Gramercy Tavern — 13 restaurants in all.

By late November, the website Eater reported, prices at the restaurants will be noticeably higher. Menus will inform diners of the policy. And there will be no space on the check for leaving a tip.

Elsewhere in Pennsylvania, restaurants that have gone to salaried employees have done it differently. Girard Restaurant in Philadelphia has eliminated tipping and pays workers $11 an hour before taxes, which after taxes ends up being almost $2 more than the Pennsylvania minimum wage for non-tipped employees. Unlike Bar Marco, on Girard’s check, there is an option to leave a tip.

“Ours is not a good model for everyone,” Bar Marco’s Mr. Steel said. “But there are a lot of ways to do it that can work.”

Melissa McCart: 412-263-1198 or on Twitter @melissamccart.