Northampton County Councilman Glenn Geissinger announced Wednesday he will run for Rep. Matt Cartwright's congressional seat next year.

Geissinger, a Republican in his second year on council, said he wants to provide voters in Pennsylvania's 17th Congressional District a candidate who shares in their political beliefs. He called Cartwright, a vocal supporter of the Affordable Care Act, a Nancy Pelosi Democrat who does not accurately represent the region's mores.

"He votes in lockstep with everything Barack Obama wants, and that's not the district. That's not what the people of Northeast Pennsylvania want," Geissinger said.

Geissinger, 50, is to date the only 17th District candidate to have filed a campaign with the Federal Election Commission. Cartwright did not immediately return a phone call seeking comment, but Shane Seaver, his deputy chief of staff, said the congressman plans to seek re-election.

Geissinger said that if elected, he would push for Congress to adopt a six-year transportation plan instead of passing three-month patch jobs to hold the country over. He vowed to fight what he called overregulation in the energy sector, saying the federal government was handicapping businesses and slowing job growth.

"The federal government does not need to regulate every little puddle," he said.

Geissinger could be facing an uphill battle if he plans to lay claim to the district, which includes portions of Carbon, Luzerne, Lackawanna, Monroe and Northampton counties and all of Schuylkill County. Cartwright in 2012 defeated Laureen Cummings, a leader of the Scranton area tea party, by 22 percentage points in 2012, and Schuylkill County Coroner Dr. David Moylan by 13 percentage points two years later.

Geissinger challenged the notion that the district was out of reach for Republicans, chalking up Cartwright's success to dominating his opponents in raising campaign funds. For example, Cartwright outspent his opponent by more than $785,000 in 2014, according FEC filings.

Geissinger, who is the managing partner and owner of Alliance Media Group, said he expects to have five figures in his political action committee by the time he kicks off his campaign next month. The Plainfield Township resident said it should prove to voters he has the chops to take on Cartwright.

"I'm going to provide an opportunity for people to back an individual who is able to beat Matt Cartwright. I know I have that ability. I can do it. I can prove I can do it," he said.

Geissinger will hold a formal announcement at Big Daddy's, a Lebanese restaurant in Easton, between 5:30 and 7 p.m. on Sept. 8.