COLUMBUS, Ohio— This election season, cleveland.com started thinking more like a voter. We wanted to explore each presidential candidate and examine the good and the bad, from the perspective of a voter casting a ballot in either the Democratic or Republican primary.

We came up with five reasons to vote for each candidate, as well as five arguments for voting against each of them. These are not our opinions, just what we think are the strongest pro and con arguments.

Here's our pro-con list for Ted Cruz. We hope it helps you make up your mind before the Ohio primary on March 15. Please add your reasons in the comments below.

Five reasons to vote for Ted Cruz:

He's a real conservative. More than any other presidential candidate, Cruz is a consistent conservative -- a strong advocate of smaller government, repealing Obamacare, upholding the Second Amendment, fighting Planned Parenthood, and returning Christian values to America. He was a leading critic of a 2013 immigration reform bill that, if passed, would have given millions of undocumented residents a chance at citizenship. The American Conservative Union gave Cruz a lifetime rating of 98 percent during his four years in the Senate; the Club for Growth and National Taxpayers Union have also ranked him among the most conservative senators.

He's talented. Intelligent, quick on his feet, and a gifted public speaker with an excellent memory, Cruz is an articulate, disciplined leader. An award-winning debater at Princeton University, Cruz is a tough campaigner who both stays on message and doesn't need a TelePrompTer to share his thoughts.

He knows the U.S. Constitution. No presidential candidate has a more impressive legal background than Ted Cruz. As a high schooler, Cruz memorized the Constitution and traveled with a group around Texas. After graduating magna cum laude from Harvard Law School, he clerked for then-U.S. Supreme Court Chief Justice William Rehnquist. He's argued before the Supreme Court, too, as solicitor general of Texas and as a private lawyer, and he's written more than 80 briefs for the court. So when Cruz pledges to defend the Constitution, he has the experience to know what he's talking about.

He stands up for what he believes is right. In the Senate, Cruz has stubbornly fought for his principles and refused to compromise, even at the cost of alienating his Republican colleagues. To fight Obamacare in 2013, he helped create a 16-day government shutdown and led a 21-hour filibuster. Last year, he accused Republican Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell on the Senate floor of lying to him about plans to reauthorize the controversial Export-Import Bank. Not surprisingly, he's now been dubbed "the most hated man in Washington," but that just shows how effectively he's resisted the Washington elite. He's held to his values on the campaign trail as well: for example, he opposed ethanol subsidies when running in Iowa.

He's a man of faith. The son of a pastor, Cruz has put his southern Baptist faith at the forefront of his campaign. While he doesn't tithe, he has blurred the line between his faith and his politics – such as when he launched his presidential campaign with a speech at Liberty University, the world's largest Christian university. As Texas solicitor general, Cruz helped defend a monument to the Ten Commandments on the Texas State Capitol grounds. As Cruz said earlier this year, "I'm a Christian first, American second, conservative third and Republican fourth."

Five reasons to vote against Ted Cruz:

He's too right-wing. Cruz, by at least one calculation, is more conservative than Barry Goldwater and every subsequent Republican presidential nominee. He once compared his fellow Republicans to Nazi appeaser Neville Chamberlain. He wants America to return to the gold standard. He said the gay community has waged a "jihad" against controversial religious freedom laws in Indiana and Arkansas.

He's divisive. At a time when partisanship is dividing America and plunging confidence in government to a new low, the last person who should be in the White House is the "most hated man in Washington." Ideologically rigid, polarizing, and reviled even by Senate Republicans, Cruz will find it difficult to get much of his agenda through Congress. And if he's stonewalled, he's already shown that he's willing to hold the entire government hostage if he can't get what he wants.

He's not electable. Many Democrats are salivating at the idea of Cruz winning the nomination so he can get a Goldwater-style thumping in November. Cruz's far-right policies won't play well with moderate voters, he's already alienated many prominent GOP leaders, and even evangelical voters – a group that Cruz's campaign has gambled lots of money and time to court – have turned their backs to him in favor of Donald Trump. Even Cruz's face and body movements make him inherently dislikable to many people, according to science.

He's politically untested. Cruz's four years in the Senate are his only experience holding elected office. He has no executive experience, nor has he ever had to endure the brutal spotlight and trials of a national campaign. He will be 46 on Inauguration Day 2017, which would make him one of the youngest presidents in history – younger, in fact, than when another president entered office with a similar lack of experience: Barack Obama.

His campaign has trust issues. Cruz's campaign slogan is "TrusTed," but his campaign has been tainted by some shady activities. In Iowa, Cruz's campaign spread false reports that Ben Carson was dropping out of the race; Cruz then incorrectly claimed that CNN had reported that Carson was dropping out. Three weeks later, Cruz's communications director, Rick Tyler, distributed a video that inaccurately depicted Marco Rubio dismissing the Bible. Cruz has repeatedly apologized for the Carson rumors and fired Tyler, but such "dirty tricks" are unbefitting for someone who hopes to become the next president of the United States.