“The Nazis who were such legal pedants therefore always were careful to deprive those whom they intended to exterminate of their citizenship,” mused Arendt in notes from 1955. In other words, there is a relationship between the removal of citizenship and the way that a society relates to its expelled members. For Senator Cruz, “the terrorist” is not merely a criminal – “the terrorist” is subhuman, a demon to be exorcised. That this legislation could even be debated in Congress is marks our deep entrenchment in a racialized culture of fear.

Then there is the fact that Senator Cruz believes that he stands to gain politically by introducing this legislation – by advocating for stripping the most basic and fundamental of rights from fellow Americans (when we already have means to prosecute offenders under criminal law). What is obscured when we erase the humanity of “the terrorist”? To openly and genuinely consider what might drive a young American to join the Islamic State requires us to see “the terrorist” as rational, thinking, feeling being. If “the terrorist” is constituted as nothing more than wickedness, then the logic of the War on Terror remains intact – as the struggle of good over evil, lightness against dark. It is the dehumanization of the “terrorist,” the Muslim Other, that drives and enables the immensity of our own bruality. According to a report recently released by Physicians for Social Responsibility, about 1.3 million people have died as a result of the US War on Terror – and that is a conservative estimate.

Citizenship stripping for political gain is part of our American history. Emma Goldman was deported in 1919 after having her citizenship revoked. “Not alone foreigners, but the naturalized citizen and the native-born are to be mentally fumigated, made politically ‘reliable’ and governmentally kosher, by eliminating the social critics and industrial protestants, by denaturalization and banishment, [and] by exile…” she wrote in a pamphlet authored from Ellis Island. Her words may seem far removed from today’s political realities – but they remind us that political motivations drive citizenship stripping, whether in the context of the Red Scare or the War on Terror.

Not surprisingly, the proposed legislation has been vocally opposed by the American Civil Liberties Union, which sent a letter to all senators soon after the bill was introduced, saying that “The bill turns the whole notion of due process on its head” and that “Government officials do not have the power to strip citizenship from American citizens who never renounced their citizenship and were never convicted of a crime.”

The sponsors of the Expatriate Terrorist Act, which compels us to believe that our survival depends on the dehumanization of someone else, would like us to think that the real existential threat to our country is the misled young men and women who have joined ISIS. It is not. The existential threat to our country is posed by Presidential Candidate Ted Cruz, and all those who believe that government is entitled to run roughshod over human rights to score political points. Our very humanity depends on recognizing the humanity of others – yes, even “terrorists.”