Boston Red Sox starting pitcher Jon Lester was traded to the Oakland Athletics for slugger Yoenis Cespedes. Getty Images

Oakland Athletics general manager Billy Beane is like the electric car: undoubtedly innovative, and unlikely to ever dominate thanks to the system that’s already in place. When Beane was coming up with clever, sabermetric-guided ways to shape his roster, teams with more money simply replicated what he was doing on a bigger scale, and reaped the rewards.

Well, those times are over, and Beane is no longer some guy you associate with Brad Pitt in “Moneyball” but a risk taker going all in on his hopes of a World Series. Before the trade deadline passed on Thursday, Beane made what’s being considered a true blockbuster deal by acquiring Boston Red Sox pitcher Jon Lester in exchange for strong-armed outfielder Yoenis Cespedes, who made the All-Star team and has won the Home Run Derby two years running. Lester is only under contract until the end of the season, and could absolutely leave once it turns out that small market Oakland isn’t ready to pay for his services; meanwhile, Cespedes is young, on a reasonable contract, and is a Sportscenter highlight machine. But it was pointedly assertive, bolstering what now clearly seems like the best pitching staff in the league. “This was a gutsy and creative move by A’s general manager Billy Beane,” writes Sports on Earth’s Wendy Thurm. “It’s not every day that a first-place team trades a middle-of-the-order power threat to strengthen a rotation.”

If it were that simple, we’d be penciling in the A’s World Series champs. They’ve won just one series under Beane, however, and have yet to prove that his longform approach to the season can be effective over seven games. (As Beane once famously said, “My s— doesn’t work in the playoffs.”) But Beane was immediately challenged by the Detroit Tigers, who completed their own blockbuster trace for Tampa Bay Rays ace David Price, and even found the time to wag their tail about it. Now, the Tigers have the last three Cy Young winners—a fact despite Justin Verlander’s struggles this season—and could look to once again outduel the A’s in the fall. (It was Detroit that swept Oakland out of the playoffs in the 2006 American League Championship Series, after that sole series win.)

It was a challenging move for the Rays, who adhered to their organizational strategy of carefully grooming a player over the years only to rip him up by his roots. “I’m not a touchy-feely mind reader, but dealing Price certainly seems like the kind of move that will not only hurt the Rays’ roster and playoff chances in the short term, but also risk damaging the psyches of Rays fans and Price’s former teammates,” Jonah Keri writes for Grantland. “This is the razor’s edge on which the tiny-revenue Rays must continually operate, trading away star player after star player while assembling younger and younger talent in the hopes of finding the right window for a playoff run.”

But it also gave us a better rivalry between two elite teams, and a chance for one of baseball’s long celebrated savants to finally win it all. “Want to second guess him? Hey, have at it. He simply does not care what you or I think,” writes Richard Justice for MLB.com. “Beane has been doing this long enough that he trusts his instincts. He’s fearless in that way.” People started driving hybrids, didn’t they?

* * *

Bless the athlete who insists he can still play, because even if it wasn’t his ego talking it’s unlikely he’d ever get a chance to prove himself right. There’s no country for old players, ones who demanded too much money to stick around on teams with no responsibility to keep them employed—which Johnny Damon, he of the long hair and ramshod playing style, is finding after two years out of Major League Baseball. Damon is most likely retired, but for a perennial man-child who reveled in the thrill of the show, accepting that is not so easy. At Sports on Earth, Pat Jordan catches up with Damon and shows how a man once celebrated as an idiot is, unsurprisingly, having a hard time figuring out the rest of his life.

“The game has always been an escape from real life for ballplayers, which is why so many dread leaving the game. The game offers a kind of constant certitude; wins and losses are fathomable in a way that real life’s problems aren’t,” he writes. “Real life’s problems aren’t clearly defined and don’t ever seem to get resolved. They linger, frustratingly. After baseball, nothing in real life will ever be as completely, simply and viscerally gratifying.”

* * *

If you’ve ever met someone from New York City, you know that they love to talk about New York City, regardless of whether or not there’s something worth talking about. That’s why the city is celebrated as the Mecca of basketball, despite the fact that a truly great player hasn’t come from the city in… decades, maybe. At Grantland, Jordan Ritter Conn explores the decline, delving into issues of geography and pride to figure out why some New York City residents would rather move to another state than rep their city, and why the myth endures.

“New York is no longer the greatest basketball city on earth. Right now, it’s not even close,” he writes. “When we talk about the decline of New York City basketball, we’re not talking about the Knicks’ interminable incompetence or the Nets’ lavish and misguided efforts to build a contender. We’re talking about the city’s footprint in the NBA: Years ago, New York’s playgrounds and high schools served as the most fertile breeding ground for the game’s elite. Today, you’re just as likely to become a star if you’re born in Los Angeles, Toronto, or Raleigh.”

Found a good column from the world of sports? Don’t keep it to yourself — write to us at dailyfixlinks@gmail.com and we’ll consider your find for inclusion in the Daily Fix. You can email Jeremy at jeremypaulgordon@gmail.com.