The number of people unaccounted for in the Colorado floods was downgraded Tuesday afternoon to 581, according to the Colorado Office of Emergency Management.

The number reflects totals statewide. Officials have repeatedly explained that their count does not mean all of those people are thought to be missing; many people simply are physically unable to let friends and loved ones know they are OK.

The floods that started Sept. 11 have so far claimed eight lives, the state said: three in Boulder County, two in El Paso County, two in Larimer County, and one to be announced.

Early morning fog has given way to blue skies in northeastern Colorado, but flood warnings continue for several areas on the eastern plains and in the foothills, continues Tuesday.

Flood warning areas, according to the National Weather Service, include:

• North Fork of the Big Thompson river at Drake in Larimer County

• Cache La Poudre River near Greeley in Weld County

• South Platte River near Julesburg in Sedgwick County

• South Platte River near Kersey in Weld County

• South Platte River near Balzac affecting areas in Logan, Morgan and Washington counties

The warnings are posted until further notice.

“We know (the water surge) is heading towards Julesburg,” said Micki Trost, a spokeswoman with the Colorado Office of Emergency Management. Officials expect the South Platte River to crest in the area about noon.

“We’re working with cities and counties in the corner of the state as we watch the water levels rise,” Trost said.

Meanwhile, in the foothills of Boulder and Larimer counties, helicopter evacuations continue Tuesday for people who have been stranded behind washed-out roads.

“We still have air operations Tuesday,” Trost said. “We also have FEMA search and rescue teams hiking through the canyons, as well,” looking for anyone who made need help.

At 2:30 a.m. the South Platte near Balzac was staging at 11.3 feet, more than a foot above flood stage in the area, the weather service reports. The river should continue to stage at about 11 feet in the area through Wednesday morning.

“Moderate flooding is occurring and will continue,” the weather service said.

The impact from the rains and subsequent flooding has impacted residents of 17 counties. Early Tuesday, some residents of Crook in Logan County were advised to leave their homes as the flood surge reached their community. The state says a total of 11,750 people are under mandatory evacuation orders because of the rising water.

Overnight Monday, about 500 people stayed in 14 shelters around the state, according to the American Red Cross in Denver.

More than 6,400 Colorado flood victims have applied for help from the Federal Emergency Management Agency, and more than $430,000 has already been approved in individual assistance to survivors.

The extended weather forecast for northeastern Colorado calls for mostly sunny weather through Saturday, except a 10- to 20-percent chance of thunderstorms on Wednesday afternoon and evening.

The Larimer County Sheriff’s Office said Tuesday there are 197 people who have not been accounted for there. Some 420 people were evacuated Monday.

An estimate Tuesday put 1,500 homes destroyed and 4,500 damaged in Larimer County. The numbers for business were estimated at 200 destroyed, 500 damaged.

Officials in Jefferson County are assessing flood damage, in some cases going door-to-door, the sheriff’s office said Tuesday via Twitter. Preliminary numbers have 14 residences and 24 commercial buildings destroyed.

On Tuesday Boulder County reported 120 homes destroyed and 160 damaged. The county reports 109 people are unaccounted for.

Staff writer Allison Sherry contributed to this report.