BOSTON - Open enrollment begins Saturday for health plans purchased through the state's independent marketplace, and state officials believe this year's launch will be far better than last year's fiasco.

The new Massachusetts Health Connector website, MAhealthconnector.org, is scheduled to go live at 8 a.m. on Saturday.

According to state officials, the connector website will allow consumers to browse health plans, apply online, determine what program they qualify for (for example, MassHealth or subsidized coverage), enroll in a plan and pay their premium.

"Today, we pledge to the Commonwealth's residents who are in need of health insurance that they will be able to access it," said Maydad Cohen, special assistant to the governor in charge of overseeing the Health Connector project. Cohen said the new website was the product of "ten months of around-the-clock work to build a working, stable website."

The state was required to roll out a new health insurance exchange in October 2013 to conform to the Affordable Care Act. However, the exchange was a technological disaster. It could not determine which programs or subsidies a person was eligible for, and customers were unable to use the site to enroll in new health insurance.

The state extended people's current subsidized plans and enrolled people in temporary Medicaid coverage. Gov. Deval Patrick hired a special assistant to oversee the project, and the administration replaced the company that built the website. Labor-intensive workarounds drove up costs and left consumers in limbo.

The state this year purchased off-the-shelf software called hCentive and customized it for Massachusetts.

At a board meeting of the Health Connector on Thursday, officials in charge of the program said this time – unlike last year – the system underwent comprehensive testing. Testing of various functions had passage rates of 97 to 98 percent. End to end testing, which measures the process from shopping for a plan to paying the insurer, passed the tests 94 percent of the time.

John Santelli, chief information officer for Optum, the technology company overseeing the site, said tests modeled the performance of the site anticipating four times more users at peak times than officials actually expect. "The platform is performing very well," Santelli said.

Santelli said Optum focused on core priorities – allowing people to shop for plans and enroll in them. Some things will be added later. For example, someone wanting to change their application after submitting it will have to call a customer service representative, and some changes will have to wait until Dec. 15.

Cohen said the state "ruthlessly prioritized" which features had to get done when. He said the state learned last year that "trying to build a perfect mousetrap, something that does everything for everyone on day one, is a very difficult task."

Last year, customers complained of long wait times to get ahold of customer service representatives. This year, the state will have a "command center" open 24 hours a day to monitor and resolve problems. Cohen called the center a "central nervous system" that will include representatives of MassHealth, the Health Connector, Optum and all the technology companies involved in the site in one room. The representatives will actively monitor the site and receive reports of problems.

There are also organizations available to provide free, in-person assistance to people filling out applications. Sites in western Massachusetts include: Caring Health Center in Springfield, Ecu-Health Care in North Adams; Casa Latina in Florence and the Hilltown Community Health Care Centers in Worthington.

Heather Goodhind, navigator coordinator for Caring Health Center, said the center takes in-person appointments, walk-ins and phone calls. She has undergone training with the system and said it seemed more easily laid out than last year's site. "With the training we've done and the confidence of board members, we're confident in the system," Goodhind said.

Anyone who currently has MassHealth or Health Connector coverage will have to re-enroll by Dec. 23 for coverage beginning Jan. 1. The state is launching a comprehensive public outreach project to get people to re-enroll. The Health Connector and MassHealth already sent out 265,000 informational mailings to members and 110,000 open enrollment packets and made 72,800 robo-calls. Call centers have trained more than 300 agents, and 130 people have been trained as navigators, to help people in person.

The Health Connector will hold enrollment events around the state, including one Dec. 3 at the Springfield Marriott. There will be a door-knocking campaign, ethnic media ads focusing on Spanish, Chinese and Portuguese media, and a general television campaign. A new TV ad, which features Goodhind, advertises the website and urges people to re-sign up for coverage. The Springfield Falcons and the Boston Bruins will provide visibility for ads in their stadiums and messaging on social media. Health Connector fliers will be available at CVS and in some Market Basket stores.

The most recent price estimate for the project is $250 million, compared to $175 million that was originally budgeted, with much of the cost borne by the federal government.

Health Connector board members acknowledged the lack of public confidence after last year's problems. But Cohen told reporters after the meeting, "We have a new vendor, we have a new product, we have a new governance structure, and we have a product that's very different."

Board member and MIT Professor Jonathan Gruber said the way to move on is the way the board has, with a "massive outreach" effort. "You explain to people it's a complicated process, we didn't do a great job last year, give us another chance," Gruber said.

Complicating matters politically is the fact that Patrick leaves office in January and will be replaced by Republican Charlie Baker, who has criticized the state's handling of the Health Connector website. Secretary of Administration and Finance Glen Shor, who chairs the Health Connector board, said there are no members appointed by the governor or Attorney General Martha Coakley whose terms are up at the end of the year. But people like Shor, who hold seats by virtue of their office, will likely to be replaced. Shor said there was a "smooth transition" for the Connector board when Patrick took office, and he is confident in a similarly smooth transition to a Baker administration.

Cohen plans to brief Baker transition officials on Monday. Cohen said he is willing to stay on for a period, if Baker wants him to. "I've indicated repeatedly that if asked, I'm happy to stay on and see the open enrollment period through," Cohen said.

The Health Connector will have customer service open this weekend from 7 a.m. to 7 p.m. at 1-877-623-6765. Its regular business hours are Monday through Friday 7 a.m. to 7 p.m. and Saturday 9 am to 3 p.m. MassHealth customer service will be open Monday through Friday 8 a.m. to 5 p.m. at 1-800-841-2900.