New pizza shop set to open in north Loveland on March 25

David Hebert, front, and his father, Joe Hebert, stand in front of one of the pizza tables at their new take 'n' bake pizza shop, Noble Roman's Pizza, on Monday. The Heberts are shooting for a March 25 opening for the store at 3153 N. Garfield Ave., Loveland. (Craig Young / Loveland Reporter-Herald)

A new take 'n' bake pizza shop is taking shape at 3153 N. Garfield Ave., with a flurry of activity in preparation for its planned opening Wednesday.

Noble Roman's Pizza, an Indiana-based chain, will open its second Colorado location March 25, according to the local franchise owners.

Joe Hebert and his son, David Hebert, opened their first Noble Roman's in Longmont on Dec. 31. Joe Hebert said they plan to open three more locations in the next year and a half — with Longmont, Loveland, Erie and Firestone-Frederick-Dacono among the likely locations.

Joe Hebert said Noble Roman's started in Bloomington, Ind., in the 1970s and had a chain of large, sit-down pizza restaurants. But as takeout and delivery began to dominate the pizza industry, Noble Roman's changed its business model.

The company started selling the Noble Roman's brand of take 'n' bake pizzas, sandwiches, breadsticks and other products in about 1,500 grocery store and convenience store delis and other locations around the country, Joe Hebert said.

The take 'n' bake model is fairly new for Noble Roman's, he said.

On Monday, the Heberts took delivery of most of their equipment, and construction workers were installing it.

David Hebert, who has been managing the shop in Longmont since it opened, said Noble Roman's presents every customer with "10 points of 'wow.'"

"We want you to say 'wow,'" he said.

One of those "wows" is that a worker will come out from behind the counter to greet each customer at the menu board and take his or her order on an order pad.

Another point of "wow": "You can get your dream pizza here for the same price that you can get a pepperoni and sausage," David Hebert said. That means a 14-topping pizza costs the same as a two-topping pie — prices range from $9.99 to $11.99 for a large.

Although the pizza shop won't have any dine-in seating, it will have two small ovens to bake the pizzas (and chocolate chip cookies and cinnamon rounds) for customers who don't want to wait until they get home.

"We have an individual-size pizza that's popular at lunchtime; it gets baked more often," Joe Hebert said. Baking takes 3 minutes and 40 seconds, he added.

Susan Ross, director of corporate communications for Noble Roman's, said the chain's deep-dish Sicilian pizza and its breadsticks with spicy cheese dip are favorites with customers.

"I can tell you I have people from all over the country asking where they can buy those two products," she said.

Joe Hebert said he loves the taste of Noble Roman's pizzas.

"That's really what sold us," he said. "We went back to Indiana to check it out and really liked the pizza."

The shop will be open 11 a.m. to 9 p.m. seven days a week. Phone: 970-775-7256.

Craig Young: 970-635-3634, cyoung@reporter-herald.com, www.twitter.com/CraigYoungRH.