This dinosaur track, outlined in charcoal, is similar to bird tracks of today. This track and many more are visible in the uptilted sandstone at Dinosaur Ridge. (Glenn Cushman)

If you go Highlights: Dinosaur and crocodile tracks, trace fossils, colorful rocks, informative exhibits, views of the plains and foothills Distance: 3 miles round trip Difficulty: Easy Access: Take Colo. 93 to Golden and continue east on U.S. 6. Exit at C-470 and watch for signs for West Alameda Parkway and Dinosaur Ridge. Follow the signs and park either at the Visitor Center or along the road a short distance west of the Visitor Center. The museum costs $2, but the walk is free.

On a cold December day, it's fun to imagine dinosaurs tromping through the mud along the shore of a warm Cretaceous sea lapping at what are now our Colorado foothills.

Along Dinosaur Ridge, just northeast of Morrison and about 45 minutes from Boulder, you can still see dinosaur and crocodile footprints as well as ripple marks and trace fossils from that inland sea that existed 100 million years ago.

Dinosaur tracks were found here accidentally in 1937 during construction of West Alameda Parkway. Since then, many more tracks have been discovered in the Dakota Formation stretching from Boulder to northern New Mexico. This "Dinosaur Freeway" shows that the lumbering giants were far from sedentary.

A slight sifting of snow and icicles dangling from red and orange rocks adds to the beauty, but too much snow obscures the tracks. So for best fossil viewing, choose a day when the snow has had a chance to melt.

Advertisement

A barn and house on Rooney Ranch (the oldest Colorado ranch continuously operated by the same family) were renovated to become the Visitor Center. Stop here to pick up a brochure and to visit the museum for the "Trek Through Time" exhibits.

You can park either here or a short distance up the paved road, which was open to vehicles until a few years ago. Now the road is a peaceful walkway into the past with only hikers, bicycles, authorized vehicles and wildlife allowed.

Rock squirrels often scurry about as mule deer browse on the ponderosa pines and junipers. Birds, widely considered descendants of dinosaurs, gather seeds from wild grasses near the road. Watch for juncos and jays and compare their tracks to the Ornithomimus (ostrich-like dinosaur) tracks in one of the uptilted sandstone slabs. Some of these tracks are highlighted with charcoal to enhance visibility.

We stop at each of the interpretive signs and displays along the route to puzzle over whether we are seeing a track or just an intriguing erosion feature. And is that really a "Bronto Bulge" (a convex mold from a dinosaur track) or just a rounded rock?

Near the top of the hogback, the Dakota Ridge Trail crosses the road. If you go in spring, you can hike this trail north to the "Hawk Watch" (above the intersection of Interstate 70 and Colo. 93) where volunteers set up scopes to monitor migrating raptors. It's also one of the places we find the earliest blooming spring beauties.

From the roadcut at the top, enjoy views of the plains and the foothills. Continue west and downhill to the Jurassic Time display and the "Dinosaur Bone Quarry" where the first stegosaurus was discovered in 1877. Before you turn back, gently touch the fossilized dinosaur bone embedded in the rock. Yes, touching the bone is allowed here.

This walk can be done in reverse by parking off Colo. 93 across from the entrance to Red Rocks Park. Other options include a guided shuttle tour ($5 per person, 3 and younger free) and Dinosaur Discovery Days, held monthly May through October.

To thoroughly immerse yourself in dinosaur lore, combine a stroll along Dinosaur Ridge with the Triceratops Trail next to the Fossil Trace Golf Club in Golden. Check dinoridge.org for details.

Ruth Carol and Glenn Cushman are the authors of "Boulder Hiking Trails," published by Graphic Arts Books.