President Obama has garnered plenty of support over his seven years in office, but a little girl has shown more support than most. In a Facebook post gone viral, the child is seen crying because Barack Obama has been President of the United States all her life, and as all presidents must do, he is stepping down after his second term.

Many on social media have shown the girl support, especially knowing that she shares a birthday with the current Commander-in-Chief, August 4. While many of us have been focusing on the politics involving front runners Donald Trump, Hillary Clinton, and Bernie Sanders, this heartbreaking moment reminds us that not everybody feels the same way about who’s coming next to the White House.

RELATED STORIES ON INQUISITR:

Little Girl Learns Breaking Up Is Hard To Do — ‘I Don’t Want To Break His Heart’ [Viral Video]

Straight Lost In Compton: Little Girl Found Wandering Streets In California, Police Investigate Toddler’s Parents

Obama Is Going To Cuba, First U.S. President To Visit The Latin Nation In Almost A Century

The Facebook video gone viral not only has the now famous “Dranbaby” crying, but comes with an explanation reported by the Independent. “On Saturday morning just before Gymnastics, [my] Dranbaby found out that our President Barack Obama was no longer going to be our President! He has been her President all of her life and [yes], her birthday is also on August 4! My poor baby!”

Possibly President Barack Obama’s biggest fan is upset that he has to leave the White House.

In the video above, Caprina D. Harris attempts to tell her granddaughter that it’s part of the process, he can only serve two terms, and his “time is up.” The still distraught little girl responds with a heartbreaking “No!”

Caprina tells her that “it’s okay,” and “we gotta vote for another President,” and her granddaughter replies with a cry of “I’m not ready for a new one!” She suggests writing President Barack Obama a letter, and continues to comfort her, “It’s okay, boo. Don’t cry.” Caprina then suggests calling someone and “Dranbaby” asks for her mom, to which her grandmother tells her to calm down, so her mom can understand what she’s saying.

The video hit social media with a wave of support, attempting to help the girl understand that she doesn’t need to be upset. Among those showing support was President Barack Obama himself, whose response might help her cope with him leaving the White House in January, says the Root.

“Caprina, tell her to dry her tears, because I’m not going anywhere. Once I leave the White House, I’ll still be a citizen just like her. And when she grows up, she can get involved right alongside me. In the meantime, I’ll keep an eye out for her letter, and we’ll always get to celebrate our birthdays together!”

This could easily be a launching point to help “Dranbaby” get into politics from a young age, and possibly help bring positive change to our nation. Some day we might actually end up voting for what used to be this crying little girl and make history once more with our first female black President. Barack Obama’s response may just be what she needed to hear.

Obama sends message to distraught little girl:https://t.co/bln3IqD6vj pic.twitter.com/KlULxRzPW6 — TheBlaze (@theblaze) February 21, 2016

Our President for the last seven years has certainly brought change to the White House, introducing the Affordable Care Act which provides healthcare options to all citizens. He also fought for net neutrality, and has helped keep the internet free from control by corporations, meaning we don’t have to pay extra to access Facebook and YouTube at the same time.

What do you think of President Obama’s reaction to the little girl in this video?

[Image via Mike Theiler-Pool/Getty Images]