Topics: From the Wires, Entertainment News, News

PRETORIA, South Africa (AP) — How much prison time will Oscar Pistorius ultimately serve for killing his girlfriend? And will the double-amputee Olympian ever run competitively again on the carbon-fiber blades that made him one of the world’s most recognizable athletes?

Here’s what Pistorius’ five-year jail sentence for culpable homicide in Reeva Steenkamp’s shooting death means:

___

HOW MANY YEARS IN PRISON?

Judge Thokozile Masipa sentenced Pistorius to five years in prison for negligently killing Steenkamp by shooting her through a closed toilet door in his home. But the specific law cited by the judge when she announced Pistorius’ sentence in a packed Pretoria courtroom allows a prisoner to apply for release after one-sixth of their term to serve the remainder under house arrest. That means Pistorius could be released from prison after 10 months, providing he meets criteria regarding good behavior while in jail.

___

WILL THE BLADE RUNNER RUN AGAIN?

Pistorius’ agent, Peet van Zyl, said no decision will be made on the multiple Paralympic champion’s career until they speak, which wasn’t possible Tuesday after Pistorius was taken straight to prison. The five-year sentence raises serious doubts if Pistorius, who is 27, will ever run at major meets again, especially after van Zyl testified during the trial that Pistorius had planned to retire at the end of 2017 anyway.

The International Paralympic Committee said that Pistorius would not be allowed to run at IPC events while serving his sentence — no matter where he was serving it — seemingly ruling the world’s most famous disabled sportsman out of the 2016 Paralympics in Rio de Janeiro, one of the last major events he planned to run in. The International Olympic Committee and the IAAF, which control able-bodied athletics events, declined to comment on Pistorius’ case.

___

PROSECUTORS CONSIDER APPEAL

Pistorius’ legal battle may not be over yet.

Prosecutors said they are considering an appeal after Judge Masipa’s ruling meant Pistorius might serve less than a year in prison for shooting his girlfriend multiple times with his 9 mm pistol. Prosecutors had already expressed disappointment that Pistorius was acquitted of murder charges and instead found guilty of a lesser charge of culpable homicide, comparable to manslaughter. They have 14 days to apply for permission to appeal, and can appeal against the sentence or the verdict.