PRESCOTT – The Central Yavapai Fire District is in the process of eliminating its reserve firefighter program, and, as a result, it will also shut down its pension fund for former reservists, ending payments to them.

A reservist is paid an hourly rate for time they work, and is expected to work a specified number of hours, but is not full-time.

There are currently nine retirees who paid into the pension fund that are affected by this decision, and CYFD is trying to establish how many more might become eligible in the near future, Fire Chief Scott Freitag said.

CYFD will soon no longer operate a reserve program, Freitag said, because of the high cost to equip and train the reservists, the fact that the Affordable Care act requires the fire district to insure them, and a state law requires that a pension be provided.

“The costs associated with it have pushed us to a point where it’s just not cost-effective,” he said. “It still exists right now, but we only have five or six people in it, and as of July 1, the plan is to just dissolve the reserve program at that point.”

The fund was operated by contributions from reservists which were matched by CYFD.

Reservists who gave 10 years of vested service with the fire district were to receive $150 a month for life, beginning when they turned 55; for 20 years, it was $350 a month.

The plan in question is not related to the state’s Public Service Personnel Retirement System; this is CYFD’s own private pension plan. It is not governed by the state Constitution section that guarantees public service retirement benefits, Freitag said.

There are two options, based on the plan’s bylaws, for the approximately $400,000 remaining in the fund, he said:



• Dissolve the fund, then pay out to retirees what they paid into the plan with interest, and use the remainder of the money – which would be composed of the CYFD’s contributed matching dollars — to pay toward CYFD’s $23 million obligation to the Public Service Personnel Retirement System. Freitag noted that there are likely retirees from the 1980s who have already received more than they contributed to the plan.

• Let the fund continue to pay benefits until it runs out of money, which Freitag said could be “10 or 12 years,” depending on its return on investment.

“The (fund’s) bylaws do not have any provision to use additional taxpayer dollars to fund that forever,” he added.

Until a full actuarial analysis is done, there’s no way to know how much, if anything, anyone who hasn’t yet turned 55, but would then be eligible for benefits, might be able to receive.

The reserve pension committee meets Wednesday, April 13, at 9 a.m. at The CYFD Administration Conference Room, 8555 E. Yavapai Road, and will discuss the fund’s future, but, Freitag said, no decision on which plan would be implemented will be made.



One reservist’s viewpoint

“About four or five months ago, I started hearing some rumblings,” said one former reservist, who has yet to turn 55, and who asked to remain anonymous, “and what the rumblings were, was that Central Yavapai was going to get rid of that pension fund. It was just going to go away.”

The rumors were the only way he knew there was a problem, he said, because “we don’t get newsletters, emails or anything from the people who are running our pension fund.”

The former reservist said he understood that, if there were no more reservists to pay into the fund, CYFD would have to shut it down. But, he said, the retirees should expect to receive benefits from the funds in the account.

“If they paid it out until the fund died, I wouldn’t have a problem with that, that’s business. But pay the benefits until the funds are gone,” he said.

He doesn’t like the idea of paying out a lump sum and then using what’s left to pay PSPRS.

“It doesn’t seem right to me. For 35 years I have had an understanding that I had a pension benefit at $350 a month for the rest of my life,” he said.

“It may be legal, but it’s wrong.”