"I was asking people, 'Hey, did you plunge?' Even with all the traffic, people were friendly."

By Steve Strunsky and Lisa Rose/The Star-Ledger

SEASIDE HEIGHTS — After Torie Esposito took part in the Polar Bear Plunge for Special Olympics in Seaside Heights on Saturday, she faced a sea of brake lights leaving the borough amid a morass of road construction.

It was such a slow ride out of Seaside that motorists were rolling down their windows and having conversations with neighboring drivers as they waited to inch forward, Esposito said. She made new friends on the beach and in the gridlock that followed the plunge.

"I was talking to the people in the cars next to me," said Esposito. "I was asking people, 'Hey, did you plunge?' Even with all the traffic, people were friendly. It was a sign of camaraderie. Each time, a car would turn off a side street and someone new was on the road, we'd wave at them and welcome them."

The traffic was a lingering effect of Hurricane Sandy. The October 2012 storm badly damaged Route 35, the main north-south artery running the length of the barrier island that stretches 15 miles from Island Beach State Park to Bay Head, including Seaside Park, Seaside Heights, Point Pleasant Beach, Mantoloking, Lavallette, the Ortley Beach section of Toms River and part of Berkeley Township.

The construction has reduced the roadway from two lanes in each direction to just one. At some points, depending on construction activity, the road is just one lane for both directions, requiring police to alternate traffic. Access lanes to the Route 37 bridge linking the peninsula to the Ocean County mainland has also been reduced by the project, adding to the island's traffic woes.



Prior to the Route 35 project, some Shore town mayors expressed concern that traffic problems could discourage summer tourists. For that reason, construction was deliberately planned for the winter.

But traffic stalled even in winter. Saturday's springlike weather for the annual Polar Bear Plunge attracted thousands of chill seekers to the Seaside Heights waterfront.

“All the way up the island, bumper to bumper,” said Cpl. Steve Shadiack, a Seaside Park Police spokesman.

Esposito said it took her an hour and a half to drive a mile and a half in Seaside. Usually when she plunges, her 87-mile ride to Flemington takes two hours. This time, it was a four-hour exodus.

"The people on the road said they'd never seen anything like this," said Esposito.

Liz Fragasso of Edison got lucky when she made a wrong turn on Route 35 and missed the exit for the bridge to Route 37, the main route back to the Garden State Parkway. She said it took her only 90 minutes to get back to Edison, driving the length of the barrier island north on Route 35 to Point Pleasant.

"I took the scenic route," said Fragasso. "I was afraid to make a left so I made a right instead and ended up going through Lavallette, all the way up. I kept following the signs for the Parkway. Maybe it wasn't so bad that I went the other way. We got on the road at 2:30 p.m. and we got to Edison close to 4 p.m."

Detective Steve Korman, a Seaside Heights Police spokesman, said the borough would be working on its own and with the state Department of Transportation to try to minimize the Route 35 project's impact on traffic during the 30th annual St. Patrick's Day Parade on Saturday, March 8.

A DOT spokesman, Joe Dee, said the problem had "come to our attention, and the project team is aware of it."

At Klee's Irish Pub in Seaside Heights, manager Joe Carey said that many borough businesses had suffered a permanent downturn after Sandy and then September's devastating boardwalk fire, when a stretch of boardwalk and adjacent businesses were destroyed.

"During the week, there just aren’t as many people around here as there used to be," he said, referring to former residents whose homes were ruined, employees of defunct businesses, or others who have curtailed their visits. "There’s a market impact in this area due to those two events."

Carey said the upcoming parade was the bar's biggest day of the year, and he was hoping the parade's 30th anniversary would attract a large crowd and kick off a robust comeback for the borough. That is, if traffic allows.

"We had employees that were late for work," Carey said of Saturday's tie-up. Even so, he added, the Polar Bear Plunge, "turned out to be a great event. I don’t think it impacted the mood of the crowd at all. It impacted the people that were moving around."

Complaining about the traffic in an open letter to the mayors of Seaside Heights and Seaside Park, Carolann Skopak of Toms River said cars were at a dead stop in both directions the entire length of Route 35.

"My husband and I had admittedly forgotten that the Polar Plunge was taking place," Skopak wrote in the letter. "We left our home on mainland Toms River to travel over the bridge to Route 35 to attend church in Bay Head, as we do each Saturday without issue. We reached a wall of cars completely stopped in both directions."

Skopak expressed concern about the upcoming St. Patrick's Day parade. The construction that caused the Polar Bear gridlock will not be completed in time for that event, which draws about 20,000 spectators. A note on the parade website advises visitors to allow an extra hour of travel time.

Skopak said the boroughs should be more proactive anticipating the influx.

"Other means must be taken to manage the cars, people, traffic during this period of reconstruction," Skopak wrote. "Shuttle buses from outside the beach area perhaps for these special events? I don't confess to know the answers, but leave that to the consideration of those in charge with experience in these matters. Summer is coming. The time to plan is now. Yesterday's debacle cannot be allowed to occur again."

RELATED COVERAGE

• Report: Jersey Shore mayors say Route 35 construction may deter summer tourists

•Seaside boardwalk fire: Demolition starts on destroyed businesses

FOLLOW THE STAR-LEDGER: TWITTER | FACEBOOK