Pop singer Kesha (also known as “Ke$ha”) announced on Friday that she checked into a rehabilitation facility to treat an unspecified eating disorder, according Us Weekly. The 26-year-old star’s body has been the subject of media scrutiny since her debut in 2010. Is it possible that constant focus on Kesha’s appearance drove her to disordered eating?

“I’m a crusader for being yourself and loving yourself, but I’ve found it hard to practice,” the singer said in a statement. “I’ll be unavailable for the next 30 days, seeking treatment for my eating disorder … to learn to love myself again, exactly as I am.”

According to Mayo Clinic, eating disorders are a group of conditions marked by a preoccupation with food and weight. They range from anorexia nervosa to bulimia nervosa to binge-eating disorder. Females, those with a family history of eating disorders, and people in the public eye are among those who are at a higher risk of developing one of the disorders. While treatment for an eating disorder varies, it usually includes some combination of psychotherapy, nutrition education, and sometimes medication. In Kesha’s case, TMZ reports that she is receiving treatment at Timberline Knolls rehabilitation center in Chicago.

Kesha’s body has been fair game for media fodder for years now. Various publications and entertainment news shows have followed the star’s “weight loss transformation,” covered her revelations about “body insecurities,” taken polls about whether her toned buttocks is an “optical illusion,” and gone as far as calling her body “hideous.” Unfortunately, it seems the constant media scrutiny may have taken a toll on the star, who has been appearing uncharacteristically thin in recent public appearances. Hopefully this stint in treatment will give her a fresh start for the new year.

"Cheers to this year being the best year ever," the singer tweeted on New Year’s Day. "2014 gon’ be the year of truth and freedom."

For more information on eating disorders and when you should seek help, visit the Mayo Clinic online.