Pope Francis said in an interview last week, "We cannot insist only on issues related to abortion, gay marriage and the use of contraceptive methods." Franco Origlia/Getty Images

On a spectacularly sunny Sunday morning, everything bustled as usual at Our Lady of Lourdes Church in Bethesda, Md. The parish pastor, Monsignor Edward Filardi, stood outside chatting with members of his flock, parents dropped their children off at Sunday school, and a table of coffee and doughnuts welcomed people heading to and leaving Mass.

One wouldn't have known that just three days earlier, Pope Francis had roiled the church -- and the rest of the world -- with a wide-ranging interview in which he appeared to denounce the church's excessive focus on culture-war issues. Many Catholics were still taking time to digest it, and Filardi said he had not even had time to finish reading it.

Initial lay reaction to the interview was mixed. Filardi, who in January didn't hesitate to lambaste Maryland's approval of gay marriage (PDF), said he would leave it to his archdiocese to comment on the interview's content -- a sentiment that was echoed by some parishioners outside the church on Sunday morning.

He did say he received many emails from parishioners about the interview. Some were "confused and hurt," but others were "very excited" about "the idea of being more open," he said. On the other hand, "I think some people say, 'Wait a minute, were we closed?'

"If that's the perception people have, it's important to know that," he said.

Pope Francis' interview, published in America magazine last week, has many people celebrating. While the media focused on 17 words -- "We cannot insist only on issues related to abortion, gay marriage and the use of contraceptive methods" -- American Catholics say his central message wasn't one of opposition on these issues. Instead, they say, he emphasized love as the central message of the Gospels. He called on clergy to care for their flocks without judgment of parishioners' circumstances. He called for a renewed focus on pastoral care over politics and on dialogue and reconciliation over judgment and division.

Still, Catholics say they see no immediate prospects for changes to the church's official positions against abortion, contraception, homosexuality and the ordination of women. In this, conservatives see an affirmation of their positions. But Catholics who dissent from the church's teaching on these issues nonetheless see a longed-for opportunity for more tolerance and respect.

And Catholics who are weary of their leadership's politicization of issues of gender and sexuality, and are disenchanted with litmus tests for what makes one a Catholic, see an immediate, visible change brought by the pope: a more diverse and welcoming church. They hope Francis, the church's first Jesuit pope, might be opening the door -- if not to a change in official doctrine, then to greater acceptance of divergent views in an institution that for far too long, they say, has brooked no dissent.

"I really admire his courage to speak and to be innovative and open and welcoming to so many of us who for so long longed for an open door," said Nelly Contreras, a lifelong member of St. John the Baptist Catholic Church in San Juan, Texas.

"I think it's beautiful this pope has not been so quick to judge," Contreras said. "Just because you had an abortion or are gay doesn't mean you are less spiritual than the person who goes to church on Sunday."