Q I know someone who has purposely displayed paper dealership advertising plate covers on their vehicle versus valid license plates for the last four years.

I have given FasTrak and CHP all the information they need to match the FasTrak camera footage with the toll evader for that vehicle plus a log showing over 120 crossing dates/times since when this vehicle has crossed without paying. He has a transponder but keeps it hidden so it does not transmit when crossing. Neither FasTrak nor CHP will take any action.

I pay my tolls and it disgusts me that this person has been running this scam for so long. Can you please help expose this scam? I've tried everything else.

Golden Gate Bridge toll plaza. (IJ photo/Jeff Vendsel) ( Jeff Vendsel )

Roadshow reader

A Sacramento needs to get involved. The Legislature will hear a bill in a month or so that would require every new vehicle sold to come with a temporary plate with an identifiable number and expiration date. There are an average of 10,000 drivers a month crossing bridges for free and getting away with it because they are using the blank dealer plates often seen on newly purchased cars. This costs the state as much as $6 million a year.

Q So, another person died on Kirker Pass Road a week ago. Along with Vasco Road, Kirker Pass is a death trap! Who was the genius who designed it and what engineers would even contemplate building such a dangerous passage? The road is way too steep and people keep riding their brakes. And then there are slow-moving and fast-moving trucks to contend with.

Advertisement

This road has to be redesigned. It is a nightmare!

Dawn Magnussen

Walnut Creek

A Especially at Hess Road, where three people have been killed in recent months. The four-lane road was designed in 1962 and opened in 1965, meeting safety standards at the time. And numerous safety upgrades have been made since then.

Next will be a 1-mile northbound truck-climbing lane, which will include shoulders beginning at the Concord Pavilion and ending at the Hess Road. Unfortunately, this won't happen until 2018 at the earliest.

Q I really appreciated your column regarding the use of "the" prior to a highway number by Southern Californians. As a former SoCal resident, I have made the adjustment to NorCal and have dropped "the" when talking about a highway. But I have always wondered: At what point, traveling south on Interstate 5, does it become "The 5"?

Getting this answer is one of the items on my bucket list, so I hope you can help.

Debbie Werter

Rio Vista

A Most folks say the dividing line between Northern and Southern California is the Tehachapi Mountains; others say to imagine a nearly straight line that separates Monterey, Kings, Tulare and Inyo counties on the north from San Luis Obispo, Kern and San Bernardino counties on the south.

Q Here is the Los Angeles explanation for the freeway numbered 405: It takes "4 or 5" hours to get from Granada Hills to Laguna Hills on The 405.

Jason St. Claire

A That's a 72-mile trip. A tortuous 72 miles.

Join Gary Richards for an hourlong chat noon Wednesday at www.mercurynews.com/live-chats. Contact him at mrroadshow@mercurynews.com or 408-920-5335.