We played Pictionary, 20 Questions and Trivial Pursuit: Former Obamacare contractor dishes on how employees spend their day at application processing center

This week an employee at Obamacare contractor Serco's office in Missouri told a local news station employees do nothing all day

Workers are supposed to process paper Obamacare applications, but there's too many workers and not enough work, the whistle-blower said

Two more Serco employees have come forward and confirmed those claims, including Lavonne Takatz, who says employees play board games, read books and take naps to pass the time

Pictionary, 20 Questions, Trivial Pursuit, reading books and taking naps.



That's how employees at an Obamacare processing plant spend their days, a former employee says.

Lavonnne Takatz, 42, says she quit her job at Obamacare contractor Serco's office in Wentzville, Missouri, just outside St. Louis in April because she couldn't handle 'doing nothing' all day anymore.

'You could be completely sane and work there for seven months and leave there and almost want to check yourself into a mental hospital. It was that bad,' Takatz told St. Louis' News 4 KMOV.

SCROL L DOWN FOR VIDEO With paper applications on the decline after healthcare.gov began working more frequently, a whistle blower says said data entry personnel at Obamacare contractor Serco were only expected to enter two paper applications a month, 'and some people are not even able to do that.' Bring lots of pencils: A former employee at an Affordable Care Act processing center recalls having so little work to do that she played board games like Pictionary and Trivial Pursuit all day

This week KMOV ran a scathing report on alleged waste and abuse of taxpayer funds at Serco Inc.'s office featuring an unidentified whistle blower who said employees do nothing for days or weeks at a time.

The employee alleged that Serco was keeping its workforce unnecessarily high to get more money out of the federal government.

'They want to hire more people, even though we still don't have work to keep the people that we have busy,' the employee said.

Serco is a subsidiary of international company Serco Group Pls. The company has a 12-year $1.25 billion contract with the Department of Health and Human Services to process paper Obamacare applications made through the federal exchanges.

The company has three facilities that process Obamacare applications in Missouri, Kentucky and Oklahoma. Employees who do data entry at those facilities 'have hardly any work to do,' the whistle blower told KMOV.



'There a weeks that a data entry person would not process an application,' the employee said.

'They're told to sit at their computers and hit the refresh button every 10 minutes - no more than every 10 minutes. They're monitored - to hopefully look for an application.'

With paper applications on the decline after healthcare.gov began working more frequently, the employee said data entry personnel were only expected to enter two applications a month, 'and some people are not even able to do that.'



After it began looking into the initial whistle blower's claims, KMOV found even more current and former Serco employees who were willing to attest that the company is wasting government resources, including Takatz.

'I think for the entire month of December, I processed six applications, ' Takatz said.



'And that was actually pretty good, correct?' KMOV reporter Chris Nagus asked her.

'That was pretty good,' she confirmed.

Another employee who wished to remain anonymous told KMOV that her supervisor told her department that if they processed two applications a month, their job was done.

So bored were employees, Serco gave them books to read, Takatz said.

'We played Pictionary on a very large dry erase board,' she said. 'We had to create games, basically for ourselves.'

Employees were not allowed to bring in cell phones, she said, adding to the monotony.

'It was prison. We all referred to it as our cell blocks,' she told the St. Louis Post-Dispatch.



Game-master: Outgoing HHS Secretary Kathleen Sebelius (L) has become a much-scorned Obama administration figure, but will son be able to leave Obamacare's woes behind her

Dubious inheritance: Sylvia Burwell has been nominated to take over HHS for Sebelius, taking on the thankless job of steering Obamacare through a rocky channel fraught with political landmines Thumb-twiddler-in-chief? Serco program director John Lau presided over a workforce with nothing but time on their hands

Takatz says she worked at the facility for six months from October to April before her boredom and her conscience got the best of her.



'I feel guilty for working there as long as I did,' she told the 'It was like I was stealing money from people.'

The employee who originally contacted KMOV alleged that Serco isn't firing employees it doesn't need because the more people it has working on the project, the more money it gets from the government.



'So they want us there, even if we're not doing anything.'

Missouri Senator Claire McCaskill says an employee of the Cognosante, a subcontractor for Serco, told her office that when CMS came to visit their facility, they were instructed to 'sit at their desks and pretend to work even though they had no work to do.

McCaskill sent a letter to the Department of Health and Human Services Inspector General asking him to 'evaluate these claims and, if warranted, undertake a thorough investigation.'

'If it's anything like what the whistle-blowers suggest, it's terrible,' Missouri Senator Roy Blunt told Fox News on Wednesday. 'If it's exactly what the whistleblowers suggest, it's an absolute outrage for every taxpayer in America.'

Rep. Blaine Luetkemeyer, whose congressional district encompasses the area where the Obamacare contractor's office is located,'is talking with all relevant committees of jurisdiction to discuss whether or not an investigation is warranted,' a spokesman said.







Zzzzzzzzobamacare: Workers tasked with entering nonexistent health insurance enrollments often resorted to napping on the job

Serco program director John Lau (right) has already had to testify before Congress in October about his company's involvement in Obamacare



The first health care open enrollment period technically ended in March, but it was extended by the federal government to mid-April for people having problems with the website. Only certain groups of people such as young people aging off their parents' health insurance can enroll for Obamacare at this time.

The next open enrollment period does not being until the middle of November. The government expects repairs to healthcare.gov to be finished by that time, which will likely reduce the frequency of paper applications even further.

Serco has been declining to comment for the story.

The Centers for Medicaid and Medicare Services - HHS agency overseeing the federal health exchanges - told KMOV that, 'Serco is committed to making sure federal funds are spent appropriately, and the number of Serco staff is reviewed on a regular basis,' KMOV says.



Serco's UK parent company is one of the leading contractors with Great Britain's government.

In 2012, the company admitted to the National Health Service that it lied 252 times over a six month period about the performance of out of hours doctors.



It is currently under investigation in the UK by the Serious Fraud Office for charging the Ministry of Justice to electronically tag criminals that were in jail or dead.

The company has already agreed to repay the govenment nearly £70 million for the falsified work related to the tagging scheme, BBC reports, and it could end up paying more.



Serco's behavior in Great Britian was so crooked that it was tporarially banned from competing for government contracts in that country. The ban was lifted in February and Serco is now contracting with the governmnet again.



When approached about Serco's terrible track record abroad last summer, a spokesman for CMS told Reuters, Serco is a highly skilled company that has a proven track record in providing cost-effective services to numerous other federal agencies.'