SIB Development & Consulting, a company that helps businesses save money on their operating expenses, has completed a move to its newly renovated 10,400-square-foot headquarters building in the Half Mile North development on Charleston’s upper peninsula.

Previously located in a smaller suite of offices in downtown Charleston, SIB made the move to accommodate its growing staff. SIB works with multiple-location companies such as restaurant groups, retail stores, grocers and health care providers to review their fixed costs and reduce their expenses.

SIB said the work pays for itself with the savings it creates and now has a nationwide client base.

“We have found plenty of ways to be more efficient, but ultimately our work requires the human touch and a lot of personal attention for our clients,” said CEO Dan Schneider.

“To keep up with the workload, we have hired a lot of talented new people. Our growth over the past couple of years has been tremendous, and now our head count is at just under 60 people. Our new building at Half Mile North will serve us perfectly and give us the space to grow to 100 people in the future.”

Half Mile North, located between Meeting Street and Morrison Drive near Brigade Street, is a new development by Raven Cliff Co. SIB will soon be joined by other tenants. They include new brew pub Edmund’s Oast and e-commerce company Blue Acorn.

Raven Cliff Company collaborated with SIB to renovate an old warehouse and build an updated office building with customized amenities for the consulting company’s personnel. Features include an outdoor conference room, an on-site dog park, a gym and a full kitchen and dining area where the company chef will provide a free daily lunch for staff members.

“We’re thrilled to be here, and we’re excited to see the continued development of the area and get to know our new neighbors,” Schneider said. “Blue Acorn and Edmund’s Oast obviously saw the same potential in this neighborhood that we did, and we can’t wait to have them join us.”