A right to farm - Bill seeks to protect farmers from Obamacare - Turkey line speeds to increase under poultry rule

With help from Chase Purdy and Jason Huffman

A RIGHT TO FARM: Missouri voters will decide Tuesday whether to approve Amendment 1, a provision that promises to “ensure the right of Missouri citizens to engage in agricultural production and ranching practices shall not be infringed.” But what the state’s “Right to Farm” amendment would really do depends on who you ask.

Story Continued Below

Those arguing for the measure in a recent flurry of campaign ads suggest the amendment could be used to help ward off national interest groups, such as the Humane Society of the United States, from influencing Missouri law to the detriment of its farmers. Those against the amendment say the measure will protect those engaged in livestock abuse. Only North Dakota has so far passed a similar law, according to the New York Times.

Brush up on both sides of the argument with this take from NBC’s Columbia, Mo., affiliate KOMU: http://bit.ly/1ohfWpZ. Or this from the New York Times: http://nyti.ms/1okMnUB

GOOD MORNING! Welcome to Morning Ag where the team is wondering whether the tumbleweeds rolling around the now empty Capitol Hill while lawmakers are off for the month are an agricultural issue. There must be a farm bill provision that covers this, right? You know the deal: thoughts, news, tip, tumbleweed control advice? Send them to jhopkinson@politico.com or @ jennyhops. Follow us @ Morning_Ag and @ POLITICOPro.

MA’s MONDAY MORNING BUZZ: In addition to Missouri, Michigan and Washington also hold primary votes on Tuesday. Kansas seems to have the races of interest to agriculture:

-- Kansas’ 4th congressional district: In the Republican battle for this spot, two-term incumbent Mike Pompeo is confronting Todd Tiahrt, who previously held this job for eight terms. Tiahrt has been gaining ground on Pompeo in the polls while attacking him over his sponsorship of a federal bill that would block states from mandating GMO labeling. POLITICO Pro spotlighted this contest earlier: http://politico.pro/1uQe2X1

-- Kansas 1st congressional district: Rep. Tim Huelskamp is also facing a tough GOP primary challenger, Alan LaPolice, who has made inroads with voters by picking on the incumbent’s support of phasing out the Renewable Fuel Standard. Read more about that race in the Kansas City Star: http://bit.ly/1rNYsoZ

-- Kansas Senate: Milton Wolf is taking on Pat Roberts, a long-time member of the agriculture committee, and the tea party challenger has been making some late-in-the-game moves to gain ground on the incumbent, as reported by POLITICO’s Campaign Pro: http://politi.co/1qk3TLs

Meanwhile, in Washington State, Republican Dan Newhouse, a farmer and former director of the state agriculture department, is facing seven other Republicans and two Democrats to replace retiring Rep. Doc Hastings in the state’s 4 th District: http://bit.ly/1ANLGgy

SPEAKING OF THE RFS: It’s August, and it seems there is still no final 2014 rule in sight. There were some expectations for an early September release, but the rule has yet to go to the White House for review and EPA’s recent announcement extending the 2013 mandates until 30 days after the 2014 ones are issued casts further doubt. The latest on the issue from Pro Energy is here: http://politico.pro/1p2hhpA

BILL SEEKS TO PROTECT FARMERS FROM OBAMACARE: Add this to the list of problems Obamacare gets blamed for causing: higher food prices. Rep. Renee Ellmers says the Affordable Care Act will “hurt our farmers and their businesses” by counting employees who work under an H-2A temporary visa toward the requirement that businesses cover workers. The two-term congresswoman has introduced The Fairness for Farmers Act, HR 5392, a bill that would exempt such workers.

The employer mandate already “has led food prices to skyrocket and caused farmers to cut back on production and jobs,” Ellmers says in a statement, but exempting temporary visa employees could help limit problems. Ellmers notes that North Carolina is the number one producer of sweet potatoes and tobacco in the country, saying these crops require labor-intensive work. The mandate will also adversely affect farmers of other specialty crops, such as melons, berries and cucumbers, she says. The employer mandate has been delayed twice and is not yet in effect. It doesn’t apply to businesses with fewer than 50 workers and those with less than 100 workers don’t have to comply until 2016. Larger businesses will have to start phasing it in next year.

TURKEY LINE SPEEDS TO INCREASE UNDER USDA RULE: “The Agriculture Department may have backtracked on its plan to increase the maximum speed that chickens can be processed [by up to 25 percent], but that reversal of direction doesn’t apply to turkeys or even some chickens,” reports Pro Agriculture’s Bill Tomson.

While USDA backed off its plans to allow line speeds of up to 175 birds per minute, a move lauded by workers rights groups, the department has stayed quiet on a provision of the Poultry Inspection System rule that allows turkey plants to boost their line speeds to 55 per minute, a 6 percent bump from the current 51 birds per minute limit. What’s more, the 20 chicken plants that were allowed to have speeds of 175 birds per minute as part of a pilot program can keep those speeds. Those facilities slaughter between 38 million and 150 million chickens per year, Tomson writes. The full story for Pros is available here: http://politico.pro/XpVhuA

BEEF PRIORITIES: The National Cattlemen’s Beef Association discussed their legislative and regulatory priorities when they met last week in Denver. Chief among those, according to a statement from Colin Woodall, the VP of government affairs: EPA’s proposed “Waters of the U.S.” rule, tax reform and ongoing international trade issues. Additionally separate NCBA committees passed resolutions to lead the development of a beef sustainability program and to support changes to mandatory price reporting. The group says it will urge USDA to allow the U.S. cattle industry opportunities to comment on the development of risk analyses used in relation to foreign countries that struggle with significant chronic animal disease issues.

HISPANIC GROUPS BACK WOTUS: But it’s not all bad for the waters rule. The Hispanic Access Foundation and the National Hispanic Environmental Council, in a letter to EPA signed onto by more than a dozen labor and farmworker groups, urges the agency “to implement strong protections for streams and wetlands that supply drinking water for 1 in 3 Americans, protect key ecosystems, and provide sorely needed outdoor recreation opportunities for Latino families.” The July 31 letter is available here: http://bit.ly/1lgNh4g

PCA TRIAL KICKS OFF: Federal lawyers laid the case Friday to justify criminal punishment for officials at the Peanut Corporation of America over the 2008-09 salmonella outbreak linked to the legume as the trial in the suit kicked off Friday in Albany, Georgia.

“Peanut Corp. of America ‘had a huge problem with salmonella in its plant and in the products it produced,’ Assistant U.S. Attorney Alan Dasher told the jury in his opening statement — a two-hour preview of a case that could take months to present,” the Associated Press reports. “Yet he said the company shipped products that were untested and products that it knew were tainted to customers including food giant Kellogg’s. Managers employed to run the company’s plants failed to do their jobs, leaving former Peanut Corp. owner Stewart Parnell ‘holding the bag,’ defense attorney Tom Bondurant told jurors.” The full story is available here: http://on.freep.com/1oWJiPt

ANTIBIOTIC RESISTANCE EXPLORED IN NIH NEWSLETTER: The National Institutes of Health gives antibiotic use in agriculture top billing in the latest issue of its in-house newsletter, NIH Record, opening with an ominous warning given by Alexander Fleming in accepting the 1945 Nobel Prize for his discovery of penicillin: “It is not difficult to make microbes resistant to penicillin in the laboratory by exposing them to concentrations not sufficient to kill them, and the same thing has occasionally happened in the body,” Fleming reportedly said. “There is the danger that the ignorant man may easily underdose himself and by exposing his microbes to non-lethal quantities of the drug, make them resistant.”

The article includes a comment made by well-known health journalist Maryn McKenna during a recent lecture on the history of medicine. You can read the NIH Record story here: http://1.usa.gov/1rQJoXH

MA’s INSTANT OATS

-- Food Directions, the government relations firm that focuses on food policy, has started their own Instagram account. Check ‘em out: http://bit.ly/1xHQlfm

-- The German beer industry is pushing back against fracking in that country over concerns of what it could do to water supplies, Newsweek reports: http://bit.ly/1tFqlUs

-- A recent study has found that root vegetables irrigated with reclaimed wastewater pick up the residues of certain drugs, Chemical and Engineering News reports: http://bit.ly/1ua0LEz

-- Sherwood, Minnesota, is the latest town to pass ordinances prohibiting the use of neonicotinoids and putting in place bee-friendly measures, the Star Tribune reports: http://strib.mn/1lmR4gH

THAT'S ALL FOR MA! We will see you tomorrow! In the meantime, drop your host and the rest of the team a line: jhuffman@politico.com and @ JsonHuffman; mkorade@politico.com and @ mjkorade; btomson@politico.com and @ billtomson4; jhopkinson@politico.com or @ jennyhops; and cpurdy@politico.com and @chasepurdy. You can also follow @ POLITICOPro and @ Morning_Ag

** A message from Just Label It: Without mandatory GMO labeling, consumers will not be able to make food choices that reflect their values, according to a long-awaited report by the National Academy of Sciences. Congress should act now to require mandatory, GMO labels on the package, not just high-tech gimmicks. Nine out of ten consumers want mandatory GMO labeling on the package — just like consumers in 64 other nations. Listen to the experts: the right-to-know is reason enough to require GMO labels. http://bit.ly/1W6njad **