SHARE Affordable Care Act

Special Section: Videos, interactive maps, summaries and local coverage of Obamacare



By of the

Madison — Gov. Scott Walker's administration is delaying putting in place a new system to help determine who receives state BadgerCare Plus health care for the needy.

The move, state officials said, is tied to the Republican governor's response to the troubled rollout of the federal health law. Because of the Obamacare problems, Walker said earlier this month that he would delay for three months his plan to move more than 70,000 state residents out of BadgerCare and into an online federal insurance market.

Walker has called for a special session of lawmakers in early December to approve the delay and keep those 77,500 patients from losing their state Medicaid coverage in January before the federal insurance program is ready to accept them. The governor wants to delay dropping that coverage until the end of March.

As part of this delay, the state will also have to delay implementing the new system for determining the composition and income of households — key information for determining whether applicants qualify for state Medicaid coverage, otherwise known as BadgerCare. Those changes in the state eligibility system were called for under the federal law and take effect on Jan. 1.

Before that effective date, the state had been planning to implement the changes Monday, but dropped that plan because of the separate delay of moving the recipients off BadgerCare, said Stephanie Smiley, a spokeswoman for the State Department of Health Services.

"These systems absolutely work; this delay is not due to technical issues. These changes are changes to our eligibility systems. The computer programming for (these income changes) was intertwined with the BadgerCare Plus eligibility changes that have now been delayed, so we had to delay (them) until we decide on a path to change the logic in the computer system," Smiley said in an email.

The new rules, called modified adjusted gross income, will be used to calculate whether applicants qualify for both state BadgerCare coverage and taxpayer subsidies within the federal insurance market.

For BadgerCare recipients, this will mean several changes, including the fact that family income from child support, worker's compensation and veterans benefits will no longer be used to calculate how much money a household makes. Those sources of income are currently included in the income total.

Jon Peacock, research director for the Wisconsin Council on Children and Families, said that he didn't understand why the state isn't moving forward with changing the income rules and system as required by the federal law.

"When are you going to turn it on and use it and why not now?" he said.

In the budget approved this summer, Walker and his fellow Republicans in the Legislature rejected additional federal money under the Affordable Care Act to expand BadgerCare to a greater number of people.

Democrats blasted Republicans for that decision, while Walker has said he thought accepting the federal money was too risky because the federal government might switch gears and stop providing as much aid in the future — leaving the state on the hook.

The 2013-'15 state budget currently requires the 77,500 adults in BadgerCare with incomes above the poverty line — $23,550 for a family of four — to be dropped from that state Medicaid coverage on Jan. 1. At the same time, Walker's budget did call for making BadgerCare available to a new population — 82,000 adults without dependent children who are below the federal poverty line.

Because of the Obamacare problems, Walker has said the state would simply delay both changes.

Peacock noted that the last time the state opened up coverage to a new group of childless adults it resulted in a monthslong backlog for processing applications.

"That's what we want to avoid," Peacock said, adding that starting up the new system now could help to ensure a smooth transition this time.

Smiley said that the state is working with federal officials at the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services to determine when the income changes will be implemented.

"We are still assessing our options," Smiley said.