By JIM PARKER

The Post and Courier

In designing a new boat for the model year, a Moncks Corner manufacturer thought small and came up big.

This year Sea Fox introduced its 186 Commander, a 2016 edition now available at Palmetto Boat Sales in West Ashley. The all-new 18-footer sits about three-quarters the size of the nameplate’s largest offering. Yet the 186 packs plenty in its small frame. Equipped with an also-new Yamaha F-115 engine, it seats seven, showcases a perk-loaded instrument cluster and boasts a 20-gallon live well.

“This is a great summer boat, family boat, fishing boat,” said Shane Logsdon, sales associate. “This package is as much boat (that) you can get in the low $30,000s” including motor and trailer. “That’s the No. 1 selling feature.”

As much design and engineering time went into developing the novel 186 Commander as Sea Fox’s veteran 226 and 246 models, which are 22- and 24-footers respectively, he said. The 18-footer commands points for its overall safety; extra freeboard — the height of a ship’s deck above the water level; wave shearing bow flare; and its smooth and dry ride.

“This is the smallest model in the Commander series,” Logsdon said. “There’s a 199 (that was) redesigned into this boat.” Sea Fox wanted to recraft the roughly 20-footer, he said, because “customers were asking for an 18-foot boat” and its shape didn’t fit with the other Commanders. The 186 is the “same Naval design and look as the 226 and 246,” he said. “The 199 looks out of place.”

At the same time, the 186 Commander’s four-stroke, 115 horsepower F series engine from respected manufacturer Yamaha stands out “better than the original,” Logsdon said. Carrying a “great weight ratio,” the motor reaches 30 mph cruising speed at 4,400 revolutions per minute and top speed of 41 mph at 6,000 rpms. The 18-foot watercraft picks up pace rapidly. “The boat just flies out of the hole,” he said. Yet the 186 Commander, which holds a 150 gallon tank, is fairly fuel efficient. “On any average day of boating, it only burns 10 gallons of gas.”

According to Logsdon, “This boat is definitely inshore. But it’s capable of cruising in the ocean safely on nice days.” The 186 Sea Fox performs “perfect for Lowcountry water, rivers and harbor.”

Logsdon said the 18-foot Commander comes with an oversized center console capable of storing loads of safety gear while alternately providing space for a “port-o-potty.” The large access door contains a clever innovation, a magnetic strip to keep it stationary when opened.

One of the boat’s top attractions is its comfortable seating configurations. Double cushioned chairs with recessed backs are built into the bow. A small bench can be folded down for fishing and flipped up to sit on for cruising. A number of drink holders encircle the deck. Another spiff unlike the competition: high “gunnels,” the upper edges of the boat’s side, he said. “For children, it’s nice and safe,” he said. The raised sides also protect riders from spray splashing over the bow. “Look how high we are off the water in an 18 foot boat,” Logsdon said while manning the helm on a drive in Charleston Harbor. “It rides like a 21 (footer),” he said.

The boat houses two live wells, including the 20-gallon tub, to keep catches. “Most boats this size only have one.”

During a 15-minute excursion manning the helm, the new Sea Fox Commander 186 held its own alongside both larger ships and similar-sized craft. Sliding the throttle all the way forward gets the 115-hp Yamaha up to cruising speed with alacrity. It’s almost as smooth generating extra power to reach top speed.

Moving around the boat is rather easy, even though it’s more contained than its lineup mates. The seating features are standout, notably the quite comfy reclining seats at the bow. The center console instrument layout proved easy to decipher, and a built-in Infinity radio with four speakers can blast out tunes.

Among other highlights, the 18-foot Sea Fox incorporates a foldable ladder, teak wood in the console’s standing area and foldable aft jump seats that give fishermen plenty of room if they need it .

If there’s any places to look for improvement, the boat could add a built-in cooler under the captain’s bench rather than leaving space for a portable cooler. The steering was a little stiffer than in larger boats, even with a handy grab knob. And the boat would get jostled slightly in wakes and larger waves.

Yet the 186 Commander’s shortcomings, if any, are small. Sea Fox looks to be on the right track toward marketing a popular, safety-conscious boat that would attract the complete novice as well as the old hand on deck.

For more information and photos, visit www.postandcourier.com/automotive.

Reach Jim Parker at 937-5542 or jparker@postandcourier.com.