Updated: Sep 29, 2014 - 3:32 PM

A Melbourne mother can't believe the bill she got after rushing her daughter to the emergency room, saying she was billed twice as much because she had insurance.

Natalie Anderson kept looking over her medical bills thinking something had to be wrong.

“I just thought the whole thing was a joke," she said.

The Palm Beach hospital that treated her daughter in the emergency room didn't bill her insurance. Instead, it charged her $550 in self-pay rates.

Anderson assumed if she filed an insurance claim it would be even less. Instead, she now owed the hospital more than twice as much. She was charged more because she had insurance.

“What am I paying premiums for? I don't feel like I'm being protected,” said Anderson.

Her policy is with Health First Health Plans. The new bill was $1,150 because the hospital was out of network.

“I could have negotiated better rates for myself for free,” said Anderson.

Anderson filed two appeals with Health First, arguing she should not be penalized for having insurance. Both appeals were denied.

Then, the ER doctor billed Anderson another $1,000. He was also out of network for her plan. His in-network rate was $138.

"Even if you supposedly have a good plan, it doesn't mean anything," said Anderson.

Consumer groups said many out-of-network rates are inflated way beyond cost so people with insurance pay more for treatment on top of higher premiums.

“Obviously in that type of situation the consumer may have zero ability to call around and find in-network providers and save money,” said Chuck Bell with Consumers Union.

Health First Health Plans told Action9 many high deductible plans were designed for the Affordable Care Act and are better for catastrophic or significant needs. But it's investigating why Anderson would be charged more than someone without any insurance.

“That night I was much better off without insurance,” said Anderson.

Once she filed the insurance claim, the hospital would not allow Anderson to pay the far cheaper, self-pay rates.

Out-of-network surprise bills are common with most insurance plans.