When friends ask what record deck is best for converting their old albums to digital, I usually suppress a shudder, grab their shoulders and beg them, ‘Just buy it again on CD, for God’s sake, man.’

There are few areas of technology where you’re left to fend for yourself so completely as when you try to ‘rescue’ music marooned on old 33rpm records by plugging a cheap vinyl-to-USB deck into a PC and converting the discs into digital files.

It’s genuinely worse than assembling cheaper-than-IKEA flatpack furniture, and I don’t say that lightly.

The Flexson really bends over backwards to make things easy: it’s got an analogue-to-digital converter and phono pre-amp builtin, so it will genuinely be working in minutes

Most decks offer an indication that X cable might fit into Y hole on your PC, then the manual points to the internet and runs away in the opposite direction. This is like handing someone a drill and expecting them to perform root canal surgery.

Hence, Flexson’s VinylPlay received quite a few admiring glances when it was unveiled this week in the UK.

It’s proper, British hi-fi (for any youngsters still reading, this refers nostalgically to the era when Britannia, or at least her hi-fi separates, ruled the airwaves, an era that slowly ground to a halt as everyone decided that iPod docks were a decent substitute for actual hi-fis).

It will tease the best out of your old discs, or indeed new ones, but it’s also sensibly determined to make converting old records easy.

Well, easier, at least. Not only does it come with a ‘Quick Start’ guide sitting helpfully on the vinyl platter, there is also a full video guide online showing you how to use the fancier functions, including converting records to digital.

This process is still a bit long-winded, and really only for precious, irreplaceable discs you can’t get anywhere else, but having a video guide works wonders.

It will also teach you how to pipe the sound through your home via a Sonos multiroom speaker system, a function unique to this deck. But it’s far from a onetrick pony.

Its makers are aware of the fact they’ve got to walk a tightrope between white-haired old geezers like me, and young trendies with improbable beards who are enjoying the pumped-up sounds of new and classic discs released on the heavier, better-sounding 180g vinyl.

Last year, more vinyl records sold in the UK than 1991.

Next year, the sales figures are expected to rise again, by another 40 per cent.

Even for those of us on the down ramp of life, it may be worth heading to the shops for some new discs – the remastered Led Zeppelin albums are particularly worth a listen.

The Flexson really bends over backwards to make things easy: it’s got an analogue-to-digital converter and phono pre-amp builtin, so it will genuinely be working in minutes.

You can plug it direct into just about any stereo worth the name, sling some vinyl on, and it’ll play – and sound good.

The high-quality converter ensures that any songs you DO convert sound vaguely like you remember them, rather than as if played on a really terrible record player at the bottom of a well, as is the case with most vinyl-to-PC decks which come in at less than £500.