Cross-Country: Winger boys 13th; Armstrong nabs All-State honors

Red Wings' Kianna Stewart (left) runs across the soccer field midway through the Class 2A state cross-country championship meet Saturday in Northfield. (Republican Eagle photo by Joe Brown)

Red Wing eighth-grader Jasmyn Armstrong approaches the finish line on the way to a 10th-place showing at the Class 2A state cross-country championship meet Saturday in Northfield. (Republican Eagle photo by Joe Brown)

Red Wing's Forest Evanson (right) overtakes Rochester Century's Zeke Green near the end of the Class 2A state cross-country championship race Saturday at St. Olaf College in Northfield. (Republican Eagle photo by Joe Brown)

Red Wing junior George Nemanich nears the finish of the Class 2A state cross-country championship meet Saturday at St. Olaf College in Northfield. (Republican Eagle photo by Joe Brown)

NORTHFIELD – At first glance, the Red Wing boys cross-country team fell short of its goal for the Class 2A state championship by finishing in 13th place, down from last year’s 12th-place total.

But considering that the Wingers had a tighter pack (40.2 seconds in 2014 compared to 58.2 last year) while running just three seconds slower than last year with a younger lineup, nobody for Red Wing was disappointed after Saturday’s race at St. Olaf College.

“Our pack was pretty good today,” said George Nemanich, who had a team-best time of 16 minutes, 45.4 seconds that ranked 84th individually. “We had some guys in the back step up. … I think we ran quite a bit better from last year.”

Wingers head coach Jesse Nelson chimed in, “We ran well … a lot better than last year. You can’t control what the other teams do.”

Wayzata went on to win its second straight 2A title by scoring 47 points, holding off Hopkins (87), Stillwater (87), St. Michael-Albertville (153) and Chaska (180). Rochester Century, the Section 1AA champion, placed ninth with 263.

Compared to last year’s state meet, Nemanich managed nearly 20 seconds off his 2013 time of 17:04.2.

“I liked my position. In the middle of the race, it kind of slowed down a bit on the open part, and on that last loop, I passed quite a few people,” Nemanich said. “I ran fairly well up until those last 100 meters, then I got passed by some guys. What’s done is done.”

A trio of Red Wing seniors – Marcus Warrington (120th, 17:09.4), Meyer Beckner (122nd, 17:11.5) and Philip Mitchell (141st, 17:19.4) – ran within 10 seconds of each other to take the two-through-four spots. Asa Beckner claimed the last scoring spot for the Wingers, placing 146th with a time of 17:25.6.

“We came up here (Friday) and our strategy was that last mile. We divided (the race) up into sections and we were focused on that last section,” Mitchell said. “We just replayed it in our minds and our feet followed.”

Forest Evanson (154th, 17:33.5) and Tom Nemanich (170th, 17:53.7) also crossed the finish line for the Wingers. While several spots can be decided by fractions of a second, the strength of the Wingers’ pack gave the team a needed lift.

“There’s no better feeling than when you can see the red wings on the back of the jersey in front of you,” Mitchell said.

Girls

Jasmyn Armstrong had aspirations of finishing in the top 10 of Class 2A, and teammate Kianna Stewart wanted to be near the top 50 heading into Saturday’s state championship.

Everything went according to plan for the Winger duo as Armstrong took All-State honors with a 10th-place finish (14:19.1) while Stewart had a strong state debut by taking 56th (15:06.8).

“They went right in line with what we were hoping,” Nelson said. “We figured third-through-10th were in (Armstrong’s) range, and for Kianna if you look at the results there are 20 runners in a 10-second span. A lot can change in a group like that.”

Back at state for the second straight year, Armstrong shaved 70.6 seconds off her 80th-place finish from 2013.

“I’m super happy (with the results). I was trying and get closer to fifth. That’s what I was ranked and that’s how the times had been at sections,” Armstrong said. “I’m happy with 10th. I feel like I had a good race and felt good the whole time, but some of the other girls ran really good today.”

The race was ultimately won by Megan Hasz of Alexandria, who held off her twin sister, Bethany, with a state championship-record time of 13:40.9. Bethany finished in 13:44.4.

“In that first mile we wanted her to be in the top group. Then coming out of the woods, she was still with them,” Nelson said of Armstrong. “The last stretch, when it became a foot-speed race, that’s where she fell behind a little bit.”

Meanwhile, Stewart tried to keep Armstrong in her sights per her usual race routine. But the mass of runners made that hard to keep up with.

“It was a lot different because everybody is so fast. It was weird, but it was still fun,” Stewart said. “I’m really happy I got to run with such good competition.”

That competition also helped Stewart stay near her goal of finishing in the top 50.

“The faster somebody went, I tried to keep up with ‘em,” Stewart said, “then the next one would come and I’d keep up with them. They kept me at a good pace the whole time.”

In the team competition, Wayzata won its third straight title with 65 points, followed by Edina (94), Willmar (96), East Ridge (119) and Marshall (168).

Both Armstrong and Stewart return for next season, and the big-meet experience can only bode well for the Wingers.

“It was a good meet for Jasmyn; she’s already learned from it and wants to get better for next year,” Nelson said. “As for Kianna, she made her decision late (to join cross-country) so she didn’t run much with us this summer. I’m looking forward to see what she can do next year.”