Keep the horses, but in the park

Brooklyn: In response to the letter from Voicer Julie Cappiello, who wants to do away with the Central Park carriage horses: For centuries, horses were bred to pull heavy wagons, farm equpiment, Conestoga wagons, stagecoaches, etc. They were not, however, bred to contend with cars, trucks, buses, speeding cabs, rogue bikers (who have killed people in Central Park and injured many) and hordes of pedestrians, not to mention exhaust fumes. If people want to take a carriage ride in Central Park, that is just what they should do — the carriages should be confined to Central Park. If people want to go sightseeing on the streets, it should not be done with a carriage. They can get on a doubledecker bus. That is what they are there for. By the way, Julie, what do you think is going to happen to a lot of those horses? I don’t want to think about that. The horses don’t deserve what might happen. Rowena Lachant

Hold your horses, Jimmy

Manhattan: I think Councilman Jimmy Vacca was a little harsh in his judgment of Edie Falco’s ad urging him to vote in favor of the proposed ban on horse-drawn carriages. She just wanted to point out that horses are forced to pull carriages work long days on the congested streets in all types of weather, even while they are sick or injured. She isn’t asking him to support the bill because of “the opinions of celebrities.” She’s a New Yorker asking him to support it because the horses are suffering, and retiring them to sanctuaries is the right thing to do. Jannette Patterson

Tried and true

Hastings-On-Hudson, N.Y.: We feel very strongly that taking the horses and carriages out of New York is an error and sends a negative message about keeping old traditions. Barbara and Ira Finegold

Incentive to care

Flushing: To all of the dopes who are against the Central Park carriage horses, please answer this question: Why would a carriage driver abuse his meal ticket? Mike Murray

Let’s fight back

Manhattan: Hey, Sony, didn’t you get the memo that we don’t cave to terror threats? Show the movie. Give it away. Let anyone who wants to see it watch for free. Don’t give in to these bums. Obama, say something, do something. We can’t let these lowlife monsters get away with this form of terrorism. Send a drone to that little nut in North Korea. This was an act of war. Let’s put him down for real. Louie Dumbrowski

The coward’s way

Mamaroneck, N.Y.: As if the current administration in the White House hasn’t done enough over the last few years to give the United States a reputation of being soft, Sony Entertainment has topped that in just two days. Leave it to Hollywood tree-hugging liberals not only to negotiate with terrorists, but to completely knuckle under. This kind of capitulation by Sony may give more cyber-terrorists the green light to act, knowing there will probably be no repercussions for their actions. Ted Rallis

Bush was right

Cortlandt Manor, N.Y.: In 2002, President George W. Bush referred to North Korea as part of an “axis of evil” in his State of the Union speech and was laughed at by the left. Now, North Korea, through the use of cyber-terrorism and direct threats of 9/11-type violence, has brought Sony Pictures to its knees over a film the regime finds offensive. In a country where there is no such thing as freedom of speech, they sure seem to have had an easy time denying Sony’s. Michael P. Devine

Dead letter office

Brooklyn: To Voicer Patty Giugliano on the problems with her post office, ZIP code 11204: My post office, ZIP code 11226, is the worst in Brooklyn. It’s a small building that services a million people. There are no stamp machines or self-service machines, as at other stations. The lines are always to the door, which makes the small area overcrowded and a fire hazard. One line is for money orders and stamps, another is for package pickup and the third is for mailing packages or letters. Someone is always arguing, and the employees make you feel like they are doing you a favor — especially the man who does passports. Since September, I have had three packages returned without ever receiving a notice. One package was left next door, in a large building complex. A man brought it over to me. The package had my correct name and address. It went to him only because he had the same apartment number as me. And this mess doesn’t happen only at holiday time — it’s year-round. Before I retired, I did all my mailing in Manhattan at Cooper Station, which runs smoothly. Emily A. Cole

Our new friends down South

Sayville, L.I.: President Obama said it’s good to have a relationship with Cuba so Americans can visit. I’d rather spend time in my cat’s litter box than go there! Now that he’s friendly with Cuba, I wonder if he’s going to offer them Obamacare? Maureen Fazio

A built-in bias

Manhattan: While I do not condone the violence in Ferguson, I understand that time and time again our black youth are challenged by a system designed for whites. Cathy Mims

The cardinal rule

Hamden, Conn.: May I say that we should fully support Timothy Cardinal Dolan! He is the voice of the common people. Truly, we should be grateful for those who literally put their lives on the line, for all of us, the officers of the NYPD. I have family living in NYC. Every day, I thank God for the NYPD, New York’s Finest! Patricia Mayko Santacroce

Back to work, Bill

Bronx: Suggestion for Bill de Blasio: Instead of kvetching about “income inequality,” trying to become a national progressive leader and kissing up to Al Sharpton, how about attending to the city’s nuts and bolts, like Rikers? Gene Roman

Defaming cops

Port Jervis, N.Y.: New York Jet Sheldon Richardson was quoted in the newspaper saying his cop friends laughed when he said Darren Wilson was a murderer and a pig. Wilson was in the pit, a pit far darker and deeper than any football field, and he survived. He is not a pig. I am amazed that none of his cop buddies explained to Richardson why it was not murder, and that there was no objection to the word “pig.” Mike Misczuk

Blame Eli, not Tom

Middlebury, Conn.: I can’t understand the demise of the football Giants being blamed on Tom Coughlin. It’s the fault of the terrible quarterback, Eli Manning. George Robinson

Think water safety

Brooklyn: As winter vacation gets closer and many go on trips to wamer climes, child safety is very important. Always swim near the lifeguard. Make sure the ocean looks safe when one goes in. Never go into a rough ocean with a riptide, which can drag a person underwater. When the ocean looks challenging, just stay out. Kids should always go into the ocean with an experienced swimmer. They can always stay near the lifeguard. Never swim near a jetty or play on rocks. Adults should always hold the hand of kids 5 and under until they get the hang of it at the edge of the water. Water safety entails knowing about caution and taking it. It’s being ready in a second to help a child with a helping hand. Not all kids can swim, but they can all be safe with an adult who is a good swimmer. Water safety is taking precautions against what could happen. Many accidents can be prevented. Raquel Boujo

Bus stop

Manhattan: Why do I, a citizen of the greatest city on earth, have to take a taxi when I don’t want to do so? Because, though the MTA may deny it, bus service on Broadway and Amsterdam Ave. seems to have been cut back. I have to wait at least 20 minutes, and if I haven’t given up by then, a bus — or two or three buses at once — will show up. Some stops don’t have seats. Many times elderly people with walkers and wheelchairs are forced to wait in the cold. This is unacceptable. The other day, when a bus finally appeared, I quietly asked the driver why, in recent months, I’ve had to wait so long. His reply: “I don’t care.” No, he may not care, but those of us waiting do care. Why is this happening? Marcia Epstein

A blown play

Brooklyn: Brian Cashman must be fired at once. This stupid dingbat should have signed David Robertson for the Yankees. Dennis Olsen