WEST PALM BEACH, Fla. - By now you've received your W-2's from your employer and are rounding up paperwork to file your taxes.

There are some changes this year that will help you ensure you’re keeping as much of your hard-earned money as possible.

"People will leave a lot of money on the table because of the simple fact that their leaving out deductions that can increase their refunds 500 dollars up to 2,500 dollars,” said Jawhon Moye, General Manager of a West Palm Beach Ameritax office.

He helped create a Top 5: Ways to get the most out of your 2014 tax return

1. Register your health insurance

2014 is the first year you’ll face a penalty if you don’t have health insurance. It’s one of the provisions of the Affordable Care Act or Obamacare.

"I do foresee a lot of individuals coming in and not being aware of that they have to have coverage 9 out of 12 months for 2014," said Moye.

You could be fined $95 for not having coverage and it goes up from there depending on your income.

If you have health insurance through the marketplace, you should have received a "1095-A" form to prove you have coverage.

On your 1040 form, line 61 is what you’ll need to find to confirm your insurance.

2. If you got hacked, let the IRS know

Florida is a hotbed for identity theft. If you had your information stolen or think it may have been at risk, you can let the IRS know. It’s an extra layer of protection.

Find the document here.

3. Deduct clothes as an itemized expense

Whether you’re a lawyer wearing a suit, an AC repairman wearing a t-shirt and shorts or a lifeguard wearing shorts - we all buy clothes for work. But you can only deduct work clothes if you cannot wear your clothes in a normal situation outside of work.

4. Child care expenses

Moye says this could be the biggest change to the amount you get back, but many people don’t realize it. He says you could lower your taxable income and increase your refund by hundreds if you calculate how much you spent in child care in 2014. You’ll need you child care provider’s tax ID number.

5. Increase IRA contributions

You can contribute up to $5,500 this year and that's up from last year. That’s pre-tax money, so don’t shortchange yourself.