Topics: Barack Obama, Border crisis, Comprehensive Immigration Reform, Deportation, Editor's Picks, Executive power, GOP, House Republicans, Immigration Reform, John Boehner, Mario Diaz-Balart, Politics, U.S.-Mexico border, Politics News

It’s been painfully obvious for months now that the reason offered by House Republicans for why they couldn’t move forward on immigration reform was a crock of nonsense. When asked about the possibility of reforming the immigration system, Speaker John Boehner and the rest of the leadership would mournfully shake their heads and say they’d love to get something done, but they just couldn’t trust President Obama to enforce whatever law they passed. Until that key element of trust could be restored, they said, no legislation would leave the House.

Everyone knew that was a load of crap; the reason Republicans wouldn’t move forward on immigration was that the caucus was terrified of the political blowback from conservatives, and not willing to hand the president a huge legislative victory. Those two obstacles couldn’t be overcome, and the Senate’s immigration reform bill, passed last summer with bipartisan support, slowly died.

The death of that bill has resulted, predictably, in everyone blaming the other side for the failure to get reform done. But yesterday Rep. Mario Diaz-Balart, one of the GOP’s chief proponents for immigration reform, came out and blew some holes in the Republicans’ attempts to deflect blame and said plainly what needs to be said: Republicans killed immigration reform.

Diaz-Balart has been quietly working to cobble together his own reform bill and muster support for it. After Boehner told Obama two weeks ago that no votes on immigration would be held this year, Diaz-Balart made one last plea to the House leadership, and they gave him the same answer: no vote. So he held a press conference yesterday to discuss the “disappointing and highly unfortunate” turn of events, and let fly with some real talk:

It is highly irresponsible not to deal with the issue. I know it is difficult, especially when you have a President that failed to build the trust of the American people or the U.S. Congress, and who has done little to enforce current law despite his assertions to the contrary. But we were sent here by the American people precisely to tackle difficult issues and not to take the easy way out.

It’s an interesting statement, in that he gives the GOP’s reason for inaction (mistrust of the president) the due credit you’d expect a Republican to give it, but then says it doesn’t matter because legislators are expected to, you know, legislate.

But what of this argument that Republicans just couldn’t trust Obama enough to pass a bill? According to Diaz-Balart, that’s not necessarily true. “I feel absolutely confident that we had the majority — of the majority — of support from the House Republican Conference,” for his bill, he told reporters. Diaz-Balart could just be blowing smoke on this point; the bill won’t get a vote anyway, so he’s free to invent whatever level of support he wants. Either way, whatever backing was there got wiped out by “multiple unexpected events — most recently the primary defeat of Majority Leader Eric Cantor, R-Va., and the uproar over the child migrant surge at the southwest border,” according to Roll Call.