The home of Bill de Blasio is shown here in Park Slope, Brooklyn. John Taggart for The Wall Street Journal

New York City Mayor Bill de Blasio and his wife have put their Brooklyn home on the rental market for $4,975 a month, describing it in an ad as an “oasis in Park Slope.”

Mr. de Blasio and his family moved to Gracie Mansion in Manhattan this summer and have been doing extensive work on their Brooklyn home ever since. The Brooklyn townhouse went on the market Thursday.

In the ad, the house is described as sporting a versatile layout with three bedrooms convertible to four. There are high ceilings on the parlor floor, rustic 12-inch wide plank floors, an original decorative marble mantle, exposed brick and two big custom closets.

“The front landscaped garden of this sun-filled home leads to the original French door entryway,” the ad reads. “The ground floor living room has newly refinished oak floors and a brick hearth with a hand painted tile hearthstone.”

The eat-in kitchen has a new dishwasher, refrigerator and microwave. The garden is described as “enchanting, landscaped, perennial and evergreen.”

“Its designed in a multi-tiered flagstone fashion with a beautiful ‘rose of sharon’ and a mini-crabapple tree. Must see to appreciate!” the ad says of the garden. “You’ll also enjoy the convenience of the edible herb garden…rosemary, thyme, sage!”

While the ad puts the house in the best light, Mr. de Blasio has long described it as “humble.” The home only has one bathroom–and it is on the third floor–and the family of four has described that feature as a challenge over the years.

The ad specifically prohibits pets and smoking, and stipulates that the tenant will be responsible for heat and hot water, gas and electric.

In an interview last month, the mayor said the house needed a lot of work because there had been more than a decade of deferred maintenance.

“Oh, it just needed a lot because, you know, we were always leading such busy lives and we didn’t get to focus a lot,” he said of the renovations. “The floors need to be redone and painting. And it’s just a lot of things that we thought from the beginning we should fix but we never got to. So, it’s nice to have the chance to do it.”

Last November, Mr. de Blasio was elected to a four-year term that ends Dec. 31, 2017. If he runs for re-election, as is expected, and wins, he will have access to Gracie Mansion through December 2021.

Mr. de Blasio is the first mayor to live in Gracie Mansion in 12 years. His predecessor, Michael Bloomberg, chose to live in his townhouse on the Upper East Side.

While Mr. de Blasio said he and the family are thrilled to live in Gracie Mansion, he said he expects to return to Brooklyn when his tenure at City Hall ends. It is unclear if he intends to return to the home he is now renting out, or another property.

“It’s as privilege to live in Gracie Mansion. It’s an extraordinary place,” Mr. de Blasio said last month. “It’s not a home per se because it’s something the public grants to you temporarily. But, you know, in terms of my home, I look forward to the day I return to Brooklyn permanently. And that’s the only place I want to live.”