BUFFALO CHIP — The smell of skunk wafted over the Buffalo Chip Campground Friday, but that was just fine to the hundreds of people gathered there — it was the smell of money.

Skunk essence is used in trapping lures and some bait to entice furbearing animals to come in for a close sniff or peek, and approximately 50 vendors were on hand at the campground for the National Trappers Association’s Western Region Trapping Convention. Many of them were selling trapping lures.

Friday and Saturday marked the first time the National Trappers Association has held a convention in South Dakota. Hosted by the South Dakota Trappers Association, around 1,000 people are expected to attend the event.

“(Low) fur prices aren’t keeping people away. Locals are excited having the convention in our state,” said Anna Hermanson, president of South Dakota Trappers Association. “They brought their families from all over to come to this event and vacation in the Black Hills.”

Trappers from coast to coast as well as some from Ontario, Canada, are attending the event.

The convention continues from 8 a.m. to 5 p.m. Saturday.

“We have trapping and skinning demos,” Hermanson said. “It’s a great way to learn about trapping. A lot of the old pros have new tricks. It’s always neat to learn something new, especially when you get into a bind out in the field.”

Chris McAllister, president of the National Trappers Association, said trapping is beneficial to the overall population of targeted species as well as the ecosystem.

“Trapping is no different than hunting. You have to reduce the excess population every year,” McAllister said. “For most furbearers trapping is the only thing they are susceptible to. They aren’t as vulnerable to hunting because they are largely nocturnal. In the end, trapping is the only efficient and effective way to control populations of furbearers.”

McAllister said he enjoys trapping, and even though he has trapped since he was “knee high,” there’s always something new to learn.

“It takes an incredible amount of knowledge about the animal,” he said. “Anyone can set a trap, but you need to set it where the animal is going to step. It’s a lifelong learning experience to make yourself better.”

To read all of today's stories, Click here or call 642-2761 to subscribe to our e-edition or home delivery.