"She was shaking her hands because they hurt, her feet hurt."

Advertisement - story continues below

An Oklahoman’s visit to a lake over the Fourth of July weekend may have led to four of her limbs needing to be amputated only days later.

Jo Rogers was a healthy, active 40 year old mother of two when she contracted a mysterious illness last month. Four days after coming home from a trip to Grand Lake in northeast Oklahoma, she fell ill with intense flu-like symptoms. By the fifth day (July 9), she had to be taken to the hospital to be tested for a life-threatening, aggressive attack of West Nile Virus or meningitis.

“She was shaking her hands because they hurt, her feet hurt,” Rogers’ cousin, Lisa Morgan, told CNN affiliate KOCO. She then went into septic shock, with her limbs turning black and blue.

Advertisement – story continues below

Doctors discovered Rogers’ illness to be Rocky Mountain Spotted Fever, a tick-borne disease she likely contracted during her lake visit. Morgan reports her cousin’s right leg required amputation mid thigh, and the other three limbs followed (amputating the left leg below the knee and the arms below the elbows) as doctors fought to keep the disease from spreading. Rogers also developed a blood clot in one of her lungs.

Doctors placed her on a ventilator and in a medically induced coma during the toughest point in the fight for her life.

The worst appears to have passed now. Morgan told her cousin: “You’re going to get to watch your boys (ages 12 and 17) grow up.”

Advertisement – story continues below

Morgan has set up a GoFundMe page to help with the expenses caused by the illness. Rogers has medical insurance which will last a few more months, according to Morgan; but medical bills are mounting. Rogers will have to undergo rehabilitation with prosthetics, as well as home and car renovations.

CNN reports that few people die from Rocky Mountain Spotted Fever anymore, but the key is treating it within the first five days of exposure with antibiotics.

Furthermore, “Not every tick bite leads to the disease. Only 1% to 3% of ticks carry the bacteria called Rickettsia rickettsii, according to Oklahoma’s health department, and to transmit it, the host tick usually has to bite for four to six hours,” according to CNN.

h/t: Fox 13

Advertisement – story continues below