DAR President: You are appreciated

Loretta Maxwell, president of the Elbridge Gerry Chapter of the National Society of Daughters of the American Revolution presents a Certificate of Valor to to SPEC. 5 Donald Frank Masin, a Vietnam veteran. (Callie Jones / Sterling Journal-Advocate)

STERLING — Sterling Public Library said thank you to those who have served our country with their annual Veterans Soup Lunch on Friday.

Veterans and their families were invited to enjoy bean soup, cornbread and cake at the special celebration. The meal was served by the Elbridge Gerry Chapter of the National Society of Daughters of the American Revolution. This was the third year the local DAR chapter has joined with SPL to put on the event.

"We just want to show them that they are appreciated," said Patty Ament, a member of the local DAR chapter, about why they continue to do this lunch every year.

A variety of military books were on display at Sterling Public Library's Veterans Soup Lunch. (Callie Jones / Sterling Journal-Advocate)

The annual lunch fits right in with the goals of the organization. For more than a century, the members of the NSDAR have dedicated themselves to historical preservation, promotion of education, and encouragement of patriotic endeavor.

During the lunch, there was a special focus on Vietnam veterans, as members of the DAR presented them with Certificates of Valor. Ament said they wanted to show them the appreciation that they didn't get when they returned home from the Vietnam War.

In addition, Loretta Maxwell, president of the local DAR, gave them a special thank you to all the veterans as they enjoyed their meal.

Advertisement

"It's very good to see all of you and to tell you how much each and every one of you, not just the servicemen, but the families of the servicemen too, because it's a sacrifice for everyone, not just the serviceman, but for their families," she told those present at the lunch.

Maxwell also read a message from the chapter.

Veterans enjoy bean soup, cornbread and cake at Sterling Public Library's annual Veterans Soup Lunch Friday. (Callie Jones / Sterling Journal-Advocate)

"Freedom always comes at a price. Throughout the years, courageous and brave service men and women have valiantly served and fought to protect and preserve the freedoms we hold dear. We salute you, each one of you, and honor the families of the veterans. No matter if you served in the Army, Air Force, Navy, Marines or Coast Guard, or where you were stationed, we are forever grateful for what you have sacrificed for us. Veterans of any war, your sweat and tears are not forgotten by the members of the Daughters of the American Revolution. Thank you for your service, we appreciate you."

Callie Jones: 970-526-9286, cjones@journal-advocate.com