Buy Photo Sgt. Joseph Hankins led the investigation when it began. Manchester police discuss a missing person case involving Vietnam Veteran William Schmidbauer who dissappeared from his Manchester home on September 23, 2007. Manchester, NJ September, 3 2014 Doug Hood/Staff Photographer (Photo: Gannett)Buy Photo

William Schmidbauer served his country in the jungles of Vietnam, where he was wounded by shrapnel in a tank explosion.

Unsolved mystery: What happened to Fatima Lopez?

The memories of combat continued for a long time afterward.

More than a quarter of a century after he retired from a 20-year military career, Schmidbauer battled depression and seemed obsessed with the welfare of U.S. soldiers fighting in Iraq and Afghanistan.

Unsolved mystery: Who killed Isabel Marcelino-Sanchez?

Then, one day in 2007, he would tell a neighbor he wanted to "end it all.''

Two days later, he vanished.

There was no note and no body. There were no signs of suicide, homicide or misadventure.

Whatever happened, Schmidbauer didn't leave a trace.

Almost seven years after his disappearance, Schmidbauer's family continues to look for answers. And detectives are taking a fresh look at the case in hopes of solving the mystery of the missing veteran.

"I cannot live the rest of my life without knowing what happened to my father,'' the Army veteran's daughter, Lisa Schmidbauer-Curcio, said recently.

His wife, Jean, died not knowing what became of her husband.

"My mother passed away suddenly in April, and that has compounded this for me,'' Schmidbauer-Curcio said. "I live with the unknown with my father. It will be seven years on Sept. 23 that he was missing.''

When William Schmidbauer disappeared that day in 2007, he and Jean had been married for 41 years. About a year before, they had moved from their home in the Manahawkin section of Stafford to a cooperative unit on Robin Street in the Cedar Glen West retirement complex in Manchester.

Jean Schmidbauer would take frequent trips to Atlantic City, but her husband didn't care to go with her and instead would sit on the front porch of his new neighbor, Dan Fuchek, said Manchester police Sgt. Joseph Hankins.

Schmidbauer would talk daily with Fuchek about the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan, said Detective Christopher Hemhauser, who now is assigned to the case, along with Detective Adam Guker, both of the Manchester Police Department.

"He was upset about the guys coming back from the war, that the guys were going to come back all messed up, and he was worried about that,'' Hemhauser said. "He was concerned for the (post-traumatic stress disorder).''

Schmidbauer himself suffered from PTSD.

The native of Kenilworth joined the U.S. Army at 18, right out of high school. Five years later, he wooed away Jean from her onetime fiancé and convinced her to marry him instead, promising to show her the world as he pursued a military career, Schmidbauer-Curcio said.

The couple first met when they were both 14 and attending Jonathan Dayton Regional High School in Springfield, Schmidbauer-Curcio said.

Her father served with the 11th Armored Cavalry Regiment in Vietnam as an infantryman in the jungle, she said.

"It was during that time when he earned his Purple Heart," she said.

Schmidbauer's service also took him to Germany and all over the United States, as he and Jean raised Lisa, now 44, of Basking Ridge, and their son, Johann, now 46, of Middlesex, the father of the Schmidbauers' four grandchildren.

When Schmidbauer retired from the military in 1981, the family settled down in Jean's hometown of Berkeley Heights. But his transition to civilian life wasn't smooth.

"He had a really difficult time adjusting to civilian life, and that's when his PTSD manifested, so it wasn't an easy transition,'' Schmidbauer-Curcio said. "He handled it as best as he could."

In the months and weeks leading up to his disappearance, William Schmidbauer's difficulties seemed to worsen, perhaps brought on by physical ailments, including chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, for which he needed an inhaler, his daughter said.

When she came from Sioux Falls, South Dakota to visit her parents in August 2007, her father seemed depressed and irritable, and she found out he had been missing his PTSD support group meetings, she said.

Hankins recalled Jean Schmidbauer telling him that her husband's medication had been changed around that time, and it seemed to cause an imbalance that agitated him.

Two days before he went missing, a Friday, William Schmidbauer spent time on his neighbor's porch, Hankins said. He had his typical conversation with Dan Fuchek about his concern for the soldiers. Then, the conversation took an alarming turn.

"Before he went missing, Bill told Dan he wanted to end it all,'' Hankins said.

"Dan reminded Bill he had grandkids and a lot of good things in his life,'' Hankins said. "Bill told Dan, 'OK, I won't bring it up again.' ''

That Saturday, William Schmidbauer visited his neighbor while Jean was in Atlantic City, and again he spoke about his concern for the soldiers, detectives said.

Schmidbauer-Curcio said she called her father that day and sensed something was terribly wrong.

"I was very concerned, and I called my mother after the conversation with my father, crying, because I was really concerned. He really just wasn't himself," she said.

Buy Photo Housing complex on Robin Street where the subject lived. Manchester police discuss a missing person case involving Vietnam Veteran William Schmidbauer who dissappeared from his Manchester home on September 23, 2007. Manchester, NJ September, 3 2014 Doug Hood/Staff Photographer (Photo: Gannett)

That night, Jean went to bed about 11 p.m., as her husband was watching television, Guker said. The couple slept in separate bedrooms, detectives said.

"He came into her room and said, 'good night,' and that was the last time she saw him," Guker said.

Around 5:30 a.m. on Sunday, Sept. 23, Jean Schmidbauer heard her husband get up, but she stayed in bed until around 9:30 or 10 a.m., Hemhauser said. When she did get up, that day's Asbury Park Press had been brought inside and was on the kitchen table but her husband wasn't around, according to Hankins.

Wherever he went, he left behind his car, keys, credit cards, cash, inhaler and medication and two items he never went anywhere without — his cigarettes and veteran's identification card, detectives said. He didn't own a cellular phone, they said.

Jean called her daughter about 3 p.m.

"She said, 'Lisa, your father,' and I collapsed to the ground,'' Schmidbauer-Curcio recalled.

At 4:01 p.m. Jean Schmidbauer called the police, and the first of many massive searches for her husband ensued.

Police, firefighters and dogs searched woods and areas surrounding Schmidbauer's home before nightfall. It would be the first of some 15 unsuccessful searches, including one by air, between that day and Oct. 6, when the effort was called off due to the onset of hunting season, detectives said.

Detectives searched the Schmidbauers' home the day after he went missing, but found no clues to where he may have gone, nor any weapons. Schmidbauer-Curcio said her father hadn't owned a gun since he retired from the military.

Leads from a national database on missing persons led nowhere, as did checks of all the hospitals in New Jersey, area homeless shelters, Tent City in Lakewood, and taxi and bus companies, detectives said.

Since his disappearance, no one has applied for credit or a driver's license in Schmidbauer's name, nor has he shown up in any Atlantic City casinos, detectives said.

The Naval Criminal Investigative Service believes it is unlikely Schmidbauer's disappearance had anything to do with his service or military secrets, Hankins said. Polygraph examiners administered tests to Jean and Johan Schmidbauer and didn't think either had anything to do with William Schmidbauer's disappearance, he said.

Hankins said he thinks Schmidbauer may have received a ride from someone to an area where investigators haven't searched.

"Maybe they will read the (Asbury Park) Press and will call up these investigators and solve this case,'' he said.

Meanwhile, Schmidbauer-Curcio said she holds out little hope her father is still alive, but wants to find out what happened to him.

"I may not find all the answers, but I need to find my father,'' she said.

Kathleen Hopkins: Khopkins@app.com

William Schmidbauer is described as about 6-foot-2 and 170 pounds, with graying, brown hair and hazel eyes. He wore upper dentures and was a chain smoker.

Anyone with information should call Manchester police at 732-657-2009. Email tips to Chemhauser@manchestertwp.com and Aguker@manchestertwp.com or anonymously through the police department's website, Manchesterpolicenj.com.

Read or Share this story: http://on.app.com/1s0OxB3