WEST HARTFORD — The board of education has unanimously approved a new four-year contract with school paraprofessionals.

The contract, which runs from July 1, 2014, through June 30, 2018, calls for a 2 percent wage increase in the first year, 2.25 percent in the second year, and 2.5 percent in each of the last two years.

Rick Ledwith, executive director of human resources, said the school system's 200 paraprofessionals, more than half of whom work with special education students, earn $11 to $15 an hour. The West Hartford Federation of Educational Personnel, the paraprofessionals' union, approved the contract this spring, and Tuesday night marked the first meeting of the board of education since the plan was approved.

Ledwith said the schools appreciate the hard work of paraprofessionals, who "do an incredible job of supporting student learning."

Board member Bruce Putterman said he wanted to point out "how valuable and unsung" paraprofessionals' work is and that "oftentimes it's physical work, it is largely unrewarded work, unrecognized work and it's not very well-compensated work."

The contract also includes an increase in the bus monitor stipend from $10 per run to $12.50 per run in 2014, $13 in 2015, and $13.50 in 2017.

Employee health care contributions will increase under the contract from 11.5 percent to 14 percent for the HMO plan, and from 16.5 percent to 17.5 percent for the PPO plan. Co-pays will also increase slightly and the contract introduces an optional high deductible health plan with a health savings account. The plan includes a deductible of $1,500 for individuals and $3,000 for families. Employee contributions will be 16 percent of the premium for the plan, with 50 percent funded by the board.

With the advent of the Affordable Care Act, Ledwith said, it's possible that the total cost of the group health plan could trigger the excise tax, the so-called Cadillac tax, so the contract includes an agreement that parties will reopen the contract for negotiations if that occurs.

The contract also increases employee pension contributions from 3 percent to 4 percent, and eliminates sick pay at retirement for new employees.

The changes will result in "significant long-term savings for the town over the next decades," Ledwith said.

The contract also eliminates paid snow days and will implement a paraprofessional evaluation plan. A committee will convene to craft the evaluation criteria and the plan is expected to be implemented over the course of the next few months, Ledwith said.