Bloomfield, IA

An amazing act of sportsmanship - led to a disqualification!

"No one from our school had ever won a district champ. To tell you the truth I had tears of joy when I finished. It had all paid off this one moment," Davis County High School senior Zach Hougland said.

It's a moment that didn't last long. While Zach Hougland was hanging out near the finish line, he spotted a rival runner - Garrett Hinson of Mediapolis - going down.

"Breathing extremely hard. Didn't want to see that - pictured myself in his shoes. I yelled, 'Is anyone gonna help him?', so I just jumped in and started walking beside him, so I gave him my hand and gave him a push to the finish line and he finished on his own," Hougland said.

He never imagined what would come next - a disqualification. The rule states no runner can help or receive aid from another runner. Despite pleas from fans and coaches, the officials held firm.

"All that work for nothing. I was devastated," Hougland said.

The Iowa High School Athletic Association uses its rules from a national federation. Bud Legg of the ISAA says he can't change Saturday's ruling, it was the proper call, and his hands are tied. Legg added that any future rule change would have to come from the national federation that sets the rules.

The good news? Zach's team still qualified for state - barely, and he'll get his chance at a medal Saturday in Fort Dodge. And that runner that he helped will be there cheering for his new friend.

"He risked his chances at state for helping, a pretty crazy thing for him to do. He's a pretty good guy for doing that. That's amazing," Hinson said.

From KCCI

General {{Title}} Remove Change News General Courts Web Only Crime Outdoors Events Center Non-Homepage Boredom Busters Pipeline Positively KELOLAND Technology Hunger Affordable Care Act Shops Flooding Remembering 9/11 Drought JazzFest Spring Storm Honor Flight Spencer Anniversary

DoApp Health News Business News Sports

Agriculture Markets Livestock Crops Politics

HealthBeat Cancer Children's Health Heart Health Wellness & Nutrition General Health Beat Women's Health RX Resources What's Going Around OTC Diabetes Recalls Dental Health Men's Health

Politics South Dakota Legislature Budget Congress Taxes General Local Campaign President US Senate New Laws US House Iowa Ballot Issues Local Races Minnesota Gubernatorial

Education Funding College Elementary High School Pre K School Supplies Middle School

Sports Professional College High School Sports Zone Headlines Summit League Tournament Olympics

Business Industry Your Money Matters Development Gas & Energy Legislation Economy/Stocks Employment General Health Care Technology Education Funding Tourism Banking/Finance Housing Transportation Insurance Meetings & Events Retail & Restaurants All Industries On The Move Shops Agriculture

Featured Stories Eye on KELOLAND Inside KELOLAND

Weather Snow Forecast Records Rain Flooding Drought WX Corner General

World News

Investigates GEAR UP

Sponsored Done

© 2016 KELOLAND TV. All Rights Reserved.