Though the official filing period won’t start until next month, members of the Keene City Council already have their eyes on a mayoral race that could be one of the more competitive contests for the office in recent memory.

By mid-June, City Councilor Kris E. Roberts had thrown his hat in the ring, saying he wanted to inject a little competition into the race.

A week later, sitting Mayor Kendall W. Lane made it official: He’ll be running for a third term.

Against Lane, a Keene native who worked for decades as an attorney in the city and as a N.H. state representative before running for mayor in 2011, Roberts has shaken up a race that, for several election cycles, has yielded few surprises.

The Wyoming native was the sole supporter of the proposal to keep the Keene Pumpkin Festival going before its cancellation, and has been a vocal presence as vice chairman of the city council’s finance and personnel committee.

A retired lieutenant colonel with the U.S. Marines, Roberts is in his fourth term as a Keene city councilor. He also represents Keene in the N.H. House as a Democrat, and serves as a member of the Keene Board of Education.

Keene’s mayor presides over city council meetings, makes appointments to committees and directs certain city priorities.

Councilors say they’re looking forward to a debate between two candidates, who are on similar footing in terms of experience.

“They’re both equally qualified,” councilor Randy L. Filiaut said Friday. “I don’t think the city would lose either way.”

The last time Filiault said he remembers a strongly contested a race was the 2007 election.

In that race, former city councilor and planning board chairman Bill Beauregard won a crowded primary and ran against six-year city councilor Dale Pregent to fill the seat left open when four-term Mayor Michael E.J. Blastos retired.

Since then, competition has been slim.

“It’s been a bit since we had two equally qualified candidates,” Filiault said.

Pregent ran unopposed for a second term and remained mayor until 2011.

When Lane, then a city councilor, ran for the office in 2011, his only opponent was Cheshire TV producer Rick Blood, who told The Sentinel that year that he was running only to prevent a one-man race.

In 2013, Lane won a second term against Darryl W. Perry, who received only 168 votes to Lane’s 1,683.

“Competition is always good,” Councilor Bettina A. Chadbourne said Tuesday. “I think there should be more people running in general for the mayor’s position, and for City Council.”

Chadbourne said she welcomes new candidates but has not officially decided which candidate for mayor she will endorse. She said she believes the 15-member council is split on who it will support.

Filiault said he remains undecided.

“I’m kind of torn down the middle,” he said.

Councilor Mitchell H. Greenwald said he’s prepared to support Lane in his run for re-election.

“I think Kendall has been an excellent mayor,” Greenwald said. “I see no reason to make a change.”

“It’s not a slap at Kris, I’m just looking at what the best options are.”

Either way, Filiault said, “it’s going to be interesting, definitely.”

Nathaniel M. Stout, a former city councilor, said he is glad to see a healthy contest among mayoral candidates.

“It’s important to have good circulation at that level,” he said.

He added that any candidates for mayor will need to focus on the looming task of replacing longtime City Manager John A. MacLean, who announced last month that he will retire in October after 20 years.

“The fact that they’re filling John’s position should be foremost in any mayoral candidate’s mind,” Stout said.

Stout, who as a councilor pushed for a campaign financing ordinance that would have required mayoral candidates to disclose their funding sources, said he doesn’t see this year’s race as particularly partisan.

While Lane is a Republican and Roberts a Democrat, Stout says he sees both as being fairly “middle-of-the road.”

But partisan or not, he said Roberts’ decision to run will make the race fun to follow.

“I’m excited to know that there will be some conversation,” he said.

The final decision will be up to city voters, who will go to the polls in November to cast ballots for both mayor and city council members.