The Studio E program, a national art therapy program for adults with epilepsy, is offering a five-week program in June and July. It's the second Studio E program to be held in Virginia, and the first on the Peninsula.

The program, funded by Lundbeck Pharmaceuticals in partnership with the Epilepsy Foundation of America, is free to participants, who must be 18 and older and have epilepsy. Epilepsy is a chronic brain disorder, the hallmark of which is recurrent, unprovoked seizures, according to the Epilepsy Foundation of Virginia website. Many people with epilepsy may have more than one type of seizure.

Participants work with art therapists in a group setting to create artistic pieces using a variety of media, but art talent is not a prerequisite.

Newport News art therapist Danielle Jweid, who will lead the local Studio E program for a second year, described art therapy as a combination of psychotherapy and creative expression using art materials. "It will help with emotional stressors and they'll take away different modalities for stress release in the future," she said in an interview last year, noting that the class also acts as a support group for people who often feel isolated.

The series will be held from noon to 3 p.m. on Saturdays, June 13, 20, 27, and July 11, 18 at The Denbigh House, 12725 McManus Blvd., Suite 2 E, Newport News.

To sign up for Studio E, contact Patty Hood, efva.hr@gmail.com, 757-652-6565, by June 10. For more information about the program, visit http://www.efva.org.

Protect your skin

More than 3.5 million cases of skin cancer are diagnosed in the United States every year, according to Patient First, which has locations providing primary care and urgent care on the Peninsula. The group passed along these tips on how to protect skin from the sun's damaging ultraviolet, UV, rays:

•Always use a broad spectrum sunscreen with a minimum of 30 SPF, even when it's cloudy. Reapply it at least every two hours and after swimming;

•Wide-brimmed hats help shade your neck and face but do not offer complete protection. Use sunscreen on these sensitive skin areas;

•Wear lightweight sun-protective clothing. Long sleeves and long pants help protect skin;

•Take advantage of shade whenever possible;

•The sun's UV rays are most intense between 10 a.m. and 4 p.m.

OTC contraception

Women's health providers are opposing legislation that would make oral contraception available over the counter because it would remove its no co-pay coverage guaranteed under the Affordable Care Act.

Mark S. DeFrancesco, MD, president of the American Congress of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, ACOG, released the following statement last week:

"Access to contraception is essential for women's health, and evidence has repeatedly proven that oral contraceptives are safe for use over the counter. "The Affordable Care Act removed many barriers to preventive care that keeps women healthy. By making contraceptives available to women without a copay, it has truly increased access to contraception, thereby decreasing unintended pregnancies, and allowing women to better plan their futures.

Unfortunately, instead of improving access, this bill (S.1438) would actually make more women have to pay for their birth control, and for some women, the cost would be prohibitive."

More online

Follow the blog at dailypress.com/healthnotes. Find more health news at dailypress.com/health; on Twitter @dphealthnotes or on Facebook at facebook.com/dphealth. Sign up for a free weekly health e-letter, The Health Report, at dailypress.com/services/newsletter/register.