TRUMP: CONGRESS MUST “STAND UP AND DEFEAT THIS RAW POWER GRAB”

|| By FITSNEWS || Billionaire real estate mogul and reality television star Donald Trump is the latest GOP presidential contender to come out against “Obamatrade” – a backdoor effort by U.S. president Barack Obama‘s to endorse foreign currency manipulation, subsidize the outsourcing of U.S. jobs and erode America’s borders and its rule of law.

Last week, former Arkansas governor Mike Huckabee announced his opposition to the deal.

“Some in the Republican Party are working overtime to hand more power to President Obama,” Trump says in a new radio ad. “These same people are turning their backs on the American workers and businesses. It’s unbelievable.”

Produced by Americans for Limited Government – which has been leading the fight against this crony capitalist monstrosity – the sixty-second radio spot will begin airing in early voting South Carolina and New Hampshire beginning Thursday. A national rollout will follow – directly listeners to the website Obamatrade.com.

“I learned a long time ago a bad deal is far worse than no deal at all,” Trump says in the spot, calling Obamatrade a “bad, bad deal for American businesses, for workers, for taxpayers.”

“It’s a huge set of handouts for a few insiders who don’t even care about our great America,” he notes.

Trump is 100 percent correct …

“Obamatrade” is a two-part deal. The first part is “trade promotion authority” (TPA) – or “Fast Track” – which refers to the ability of Obama to unilaterally write and enforce the second part, which is the “Trans-Pacific Parternship” (TPP) – a massive trade deal with Pacific Rim nations.

The former is basically a blank check to the Obama administration to impose the latter – a special interest, crony capitalist bonanza that would benefit liberal Hollywood elites and wealthy bailout recipients on Wall Street at the expense of U.S. workers.

Trump called on members of Congress to “stand up and defeat this raw power grab.”

“With the dismal Obama track record why should a Republican Congress give him more power – and gut the Constitution to do it,” Trump said. “It’s crazy.”

“This is a game changer in the debate over fast track trade authority,” said Rick Manning, president of ALG. “Mr. Trump’s business acumen and expertise makes him a unique and powerful voice whom America trusts to tell them the truth.”

Wanna hear the ad for yourself? CLICK HERE.

As we’ve repeatedly noted, Obamatrade would be bad for America (see HERE and HERE). And especially bad for South Carolina (HERE and HERE). Which is why we have called on our state’s “conservative” congressional delegation to oppose it – joining those responsible members of the U.S. Congress who have already taken a stand.

We’re glad to see yet another presidential candidate sound the alarm on this important issue …