Reid Vows to Give McConnell a Taste of His Own Aprops Medicine Andrew Harnik/AP What happened:



Harry Reid is back to his rabble-rousing ways in the Senate, promising to put a stop to the Republican majority’s plans by blocking any funding bills that don’t raise domestic spending in tandem with planned hikes in defense spending. After a closed-door meeting Tuesday, Reid, D-Nev., said Democrats would hold together to prevent the body from moving onto any of the 12 annual appropriations bills if Republicans aren’t willing to negotiate.



Why it matters:



President Barack Obama has already vowed to veto any of the appropriations bills that don’t meet the same requirements Reid has set, but it’s better for him politically if Democrats prevent them from ever reaching his desk. “We will not vote to proceed to the Defense appropriations bill or any appropriations bills until Republicans have sat down at the table and figured out with us how we’re going to properly fund the Defense Department … and our families’ domestic needs,” Sen. Chuck Schumer, D-N.Y., told reporters after the meeting.



For his part, Majority Leader Mitch McConnell blasted the plan, despite having led his own caucus down a very similar road while in the minority in the past several years. Ultimately, the final goal seems to be a repeat of the deal struck in 2013 by Rep. Paul Ryan, R-Wis., and Sen. Patty Murray, D-Wash., to circumvent the spending caps set by sequestration in 2011.



The Needle Moves on Immigration Reform

The Needle Moves on Immigration Reform Saul Loeb/AFP/Getty Images What happened:



A new poll out this week from Pew Research Center shows that a whopping 72 percent of Americans believe immigrants in the U.S. illegally should be allowed to stay. Of that group, about two-thirds (42 percent of the public overall) believe those immigrants should be provided a path to citizenship, and the remaining third (26 percent) think they should be limited to permanent residency. Just 27 percent of the public don’t believe the approximately 11 million people living in the U.S. illegally should be allowed to stay.



Why it mattered:



The news comes at the same time as a small but noticeable groundswell toward legislative steps for reform. Lawmakers and activists alike are floating proposals that, perhaps for the first time in several years, stand a chance of making it through Congress and becoming law. First among those, paired with increases in border security, are guest worker programs that would help bring low-skill workers to the U.S. legally and help keep the people trained in U.S. schools in the country after they complete their educations.

Massive Data Breach Highlights Failure to Pass Cybersecurity Legislation

Massive Data Breach Highlights Failure to Pass Cybersecurity Legislation Mark Wilson/Getty Images What happened:



Chinese hackers stole the personal data of more than 4 million current and former federal workers in December, landing a significant blow to the government’s cybersecurity systems. The hack, detected in April and revealed to the public Thursday, was possibly the third or fourth significant theft of federal data in the last year, although it is not clear what foreign hackers or their alleged state sponsors may want to do with the information.



Why it mattered:



The incident was a serious slap in the face to lawmakers, who have tried without success to advance cybersecurity legislation. “Today’s reported breach is part of a troubling pattern by this agency in failing to secure the personal data of federal employees – the second major breach in a year,” said Sen. Mark Warner, D-Va., a member of the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence. “Cyberattacks present a critical threat to our national security and our economy. We cannot afford to keep dragging our feet in addressing the escalating threats posed by hackers out to steal individuals’ personal information.”





Senate Scrambles to Patch NSA Lapse With USA Freedom Act

Senate Scrambles to Patch NSA Lapse With USA Freedom Act Patrick Semansk/AP What happened:



It took several weeks and a lapse in the National Security Agency’s surveillance capabilities, but the Senate on Tuesday easily passed the USA Freedom Act. The reform bill renewed the controversial Section 215 and two other provisions of the Patriot Act, while blocking the NSA from collecting Americans’ phone data in bulk.



Why it matters:



The Patriot Act remains mostly intact, but thanks to Edward Snowden's revelations the public mood has undeniably shifted away from giving the surveillance authorities carte blanche in the name of security. Majority Leader Mitch McConnell, Kentucky's senior senator, was embarrassed when he insisted on leaving the NSA unchallenged and was abandoned by the majority of his colleagues, who came down in favor of reform.



It was more of a mixed bag for Kentucky’s junior senator, presidential candidate Rand Paul, who took a stand against the government’s spying capabilities. Paul made an enemy of a number of his colleagues while boosting his bona fides to the libertarian skeptics who make up his support base nationally. "Government's bulk collection of records is going to end," he said Sunday. Two hours later, it did. But it was back up and running two days later.







Feds Raid Aaron Schock's Campaign Office