People Moves of the Week: Hoberman, Platinum Equity, KeyBanc

Lori Hoberman launches law firm; Platinum names new head of global business development; KeyBanc hires Jeff Geuther and Larry Ellis as managing directors

AGC Partners — Gee Leung has joined the Boston investment bank's Silicon Valley, California office as a partner in the Internet and digital media group. Over the course of 16 years in banking, Leung has advised a range of clients, including Viacom Inc. (Nasdaq: VIA) and YP Holdings. Previously, Gee worked with boutique banks Mesa, Friedman Billings Ramsey, and Montgomery & Co. He began his career at Salomon Brothers, which was purchased in 1997 by Citigroup Global Markets Holdings Inc., a unit of Citigroup (NYSE: C).

BKM Capital Partners — The private equity firm has announced two new hires. Michael Hernstad and Charlie Ittner have joined BKM from Colony Capital and Platinum Equity, respectively. As executive staff fund management experts, Hernstad will serve as BKM's director of finance and accounting, while Ittner oversees fund structures as director of investor relations. Separately, BKM announced that its board of advisers now includes former Morgan Stanley CEO John Mack; former president of equitable real estate investment management Paul Dolinoy; and RCP Advisors co-founder Jeff Gehl. BKM co-founders Brian Malliet and Nima Taghavi will remain on the board.

Hall & Company — The Orange County, California-based accounting firm has named Jeremy Wheeler director of audit services. The move coincides with the firm's expansion efforts into the technology, consumer markets, manufacturing and real estate sectors. Wheeler previously worked for more than 12 years at the Orange County office of KPMG LLP.

Hoberman Law Group PLLC — Lori Hoberman, an attorney who specializes in venture capital-backed startups and was formerly a partner at Chadbourne & Parke, has opened a New York law firm. As head of Hoberman Law Group, she will continue advising entrepreneurs. Hoberman currently chairs the NYC Chapter of the MIT Enterprise Forum and serves as a mentor to 37 Angels, a network of women investors. In 2014, she helped jumpstart a program to teach entrepreneurship to high school students.

Littlejohn & Co. — The private equity firm's portfolio company GSE Holdings Inc., an environmental protection service, has named Robert Preston CEO. Preston will also join as president and chairman of the Chicago-based company’s board of director. Prior to joining GSE, Preston served as CEO of Davis-Standard LLC, a company specializing in plastics processing. He replaces Chuck Sorrentino, who will be retiring. Littlejohn took over GSE in 2014 through a bankruptcy process. GSE filed Chapter 11 in May.

KeyBanc Capital Markets Inc. — The investment banking arm of Cleveland-based KeyCorp (NYSE: KEY) has tapped Steve Schauer as a managing director in the utility, power and renewable energy group. Steve will be based in Boston. Schauer, a 24-year veteran of energy finance, most recently served as CEO of Westerly Wind LLC, a wind power developer owned by US Renewables Group. Separately, KeyBanc announced a Southwest expansion effort with new hires to the bank's Houston office. Jeff Geuther and Larry Ellis (pictured) have joined as managing directors, with Brian Hanley and Eric Appel as directors. Each hire was previously with Birmingham, Alabama-based BBVA Compass.

Platinum Equity — The Beverly Hills, California-based private equity firm brought in David Boutry as a principal. Boutry will oversee Platinum's global business development team. Previously with Deutsche Bank, Boutry has worked at several other investment firms, including Bear Sterns & Co. Inc., Westbrook Partners LLC, Merrill Lynch & Co. and Chase Manhattan Bank. His hiring comes on the heels of two other principals being named to Platinum: Randy Teo and Soo Jin Goh. Based in Singapore, Teo and Goh are expected to help drive deal flow in Asia.

Seyfarth Shaw LLP — The Chicago-based law firm has added four partners to its litigation department. WilliamBerkowitz, BrandonBigelow, JamesMcGrath and JohnSkelton have each left their posts at Bingham McCutchen to join the Boston branch of Seyfarth. The four lawyers focus on representing manufacturers and franchisors in disputes with their franchisees, as well as counseling clients on antitrust compliance issues and antitrust aspects of mergers and acquisitions.

For more information on related topics, visit the following: