MCC division chair shares love of science at event

This fossil shows the jaw of a mosasaur, which lived around 70 million years ago during the Cretaceous Period, according to Todd Schneider, Morgan Community College Arts and Sciences Division chair. This was only one of the fossils Schneider shared during his Artists and Experts presentation Feb. 12, at Fort Morgan Library & Museum. ( Jenni Grubbs / Fort Morgan Times )

Morgan Community College Arts and Sciences Division Chair Todd Schneider holds up a model tyrannosaurus rex skull. Fossils, like the many spread out on the table, and how and when they were created was the topic he chose for his Artists and Experts presentation Feb. 12 at Fort Morgan Library & Museum. (Jenni Grubbs / Fort Morgan Times)

Todd Schneider is a self-proclaimed "science nerd."

A long-time science teacher and now the chair of Morgan Community College's Division of Arts and Sciences, Schneider was the featured speaker at Fort Morgan Library & Museum's Feb. 12 Artists and Experts program.

"Probably the most fun part of my job is doing workshops with kids," he told the small group of adults gathered for the evening program.

But the older age of the participants did not stop Schneider from geeking out and having fun with his audience.

After all, he was talking about fossils and showing lots of examples of them.

"My philosophy of how we teach is kind of the same with young kids and older ones," he said. "Engage them again and again. The more hands-on you can get, the better it will be."

This saber-toothed cat's gaping jaw was one of the show-stoppers at Todd Schneider's Artists and Experts presentation about fossils Feb. 12 at Fort Morgan Library & Museum. Schneider, a self-proclaimed "science nerd," is the chair of the Morgan Community College Division of Arts and Sciences. (Jenni Grubbs / Fort Morgan Times)

Schneider's Artists and Experts presentation was very hands-on, with examples of everything from trilobites to tyrannosaurus skulls for people to hold and examine up close.

There even was some fossilized dinosaur dung in Schneider's crates.

That brought some giggles and weird faces from the participants, but the speaker assured people that as a fossil, it did not smell and no longer carried any bacteria.

Schneider also talked about how to find fossils.

"When we're looking for fossils, we look in sedimentary rocks," he said.

That's where the plants and animals remains got imprinted as the rocks formed from sand, minerals and those remains.

"The trick is when we start looking at fossils, we're looking at what's left in the mineral deposits," he explained.

As plants and animals' habitats changed, they had to either adapt or die, and sometimes that led to fossils being formed from what was left behind.

"That's true of all the fossils we find, especially dinosaurs," Schneider said.

Some plants and animals have changed greatly over the eons; others are not that different. There have been at least five mass extinctions in the distant past that scientists know about from the fossil record.

Fossilized dinosaur dung has no smell and does not spread any germs, but the chunk of it shown here in an Artists and Experts attendee's hands brought some giggles and funny faces, like the one Library/Museum Educator Chandra McCoy is making, to the small crowd at Todd Schneider's presentation on fossils Feb. 12 at Fort Morgan Library & Museum. (Jenni Grubbs / Fort Morgan Times)

Schneider took his audience through the past with the fossils he brought, moving from a 500 million-year-old trilobite all the way up through saber-toothed cat skulls from 10,000 years ago.

He showed off a 40-60-million-year-old shark's tooth, a megalodon tooth, shells fossilized in rocks, various fish fossils, a 70-million-year-old mosasaur (like a crocodile) jaw outline, 4 million-year-old scallop fossils, a 10,000-year-old giant worm fossil, the tyrannosaurus skull, a velociraptor tooth and the fossilized dinosaur dung, among others.

Holding up the big saber-toothed cat's skull in his hand, he pushed it forward at the audience.

"What a beast to be coming at you," he said.

Schneider also showed off some miniature hominid skulls, showing how humans' early ancestors evolved and encouraging people to look at the differences and notice the changes from one to the next.

"Neanderthals and homo sapiens lived at the same time, but they counteracted each other," Schneider said. "They did not get along."

He also pointed out that part of archeology is making sure not to "put our perspective on what we find," especially when talking about hominids.

Schneider also used the geological clock as a means of giving people perspective on the history of all life on this planet.

If one looks at all of history on Earth, "we've been around for the last 10 minutes of this week. Dinosaurs were here for five days, and 10 years ago there was nothing."

Schneider was not the only one geeking out during his presentation, which drew lots of questions and interest from the small group gather to listen and learn about fossils.

Jenni Grubbs: jgrubbs@fmtimes.com, Twitter @JenniGrubbs or tout.com/jennigrubbs