Former University of Colorado distance running runner Jenny Simpson, competing in one of the strongest 1500-meter women’s fields ever assembled, finished a disappointing 11th at the world championships on Tuesday in Beijing after losing a shoe midway through the race.

Simpson’s time of 4 minutes, 16.28 seconds at the Bird’s Nest was slowed after the heel of her left shoe was clipped off with about 700 meters left in the race. She eventually kicked it away 100 meters later, and losing it ended any chance of a strong finish. Her foot was scarred and bloodied after the race.

“(Genzebe) Dibaba went by, and about 700 meters to go, the heel of my shoe got caught by somebody and just slipped off,” she told Universal Sports. “There’s some pretty intense jostling, and that’s where I started to lose half of it. And I was clenching my toes as hard as possible just try to keep that toe box of my shoe in, and it just wouldn’t stay on. So about 600 meters to go … I finally give up and just kick it off.

“I didn’t want to kick it into the crowd of people and take anyone else out because it’s, like, terrible for me, but I didn’t want to ruin anyone else’s race. I hope it didn’t impede anyone. I tried to run without a shoe as long as I could, but I just really couldn’t, like, get up on my toes and start kicking.”

Dibaba of Ethiopia — the world record holder in the event — took control halfway through after an extremely slow start, the kind typical of championship finals, finishing in 4:08.09 — a time that would have been even faster had she not pulled up in the last 15 meters to celebrate.

Kenya’s Faith Kipyegon was second, .87 seconds back from her, and Sifan Hassan of the Netherlands was third, 1.25 seconds behind.

Shannon Rowbury, who set the American record in this event earlier this year, finished seventh in 4:12.39. Both Rowbury and Simpson took an early lead after the gun and led the field, trotting to a 77-second first 400 meters. Dibaba moved up alongside Simpson and Rowbury with two laps to go and cranked up the pace to lung-searing levels, and both Americans faded into the field.

Simpson — who is coached by Colorado’s Mark Wetmore and Heather Burroughs — won a gold medal in this event in 2011. She had advanced to the final on Sunday after racing to a fifth place finish in the semifinal.

Once she lost her shoe, Simpson debated dropping out to save further damage to her foot, which could hinder training for the rest of her track season.

“That also goes through your mind: I’m probably not going to finish well. Should I stop, because I have other races? Or what?” Simpson told Universal Sports. “I don’t think anyone knows how to handle it until they’re in it. There’s no way I’m not going to finish. But I’m going to run as hard as I can. And as everyone ran by me, I just thought, ‘I’m going to get them next week.'”

Daniel Petty: 303-954-1081, dpetty@denverpost.com or twitter.com/danielpetty