The Topeka Zoo’s as-yet unnamed Sumatran tiger cub will soon have a name.

At a charity auction Saturday evening, Topekans Karlun and David Callanan bought the right to name the only one of three tigers born at the zoo on May 4 that had yet to receive a moniker.

“We have two little girls,” ages 4 and 7, Karlun Callanan said. “It will be fun for them.”

On Sunday, Callanan said her girls had come up with a name but she wasn’t going to share it until the family told the Topeka Zoo.

“We went today and saw one of the bus,” she said.

She said her daughters were excited about the chance to work together and be creative.

The Callanans bid $4,500. The tiger is currently known only as cub No. 2.

Asked what the family might name the cub, David Callanan, cofounder of the company Advisors Excel, said they would have to give it some thought.

“Probably our daughters will decide,” he said.

The auction took place at an annual fundraising gala organized by the Topeka Active 20-30 Club, a local chapter of the international men's professional networking group.

Hundreds of people packed the Regency Ballroom of the Ramada Hotel and Convention Center for the event, at which scores of items were up for auction.

Each year the club holds the gala to benefit children's charities in Topeka and northeast Kansas. Last year the event raised more than $200,000 for charities, gala chairman Mike Maas said.

Fifty percent of the proceeds from auctioning the cub-naming rights will go to children's charities and the rest to preservation efforts for Sumatran tigers living in their native habitat in Indonesia.

Zoo director Brendan Wiley described the arrangement as a win-win situation for two good causes.

“Tigers in the wild need a lot of help,” Wiley said. “Through working with a great community partner,” he said, “now children in our community will benefit, as well as the (Sumatran tiger) species.”

Asked why the zoo chose to auction the naming rights at the gala rather than working on its own and avoiding splitting the proceeds, Wiley said collaboration has the potential to raise more money.

“The Active 20-30 Club Gala is one of the most successful fundraisers in our community,” he said.

He said the zoo’s partnership with 20-30 stems from years earlier, when the two teamed up to auction the right to name a newborn Nile hippopotamus at the annual gala in 2010.

Vision Bank president Gary Yager made the highest bid — $4,200, according to Capital-Journal archives — and named the hippo “Vision.”

Vision Bank then began supporting the zoo in other ways, Wiley said, a relationship that has also helped the zoo build other fundraising connections.

The cub's name will be unveiled Friday.

Her siblings are named Shanti and Raza.

Shanti received her name, which means “peace,” through a public poll. Her sister’s name means “hope” and was chosen by Karis Selk, a seven-year-old who has battled cancer.

Raza also fought for her life, facing difficulties after birth that required zoo staff assistance to help her survive.

The cubs’ mother, Jingga, and father, Rojo, are also residents of the Topeka Zoo.

The three cubs got their first taste of the outdoors earlier this week, in the morning before the zoo opened to visitors.

Sunday morning they will return to their outdoor enclosure, where they can be viewed by the public, and will then spend time outside on a daily basis until at least 10:30 a.m. each morning.

Contact Celia Llopis-Jepsen at (785) 295-1285 or @Celia_LJ on Twitter.