In light of a report that Healthcare.gov might violate consumers' privacy rights by giving their personal data to third-party sites, lawmakers wrote a letter to Department of Health and Human Services Secretary Sylvia Mathews Burwell requesting information about the safety and security of the site.

Members of Congress had previously contacted the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services in September about numerous security vulnerabilities at Healthcare.gov.; they never received a response.

With the most recent letter, the lawmakers don't mince words, saying that overlooking implementation failures has real consequences for those who use the site. In addition, the letter says that a staff analysis reveals that some of those third-party sites include Google, Yahoo, Twitter and Advertising.com.

More than 9.5 million Americans have purchased health insurance or been automatically reenrolled in plans during the second enrollment period for the Affordable Care Act exchanges, according to recent data released by the Department of Health and Human Services.

The lawmakers' letter was released on Friday, less than a week after CMS said in an announcement that it is reviewing its privacy policies. In addition, the Obama administration made changes to Healthcare.gov less than a week after the report about the privacy violations.

CMS admitted in the announcement it does use third-party tools to find out where users of the sites have issues and evaluate website traffic. The agency said it takes concerns about privacy seriously and will launch "a review of our privacy policies, contracts for third-party tools and URL construction. We are looking at whether there are additional steps we should take to improve our efforts."

However, lawmakers don't think that CMS is taking the right steps.

"Instead of making decisions piecemeal, after problems have been discovered, CMS should have a standard protocol that protects consume privacy," they write in the letter to Burwell.

In addition, they pose some questions to Burwell, seeking answers by Feb. 13, which include:

"Has HHS or CMS at any time authorized the sharing or distribution of any consumer information between Healthcare.gov and any company or non-U.S. government group, organization or entity?"

"Has HHS or CMS at any time authorized the sharing or distribution of any consumer information between a company with access to Healthcare.gov consumer information and one or more third-party organizations?"

"Is HHS or CMS aware of any instance, authorized or unauthorized, in which consumer information has been sold traded or otherwise used for any commercial or political purpose?"

To learn more:

- read the lawmakers' letter (.pdf)

- check out the CMS announcement

Related Articles:

Healthcare.gov might be violating consumer privacy

Obama administration made security changes to Healthcare.gov

HHS: 9.5 million Americans have health insurance from public exchanges