It’s a rollicking Saturday night in the cozy basement comedy club at Stairs, a gay bar in New York’s East Village. A series of young comedians are doing their 10-minute bits before an audience of about two dozen millennials. The topics are edgy and funny: race, sex, gluten, kale.

Next up is Caitlin Brodnick, a fresh-faced blonde in heels and a bright red dress. She announces that she’s wearing Spanx. The crowd chuckles. Then she launches into her real topic.

“I’m excited today, guys,” she says, “because I don’t know if anybody else out there is afraid of dying of cancer.”

Yes, she’s going there.

Have you heard the joke about cutting off your boobs to prevent breast cancer? The room is not warming to her shtick. She continues: “I had the Angelina Jolie surgery, you guys, where they removed my breasts because I’m BRCA-positive, so I have a huge chance of getting breast cancer.”

Dead silence.

“I know — it’s so intense,” she says. She soldiers on: “I’m just like Angelina Jolie— we’re like twins. I love her. Except she has Brad Pitt, and I have credit card debt.”

At that, the audience erupts in laughter, and she has the crowd back.

Brodnick can do that. The 30-year-old native of Kensington, Maryland, has made a name for herself in the past couple of years with her very public, poignant and funny openness about finding out that she is BRCA1-positive and then taking the radical step of undergoing a preventive double mastectomy.

At first glance, not so funny, right?

Increasingly, women who learn that they have the BRCA1 and 2 genetic mutations that exponentially increase their risk of developing breast or ovarian cancer have been having preventive mastectomies to lessen their chances of getting the disease. They call themselves “previvors.”

But joking about it?

When Brodnick found out, at 26, that she has the gene and started doing research, she mainly found fear and sadness.

“I looked at YouTube, and all the women had had breast cancer or terrible experiences,” she says. “Nobody was casually talking about it in a hopeful, positive way.”

And nobody was seeing the subject matter as comic fodder. That’s where she comes in.

“I have these amazing fake” breasts, she tells the audience. “They are high — and they just won’t quit!” When she’s old, she’s going to walk around topless in the nursing home, she says.

Brodnick is not the only comic who has tapped into the mastectomy humor vein. Tig Notaro, the subject of HBO’s “Boyish Girl Interrupted,” developed breast cancer before she decided to have her breasts removed. Also, before her surgery, Notaro’s chest was so flat that she joked about it to the extent that, as she recounts in her stand-up routine, her breasts said, “You know what? We’re sick of this. Let’s kill her.”

Notaro is now completely flat-chested and nipple-free, which she reveals when she removes her shirt for the last 20 minutes of her HBO special. She makes no further reference to breasts or cancer, though.

Brodnick, on the other hand, has never had cancer. And she delights in her new size 34C breasts. She says the former ones were too large — 32G on a 5-foot-1 frame — and she can’t seem to stop talking about her freedom to downsize and create what she calls “DIY boobs.”

She also decided that the best way to go through the experience was to document it, which led to a groundbreaking video series posted on the Glamour magazine website. As a habitual over-sharer, she knew that “I’m probably going to talk about it anyway.” So why not be that open book?

Brodnick has spent her life in the shadow of cancer. Her father’s sister died of breast cancer at 32.

“It really rocked everyone to their core,” she says.

Born nine months later, Caitlin was the “miracle child” who gave her grandmother a reason to live. Then other family members started dying: her grandmother, another aunt.

“I just remember being -- it’s always about the cancer,” Brodnick says. When her test proved positive, “it felt like I had cancer. It felt like my family’s fears were coming true, that I was going to be the next one.”

For three years, her reaction was depression and not taking care of herself. Then Jolie announced her decision to undergo a preventive mastectomy. For Brodnick, it was a major tipping point.

Sandy Cohen, coordinator of volunteers for Facing Our Risk of Cancer Empowered, a national nonprofit organization that supports and advocates on behalf of those with hereditary breast and ovarian cancer, heard about the Glamour series and invited Brodnick to speak at this year’s annual conference, held in Philadelphia in June.

Brodnick did about 20 minutes of her comedy routine for about 80 attendees.

“She was very frank,” Cohen says. “It was like a breath of fresh air that they needed” after talking about cancer and prevention all day.

Today, Brodnick is part advocate, part comedian and part the girl you want to sit next to on the airplane. She performs a regular gig at New York’s Upright Citizens Brigade comedy shows as well as at other venues, and is launching a new tour called BRCA Power Prevention International to connect with other BRCA-positive women.

Thanks to her comedy and her video series, she says, she is starting to be recognized. People will ask her, “Are you the one who went under the knife and then showed everyone your breasts?”

“Yeees!” she says. “I aaaaam! This is all I have to offer! I’m a feminist, but this is all I have to offer!”