While Phoenix braces for a freeze warning Sunday night, travelers are finding blizzard conditions in New Mexico creating roadway misery.

Eastbound Interstate 10 reopened shortly after 10 a.m. Sunday at US 191 after hazardous conditions forced its closure.

OPEN: I-10 East is now open to the NM line. NM officials report I-10 is open but blizzard warnings remain in place. Be careful! — Arizona DOT (@ArizonaDOT) December 27, 2015

Cold air in the lower deserts will keep area residents bundled up with the threat of even colder temperatures on tap during the overnight hours into Monday.

A freeze warning is in effect for the Phoenix area from 11 p.m. Sunday until 9 a.m. Monday, meteorologists said.

Those living in the alert areas are advised to protect cold sensitive plants, wrap pipes to prevent bursting and make sure pets have a warm place to stay to prevent hypothermia and frostbite.

#Freezing temps likely Mon morning across the lower deserts of AZ and far SE CA. Don't forget the 5P's! #AZwx #CAwx pic.twitter.com/kO5OWRvYf3 — NWS Phoenix (@NWSPhoenix) December 27, 2015

Some selected temperatures at 6 a.m. Sunday included:

5 degrees – Grand Canyon

16 degrees - Flagstaff

17 degrees – Prescott

25 degrees – Payson

29 degrees – Tuscon

31 degrees – Gila Bend

34 degrees – Mesa

36 degrees – Deer Valley

37 degrees – Buckeye

39 degrees - Phoenix

Snow showers are expected to continue from the Mogollon Rim northward through Saturday and across the White Mountains through Sunday.

US 180-area snow recreation sites near Flagstaff are packed with people and travelers should be prepared for possible gridlock in wintry conditions, according to the Arizona Department of Transportation.

Area law enforcement reported 10 miles of slow traffic early Saturday evening as motorists headed back toward Flagstaff.

Those making the trip should allow for extra travel time and prepare as they would for any extended period in snowy, icy or cold areas, ADOT advised. Motorists should have a fully charged cellphone, plenty of gas, drinking water and winter coats, warm blankets or both.

Traffic back from US 180 snow-play areas near Flagstaff was very heavy last night. Be prepared if going today. pic.twitter.com/yd45yqMZGZ — Arizona DOT (@ArizonaDOT) December 27, 2015

They also should consider leaving for home in the afternoon, as traffic builds significantly after 4 p.m.

To avoid congestion through Flagstaff, consider taking an alternate route via the Butler Avenue I-40 exit. Signs will direct travelers to and from US 180, ADOT said.

The Valley will see mainly sunny skies.

A life-threatening and record setting blizzard left motorists stuck in parts of New Mexico and the eastern plains.

Snow drifts over 6 feet have been reported across much of the E central & SE plains. Do not attempt travel. #nmwx pic.twitter.com/1GkoH8MsCE — NWS Albuquerque (@NWSAlbuquerque) December 27, 2015

In Albuquerque, police responded to nearly 200 crashes.

Albuquerque police tweeted the following message for residents and motorists.

The roads within certain parts of the city are extremely slick due to ice and snow. Pls stay indoors but if you must travel take your time! — Albuquerque Police (@ABQPOLICE) December 27, 2015

Besides the I-10 closure, Interstate 40 east of Albuquerque at Eubank was also closed due to hazardous road conditions

Roswell this morning... Courtesy: Marty Peach #nmwx pic.twitter.com/3VvXYyoZGi — Jorge Torres (@JorgeTWeather) December 27, 2015

Further east, severe storms that brought tornadoes to the Dallas, TX, area Saturday may have played a role in six deaths, according to a newspaper report.



The storm spawned at least one tornado that the National Weather Service said touched down about 30 miles south of Dallas in Ellis County, and emergency responders said the tornado damaged and destroyed houses.

[RELATED: Dallas-area storms may have cost 11 lives]

Back in Arizona, Monday looks to remain unseasonably cold, but conditions should be calm state-wide.

A fast moving trough arriving in Arizona late Monday night to early Tuesday morning, ushering in a slight chance of showers.

Copyright 2015 KPHO/KTVK (KPHO Broadcasting Corporation). All rights reserved.