More flood, storm warnings go up for Loveland

Traffic moves on U.S. 34 in the Big Thompson Canyon on Saturday morning as persistent rain showers create new waterfalls on the sides of the canyon walls. Loveland is in a flood warning, winter storm watch and flash flood watch. (Jeff Stahla) A persistent rain system in Northern Colorado has prompted the National Weather Service to increase its warnings in the region.

A flood warning was issued at 8:50 a.m. Saturday by the agency, and its weather forecasters predict that eastern Larimer County, including Loveland, will receive an additional 2 inches of rain through the day.

"Rock slides and debris flows are likely from this rainfall," the warning said.

The flood warning is through 8:45 p.m. Saturday.

Also, the area is incldued in a winter storm watch from Saturday night to Sunday morning, with predictions of several inches of snow for the Interstate 25 corridor north of Denver. Even forecasters are uncertain about storm totals, however, which will be affected by what time the rain starts turning to snow. Some believe areas of the Front Range could have 5-10 inches of snow, with a foot in the foothills west of Loveland.

The rains have prompted a flash flood watch for much of northeast Colorado, too. More heavy storms are anticipated on Saturday afternoon.

Larimer County emergency managers said Big Elk and Pinewood Springs were seriously affected Friday night, with two bridges at Pinewood Springs being closed for safety reasons. About 40 residents were notified of the closure, and an evacuation site was set up by the Red Cross at Fellowship Bible Church, 1575 S. St. Vrain Ave., Estes Park.

Colorado Division of Parks and Wildlife officials had to evacuate campers at St. Vrain State Park near Longmont on Friday night after rising water threatened the site. Advertisement

In the Big Thompson Canyon by 9 a.m., traffic was still flowing smoothly, with only a few small rocks visible on the shoulders of U.S. 34.

However, reports have come in that construction work under way between Glen Haven and the Dunraven Glade road has been affected by the storms.









A persistent rain system in Northern Colorado has prompted the National Weather Service to increase its warnings in the region.A flood warning was issued at 8:50 a.m. Saturday by the agency, and its weather forecasters predict that eastern Larimer County, including Loveland, will receive an additional 2 inches of rain through the day."Rock slides and debris flows are likely from this rainfall," the warning said.The flood warning is through 8:45 p.m. Saturday.Also, the area is incldued in a winter storm watch from Saturday night to Sunday morning, with predictions of several inches of snow for the Interstate 25 corridor north of Denver. Even forecasters are uncertain about storm totals, however, which will be affected by what time the rain starts turning to snow. Some believe areas of the Front Range could have 5-10 inches of snow, with a foot in the foothills west of Loveland.The rains have prompted a flash flood watch for much of northeast Colorado, too. More heavy storms are anticipated on Saturday afternoon.Larimer County emergency managers said Big Elk and Pinewood Springs were seriously affected Friday night, with two bridges at Pinewood Springs being closed for safety reasons. About 40 residents were notified of the closure, and an evacuation site was set up by the Red Cross at Fellowship Bible Church, 1575 S. St. Vrain Ave., Estes Park.Colorado Division of Parks and Wildlife officials had to evacuate campers at St. Vrain State Park near Longmont on Friday night after rising water threatened the site.Local fire crews were able to get everyone safely moved.In the Big Thompson Canyon by 9 a.m., traffic was still flowing smoothly, with only a few small rocks visible on the shoulders of U.S. 34.However, reports have come in that construction work under way between Glen Haven and the Dunraven Glade road has been affected by the storms.