The day before Thanksgiving, Avalanche forward Jack Skille got the green light to get a place in the Denver area, and on Friday he was probably one of the few NHL players looking for a good deal during the shopping frenzy.

“I had a good Black Friday,” said Skille, who bought a 65-inch television with 4K technology at Costco.

Skille, 28, had been living out of the team-paid hotel since training camp in September, when he was on a professional tryout, or PTO, contract. He made the opening-night roster and was given a one-year, two-way deal paying him $675,000 in the NHL and $150,000 in the minors.

By being told to get a place, the Avs told Skille he won’t likely be sent down to San Antonio of the American Hockey League. Skille is playing right wing on the fourth line, but has the ability to play in a top-six role. He has two goals and three points in 22 games and is a primary penalty-killing forward.

“At the end of the day, I’m not secure by any means,” Skille said after Saturday’s morning skate at the Pepsi Center. “That’s the way I’m going to face every single day. It is nice to kind of have a little bit more freedom, and be able to cook meals and stuff like that. But the on-ice (work) doesn’t change.”

Agozzino debut. Left wing Andrew Agozzino was recalled from San Antonio on Friday and made his NHL season debut Saturday against Winnipeg. It was his second career NHL game, having made his debut Nov. 22, 2014, against Carolina.

Agozzino, 24, leads the Rampage with seven goals and 16 points in 13 games. He played on the fourth line with Skille and center Chris Wagner against the Jets.

Agozzino traded places with Dennis Everberg, who was demoted to the Rampage.

Footnotes. Avs defenseman Nate Guenin was a healthy scratch for the fifth consecutive game. Forwards John Mitchell (oblique) and Alex Tanguay (knee) continue to skate with the team and will likely play during the upcoming four-game road trip beginning Monday at the New York Islanders. Mitchell has missed 10 of the past 12 games and Tanguay the last nine consecutive. … Avs coach Patrick Roy said forward Jesse Winchester, who has battled a head injury for more than a year, currently has no contact with the team and “will call” if his condition dramatically improves. Winchester has yet to play a game with the Avs since signing a two-year free agent contract on July 1, 2014. Mike Chambers, The Denver Post