What comes to mind when you think about bipartisanship?

Most of us hope to see Republicans and Democrats working together to protect hardworking taxpayers and get our economy growing. Balancing the budget, reforming the tax code and entitlements, protecting our national interests – we want politicians in both parties to roll up their sleeves, get to work, and make hard choices about important issues.

But most politicians aren’t like most Americans. For them, bipartisanship is an excuse to dole out tax dollars to special interests.

ADVERTISEMENT

Just look at what’s happening in Congress right now. On Tuesday, 127 Republicans and 186 Democrats in the House of Representatives voted to reauthorize the U.S. Export-Import Bank. They voted to resurrect a federal agency that benefits foreign governments and a few well-connected corporations at the expense of everyone else

Congress let the Ex-Im Bank expire when its charter ran out in June. Lawmakers did so for one simple reason: As then-Senator Barack Obama Barack ObamaRyan seeks to put stamp on GOP in Trump era Stoddard: Clouds loom for Clinton Pelosi, Dems rush to defense of Wasserman Schultz MORE said in 2008, the bank is “little more than a fund for corporate welfare.”

It most certainly is. The Export-Import Bank is a New Deal relic originally created to subsidize American exports. The theory was that taxpayer-backed financing would boost American small businesses in the global economy. Reality, however, looks significantly different.

It’s true that Ex-Im helps some companies export their products—roughly 2 percent of America’s exports are financed by the bank. But the vast majority of the Ex-Im’s money doesn’t benefit small businesses. Instead, it goes to multi-national companies with multi-million dollar profit margins. Large companies typically benefit from around 75 to 80 percent of the bank’s money every year. Tellingly, a mere 10 mega-corporations received 64 percent of the bank's financing in 2013—and roughly 30 percent went to just one business.

Why should hardworking American taxpayers subsidize these corporate profits? The Congressional Budget Office predicts Ex-Im will lose $2 billion over the next decade. That number could quickly grow if the economy takes a turn for the worse. All told, there are roughly $110 billion on Ex-Im’s balance sheet. Another Fannie Mae or Freddie Mac collapse could be just around the corner.

You won’t hear that from Ex-Im’s beneficiaries, however. Ever since the bank expired, they’ve launched a furious lobbying campaign to convince Congress the sky will fall if they don’t get their subsidies. Yet their threats should be taken with a grain of salt, if not the whole shaker. They’re little more than a transparent attempt to trick lawmakers into turning the taxpayer spigot back on.

These special interests also ignore that Ex-Im already harms the economy with every deal it makes.

It’s Economics 101. Tim Carney at the American Enterprise Institute has shown that when Ex-Im helps a company export, that company’s rivals are automatically put at an unfair disadvantage. They don’t have the same access to taxpayer handouts. Similarly, when a foreign company buys an export with the taxpayer’s help, its American competitors suffer.

Put another way, Ex-Im isn’t just picking winners—it’s picking losers, too. Just look across the economy for proof.

The largest portion of Ex-Im’s portfolio deals with aircraft exports. When foreign airlines use the bank to buy U.S. planes, they get a leg up on their American competitors. The Air Line Pilots Association estimates that Ex-Im’s preferential treatment of only two foreign airlines – Emirates and Air India – has eliminated 7,500 jobs here at home. This number would only grow if you add in the hundreds of other aircraft deals financed by the bank.

More broadly, Daniel Ikenson at the Cato Institute found that nearly every sector of American manufacturing gets harmed by Ex-Im. Appliances, electronics, textiles, and nearly 200 other industries others are among the bank’s victims, losing more than they gain from Ex-Im benefits. All told, this costs American companies in these areas at least $2.8 billion every year.

This money could have been used to create jobs and grow the economy. Apparently that’s less important than giving corporate welfare to a well-connected few.

Yet special treatment for special interests is what passes for a bipartisan cause in Washington, D.C. these days. As the vote for the Export-Import Bank on Tuesday shows, almost every congressional Democrats and a majority of Republicans are already willing to put special interests above Americans’ interests. Who knew that was something both parties could support?

Koenig is senior policy advisor at Freedom Partners Chamber of Commerce.