Former Republican presidential candidate has hosted a weekly program for the cable news network since 2008

Mike Huckabee is leaving Fox News to consider a re-entry into politics.

He made the announcement just before Saturday’s episode of “Huckabee,” the final hour of the political commentary program. The former Republican presidential candidate is leaving to consider another run at the office in 2016, after President Barack Obama vacates, though Huckabee plans to save that decision for a later date.

See Photos: 24 TV Newscasters Ranked by Popularity

“Tonight I will do more than just say goodnight. I will say goodbye. This is the last edition of ‘Huckabee’ on the Fox News Channel,” he wrote Saturday on his website, in a statement he planned to also deliver on his final telecast. “It’s been the ride of a lifetime, and I have never had so much fun in my life. But I also realize that God hasn’t put me on earth just to have a good time or to make a good living, but rather has put me on earth to try to make a good life.”

The former Arkansas Governor has starred on his eponymous Fox News Show since 2008, the same year he made an unsuccessful bid for the presidency. He won the Iowa Republican caucus, but lost out in the Republican primary to Senator John McCain, who later went on to lose in the general election to then-Senator Barack Obama.

In the politician-turned-TV host’s statement he admitted he hasn’t ruled out running again in 2016, though he doesn’t plan to make that announcement until the Spring.

Also Read: ‘Scandal’ Creator Shonda Rhimes Slams Mike Huckabee’s Comments on Birth Control, Obamacare

“There has been a great deal of speculation as to whether I would run for President. If I were willing to absolutely rule that out, I could keep doing this show. But I can’t make such a declaration,” he continued.

“I won’t make a decision about running until late in the spring of 2015, but the continued chatter has put Fox News into a position that is not fair to them nor is it possible for me to openly determine political and financial support to justify a race,” Huckabee added. “The honorable thing to do at this point is to end my tenure here at Fox. As much as I have loved doing the show, I cannot bring myself to rule out another Presidential run. So as we say in television, stay tuned!”

If Huckabee were to run for President of the United States of America in 2016, it’s unclear who he would run against. Hillary Clinton, former first lady, New York senator and secretary of state, is widely expected to throw her hat in the ring for the Democrats, but she has yet to make any formal announcement.

Also Read: 2014 in Cable News: Fox News Stays on Top, CNN Climbs to No. 2 in Demo, MSNBC Falls Behind

A Fox News Channel spokeswoman told TheWrap the network and the governor had amicably parted ways, saying the move was in the best interest of both parties.

“The network will run various specials in place of ‘Huckabee’ for the next few weeks and will be trying ‘a few new ideas’ in the 8 p.m. weekend time slot,” the spokeswoman added.

Read Governor Huckabee’s tweet below:



Release: Gov. Huckabee Departs Fox News, Will Make Decision On '16 Campaign By Late Spring http://t.co/KtUv7PoMBD — Gov. Mike Huckabee (@GovMikeHuckabee) January 4, 2015

24 TV Newscasters Ranked by Popularity (Photos) Scott Pelley, "CBS Evening News" Q Score: 19

Anderson Cooper, "AC 360" Q Score: 18

Lara Logan, "60 Minutes" Q Score: 17

Brian Williams, "NBC Nightly News" Q Score: 15

Chris Cuomo, "New Day" Q Score: 15

Kate Bolduan, "New Day" Q Score: 15

Diane Sawyer, "World News" Q Score: 13

Ann Curry Q Score: 13

Morley Safer, "60 Minutes" Q Score: 13

Rachel Maddow, "The Rachel Maddow Show" Q Score: 13

Tamron Hall, "News Nation" Q Score: 13

Christiane Amanpour, "Amanpour" Q Score: 12

Thomas Roberts, "MSNBC Live" Q Score: 12

Michaela Pereira, "New Day" Q Score: 12

Bill O'Reilly, "The O'Reilly Factor" Q Score: 10

Piers Morgan, "Piers Morgan Live" Q Score: 10

Nancy Grace, "Nancy Grace" Q Score: 10

Sean Hannity, "Hannity" Q Score: 10

Shephard Smith, "Shephard Smith Reporting" Q Score: 10

Dr. Sanjay Gupta, "Sanjay Gupta MD" Q Score: 9

Leslie Stahl, "60 Minutes" Q Score: 9

Andrea Mitchell, "Andrea Mitchell Reports" Q Score: 9

Alex Wagner, "Now" Q Score: 8

Chris Matthews, "Hardball" Q Score: 6 Previous ; Next 1 of 24 Anderson Cooper, Lara Logan and Brian Williams are up there — but who ranks No. 1? Scott Pelley, "CBS Evening News" Q Score: 19