Matron of honor Patti Lovell, Kathy Butkovich, Joe Butkovich and best man Richard "Rick" Butkovich

Butkovich: 50th anniversary

Joe and Kathy (Mann) Butkovich, of Broomfield, on Sept. 21 held an early 50th anniversary celebration with friends and family at the Broomfield Senior Center. Numerous cousins from Iowa also travelled to attend the party.

In special attendance was Kathy's matron of honor, Patti Lovell, from Long Prairie, Minn., and Richard "Rick" Butkovich, Joe's best man, from Brooks, Iowa.

They also celebrated their 50th anniversary with their four children and their spouses/significant others, seven grandchildren and three great-grandchildren.

Joe and Kathy were married in Des Moines, Iowa, on Nov. 14, 1964. They moved to Denver soon after their second child was born. They have lived in three cities and four houses in their 50 years together.

Jakowatz-Helgerson engagement

Amy Jakowatz, daughter of Charles and Carol Jakowatz of Albuquerque, N.M., and Gabriel Helgerson, son of Robert and Frieda Helgerson of Randolph, Minn., were engaged on Sept. 20 in Aspen.

Amy graduated from the University of New Mexico in nursing and from the University of Colorado as a nurse practitioner in child psychology. She works for Aurora Mental Health.

Gabriel is a graduate of the Air Force Academy in Colorado Springs and the University of Southern California with a Master's of Business Administration. He works at Datavail in Broomfield as a senior financial analyst.

A fall 2015 wedding is planned.

Debenport-Baxter wedding

Advertisement

Brittney Debenport, daughter of Mark Baxter of Broomfield and Sandy and Steve Grimsley of Louisville, and Graham Debenport, son of Jim and Joyce Debenport of St. Louis, Mo., were married on July 5.

The outdoor ceremony, officiated by the brides grandfather, Marsh Riggs, was at Stonebrook Manor and was followed by dinner and dancing.

Brittney is a second-grade teacher and Graham works as a middle school history and geography teacher. The couple lives in Lafayette.

Gabriel Helgerson and Amy Jakowatz