MINNEAPOLIS -- Sen. Bernie Sanders (I-Vt.) faced some tense moments during a Black America forum as attendees pushed the presidential candidate to endorse reparations on Friday night, a topic he's been pressed on for months as he fights to draw African American voters away from rival Hillary Clinton.

"I know you're afraid to say black, and I know you're afraid to say reparations," said Felicia Perry, a panelist on the forum that the nonprofit Neighborhoods Organizing for Change organized.

This wasn't a typical Sanders campaign event, where he could give a version of his stump speech to a massive crowd, only taking a few questions before hitting the road to the next venue. The gymnasium of Patrick Henry High School was packed with voters, many of them black activists, who had waited for over an hour in below freezing temperatures, eagerly awaiting to pick the Vermont senator's brain on issues most important to them. Many in the crowd were aligned with the Black Lives Matter movement, and activists had called for Sanders to address racial injustice before he even took the stage.

"Ma’am, I don't think that's a fair statement," Sanders interrupted, but Perry continued to speak.

"It seems like every time you talk about black people, and us getting something for the systemic oppression and exploitation of our people, we have to include every other person of color," she said, as the crowd applauded, urging him to "talk specifically about black people and reparations.”

Sanders, who had just said the phrase "African American" narrowed his gaze, adjusting his glasses with a strained look on his face. He repeatedly shied away from stating his position on whether African Americans should receive reparations, which did not go over well with some in the audience.

"You and I may disagree on this," he said. "It's not just black. It is Latino. There are areas of America, in poorer rural America, where it's white. So, I believe that in a country that has more income and wealth inequality than any other country, then yes, the time is overdue to invest."

As Sanders launched into the exact lines from his stump speech, where he mentions income inequality and poverty in the African-American community, rattling off unemployment numbers, he was interrupted again.

"Say 'black!'" a member of the audience yelled at Sanders.

"I've said 'black' 50 times," Sanders shouted into the microphone. "That's the 51st time."

The reparations issue first emerged on the 2016 campaign trail during a Fusion-sponsored Black Brown forum in January in Iowa. Sanders had agreed to participate in Friday’s forum after a busload of activists from Minnesota showed up in Des Moines. His stance on reparations drew criticism from the writer Te-Nehisi Coates earlier this year, but the influential journalist said this week he’d still vote for Sanders.