CHERRY HILLS VILLAGE — Joey Matarazzo, like many of his teammates, was “dinged.”

The Kent Denver senior was battered and bruised Saturday but certainly not beaten after leading the Sun Devils to a home 21-12 Class 2A playoff victory over Lamar’s Savages.

On a glorious, sun-splashed fall afternoon at Justin DeSorrento Memorial Field, Matarazzo’s execution and heady play pushed the 2012 state champion Sun Devils into next weekend’s quarterfinals. But first he was looking forward to resting as long as he could.

“I think I’m going to go home and recover,” Matarazzo said.

He deserved it. Matarazzo had two key completions on the game’s opening drive that ended with a 1-yard touchdown plunge by fullback Gunnar Sveen. Matarazzo capped a 14-play, 70-yard drive right before halftime with a 2-yard scoring toss to Anders Soderberg to make it 14-0 in a quarter in which there were only two possessions. And his 4-yard bootleg right made it 21-0 in the third quarter.

Matarazzo also added an interception, helped overcome the void of star running back Jaden Franklin (sidelined with a groin injury) and kept the Savages chasing.

“I think it just goes with being the quarterback, you know?” he said. “I don’t think I had a different mind-set. I just count on the boys and they count on me.”

The Sun Devils had to do a lot of counting. Assorted injuries created some makeshift lineups, including on defense, but Kent Denver generally remained in control and didn’t have to overly sweat until Lamar got within 21-12 with 3:43 to play on a 19-yard touchdown pass from Draven Adame to Zach Ramsey.

But the Sun Devils were able to knock down Adame’s conversion pass attempt and run out the clock.

“Joey did a great job,” Sun Devils coach Scott Yates said. “(The Savages) are a good football team; they play tough and we knew that going in.”

Kent Denver won its fifth straight playoff game and will be at second-seeded Manitou Springs, which whipped Jefferson 49-8, next weekend. Lamar ended 7-3 and struggled early on offense, “which has kind of been our MO this year,” coach Jason Tice said.

A banged-up Sveen saw spot duty, so Luke Wilson, Wyllis McKissick and Jack Ammons helped carry most of the load.

“It always hurts not having Jaden,” Matarazzo said of the junior who leads the Sun Devils in rushing (1,186 yards) and scoring (17 touchdowns).

Jack Raeder and Soderberg turned in some big receptions in traffic, and Trevon Hamlet blocked Lamar’s first conversion kick attempt, which proved to be huge late.

Neil H. Devlin: ndevlin@denverpost.com or twitter.com/neildevlin