Topics: cyberlibertarianism, Edward Snowden, Glenn Greenwald, Jacobin, Julian Assange, Libertarianism, Politics, The Left, the state, Politics News

This article originally appeared on Jacobin

A certain strand of left-wing anti-libertarianism has aroused the ire of my colleague Peter Frase. But his critique is hard to follow — its object has been a moving target.

In a post last week, Frase used Sean Wilentz’s recent New Republic hit piece on Julian Assange, Edward Snowden, and Glenn Greenwald as a jumping-off point to condemn “some on the Left” who believe “defending the possibility of government requires rejecting any alliance with libertarians who might criticize particularly noxious aspects of the existing state.”

But in a follow-up post, he clarified that he wasn’t advocating a literal “alliance” with libertarians. Rather, he explains:

I lump in left critics of Glenn Greenwald or Edward Snowden’s ‘libertarianism’ with obvious partisan hack like Sean Wilentz [because] their arguments all point to the same thing: not a clarification of the Left’s politics, but merely a stigmatization of anything that attacks the security state, as if that’s somehow incompatible with the values of the Left.

But that explanation doesn’t compute either. Of the two “left critics” Frase offered as examples — Mark Ames and David Golumbia — neither appears to be engaged in a campaign of blanket “stigmatization of anything that attacks the security state.” Ames has praised 1970s CIA whistleblower (and actual defector) Phillip Agee — whose own politics were firmly on the Left, Ames notes, unlike today’s leakers — for helping to spark a number of valuable restrictions on the security state. Ames compares him favorably to Assange and Snowden.

David Golumbia recently wrote (in an online comment) that private intelligence contractors like Booz Allen Hamilton are “every bit as serious a problem for freedom as is surveillance directly conducted by governments, and by dint of being formally outside of oversight, may be even more worrisome.” That may or may not get the issue just right, but it doesn’t sound like a knee-jerk defense of the NSA to me.

Frase quotes “libertarian-ish” blogger Will Wilkinson making a point similar to his own — that “it’s crazily illogical to reason that the actually existing state is justified on liberal terms just because the libertarian critique of the state is false.” But the only named person to whom Wilkinson attributes that fallacy is … Sean Wilentz.

At this point, I’m not convinced there actually are any left-wing apologists for rampant NSA spying.

But that doesn’t mean Frase is merely chasing phantoms. He is gesturing, somewhat wildly, at an old and knotty problem for the Left: the question of the state, its nature, and its uses. This insightful passage provides a hint of Frase’s real concerns:

And yet there is the persistent temptation to invoke the genie of state repression despite the Left’s documented inability to make it do its bidding. That can take the form of “humanitarian” warmongering or what Elizabeth Bernstein has described as “carceral feminism”: “a vision of social justice as criminal justice” that attempts to deploy the repressive power of the state to protect women who are portrayed as helpless victims.

The issues Frase is pointing to are real. The problem, though, is that somehow in talking about the Left and the state, he has gotten himself mixed up talking about libertarianism. Libertarianism, to put it mildly, is not helpful for the Left. As a political philosophy that revolves obsessively around the secondary question of “the role of government,” it’s an irrelevant monomania at best. At worst, it’s a rhetorical decoy that uses procedural anti-statism as cover for a series of private tyrannies.