Pass rusher Dumervil, safety Adams thrive with new teams

Ravens outside linebacker Elvis Dumervil finishes the season with 19 sacks overall — 17 in the regular season and two in the playoffs. ( Steven Senne / Associated Press )

SCOTTSDALE, Ariz. — The Pro Bowl is so overcrowded with Broncos, Elvis Dumervil and Mike Adams had to come from their past.

"Yeah, we're 13 deep," said running back C.J. Anderson, one of the 11 current Broncos named to the Pro Bowl team.

It's not all laughs for Dumervil and Adams. It stung when the Broncos let them go.

Dumervil's departure occurred two years ago amid the most bizarre of circumstances. It began when the Broncos wanted to cut the $12 million salary he was scheduled to draw in 2013. It ended when the paperwork for a final-minute agreement of $8 million got so hung up in a fax exchange, it missed the NFL deadline. As the minutes ticked away, the Broncos believed they had no choice but to release Dumervil.

Although the Broncos tried to re-sign him, a spurned Dumervil instead signed with the Baltimore Ravens. The Dumervil Fax Fiasco went down in history, but he was far from done. Playing roughly half the snaps as a pass-rushing outside linebacker for Baltimore, Dumervil finished with 19 sacks — 17 in the regular season to match his 2009 season in Denver, plus two more in Baltimore's first-round playoff win against Pittsburgh.

The Broncos, meanwhile, so missed Dumervil in 2013 that last March they signed DeMarcus Ware to a three-year contract that paid him $13 million this season. Ware finished with 10 sacks.

Advertisement

"It's not that I felt I had anything to prove, because regardless of what (the Broncos) were trying to say, I had confidence all along that I was a Pro Bowl-caliber player," Dumervil said after a Pro Bowl practice at Scottsdale Community College. "The last time I had 17 sacks (in 2009), I was an outside linebacker. Then I got injured and when I came back, I played defensive end.

"I didn't complain. I did my job. I played hurt. I just wanted to win for those guys. The fans, the city. But then with the contract, they threw the fact I didn't have 15 sacks in my face."

Adams, a free safety, was let go the old-fashioned way. After starting 28 games in two years with the Broncos, including last year's Super Bowl, the team allowed his contract to run out.

Adams sat idle through three months of free agency before the Indianapolis Colts signed him in mid-June. Playing at 33 and for the veteran minimum salary of $955,000, Adams had a career-best five interceptions, two fumble recoveries and two forced fumbles.

And his Colts beat the Broncos in a second-round AFC playoff game two weeks ago.

"That stuff fuels," Adams said. "Indy's a great place and I hope they bring me back. But even if they don't, I felt wanted. I felt they let me do my thing. They let me ball. Line the guys up and make plays. It wasn't — you do this wrong, you rotate the next game or we're going to bench you. No. I was comfortable."

The Broncos would point out the two players brought in to replace Adams and Dumervil — T.J. Ward and Ware — are playing in Sunday's Pro Bowl, too. A team can't keep them all. But that didn't stop Dumervil and Adams from delivering a reminder of what they let go.