Every Saturday cleveland.com will highlight stories of interest from the previous week of news coverage. Today we take a look at the discovery of Ariel Castro hanging in his jail cell, the cause of the high number of involuntary part-time workers, the heroin problem in Cuyahoga County, the success or failure of Cleveland mayor Frank Jackson's big ideas, and Cleveland City Councilman Zack Reed being sentenced to 10 days in jail for his third DUI.



Included below are overviews each story. Take our poll to tell us which one was the most influential of the week, and let us know in the comments if another story on the site caught your attention.



Ariel Castro found hanging in prison cell









Tuesday night at 9:20 p.m. officials at the Correctional Reception Center in Orient, found Ariel Castro hanging in his jail cell. Castro was pronounced dead at 10:52 p.m. Castro's death comes one month after he was sentenced to life plus 1,000 years for imprisoning Amanda Berry, Gina DeJesus, and Michelle Knight for a decade at his Seymour Avenue home.



Amanda Berry, Gina DeJesus, and Michelle Knight declined to comment on Ariel Castro's death. Castro's family did not issue a statement.



The Franklin County coroner ruled that Ariel Castro's death was consistent with suicide and that Castro likely used a bed sheet to hang himself. Prison officials did not find a suicide note in Castro's cell at the time of his death.



Castro's defense attorney said that prison officials denied his request for a forensic psychologist to evaluate Castro for suicidal tendencies. Questions still remain as to why Castro was not placed on suicide watch and how was he able to kill himself while under protective watch.

The NEOMG Editorial Board said the public needs to know the full circumstances surrounding Castro's death:



Castro earned this community's hatred through his vile actions. Many are glad that he is dead. Still, the public needs to know the full circumstances of why the correction department, which is duty-bound to protect the health and safety of every inmate, failed to prevent Castro's suicide. And beyond that, how, within reason, the department can improve procedures for handling potentially suicidal inmates.

Wednesday, Gary Mohr, the director of the Ohio Department of Rehabilitation and Correction, ordered two reviews to examine whether the state’s policies and procedures for handling inmates and providing for their medical care were followed.

Friday, a video a was released of Ariel Castro admitting to investigators that their were several close calls over the years, and that he called one of the victims parents to tell he that she was still alive.







Heroin use in Cuyahoga County on the rise

In 2012, 161 people died from heroin overdoses in Cuyahoga County, four times as many as in 2007. This year 91 people have died from heroin overdoses.



NEOMG reporter Brandon Blackwell discussed how the crackdown on the abuse of prescription opiates has made heroin use increasingly problematic in Cuyahoga County:

The numbers do not show a causal link, but Steven Dettelbach, U.S. attorney for the Northern District of Ohio, said, "there's definitely a progression from people using opioid pills to using heroin." Experts suggest the switch from prescription pills to heroin may have something to do with the black-market economy of both narcotics. "Heroin is cheaper than pills," said Deborah Naiman, a supervising prosecutor with the county's Major Drug Offenders Unit. "You have everything from people using it who actually have legitimate physical ailments that cannot be conquered...to young people trying drugs just to try drugs, to not so young people who are enmeshed in the drug culture, taking heroin because it's cheap and it's everywhere."

Recovering addicts and others affected by heroin use stepped forward to share their stories in a series of videos.



Heroin use is no longer considered an inner city issue as overdoses from the drug are on the rise in suburban communities. NEOMG reporter Cory Shaffer wrote:



Caraffi, head of the Cuyahoga County Opiate Task Force, said statistics analyzed by the Cuyahoga County Medical Examiner show that heroin fatalities have increased in the last five years in Cuyahoga County suburbs. Last year, 55 percent of the heroin related overdoses were suburban residents.



Naloxone Hydrochloride is viewed as an "antidote" for a person overdosing on heroin. When administered Naloxone removes the opiates from the person's system and sends them into a state of withdrawl. Cuyahoga County's Project Dawn provides heroin addicts with two doses of Naloxone, as well as information on treatment.



Cuyahoga County's Project Dawn program has enrolled 160 people and reversed 11 overdoses.

Is Obamacare the cause for the increase of part-time workers?

During the recession the number of involuntary part-time workers rose.



The increase in part-time workers is an expected occurrence in tough economic times as employers seek to trim costs. Now that the economy is in a state of recovery the number of involuntary part-time workers has remained high, and people are searching for the reason.



Is the weak economic recovery the cause for the increasing creation of part-time jobs or is it Obamacare?

Critics of the Affordable Healthcare Act, often referred to as Obamacare, point to it as the reason why the number of part-time workers continues to rise. The argument is that employers are hiring part-time workers and reducing the hours of current employees to avoid paying for medical insurance.



Plain Dealer reporter Olivera Perkins examined the issue and both liberal and conservative experts said it was too early to tell:



Conservative and liberal experts agree that reports of employers cutting back hours to avoid paying for health coverage is more anecdote than fact. "My read of the data is that while part-time employment has certainly gone up, you can't tie it to the health care law," said James Sherk, a labor policy analyst at the conservative Heritage Foundation in Washington, D.C. "We have had a very weak recovery." Mike Evangelist is a policy analyst in the Michigan office of the liberal National Employment Law Project. He said while more recent figures show 3 out of 4 jobs created are part time, a longer-term view gives a more accurate picture. The number of part-time jobs created has fluctuated. When one looks back to February 2010, the lowest point of employment, only 12 percent of jobs created since then are part time, he said.

It appears that for the time being that Obamacare being the cause of the rise in the creation of part-time jobs is a myth.

Success or failure: Frank Jackson's big ideas

Cleveland mayor Frank Jackson is running for his third term in office. What impact has his past two terms had on the city of Cleveland? In a series of videos, NEOMG reporter Leila Atassi took a look at five of Frank Jackson's major initiatives he has introduced since taking office.

Here is an overview of the ideas examined in the videos:

Tuesday: A look at Jackson's vision to redesign Public Square into a pedestrian-friendly, unified space, perfect for live entertainment and events.

Wednesday: Jackson’s hard-fought plan to save Cleveland’s public school system and his hopes for the district’s long-term success.

Thursday: The lakefront and Jackson’s plans to develop the 90-acre swath -- a proposition pondered by many mayors before him.

Friday: The proposition of building a waste-to-energy plant at the Ridge Road garbage transfer station to divert much of the city’s trash from Ohio landfills, while generating electricity for city-owned Cleveland Public Power.

Today: What happened to Jackson’s plan to buy LED light bulbs from a Chinese company in exchange for jobs and the relocation of the firm’s North American headquarters to Cleveland?

Zack Reed to serve 10 days in jail for his third DUI

View full size View full size

The five videos can be seen at cleveland.com/cityhall Thursday, Cleveland City Councilman Zack Reed was sentenced to 180 days in jail with 90 days suspended. Reed's sentence is divided between jail time, alcohol-monitoring days and deferred time.

Reed will serve 10 days in jail beginning on Sept. 25., and will be required to wear an alcohol-monitoring bracelet for an additional 60 days after his release.

Plain Dealer Reporter Rachel Dissell noted in her story that Reed takes full responsibility for his actions and expects to be re-elected to his Ward 2 council seat:

Before sentencing, Reed told the judge, "I let the disease of alcoholism get a hold of me and take advantage of me." Reed said he takes full responsibility for his actions said he has not had a drink in 185 days and knows he cannot have another drink for the rest of his life. The sentence, he said, will not impact his campaign and he expects to be re-elected. He said he will also continue to attend community events and fundraisers but refrain from drinking.

Reed faces an additional 70 days in jail if he does not follow the terms of his sentence.

Also in the news ...