Nestled in the Foothills of North Boulder, Colo., sits 335 Lee Hill Drive, the custom-built home of Spyder Active Sports founder, David Jacobs. Recently listed by Carliss and Jeff Erickson of LIV Sotheby’s International Realty, the residence proves there is no greater curb appeal than what nature provides, as views of the Boulder Flatirons and Foothills are prevalent from nearly every room. Similar to the iconic Spyder brand Jacobs created, his residence is equally unique.

“The home was built for the founder of Spyder Active Sports and his wife,” said LIV Sotheby’s International Realty broker, Carliss Erickson. “After a storied career creating one of the world’s most iconic sport brands, Mr. Jacobs and his wife turned their creative focus on building this dream home. Private, serene and nestled on five stunning acres in the Foothills of North Boulder, this residence is like no other.”

Exquisitely designed, the multi-level, floorplan was designed by well-known architect, John Mink, and showcases an unparalleled level of artistic talent. The builder of the home is Tim Harrington, one of Boulder’s leading builders with a reputation for excellence.

Meticulous planning and custom detailing is evident throughout the Spyder estate, creating a subtle, yet elegant, ambiance. The interior of the home is contemporary in nature, with an abundance of natural light. The walls are constructed of hand-applied Venetian plaster and the flooring is 6-inch wide plank polished walnut.

Radiant heat flooring, custom millwork, designer chandeliers and glass on glass windows that seamlessly connect the indoors and outdoors, are just a sample of the many home features the residence includes.

A gourmet kitchen with breakfast area opens to expansive mountain views, and features two center islands, white eucalyptus cabinetry, granite countertops, state-of-the-art appliances, a walk-in pantry and butler’s pantry with wet bar, and wine storage.

The emphasis on entertaining extends outdoors to a 16-foot cantilevered overhang, with complete outdoor kitchen with Viking grill and granite surfaces, a 75-foot lap pool with 12-person hot tub, and terraces.

One of the most unique attributes of the Spyder residence is a 1,600 square foot plate glass windowed garage that currently houses Jacobs’ vintage race car collection. The space would prove to be an ideal location for an artist’s studio, workshop or passionate car collector.The private estate sits on 4.9 level, landscaped acres, surrounded by hiking and biking trails yet is located only minutes from the heart of downtown Boulder.

For more information, contact Carliss and Jeff Erickson at 303-249-8384. To service all of your real estate needs visit LIVSothebysRealty.com.LIV Sotheby’s International Realty, the exclusive Board of Regent for the Who’s Who in Luxury Real Estate, has 12 office locations throughout metropolitan Denver, including Boulder, Evergreen, and the resort communities of Breckenridge, Vail and Beaver Creek. For more information call 303-893-3200. To service all of your real estate needs visit LIVSothebysRealty.com.