‘Smiling Faces, Beautiful Places” sounds cheesy.

“While I Breathe, I Hope” sounds inspiring.

So this week’s news that the latter message will replace the former on South Carolina license plates sounds welcome.

Or, to borrow from Gov. Nikki Haley’s also-cheesy catch phrase, “It’s a great day in South Carolina” to know that “Smiling Faces, Beautiful Places” is finally being forced into retirement.

Still, why must we wait so long — up to several years depending on when you got your current plates — to complete the looming upgrade in license-plate messages?

The Latin (“Dum Spiro Spero”) origin of “While I Breathe, I Hope” proves that state motto has staying power.

Yet some folks detect a downer tone in the stating-the-obvious reminder that as long as we are sucking air, we still have hope.

WTMA-AM 1250 morning host Charlie James even seems to sense a hopelessness of sorts in that hope-based maxim.

On his show Friday, James delivered this withering put-down of what many of us consider a generally uplifting word:

“How much good does ‘hope’ do for you? I took a big old pile of hope to the bank one time and they wouldn’t cash it. So I don’t like the word hope. It is a ‘less than’ attitude.”

And: “Why don’t you just quit having hope and start getting off your butt and doing something? Donald Trump didn’t build an $8.9 billion empire from hope. Steve Jobs didn’t build Apple computer off of hope. He built it off of action.”

And: “Put an action word in there. ... Hope is a longing or a desire or a wish. Hope isn’t an action word. Hope is an inaction word.”

Gee, let’s hope few South Carolinians share James’ depressing interpretation of “hope.”

After all, “hope” doesn’t necessarily block action. Indeed, “hope” can be a powerful motivator for action.

And those of us who have long hoped for the action of removing that insipid “Smiling Faces, Beautiful Places” pitch from S.C. license plates can now breathe more easily knowing our wish will be granted.

Maybe you also have been hoping for a different state motto than “While I Breathe, I Hope.” Maybe you didn’t know this second S.C. motto already existed:

“Prepared In Mind And Resources” (from the Latin “Animis Opibusque Parati”).

Prepared for what?

States of confusion

Now prepare for a test on which states have these mottoes (answers later in the column), which hopefully will help you better appreciate our mottoes:

1) “Strong Deeds, Gentle Words” (from the Italian “Fatti Maschii, Parole Femine”).

2) “She Flies With Her Own Wings” (from the Latin “Alis Volat Propriis”).

3) “Thus Always To Tyrants” (from the Latin “Sic Semper Tyrannis”).

4) “To Be, Rather Than To Seem” (from the Latin “Esse Quam Videri”).

Local priorities

Much closer to home, representatives from The Beach Co., the city’s planning staff, and neighborhood and preservation groups met again Friday to discuss what should — and should not — happen at the Sgt. Jasper site.

And that’s a reminder of Charleston’s motto:

“Aedes Mores Juraque Curat” (“She Guards Her Buildings, Customs, and Laws”).

Vive la difference

1) Maryland. The official line from “The Old Line State” is that its motto from the Italian, “Fatti Maschii, Parole Femine,” means “Strong Deeds, Gentle Words.” But Anthony Shugaar, an expert linguist, wrote last year in The Washington Post that the direct translation is “Manly Deeds, Womanly Words.”

Shugaar added that Giuseppe Patota, director of the Garzanti Italian Dictionary in Milan, says the phrase “has distinctly sexist connotations” and “belongs to a misogynistic and politically highly incorrect tradition.”

2) Oregon. “She Flies With Her Own Wings” sounds weird. Yet it also sounds like not just a celebration of woman power but a tribute to self-reliance, regardless of gender.

3) Virginia. Virginian John Wilkes Booth shouted “Sic Semper Tyrannis” (“Thus Always to Tyrants”) after fatally shooting President Abraham Lincoln. Thus, that warning is always linked to that assassination.

4) North Carolina. “To Be, Rather Than To Seem” is an intriguing, potentially existential challenge. But some (though not all) Tar Heel fans seem to be chronic sore losers as they keep whining about that onsides-kick offsides call late in Clemson’s 45-37 victory over UNC two weeks ago in the Atlantic Coast Conference championship game.

Veni, vidi, vici

If Clemson coach Dabo Swinney’s winning ways with words, acronyms and landing talented recruits have staying power, perhaps we will one day put his “B.Y.O.G.” (“Bring Your Own Guts”) credo on our license plates.

Or should that be “B.Y.O.R.” (“Bring Your Own Referees”)?

Better yet, we should go with this variation on one of our state mottoes:

While I Drive, I Don’t Text.

Frank Wooten is assistant editor of The Post and Courier. His email is wooten@postandcourier.com.