Ben Carson has been very outspoken about various policies implemented by Obama’s government, as well as the now controversial Planned Parenthood organization.

Beginning with his criticism of Planned Parenthood, Ben Carson recently launched a petition against the group through his website. The petition includes the controversial video about Planned Parenthood released by the Center for Medical Progress, a group that advocates against abortion.

The following is an excerpt from the petition.

“I, like many of you, was sickened when I saw the video of Dr. Deborah Nucatola of Planned Parenthood secretly video taped discussing selling aborted baby parts. I was more than sickened, I was enraged… Congress must act NOW! Please sign my petition to Congress demanding that they stop all public funds to Planned Parenthood.”

According to Live Action News, Margaret Sanger, the group’s founder, is said to be racist. It is alleged that she at one time said that the program should be used to obliterate black people. The following is the statement.

“We don’t want the word to go out that we want to exterminate the Negro population, and the minister is the man who can straighten out that idea if it ever occurs to any of their more rebellious members. “

The organization is said to have received sizeable contributions for the course. After watching the video made by the Center for Medical Progress, in which Planed Parenthood is depicted as a heartless group that makes money from selling body parts, Ben Carson made the following comment.

“We have reached a time where people are so desensitized where they are not horrified by this kind of activity. We’ve allowed the secular progressive movement to [desensitize society] to the point where things are no longer wrong… If we can’t defund Planned Parenthood after this, we are lost.”

Ben Carson also recently attacked Obamacare saying the whole thing should be changed with the exception of one clause. And that is the one that prevents insurance companies from barring people with pre-existing conditions from joining health care programs.

The following was Ben Carson’s statement, according to IJ Review.

“Providing coverage to people who are sick is extremely important. When I work with Congress to repeal the law, I think we should keep this protection for the sick.”

[Photo by Scott Olson/Getty Images]