For the first time in four years, students form the Medical Assistant Program enjoyed a Pinning Ceremony last week at the Harlingen Cultural Arts Center.

The ceremony is the symbolic welcoming of newly graduated medical assistants into the profession, and graduates are presented pins by the faculty of the MEA Program.

Department Chair Alicia Lugo said 15 students received pins in a celebration that involved a candle ceremony and the presentation of a scroll creed by the American Association of Medical Assistants.

The graduating class consisted of Jacky Castro, Daniela Flores, Selene Garcia, Nancy Gaytan, Roberto Lizama, Diana Mendoza, Maria Mandujano, Crystal Maldonado, Yolanda Martinez, Sandra Olvera, Ruby Portales, Desiree Posas, Michelle Rodriguez, Mirna Tamez, Celeste Rivera and Diana Varela.

Lugo, who took over as department chair in April of 2013, addressed the graduating class.

“We wanted them to feel a sense of worth,” Lugo said about bringing back the pinning ceremony. “We have commencement coming up, but we wanted them to have their own ceremony, as well.”

Lugo reminded students that their role in the medical profession is important and the demand for medical assistants is growing.

Medical assistants work in doctors’ offices or clinics and assist the physician with anything from checking vital signs, to performing phlebotomy, EKGs or injections.

“Joining this profession is very important to everyone,” Lugo said. “And I make sure they know it. That’s why I wanted our pinning ceremony, too. So that they know they are needed and valued in the medical field.”

Lugo said the aging Baby Boomer Generation and implementation of the Affordable Care Act will generate an increase in patients in the near future and an increased demand for medical assistants.

“As more and more people become insured, they’re going to need us out there, and our students need to know they’re needed,” she said.

For more information on the Medical Assistant Program, go to www.tstc.edu/harlingenmedassist.