One action USDA could take to help cotton farmers, says Agriculture Secretary Tom Vilsack would be to develop a program in which USDA could cost-share on the ginning of cotton. Vilsack said USDA officials are working with the cotton industry on the details of such assistance.

Agriculture Secretary Tom Vilsack says USDA could make Cotton Transition Assistance Payments similar to those authorized in the first year of the 2014 farm bill to help cotton producers deal with the dire economic conditions they face.

That possibility comes with a big IF: Congress would have to restore Vilsack’s authority to use the Commodity Credit Corp. Act to provide funds to farmers to help them market their crops – authority Congress took away from the secretary under unusual circumstances in 2010.

Vilsack floated that possibility when he testified before a hearing of the House Agriculture Committee two weeks ago, and he repeated his willingness to do it again when he spoke to several thousand corn, soybean, grain sorghum and wheat farmers attending Commodity Classic in New Orleans today (March 4).

“It’s obvious to us we don’t have the statutory authority to designate cottonseed as an other oilseed,” Vilsack said, responding to a question raised about the issue during a press briefing that followed his speech in New Orleans.

Delta Farm Press Daily Stay current on what’s happening in Mid-South agriculture: Subscribe to Delta Farm Press Daily.

“Having said that, we want to help,” he added. “There are two ways we could help, one of which has been shut off by Congress. We could use the Commodity Credit Corp.’s resources to provide some kind of payment program similar to the transition program that was in place for 2014 and 2015 for cotton growers.”

Congress specifically prohibited the Agriculture Department from using those funds, reportedly, because of charges USDA used such a program to try to help Arkansas Sen. Blanche Lincoln’s failed re-election claim in 2010. Lincoln lost to current Sen. John Bozeman because of Arkansas voters’ unhappiness with the Affordable Care Act.