By Tung Yin

Bill Cosby has been in the news a lot lately, and it's not because of a revival of "The Cosby Show." Although it is said that there's no such thing as bad publicity, Cosby's public immolation over allegations of sexual assaults against dozens and dozens of women belies that adage. Even seven months ago, which is before recent damaging revelations, he had already dropped in polling from ranking near the top of the most trusted celebrities list to the bottom quarter, according to FiveThirtyEight.com.

As a result, Cosby, once responsible for the No. 1 rated TV show, has become a virtual pariah in Hollywood. Within a three-day period in November 2014, he lost a new TV show to be aired on NBC this summer and a comedy special on Netflix, and reruns of "The Cosby Show" disappeared from the cable network TV Land. When asked if it would be possible to revoke Cosby's Medal of Freedom Award, President Obama said there was no mechanism to do so but also said the allegations of drugging women without their knowledge to have sex with them would constitute rape, something that "this country, any civilized country, should have no tolerance for"

Comedians have taken to mocking Cosby openly, ranging from Tiny Fey and Amy Poehler at the Golden Globes to Bill Maher on "Real Time with Bill Maher" and Judd Apatow on "The Tonight Show."

Although Cosby has yet to be charged, much less convicted of any crime, all of these condemnations in the court of public opinion are completely understandable. The sheer number of accusers (at least 40 so far), the details provided and Cosby's own admissions under oath in depositions certainly make him seem like someone decent people would want to avoid working with.

Yet, for some reason, Hollywood seems to have no similar disgust with movie director Roman Polanski, whose sexual misconduct, though less voluminous than that alleged against Cosby, was proven beyond a reasonable doubt in a court of law.

To recap, in 1977, Polanski was charged with raping a 13-year-old girl after plying her with alcohol and drugs; he pleaded guilty to unlawful sexual intercourse with a minor. To be fair, Polanski has continued to deny that he gave her drugs or alcohol, but even if he is being truthful, we are talking about a 43-year-old man engaging in sexual intercourse with a child. Worse yet, Polanski fled the United States before sentencing, claiming that he was not going to be treated fairly by the trial judge. The proper avenue for redressing such concerns, of course, is within the judicial system, via appeal, not by becoming a fugitive a la Dr. Richard Kimble.

Hollywood not only has not turned its back on Polanski and continues to work with him, but also fetes him! Since 1977, the list of actors who've starred in his films includes Nastassja Kinski, Peter Firth, Walter Matthau, Harrison Ford, Sigourney Weaver, Johnny Depp, Ewan McGregor, Pierce Brosnan, Kate Winslet, Jodie Foster, among others. He has been nominated for several Academy and Golden Globe Awards and won one of each.

It is a common debating tactic to distract an opponent by arguing that he or she can't really care about an issue because that same concern isn't applied to a different issue — as in, "You shouldn't donate to save animals because there are starving kids in the country." People can and do have different priorities for their issues of concern. But in this instance, the rage stemming from Cosby's apparent raping of women through drugs and the inability of the criminal justice to pursue charges because of the statute of limitations should apply equally to Polanski's similarly reprehensible behavior. Yet, for some inexplicable reason, Hollywood's white hot fury is figuratively incinerating Cosby, but it's bathing Polanski in a soft, flattering light.

•

Tung Yin is a law professor at Lewis & Clark Law School. The views expressed are his own.