It’s been about a week since Sen. Dianne Feinstein, a San Francisco Democrat and chair of the Senate Intelligence Committee, released the executive summary of a report detailing CIA agents’ shocking abuses of terrorist detainees. But it’s still making headlines, and probably will for the near future.

[READ: Why Iran Loves the CIA Torture Report]

Which brings us to today’s Long Read, another mash-up of sorts, explaining the how - and why - of the the debate over torture and whether the U.S. can continue maintaining its moral authority. We open with some video of former Vice President Dick Cheney and his remarkable appearance Sunday on “Meet the Press”:

It’s not surprising that Cheney would mount a full defense of a policy most people believe he’s responsible for; after all, he’s defending his legacy as vice president. Rare is the politician that wouldn’t at least try to rationalize a major decision that was later proven wrong.

What IS surprising is that Cheney doesn’t blink when Chuck Todd questions him on the fact that some torture victims did nothing other than end up in the wrong place at the wrong time. Todd points out that 27 of the men who were tortured were later found to be innocent, and released without so much as an apology for the error.

[ALSO: Cheney: I'd Do It Again]

Enter the New Yorker’s Amy Davidson, who not only critiques Cheney’s appearance, but also links it to CIA director John Brennan’s ambivalence at a press conference last week -- and CIA officers’ pique at not getting praise for eliciting information from terrorist suspects, even if some of them didn’t know anything or made stuff up so the abuse would stop. A sample:

It would be comforting to dismiss Cheney as a historical oddity, to picture him sitting in the dimly lit room of a motel, changing the pitch of his voice to pretend he wasn’t alone. But he’s got company, and it’s dangerous. The way that many, including the present and former directors of the C.I.A., have responded to the Senate report has been shameless and sordid. (There have been exceptions, as Jane Mayer notes.) They have spent a lot of time complaining that the Agency hasn’t been sufficiently praised. The word “torture” upsets them.





Yet President Barack Obama, Davidson writes, hasn’t exactly emerged as a champion for good in this issue. The same president who talked a tiny bit of human-rights smack to the Chinese, and met with Burmese opposition leader Aun San Suu Kyi on his Asia trip a few weeks ago has decided not to bring the CIA to heel once and for all by sacking Brennan:

John Brennan works for Barack Obama. As Mayer writes in the magazine this week, the President, when it comes to torture, has preferred avoidance to accountability. Obama looks back in sorrow, and seems to think that everyone else does, too. But if this past week has proved anything, it’s that the legacy of torture is not quite repentance but impunity. This President has told his agents not to torture, and Brennan says he can work with that, while the C.I.A. waits for instructions from the next one.





The Mayer piece Davidson refers to is this one from the New Yorker’s current issue, which examines the White House’s role in bringing the torture report to light but also underscores some new poll numbers in which the public doesn’t seem all that bothered by what the CIA did, and whom they did it to. Mayer writes:

It remains to be seen, though, whether the report will spur lasting reform. Darius Rejali, a professor of political science at Reed College and an expert on torture regimes, doubts that it will. For one thing, despite {John} McCain’s testimony, torture is becoming just another partisan issue. This wasn’t always the case—it was Ronald Reagan who signed the U.N. Convention Against Torture, in 1988. But polls show both a growing acceptance of the practice and a widening divide along party lines. “It’s becoming a lot like the death penalty,” Rejali said.





A Pew poll released yesterday backs that up. According to the poll, roughly 51 percent believe the CIA abuse of detainees was justified, compared with just 29 percent who don’t - and 20 percent who don’t have an opinion on the issue. The divide is even sharper when political affiliation is factored in: a whopping 76 percent of Republicans say that torture was justified, while Democrats were split, 37 percent in favor and 46 percent opposed.

Courtesy of Pew Research Center

Even more fascinating - or troubling, depending on your perspective - is the fact that the public was almost evenly split over whether to release the report. Forty-three percent thought it was a good idea, while 42 percent thought it would do more harm than good.

Keep that in mind, however, while reading the final segment of the Long Read: a report by The Daily Beast’s Noah Schachtman which suggests we ought to brace ourselves for photos of detainee and prisoner abuse that could be released as early as Friday. That’s when a federal judge is set to rule on an American Civil Liberties Lawsuit that could release dozens of shocking images of abuse that make the ones from Abu Ghraib look like a child’s tea party:

Some photos show American troops posing with corpses; others depict U.S. forces holding guns to people’s heads or simulating forced sodomization. All of them could be released to the public, depending on how a federal judge in New York rules—and how hard the government fights to appeal. The government has a Friday deadline to submit to that judge its evidence for why it thinks each individual photograph should continue to be kept hidden away.

The photographs are part of a collection of thousands of images from 203 investigations into detainee abuse in Iraq and Afghanistan and represent one of the last known secret troves of evidence of detainee abuse. While the photos show disturbing images from the Bush administration’s watch, it is the Obama administration that has allowed them to remain buried—all with the help of a willing Congress.