Topics: Apartheid, Books, Editor's Picks, Nadine Gordimer, Nelson Mandela, Entertainment News

I remember her voice — clear, acerbic, assured. I must have been six or seven years old, scurrying around the lunch or dinner table. Johannesburg, early ’70s. I remember her bearing and keen gaze, her straight posture and straight talk. Nadine Gordimer chose her words carefully, and when she spoke people listened. The voice, the accent, told her story: arid gold mining town, Lithuanian watchmaker father, English mother. An outsider — Jewish, the child of foreign parents, female — she was educated by a tutor, read and wrote compulsively and published her first short story at the age of fifteen.

When I was in college in America, I began an intermittent epistolary relationship with Nadine, first about her writing and then about mine. I was probably the only freshman in my literature class who thought of her novel “My Son’s Story” when I read “The Tempest,” so I wrote to tell her so. (Caliban: “You taught me language; and my profit on’t. Is, I know how to curse.”) I screwed up my courage and sent the first short story of mine that I thought worthy of her time, and she wrote back that it perfectly captured the gap between “privilege and privation” in South Africa. That letter sent me back to my Apple LC in a happy hurry. Another story, an attempt at frugal prose and a setting further afield, elicited a succinct reply: don’t try to be a Japanese writer. We met in New York; we met in Johannesburg. Every time I wrote to her, she wrote back, a letter typed on a manual typewriter that left divots in the thin airmail parchment. When my novel was published in South Africa last year, she wrote a blurb (shout, they call them there) that made me jump for joy.

Are there many writers who fight for a cause, chronicle that cause and eventually outlive that cause? Nadine was that writer; she spans the Struggle. Her 1963 work, “Occasion for Loving,” is about a white woman who has a relationship with a black man, something that was illegal at the time, banned by the Immorality Act. “Burger’s Daughter,” published in 1979, is a fictionalized account of an anti-apartheid activist and his daughter, based in part on her friend and ANC comrade Bram Fischer. The book was banned in her homeland, but a lot of South Africans read it, and a copy was smuggled to Nelson Mandela on Robben Island.

“July’s People” (1981) imagines the end of apartheid and penetrates the feeling of futurelessness that permeated South Africa at the time. She chose for the epigraph a line from Antonio Gramsci: “The old is dying and the new cannot be born; in this interregnum there arises a great diversity of morbid symptoms.” “The House Gun” (1998), “The Pickup” (2001) and “No Time Like the Present” (2012) are about people living in post-apartheid South Africa. She sees the world through each of her characters’ eyes, and the result is writing that is taut and true.