<p>(AP Photo)</p>

By Kristi L. Nelson of the Knoxville News Sentinel

More than 18 percent of Knox County high school students smoke cigarettes, and almost 10 percent use smokeless tobacco products.

Nearly 12 percent of Knox County women who gave birth in 2013 reported smoking some time during pregnancy.

Those statistics alone concerned the Community Health Council enough that it decided decreasing tobacco use among youth and pregnant women should be one of its top four priority health issues this year.

The Knox County Commission-ordered council, which has up to 21 members from various organizations, decides what health issues require the most immediate attention, most recently from reading the Community Health Assessment Knox County Health Department released last month. It will develop a health improvement plan and present it to the community in early 2016.

But some initiatives already are addressing the problem. Early this year, Knox County Health Department received more than $300,000 — part of the state department of health’s share of a 1998 legal settlement against major tobacco companies — to begin the “Power to Quit” program for pregnant women.

The program offers incentives such as $50 retailer gift cards to women who attend monthly smoking cessation programs and stop smoking by the fifth month of pregnancy (a Breathalyzer-type device tests them for carbon monoxide). Women can stay in the program six months after birth; call 865-215-5170 for information.

Babies’ health is another incentive; women who smoke during pregnancy are more likely to have low-birthweight or premature babies.

And though 11.9 percent of women who gave birth in 2013 reported smoking during their pregnancies, “It is self-reported, so we believe that this number is probably underreported,” said Mark Prather, an epidemiologist with Knox County Health Department.

The percentage of Knox County high school students who smoke has decreased, from around 20 percent in 2009, and more than half of those who did smoke reported trying to quit. But, Prather noted, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention reports the use of e-cigarettes and “vaping” among middle and high school students tripled in 2013-2014. Prather said the Youth Behavioral Risk Survey this year will ask about vaping.

Slightly more than 21 percent of Knox County adults smoke — 20.9 percent of white residents, 29.3 percent of black residents — which is higher than the national average of 16.8 percent. Income and education were factors; the health department’s survey found 7.7 percent of college graduates countywide smoke, while 49.9 percent of Knox County residents who don’t have a high school diploma smoke.

HealthCare 21 Coalition is one of several agencies statewide participating in a statewide campaign in February to drive smokers who want to quit to a “one-stop-shopping” website of resources. Meanwhile, it’s focused on helping its member businesses encourage employees to quit. Karen Pershing, director of community initiatives for the coalition, said it can help employers look at their own tobacco-related policies and benefits, making sure they’re complying with Affordable Care Act and Mental Health Parity Act requirements, since “tobacco is an addictive substance.”

Pershing said it can also help companies offer on-site cessation classes, employer-customized apps to remind and encourage those who want to quit smoking, websites with interactive tools, presentations and a “cost calculator.”

The American Cancer Society will have its Great American Smokeout Thursday, asking smokers to quit, even for one day. Tennessee’s QuitLine, 1-800-QUIT-NOW provides counseling, resources and referrals in English and Spanish.

Related:

Cancer disparities rooted in ‘health inequity'

Assessment looks at Knox County's top health concerns