Jonah Goldberg: The bogeymen of the 'billionaire class'



CLEARLY THE ONLY explanation for Jeb Bush's almost effortless stroll to the Republican nomination is the pernicious stranglehold of big money in politics.



Oh, wait. Bush is in the low single digits in most national polls, despite his campaign and his super PAC raising more than $100 million.



Perhaps that's only because Donald Trump, the billionaire populist, is buying the nomination with his dragon's hoard of gold? Well, no. Trump has spent less than any other major candidate.



But surely Hillary Clinton, with her close ties to Wall Street, her husband's storied hobnobbing with the global .001 percent, not to mention her vast Rolodex of Clinton Inc. supporters going back four decades, has bought herself the nomination?



It doesn't look that way, according to the polls. She's losing ground to Sen. Bernie Sanders in both Iowa and New Hampshire. Sanders has raised more money from small donors than any other candidate in American history. And he's done so by declaring nothing short of war on what he calls the ?billionaire class.?



?I do not exaggerate when I tell you that the foundations of American democracy are being undermined,? Sanders told some students at the University of Chicago (and pretty much anyone else he's ever talked to). ?American democracy is not supposed to be about billionaires buying elections.?



You'd think that if the ?billionaire class? ? all 536 people ? had the kind of unfettered control over the U.S. political system Sanders believes them to have, Mr. Sanders would be asking, ?Would you like fries with that??



Instead, he's got a plausible, if not yet entirely probable, shot at the Democratic presidential nomination. And even if he doesn't emerge victorious, he's already dragged Clinton to the left on the issues the billionaires are supposed to care about.



And Trump, widely disliked among his fellow billionaires ? at least the Republican ones ? has had remarkable success demonizing his wealthy peers.



The simple fact is that almost everywhere you look, the super-rich are being stymied by democracy. In 2014, David Brat, an unknown academic, defeated the second most powerful Republican in Congress, then-House Majority Leader Eric Cantor, even though Cantor spent more money on steak dinners than Brat did on his whole campaign. The recent referendum on marijuana legalization in Ohio was lavishly funded ? and failed. And just a reminder: Barack Obama beat Mitt Romney and his plutocrat pals.



Those evil corporations aren't faring much better. We constantly hear about their vise grip on Washington, yet we still have the highest corporate tax rate in the developed world (not counting United Arab Emirates). Big corporations rightly want to be able to repatriate their profits earned overseas without being taxed on them again. (Most countries allow corporations to pay taxes on profits solely in the jurisdictions where they were earned.) And yet they can't get it done.



Even the dreaded Koch Brothers, those supposed super-villains, have failed to buy the policies they prefer.



And yet, to listen to countless pundits and politicians, we live in an oligarchy now. Clinton, who benefits from no less than five super PACs, thinks the Citizens United case, which made super PACs possible, is such a threat to democracy that the First Amendment should be rewritten to get rid of them.



Democrats don't like Citizens United because they think it might blunt their advantages. According to OpenSecrets.org, of the top five organizations ? i.e., unions and corporate PACs ? that give to federal candidates, all (mostly public unions) give 97 percent to 100 percent of their donations to liberals and Democrats. Of the top 10, eight give almost exclusively to the left. Of the top 25, 18 donate disproportionately to the left.



By the way, Koch Industries is No. 49 on the list, and the National Rifle Association is No. 74.



One can certainly understand why average citizens find this ?billionaire class? stuff plausible. Government certainly has become more and more unresponsive and aloof. (Public sector unions are a big reason why.) And it is obviously true that big money ? variously defined ? plays a significant role in our politics.



But you know what plays a bigger role? Politics. The NRA is a good case in point. President Obama insists that the ?gun lobby? owns Congress, which is why he can't get the gun-control policies he wants passed. The truth, however, is that politicians care more about votes than money, and if they follow his advice, they'll also follow so many Democrats who were fired for agreeing with Obama.



That's actually how democracy is supposed to work.





Jonah Goldberg is a fellow at the American Enterprise Institute and a senior editor of National Review.



To improve the chance of seeing your comment posted here or published in the New Hampshire Union Leader:



Identify yourself. Accounts using fake or incomplete names are suspended regardless of the quality of posts.

Say something new, stay on topic, keep it short.

Links to outside URLs are discouraged, if used they should be on topic.

Avoid comments in bad taste, write well, avoid using all capital letters

Don't cite facts about individuals or businesses without providing a means to verify the claim

If you see an objectionable comment please click the "Report Abuse" button and be sure to tell us why.

Note: Comments are the opinion of the respective poster and not of the publisher.

CHRIS HERBERT said Monday, January 18, 2016 at 7:21 am



Goldberg ignores history and the real world when he tells his readers not to look behind the curtain. The Koch brothers have stated publicly they will raise $800 million to influence the 2016 elections, from the Presidency right down to state legislative races. Much of that money will be funneled through super secret 401(c) 4 Super Pacs created as a result of the 2010 Citizens United Supreme Court ruling. No one, not Goldberg or anyone else, has a clue as to how much money these secret slush funds will raise, nor where it comes from. Only the Kochs of the world will know. The Billionaire class will know. Goldberg argues the public should not pierce the veil of secrecy. Not to worry, he advises. I suspect Goldberg's bread is buttered by making such misleading statements. History shows that money can and has influenced political policy making since the birth of our nation. Unregulated campaign funding, as was the case in the late 1800s, sparked a political backlash that Theodore Roosevelt used (trust busting) to reign in the market power of great wealth. Child labor laws were passed. Unions were allowed, even encouraged, to form and sign contracts with employers. The forty hour work week was created. All of this opposed by the wealthy class. Goldberg is right in the sense that the public can, and has before, rolled back and contained the unfettered power of money. Yet he advises we not, once again, unite to take back control of our government. He works for the ruling class. The class that considers our government a mere appendage of their private affairs. Ignore his song.

JOHN LABONTE said Monday, January 18, 2016 at 8:30 am



$800 million and they're way down in slot 49 on the political donation list? Make's you wonder what the top 5 (all liberal donors) are giving the Democrats. Sounds like the Koch brothers are being outspent by Hillary's rich "friends" big time. Maybe Bernie's right about her being in their pocket after all.

Matt Lulling said Monday, January 18, 2016 at 10:08 am



Meanwhile, this boot lick totally ignores the fact the US Congress is bought and sold by the billionaire class everyday, which is why we have a horde of issues that 75% of the people want, that never get passed....

Michael Raleigh said Monday, January 18, 2016 at 11:46 am



Citizens United must be reversed. It is essential that a Dem be elected in 2016 with the aging SCOTUS it is possible that as many as 3 seats will be open. This is an opportunity to correct the bad Roberts holdings that have shunned stare decisis and are political holdings rather than the legal ones they should be.

JAMES E FIEST said Monday, January 18, 2016 at 2:13 pm



Well, if a Dem must be elected, you Dems better make sure that Hilary is on the ticket because anyone of the Republican candidates can beat Bernie in the general election, and Hilary is beginning to "feel the Bern."

JAMES E FIEST said Monday, January 18, 2016 at 2:17 pm



Yeah, I'm sure working as the senior editor at the National Review is just a gold mine of kick backs from conservative billionaires and corporations. Come on Chris. Sheesh.

GENE RONIKIER said Monday, January 18, 2016 at 6:52 pm



@Raleigh....that bad Roberts is the one that upheld Obamacare, though he should not have.

Neil Strathearn said Tuesday, January 19, 2016 at 5:09 am



If Citizens United isn't such a big deal, why don't they need it at all?If big contributions are not being made, why was the aggregate cap removed in McCutcheon v. FEC?If it's a fair system, why did Justice Stephen G. Breyer dissent and say this, regarding the donation cap removal: “If the court in Citizens United opened a door, today’s decision may well open a floodgate.”If it's totally legit, why do candidates need a SuperPAC that acts as a middle man between candidates and corporations?If it's mostly Democrats that receive donations, why are five of the top six PACs giving to Republicans, with Bush receiving $103,167,845 from Right to Rise USA?Do we have the same numbers? https://www.opensecrets.org/pacs/superpacs.phpIf it's not a big deal, why did one staunch, conservative veteran call it, "the worst decision ever"? http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2012/10/12/john-mccain-citizens-united_n_1960996.htmlIf Citizens United is mostly liberal, why is the organization attacking Clinton and Sanders on their website? Why did they start anti-Clinton, witch-hunt petitions? Why did Citizens United pay for a slanderous anti-Clinton film? If it's not an attack on Clinton, why did the FEC initially bar its release?http://www.citizensunited.org/Something's not right here.

Gary ONeil said Tuesday, January 19, 2016 at 5:20 am



Roberts ruled that Obamacare was a TAX, that's all he ruled. As such, and with the support of the "majority" of Congress...it remains a TAX...probably the biggest TAX of all time. Roberts found the ONLY way Obamacare could have been upheld. You can yell and scream at individual folks in Washington all you want...but, what they screwed up was sustained when Roberts ruled it a TAX. The billionaires had nothing to do with the creation of the new TAX. Hardly... Now, does anyone believe that the President and other folks in DC did not believe right from the beginning that they were creating a TAX? As the voters have figured out over the past few elections, they have sent home many members of Congress. Too bad they can't send home members of SCOTUS.

Post a comment