Prankster Big Daws posed as a homeless man to give back to people who give to those in need, while learning a thing or two in the process.

Prankster Big Daws posed as a homeless man to give back to people who give to those in need, while learning a thing or two in the process. Screenshot "Giving to People Who Give"

One YouTube prankster decided to switch things up to make a difference. Big Daws (his YouTube name), known for his silly comedy sketches, took a more serious tone in his most recent prank video, where he pretended to be homeless, and gave $20 to anyone that stopped to speak to him or give him money. It’s his way of doing a good deed for people who give to those in need. “Today I wanted to give back to the people who are giving to the homeless,” he said.

Big Daws looks very convincing in the video, where he carries around a sign that says, “Anything Helps, God Bless,” while he waits for someone to approach him. Some people walk right by while others tell him to get a job. But a few good people stop to help — one of them even tells him about how he just got out of a homeless shelter. His reaction to receiving money was priceless. The prankster gave anyone who offered donations or encouragement their money back plus $20.

Not only did these generous people get an extra $20 in their pocket but they most likely reaped the great benefits of giving. A study from the University of Albany found that people who got tax subsidies from charitable donations were less likely to have lung problems, emotional and psychological issues, and arthritis.

Others have also come up with creative ways to raise awareness about homelessness, such as Mark Bustos, who cuts hair for the homeless every Sunday free of charge. He also gives out food and posts pictures on Instagram to encourage others to commit acts of kindness. According to the National Alliance to End Homelessness, over 600,000 people are homeless in the United States. A large percentage of these people, especially in New York and Los Angeles, live under bridges, in abandoned cars, and outside of churches, NPR reported.