The Broncos’ defensive coordinator, and pro tem head coach last season, possesses a dedicated work ethic, determination and competitiveness defined by the Del Rio ancestry.

In 1907 a young Spaniard, whose last name meant “Of The River,” and his wife were crammed with 2,200 other emigrants into “animal-like cages,” it was reported then, in the hold of steamship Heliopolis docked at Malaga on the Mediterranean Sea. They were bound for a new life in the Pacific Ocean.

Forty-seven miserable days later — a voyage across two oceans and around the Strait of Magellan — the dazed passengers arrived in Hawaii. Fourteen babies had been born, but 19 children died. The Del Rio couple were among the 8,000 “contract employees,” who had endured hunger and unrest in southern Spanish villages, lured to an “island paradise” with promises of a house, an acre of land, medical care and 20 gold pieces a month.

“My great-grandfather was a pineapple picker,” Jack Del Rio told me.

The imported workers had not understood they would labor 16 hours a day 26 days a month at the blooming pineapple plantation on the northwest side of Maui.

“My grandfather (Louis Del Rio) was born by the banyan tree (one of the world’s largest) in Lahaina,” says Del Rio, who has visited the site. Maui has become one of the world’s most popular vacation destinations, and the old pineapple plantation and the workers’ homes have been replaced by a scenic golf course — “The Plantation” at Kapalua.

When their “contracts” expired in three years, 5,000 Spaniards left for another ocean trip — to California.

The Del Rio family settled in the Napa Valley area and, later, Hayward.

Louis found Hope … Italian-American Hope Grasseschi. Their son, Jack Louis Del Rio, served in the Army, married, started his own business as a building contractor and wore a blue collar.

Jack Jr. was born in 1963 and would become protectorate of three younger brothers (James, Jason and Jeff).

In the summer the four boys lifted and loaded, and shoveled stuff, for Jack Sr. — and played every type of ball. At Hayward High School, Jack Jr. was the star on seven state title teams in football, basketball and baseball. He turned down an offer from the Toronto Blue Jays and played baseball and football at Southern Cal from 1981-84.

Del Rio was drafted into the NFL and developed into a tireless, tough Pro Bowl linebacker.

After his fourth season, while with the Chiefs, Del Rio finished college at Kansas. “I’m very proud that I was the first in my family to earn a degree,” he said.

After 11 seasons as a player and six more as an assistant coach, Del Rio was the Jacksonville Jaguars’ head coach for nine years. He was fired in 2011. John Fox offered him the defensive coordinator’s position in 2012.

“I could lie on the beach for a year and collect my (contract) money or join the Broncos. My brother-in-law and 13 friends voted 14-0 that I should lie on the beach,” Del Rio laughs.

“I made the right choice. The Broncos have a great coach, great organization, great city, great talent. And I knew John Elway would produce a winning team every year.”

Last season, when John Fox experienced a serious heart issue over the bye week, then underwent surgery, Del Rio was the obvious selection for interim coach.

“It’s like riding a bike. Only difference was I never had this good a bike before, one with Manning racing tires. But if we won, it was because we had an outstanding team. If we lost, it was my fault.”

The Broncos won three out of four, and, oddly enough, Rio’s overall head coaching record nearly reached .500 (71-72).

“I’ve thought about it. If we hadn’t blown the game in New England, I’d be a winning coach.”

He wants it.

“Sure, I’m anxious to be a head coach again. It has to be the right fit for some team, and that hasn’t happened yet. But I’m so happy and satisfied to be right where I am.”

In 2012 the Broncos ranked No. 2 in yards allowed. Struck by injuries and the loss of Elvis Dumervil and, for most of the season, Von Miller, the defense dropped off considerably last year. Now, Del Rio has new toys and repaired players.

“It starts with the edge rushers, and we’ve got two of the best — like we did in 2012. You put pressure on the quarterback, protect the backside with your secondary and stop people from running right at you, and that’s what we have a chance to do this year.”

The season also will include a particularly special day for Jack. He will be inducted into the USC Sports Hall of Fame.

“The school called and said they knew I couldn’t be there because of the Broncos’ season. I’d already looked at the schedule. That’s our bye weekend (Sept. 28), plus USC is playing Oregon State.”

Luke Del Rio, Jack’s son and a graduate of Valor Christian High School, where he was the quarterback on the state championship team, is one of two candidates to be the Beavers’ backup at QB this season.

“I’m thrilled to be with my son that day.”

For more than a century, the Del Rio family has traveled long and hard, far and wide — beginning with a young man who courageously and adventurously left his home in Spain to pick pineapples.

Woody Paige: woody@woodypaige.com or twitter.com/woodypaige