Aetna Better Health of New Jersey, a subsidiary of the health insurer Aetna, announced it was awarded a state contract to participate in the NJ FamilyCare, or Medicaid, program, effective last Dec. 1.

Medicaid provides health care to serves low-income New Jerseyans, and the state is now in the midst of a major Medicaid expansion funded by the Affordable Care Act. Health plans provide the state’s Medicaid program under managed care contracts with the state. The largest provider is Horizon Blue Cross Blue Shield of New Jersey’s managed Medicaid subsidiary, Horizon NJ Health.

Aetna also announced that Barry Volin is the new CEO of Aetna Better Health of New Jersey.

Click here to subscribe to the NJBIZ e-newsletters

Pamela Sedmak, CEO and president of Aetna Medicaid, said: “We look forward to partnering with the state of New Jersey and its physicians, health systems and other providers to help drive improvements in delivery and health outcomes through comprehensive and integrated services for NJ FamilyCare recipients. We are ready to commit our talent and resources to help improve the quality and efficiency of medical care in New Jersey.”

Aetna said that, of the nearly 1.6 million individuals eligible for New Jersey's Medicaid managed care program, the overwhelming majority are enrolled in the NJ FamilyCare managed care program.

Aetna currently serves nearly 1.2 million New Jersey commercial and Medicare members. Aetna Medicaid said its entry into NJ FamilyCare will enhance health plan choice. Aetna Medicaid currently serves more than 2.9 million Medicaid recipients in 17 states.

Aetna Better Health joins the four managed care organizations who now compete for Medicaid members across the state: Horizon NJ Health; Amerigroup Real Solutions; UnitedHealthcare Community Plan; and WellCare.

Aetna said it will initially offer services to New Jerseyans in eight of the state's 21 counties (Bergen, Camden, Essex, Hudson, Middlesex, Passaic, Somerset and Union), which Aetna said represent 64 percent of the state's Medicaid-eligible population. The remaining 13 counties are expected to be added by June 2016.

ALSO ON NJBIZ:

Barnabas Health purchases Jersey City-owned property for $24M

Matzo maker to shift operations to N.J., leaving historic N.Y. home

Maserati North America roars to sales record in 2014