Sanofi CEO Christopher A. Viehbacher pictured in May. Agence France-Presse/Getty Images

Sanofi became the second European drug maker to be hit by cold winds from across the Atlantic Tuesday, as pharmaceutical companies reel from price squeezes in the U.S., their most profitable market.

Shares in Sanofi fell 8% as its forecast of flat diabetes drug sales next year stunned investors. Analysts had penciled in double-digit growth in the French company’s most important business line.

Sales of its best-selling drug, the insulin Lantus, disappointed analysts in the third quarter, while its new forecast could spark low to mid-single digit earnings downgrades for 2015, estimates Deutsche Bank.

U.S. pricing pressures have forced Sanofi to cut the price of Lantus in order to compete with rivals, and the company noted that “the increased rebates in the U.S. and the impact of the Affordable Care Act will continue in 2015.”

Sanofi isn’t the only drug maker feeling the chill. GlaxoSmithKline PLC cited U.S. price pressures in respiratory drugs as the main reason for its full-year earnings downgrade in July. Earlier this month, Glaxo Chief Executive Andrew Witty talked of a “new reality” in pricing and competitor dynamics.

And the market was quick to seize on wider implications from Sanofi’s announcement Tuesday. Shares in Novo Nordisk, which markets Lantus’ big competitor, the long-acting insulin Levemir, fell 3% in morning trading. Between them, Sanofi and Novo Nordisk dominate the U.S. insulin market.

U.S. price pressures are particularly acute in the ‘primary care’ space, analysts note: these are drugs prescribed by general physicians, rather than those prescribed by hospital specialists.

That’s partly due to increased competition, amid a wave of drug launches in areas like heart disease, diabetes and respiratory conditions.

It’s also because payers are getting more aggressive and savvy, thinks Alistair Campbell, a health care analyst at Berenberg bank.

“There are battles to be fought now, and where the payers can see a battle they can win they’re definitely getting more effective at fighting them.”

U.S. pharmacy benefit manager Express Scripts – which negotiates drug prices on behalf of employees and health insurers – excluded certain drugs from its suggested prescribing list this year, including Glaxo’s Advair, and Novo Nordisk’s insulins Novolin and Novolog, recommending doctors prescribe cheaper alternatives instead.

The U.S. payer market is also becoming more consolidated. Glaxo estimates that the top 10 commercial plans now control 86% of the marketplace, creating more visibility on contracting strategies and pricing.

“I think you have a general shift in power toward the purchaser,” said Mr. Witty on a call to analysts last week.

Mr. Campbell thinks these dynamics could force a more widespread rethink of pricing expectations. He notes another worrying trend: that new drug launches have also been hit by the pricing squeeze, citing a “painfully slow” start for U.S. prescriptions of Glaxo’s new respiratory drug Anoro.

“You’ve seen right from the start difficult reimbursement discussions on new launches for even drugs that have reasonable data on clinical efficacy– now that is a concern.”