Many seniors who seek care in emergency departments may be malnourished, a small study by researchers at the University of North Carolina suggests. The study is among the first to attempt to document the extent of this problem.

“Although we don’t know if the results extrapolate to all emergency departments, my guess is they probably come pretty close,” said Dr. Christopher Carpenter, chairman of the geriatric section of the American College of Emergency Physicians, who was not involved in the research.

Malnutrition in older adults can lead to muscle wasting, fatigue, weakness, functional decline, an increased risk of infection, the exacerbation of chronic illnesses and death. Yet this treatable condition is often overlooked or ignored by medical providers.

In 2010, a large study that pooled research from five continents found high rates of malnutrition among adults ages 65 and older in hospitals (39 percent), nursing homes (14 percent), rehabilitation facilities (51 percent) and the community (6 percent). Emergency departments were not included.

Yet older adults account for about 20 million emergency room visits each year. “If this study’s findings are confirmed, we should do nutritional screening for all these patients,” Dr. Carpenter said.

In the new study, published online in the Annals of Emergency Medicine, 138 patients ages 65 and older (none with acute medical problems or dementia) were evaluated at a North Carolina hospital last summer with a six-item questionnaire that asked about food consumption, weight loss, body mass index and problems such as stress or depression.

Scores indicated that 22 patients were malnourished and an additional 61 patients were at risk of becoming so — in all, 60 percent of the entire sample.

“That was an eye-opener,” said Dr. Timothy Platts-Mills, an author of the study and an assistant professor of emergency medicine at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill.

Factors linked to poor nutritional status included depression (of 25 seniors with depression, 52 percent were malnourished); difficulty eating, often due to dental problems (38 percent); and problems affording or having transportation needed to buy groceries (33 percent).

Other studies have suggested additional contributing factors: social isolation — who likes to eat alone? — cognitive difficulties, and medications that interfere with appetite or the absorption of nutrients.

Alarmingly, none of the patients identified by researchers as being malnourished had notes in their medical charts indicating that doctors or nurses had identified this problem. “This is not where our training is,” Dr. Platts-Mills said.

Many families notice when an older relative is not eating well; this study, along with others, suggests that a referral to a doctor for an evaluation may be in order. “Malnutrition is a really serious, common issue and just nagging Grandma to eat more might not be an effective solution,” Dr. Platts-Mills said.