James Spaulding was invited to become a senior lecturer at the University of California, Berkeley Graduate School of Journalism. Credit: University of California Berkeley

By of the

Whatever you do, do the best you can.

That was one of the many lessons James "Jim" Spaulding taught his children, through his words and his actions.

Spaulding, a longtime medical and science writer for The Milwaukee Journal who died this summer at the age of 94, is being honored Sunday at a memorial gathering in Calistoga, Calif., where he spent his later years after leaving the newspaper.

Spaulding, who was born in Des Moines, Iowa, served as a captain in World War II.

He joined the Journal in 1951, and rose to national prominence and his health column became a mainstay for readers. Because of his extensive knowledge of medicine, Spaulding was known in the newsroom as "Doc."

"Doctors read it very carefully," the newspaper's former features writer Mike Drew said. "Patients did too."

He added that Spaulding was a talented tennis and squash player.

"He would beat me right handed, and then he would beat me left handed," Drew said.

Ruth Zubrensky, a longtime family friend, said Spaulding was "very intense" about things he cared about, including journalism, tennis and wine. She added that he and her husband, Leonard, were both "health fanatics" and active, fit men, who loved tennis as well as wine.

"He was very focused on everything he did," she said.

In 1971, Spaulding was invited to California to become a senior lecturer by Edwin Bayley, the founding dean of the Graduate School of Journalism at the University of California, Berkeley.

Spaulding and his late wife, Barbara, bought 40 acres of land in California, which they developed into Spaulding Vineyard. They then converted it into Stonegate Winery, and came to be known as pioneers in the creation of the Napa Valley as a source of world-class wines.

He was a self-made man, said his daughter Ann.

"My dad was smart, witty, and he was a man of integrity," she said. "From a child's standpoint, he always said, 'You won't get punished if you tell the truth.'"

She added that he always told his children, "Whatever you do, do the best you can."

Spaulding is survived by his wife, Martha Casselman, three children, David, Susan, and Ann Spaulding, two grandsons, and two great-grandchildren. He is also survived by his sister Jane Nordberg of Northbrook, Ill.