Source: Alice Park, "Little by Little, Violent Video Games Make Us More Aggressive," www.time.com, Mar. 24, 2014 Whether or not video games cause violent behavior in children is still up for debate. New research out this week points to both conclusions.



A new study published in the Aug. 2014 Journal of Personality and Social Psychology found that children playing mature-rated and risk-glorifying video games had "increases in all measures of behavioral deviances." The games affected ideas of "sensation seeking and rebelliousness, attitudes toward deviant behavior in oneself and other, and affiliation with deviant peers," resulting in risky real-life behavior, specifically among children who reported "heavy play" of mature-rated games and who played characters who deviate from social norms. Children who played the same games but played as a "noble protagonist" were less likely to engage in risky behavior in real life.



That Aug. 2014 study, co-authored by Jay Hull, PhD, Professor of Psychology and Brain Sciences at Dartmouth University, builds on a 2012 study by Hull published in Psychology of Popular Media Culture that found that children who play mature-rated and risk-glorifying games were more likely to engage in "a variety of risky driving habits (e.g., speeding, tailgating, weaving in traffic), being pulled over by the police, automobile accidents, and willingness to drink and drive." Hull stated, "They might think 'I've done much worse things in these games,'… They’re less likely to find things as being wrong that other people would find wrong."



A new study published in the Aug. 4, 2014 Pediatrics by Andrew K. Przybylski, PhD, behavioral scientist at the University of Oxford, found that both girls and boys aged 10 to 15 years old who played an hour or less of video games per day were more likely to be more satisfied and happier than children who do not play video games at all. Children who played more than three hours a day reported lower levels of happiness and satisfaction. Przybylski also notes that playing video games accounts for 2% of a child's psychological and social function, positive or negative.



James Ivory, PhD, Associate Professor at Virginia Tech, argues that neither study proves or disproves violent video games as a cause of behavior. "If a parent is just worried that their kid is playing Grand Theft Auto, and not worried about other factors that influence their kids… then they’re looking the wrong way," stated Ivory.





Sources:



Jay G. Hull, Timothy J. Brunelle, Anna T. Prescott, and James D. Sargent, "A Longitudinal Study of Risk-Glorifying Video Games and Behavioral Deviance," Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, Aug. 2014



Jay G. Hull, Anna M. Draghici, and James D. Sargent, "A Longitudinal Study of Risk-Glorifying Video Games and Reckless Driving," Psychology of Popular Media Culture, Aug. 2012



Andrew K. Przybylski, "Electronic Gaming and Psychosocial Adjustment," Pediatrics, Aug. 4, 2014



Nicholas St. Fleur, "Playing Video Games Can Help or Hurt, Depending on Whom You Ask," www.npr.org, Aug. 8, 2014