Highlights from the NEXT PRACTICES Round Table at Harvard University . . .A few of our guest presenters (in order of appearance) . . . 9 Harvard, Dr. Dennis Culhane,UPenn; Deb De Santis, CSH; Dr. Jeffrey Liebman,Harvard University; George Overholser, Third Sector Capital;Andrew Wolk,Root Cause; Joe Finn, MHSA; Mike Durkin, United Way; Gary Graves,Santa Clara County; Ray Flynn,Philip Mangano, ART; Mike Gallo, TET; Antoinette Triplett,St. Louis;Dr. Sam Tsemberis; Dr. Stephen Gaetz; and Sec Donovan,HUD Secretary

Shaun Donovan.

8 Harvard NATIONAL NEXT PRACTICES COLLOQUY CONVENES AT HARVARD UNIVERSITY WITH FOCUS ON SCALING SOLUTIONS; OFFERS PROVOCATIVE AND INTERACTIVE EXPERTISE FROM INNOVATORS AND FUTURISTS

"Will we tolerate homelessness? A good question for us to begin this colloquy," stated Round Table President Philip Mangano as he welcomed more than 100 invited attendees from across the country to the inaugural NEXT PRACTICES colloquy at Harvard University last month. Convened in partnership with the Massachusetts Housing and Shelter Alliance (MHSA), and Phillips Brooks House Association (PBHA) at Harvard University, the groundbreaking gathering featured provocative and interactive presenters and mavens from across the country.

Attendees heard from HUD Secretary Shaun Donovan who received the Robert Coles Call of Service Award, Former Vatican Ambassador and former Boston Mayor Ray Flynn who received the William Lloyd Garrison Public Service Award for Moral Courage, Dr. Dennis Culhane of the University of Pennsylvania, Dr. Sam Tsemberis of Pathways to Housing, and Dr. Stephen Gaetz of the Canadian Homeless Research Network. Panels of public and private sector experts on the Affordable Care Act and Social Impact Financing, along with practitioners in employment and housing, brought insights to move the gathering forward to the future, to position participants to accomplish the mission of ending homelessness and to be opportunistic.

"Wherever we are in this country, whether in the small cities of Maine or Skid Row in Los Angeles, our societal tolerance for the long misery and human tragedy of homelessness is too apparent," Mangano told the attendees. "How long will we tolerate people languishing on our streets? Living in our shelters? Randomly ricocheting among health and law enforcement systems?"

Mangano was joined in welcoming participants by co-conveners Joseph Finn, Executive Director of the Massachusetts Housing and Shelter Alliance (pictured at right) and Maria Dominguez Gray, Executive Director (pictured below) and President Kate Meakem of Harvard's Phillips Brooks House Association.

Colloquy participants were urged to use the opportunity to engage new ideas, new approaches, and new resources, knowing that their interaction need not be one of "brain storming" or consensus building but challenging. "We're not here to confuse or obfuscate the differences between process and performance, conjecture and research, inputs and outcomes, all part of the tolerance," indicated Mangano. "Not to pretend that progress is being made in our gatherings that celebrate new collaborations, new dialogue, new conversations, while the numbers go back up and we fall further behind. That's tolerating homelessness."

This issue of the e-news highlights the colloquy program. In upcoming issues, we'll provide more depth and detail on individual presenters and topics.

STARTING AND FINISHING WITH NEXT PRACTICES IN HOMELESSNESS RESEARCH

Each presentation and topic at the NEXT PRACTICES colloquy was framed with the intent explore the emerging NEXT PRACTICES that will contribute to scaling what we know works and to offer a strategic platform to be intolerant of homelessness. With research as the foundation of every strategy, the colloquy commenced with a research update from Dr. Dennis Culhane of the University of Pennsylvania. Culhane also is Director of Research, National Center on Homelessness among Veterans. He outlined important age-related data that can shape next responses in policy and investment, including the importance of integrated data sets, as well as updating attendees on progress in meeting the national goal of ending veteran homelessness.

Culhane noted that 1 in 3 sheltered homeless single adult males was age 46-54 in 2010 (compared to 1 in 5 in 2000 and 1 in 8 in 1990). Aging trends in homelessness are distinct relative to the general population and consistent across cities, providing a model to predict the size of the future homeless population age 60 and over.

"With increasing number of homeless persons approaching life expectancy, health care needs and associated costs expected to increase," indicated Culhane. He also demonstrated that projections suggest a growing proportion of young adults in the homeless population, grouped around age 30 in 2020 and 35 in 2025. As a cohort of individuals born after the Baby Boom years which did not become part of the labor force in their 20's, they face permanent dislocation that puts them at risk of homelessness, especially chronic homelessness. He noted the "emerging imagination" of cost research in highlighting the expense associated with this group.

From his work on veterans' homelessness, Culhane showed data on the decrease from 70,208 veterans in 2009 to 62,619 in 2012, adding that the number of veterans served has also increased every year, with the addition of HUD-VASH vouchers, services initiatives, and prevention funds.

ENDING HOMELESSNESS THROUGH THE RESOURCES OF THE AFFORDABLE CARE ACT AND THE HEALTH CARE SECTOR

As the NEXT PRACTICES Colloquy convened at Harvard, few topics had been more in the headlines than the Affordable Care Act (ACA), with the notable exception of the likely World Series Championship of the Boston Red Sox. The colloquy organizers, especially MHSA's Joe Finn, organized a group of expert presenters who charted new territory for attendees on the intersection of opportunities in permanent supportive housing and health care that are presented by the ACA.

Deborah De Santis, President of the Corporation for Supportive Housing,

gave opening remarks. She was followed by a panel on Scaling Housing through the Affordable Care Act, moderated by George Smart, Massachusetts Behavioral Health Partnership (MBHP). MBHP has been a long-time partner to initiatives and innovations to end chronic homelessness in Massachusetts, and is partnered with MHSA in its CSPECH and Home and Healthy for Good initiatives. De Santis is pictured here with Joe Finn.

Panelists whose insights will be featured in upcoming e-news issues were Dr. Jessie Gaeta, Boston Health Care for the Homeless Program; Dr. Monica Bharel, Boston Health Care for the Homeless Program; Ellen Breslin Davidson and Tony Dreyfus, BD Group; and Dick Dougherty, DMA Health Strategies.

Dr. Bharel, Chief Medical Officer at Boston Health Care for the Homeless and Dr. Gaeta, Physician Advocate at MHSA, presented cost and utilization data from 6,493 individuals seen by Boston Health Care for the Homeless Program (BHCHP) in 2010 who had Medicaid coverage. Average annual health care expenditures for these patients was $22,934 which is well above the Massachusetts average. Patients with a substance use diagnosis have average costs twice those of patients with no behavioral diagnosis. Patients with mental illness have average costs five times larger. Almost 1400 individuals had 6 or more ER visits. The group in total represented $149 million in expenditures. The most expensive 10% of the individuals represented 48% of the costs.

SOCIAL IMPACT FINANCING FOCUS BRINGS NEW TOOLS TO PAY FOR SUCCESS INITIATIVES

From Massachusetts to California, cities, counties, and states are pursuing new opportunities to scale solutions using Social Impact Financing models to put field-tested, evidence-based solutions to work with a pay-for-success strategy. Massachusetts is underway with the launch of the first in the nation state initiative focused on chronic homelessness, and Santa Clara County, California is forwarding a county-level inaugural enterprise.

Colloquy attendees heard from Dr. Jeffrey Liebman, Kennedy School of Government, Harvard University, Director of the Social Impact Bond Technical Assistance Lab (SIB Lab) at Harvard and Malcolm Weiner Professor of Public Policy (pictured here). The SIB Lab provides technical assistance to seven cities and states and conducts research on how governments can foster social innovation and improve the results they obtain with their social spending. Dr. Liebman is a former Obama Administration OMB official, and former Clinton Administration Special Assistant to the President for Economic Policy and coordinator of the Clinton Social Security reform technical working group.

Andrew Wolk of Root Cause, is widely recognized as a leading social innovator and a pioneering teacher of social entrepreneurship. He founded Root Cause in 2004 and continues to lead its overall strategic direction, having consulted to dozens of nonprofit organizations in their quest to achieve enduring social impact. Wolk designed and taught one of the first courses on social entrepreneurship in the country. He is a senior lecturer in social entrepreneurship at MIT and is a Gleitsman Visiting Practitioner at Harvard Kennedy School, where he is currently teaching a course on new public leadership and the role of government.

A panel of practitioners addressing the issues and opportunities included Gary Graves, COO of Santa Clara County, CA; George Overholser, Third Sector Capital Partners; Michael Durkin, President, United Way of Massachusetts Bay and Merrimack Valley; Arthur Jemison, Deputy Undersecretary, Massachusetts Department of Housing and Community Development; and MHSA's Joe Finn.

FORMER VATICAN AMBASSADOR AND FORMER BOSTON MAYOR RAY FLYNN PRESENTED WITH THE WILLIAM LLOYD GARRISON PUBLIC SERVICE AWARD FOR MORAL COURAGE

Even as Boston has elected its first new mayor in 20 years, Ray Flynn, who brought the issue of homelessness to the national agenda while serving as Boston Mayor and President of the U.S. Conference of Mayors, was recognized at the NEXT PRACTICES Round Table with the William Lloyd Garrison Public Service Award for Moral Courage.

Citing Flynn's leadership in Boston and his role on the national stage in helping garner support for the successful passage of the Stewart B. McKinney Act in 1987, including sleeping out at the U.S. Capitol with the late activist Mitch Snyder, Round Table President Mangano and MHSA President Joe Finn joined in citing Flynn:

"For relentless and initiatory moral suasion in his personal and professional life on behalf of our poorest neighbors; "For heeding the call of his faith and conscience while City Councilor, Mayor, and President of the U.S. Conference of Mayors to advocate on behalf of the most vulnerable and disabled persons; "For his unwavering and courageous stands to shape public policy in local, state, and federal governments in the tradition of Boston's Abolitionist moral leader, William Lloyd Garrison; "For his support and participation in advocacy to advance the solution of housing for homelessness in the creation of the Special Initiative to House Homeless Mentally Ill Persons and the Housing Now! March in Washington; and "For his spiritual passion in the tradition of St. Francis of Assisi to attend and care for his city's and our nation's poor and disadvantaged."

Flynn was elected the 46th Mayor of Boston on November 15, 1983 and served three terms, to 1993. His career in public service included four terms in the Massachusetts Legislature from 1971 - 1978. From 1978 - 1983, he served three terms on the Boston City Council. He was chairman of the committees on Housing and Neighborhood Development, Neighborhood Services, the Special Committee on School Matters, Government Relations, and Government Finance. He served as President of the United States Conference of Mayors in 1991 - 1992. In his leadership role, he brought issues of poverty, hunger, and homelessness to the national agenda, as well as focusing on the needs of the homeless mentally ill. He worked for the passage of the federal Stewart B. McKinney Homeless Assistance Act in 1987, and he was the only Mayor to speak at the 1989 HOUSING NOW march in Washington. In an upcoming e-news, we'll share Ambassador's Flynn's comments and more details from the award event.

EMPLOYMENT - JOBS TO CAREERS: EXPERIENCE AND OPPORTUNITY IN SCALING WORKFORCE SOLUTIONS

Starting with the 2003 joint HUD-DOL housing and employment initiative for people experiencing chronic homelessness - now marking its first decade of insights - employment has increasingly been included in strategies to end homelessness. But moving beyond unskilled and day labor job pools to strategies that yield skilled workers with career opportunities has been a challenge. In a well-received segment of the Round Table, Michael Gallo, CEO of Technical Employment Training (TET), in San Bernardino, CA, made featured remarks on TET's workforce model and the many community partnerships central to its success. TET has focused on the needs of its regional economic base, examining where economic experts predict the jobs of the future will be and identifying the technical skills needed to fill those jobs. TET is a partnership between education and industry, to prepare a skilled and highly-qualified workforce for the manufacturing sector and a key element of the Inland Empire Employment Initiative, a new strategy to bring this workforce model to the homeless and reentry population as more ex-prisoners at risk of homelessness and unemployment and recidivism return to California counties.

ST. LOUIS: NEXT PRACTICES IN A JURISDICTION WITH A DATE CERTAIN TO END CHRONIC HOMELESSNESS

Mayor Francis Slay of St. Louis is that city's longest-serving Mayor, and Antoinette Hayes-Triplett, City of St. Louis, Department of Human Services (pictured here) came to the Colloquy to share the St. Louis results. The Mayor's political will and the leadership of Department of Human Services Director Bill Siedhoff in the implementation of their Ten Year Plan plus constant vigilance to outcomes and consumer preferences has allowed St. Louis to set a date certain to end chronic homelessness, based on the results of its last census, which is conducted twice annually.

Building on the success of its Ten Year Plan strategy and its Welcome Home, Neighbors and Moving Forward plan that successfully dismantled multiple encampments and relocated residents to permanent housing, St. Louis is forwarding two goals - BEACH - The Beginning of the End: Abolishing Chronic Homelessness in which the city will house the 138 chronically homeless individuals identified in the most recent census by next spring and Operation Reveille, which will rapidly rehouse every veterans homeless on the day of next July's census.

BEACH was launched in early 2013 "Making Homelessness History," a summit at the Missouri History Museum at which Round Table President Mangano delivered keynote remarks. Each of the 138 individuals in the target group is being visited by a case worker for assessment for services that include rapid rehousing assistance, intensive case management, health and behavioral health treatment, transportation, food and other social services.

Improvements in engagement, assessment, case management and data management make the new initiative possible. Since 2001, according to the City, there has been a 122% increase in permanent supportive housing units, an increase from 595 to 1322 units; a 2700% increase in permanent supportive housing units for chronically homeless persons, an increase from 11 to 308 units; and closure of four encampments with 64 individuals provided rapid re-housing and case management.

A SENSE OF BELONGING FOR HOUSING CONSUMERS - NEXT PRACTICES IN COMMUNITY AND WELL-BEING

Over the last year, as the NEXT PRACTICES program was in development, the issue of measuring a sense of belonging and well-being for individuals who have moved from homelessness to housing has surfaced as a topic that needed more insight.

Research showed that proven tools to measure the integration of individuals in the community, their new relationships and resources, were missing from the picture of success in ending the long misery of homelessness. Practitioners, including those serving the homelessness mentally ill, were interested in how to quantify consumer satisfaction and need as stability, recovery, and integration move forward.

Dr. Sam Tsemberis, Founder of Pathways to Housing in New York City and sites around the world, joined John Ladner, of the Gettlove program in Los Angeles and Tod Lipka of Step Up on Second in Santa Monica, CA to offer insights on this key topic. Step Up develops permanent supportive housing for the homeless mentally ill and involves and employs large numbers of consumers. Gettlove has moved from a street oriented program to housing some of Hollywood's chronic population.

Watch for the upcoming e-news issue where we will share some of the insights of this panel.

NEXT PRACTICES IN YOUTH HOMELESSNESS COMBINES EXPERT RESEARCH WITH NEW INITIATIVE

In the final interactive session of the colloquy, Canadian researcher Dr. Stephen Gaetz, Director, Homeless Hub (Canadian Homelessness Research Network) (pictured here) and Associate Professor, York University, Toronto, Canada, addressed data and solutions regarding youth homelessness from his expertise in the youth issue. Gaetz was joined by Sam Greenberg and Sarah Rosenkrantz of Phillips Brooks House (pictured here), who briefed participants on their developing response to youth homelessness as an extension of their work in the Harvard Square Shelter. With a significant youth population that is underserved, the Harvard volunteers have drafted a proposed program model that is built on the insights of Dr. Gaetz and consumer preferences.

HUD SECRETARY SHAUN DONOVAN RECEIVES 2013 ROBERT COLES "CALL OF SERVICE" AWARD AND OFFERS PERSONAL INSIGHTS INTO ENDING HOMELESSNESS

At the historic Memorial Church on Harvard Yard, as the NEXT PRACTICES Round Table and the 30th anniversary of the Harvard Square Homeless Shelter operated by Harvard's Phillips Brooks House commenced, former shelter volunteer, Harvard graduate, and U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development Secretary Shaun Donovan was presented the 2013 Robert Coles Call of Service Award by Harvard President Drew Faust, along with Phillips Brooks House President Kate Meakem and Executive Director Maria Dominguez Gray. The annual award recognizes former Phillips Brooks House volunteer, Board Member, child psychologist, civil rights worker, longtime Harvard Professor, and Pulitzer Prize Winning author Dr. Robert Coles, author of numerous books, including "The Call of Service." Coles also has taught the well-known "Literature of Social Reflection" and "Literature of Christian Reflection." Pictured here are (left to right) Secretary Donovan, Philip Mangano, and Dr. Coles.

Round Table President Mangano introduced the Secretary for the accompanying Call of Service Lecture. Mangano was Director of Homeless Services for the City of Cambridge when Secretary Donovan was a Harvard student and shelter volunteer. In their remarks, both Mangano and Donovan cited their attendance in Coles' class as important to their thinking and commitment. "Secretary Donovan has not only preserved the legacy of the past that works, he has worked to discard what has not gotten the job done," indicated Mangano. "His emphasis on performance, on outcomes continues the new vocabulary for compassion. Rather than being content with serving people, let's solve the problems. Not simple, but a larger moral vision. A recognition that détente with the morally intolerable is unacceptable. His job, our job, is to bring remedy to the long misery; a cure to what we should not tolerate."

"He has a moral compass shaped by Robert Coles and the literature of reflection, by involvement with Phillips Brooks House, through volunteering at the Harvard Square Shelter - that's a compass we can trust. A compass that will lead in a direction to improve the lives of all Americans." Thanks to our conference partners for the photos included here.

SOURCE: The American Round Table,To learn more about The American Round Table, contact: quest@abolitionistroundtable.com; philip.f.mangano@abolitionistroundtable.com, American Round Table, Five Park Street, Boston, MA 02108