Anne Buckindall, front of the house supervisor, rushes food to waiting customers as she works at Rocky’s Hot Chicken Shack in Asheville. The restaurant pays workers more than the minimum wage. (Photo: Paul L. Newby II/pnewbyII@Citizen-Times.com)

Almost 2,000 miles away from the North Carolina mountains is Las Cruces, New Mexico, a city with stark differences — but also uncanny similarities — to Asheville.

An hour from Mexico, Las Cruces' 100,000 residents are mostly Hispanic. Like Asheville, many work in services used by a burgeoning retiree population, in restaurants, retail and home health care.

Over the years, Mayor Ken Miyagishima said he noticed a shift in who filled low-wage jobs, with fewer young people and more bread-winning, middle-age adults.

"That's tough to see," he said.

So Miyagishima in September helped push through a controversial increase of Las Cruces' minimum wage to $10.10 an hour, more than $2 over New Mexico's minimum wage of $7.50. The federal minimum wage is $7.25.

"I think most people recognize that getting by on $7.50 an hour is a difficult task," he said.

In Asheville, there is similar sentiment on City Council. A majority of the elected officials say they would vote to boost the minimum, citing the local cost of living.

"A worker can easily be spending two-thirds of their income on housing alone — without even considering food, utilities or transportation," Councilman Chris Pelly said.

But despite a wave of cities around the country raising minimum wages and a poll showing a majority of North Carolinians support a hike in the lowest allowed wage, such a move for Asheville is almost impossible.

In North Carolina's government structure, cities and counties don't have the power to raise the minimum wage by themselves. State legislators would be required to help. But the majority of General Assembly members have shown no support for even incremental adjustments.

The situation has left wage-boost supporters feeling powerless.

"The city of Asheville has tried to be a leader in addressing this issue," Pelly said. "Because ... the General Assembly has limited the power of cities to address the minimum wage issue, until the majority party in Raleigh decides the working poor deserve help, this problem will only get worse."

Critics of a minimum wage hike, though, say it could have unintended negative consequences.

Cities going it alone

President Barack Obama has called for a raise in the national minimum wage, but a Republican-controlled House has declined to act.

One result has been smaller units of government going it on their own. By November, 29 states had higher minimums or had voted to step up wages in the near future.

In the South, Florida will go from $7.93 to $8.05 next year. Arkansas residents just voted in a $7.50 minimum that will increase to $8.50 by 2017. West Virginia also raised its minimum by referendum and will go to $8 on Dec. 31 then $8.75 a year later.

At an even smaller level, cities are tackling the issue. By one count, almost a dozen municipalities have made raises as of December. The most eyebrow-raising have been Seattle and San Francisco, with the highest rates in the nation at $15. This month, Chicago pegged its minimum at $13.

Down a notch from the behemoth municipalities are cities such as Las Cruces and Louisville. The Kentucky city hasn't yet passed a higher minimum, but elected officials are now debating a stepped hike to $10.10 by 2017.

Louisville Metro Councilwoman Barbara Shanklin said Washington "gridlock" is pushing cities to act.

"Over the last decade worker productivity and inflation have risen but actual wages on the ground have not," Shanklin said. "This legislation's intent is to aid thousands of working men and women in coming closer to a living wage."

Who holds the reins?

What gives the New Mexico and Kentucky cities the power to make the changes is the legal relationship between their state governments and municipalities. Both are considered "home rule" states, meaning local governments have broad powers to run their affairs.

In other states, such as Virginia and North Carolina, cities are tightly restricted. Changes to things such as city sales taxes or even major financing deals have to pass muster with the central government.

North Carolina wage laws are even more locked down because of a rule in the state constitution forbidding attempts at regulation by cities or counties, said state government expert Frayda Bluestein with the North Carolina School of Government in Chapel Hill.

"The starting point is cities don't have home rule authority and then there is actually a preemptive provision," Bluestein said.

Some wage hike supporters say higher local minimums might still be constitutional if they are enforced with civil penalties.

Bluestein said the problem is such regulation is forbidden in the first place.

"It's a bigger problem than enforcement," Bluestein said.

It's possible legislation could be passed that dodges constitutional obstacles. A more sweeping move would be a change to the constitution itself, something voters did through the 2012 Amendment 1 restricting gay marriage, though the amendment was later overturned in court.

But current the political climate makes those routes treacherous.

Stymied

In any scenario, Asheville would need the help of legislators, and there are few friendly hands extending from Raleigh.

The city began requiring its large private contractors to pay employees a "living wage" of $11.85 or $10.35 in 2011 if health insurance was included. The rule didn't apply to construction contracts. Two other local governments, the city of Durham and Durham County, had similar rules.

A GOP-majority General Assembly swept away those wage requirements two years later, passing a law making them illegal.

Recently, a poll showed that North Carolina residents support a minimum wage boost. According to the left-leaning Public Policy Polling, 58 percent of state residents support an increase while 36 percent oppose it. The poll was released in October.

Stances in Raleigh, though, appear to have held steady.

Rep. Tim Moffitt, R-Buncombe, the sponsor of the bill that quashed Asheville's living wage, was ousted by voters in November. But his replacement, Democrat Brian Turner, said he wasn't in favor of higher state or local minimums.

Sen. Tom Apodca, a Henderson County Republican who controls the flow of legislation as the rules committee chairman, would not comment.

Turner, a former executive with a defense contractor making parachutes in Woodfin, said local contractors are competing on a global scale, and higher local wage requirements would put them at a disadvantage. Locally based businesses would face extra pressure from those based right outside the city, he said.

Instead, Turner said he'd like to see an increase in the federal minimum.

"I understand the challenges that people working locally are facing. I just get concerned about the impact it would have on businesses and on jobs," he said.

What then?

With no legislative avenues, wage boost advocates have turned to largely voluntary measures and incentives.

In Asheville, the restaurant industry is a large employer of low-wage earners, from fast food to white-tablecloth establishments. Asheville restaurant worker Alia Todd said she's worked in a variety positions, earning the sub-minimum $2.13 an hour that many tipped employees get all the way to a salaried position as a pastry chef at the upscale downtown restaurant Cucina 24.

Todd is helping organize Asheville Sustainable Restaurant Workforce, food service employees who she said want to work with employers and customers on issues including "wage theft," the withholding of wages or benefits.

Todd said she'd like to see a living wage of $11.85 for all residents, but that would "be most certainly challenged by the North Carolina legislature," she said. Instead, she suggests building a grass-roots effort.

"Let's start by building communities of workers that will become the voice for higher wages," she said.

The most well-established effort is Just Economics of Western North Carolina, which promotes voluntary certification of living wage businesses.

The nonprofit calculates a living wage based on federal housing costs estimates for Buncombe County. Only a third of a living wage should have to go to housing, Just Economics Executive Director Vicki Meath said. That's how the nonprofit arrived at $11.85, though that amount will soon go up because of rising housing costs.

Those paid the current minimum wage who work 40-hour weeks year-round with no vacation or sick time would earn $15,080 before taxes, she said. "It would be hard to put a roof over your head or food on your table without some sort of public assistance."

At one living wage certified business, Rocky's Hot Chicken Shack, owner Rich Cundiff said paying more is not a problem for his bottom line. Cundiff owns two of the restaurants famous for blisteringly hot chicken and also, he said, its great service.

"I'm a believer in that you invest in what is important, and one of my most important resources is people," he said. Current staff actually get a say in who's hired. And one of the key requirements is attitude, he said. "If you're paying better, you get to pick the fun people."

But some say higher wages, either mandated or pushed through such certification processes, can actually hurt some of the most vulnerable.

Economist Roy Cordato, with the conservative John Locke Foundation in Raleigh, said higher wages for traditionally low-paying jobs can present stark economic realities.

"You can make more money is one alternative," he said. "The other is getting fired. That is the choice the employer faces."

Low-wage jobs shouldn't be promoted as careers, Cordato said, but should be used as stepping stones, particularly by those with some of the greatest disadvantages in terms of education and training. That means minority teenagers, he said, who have a 23 percent unemployment rate, according to the latest federal data.

"Historically, I would argue that high unemployment rate for black teens is a function of the minimum wage," he said.

The city, though, has continued to chip away at wage and affordability issues. In one move the council mandated that all municipal employees be paid the living wage. Also, when offering taxpayer money to businesses as incentives to open or expand in Asheville, the city can require that new jobs pay at least the average local wage as determined by the state.

Councilman Gordon Smith said since the General Assembly struck down the city's contractor wage rules, he's been looking for alternatives and is "open to any ideas," including offering tax incentives to builders of cheaper apartments and putting more money into buses.

"Until such time as Asheville is better able to set wages, we continue to do what we can to attract higher wage employers, create and support affordable housing and increase affordable transportation options," he said.

States above federal minimum

A total of 29 states have minimum wages above the federal $7.25 an hour or have enacted recent wage hiking legislation:

Alaska, Arizona, Arkansas, California, Colorado, Connecticut, Delaware, Florida, Hawaii, Illinois, Maine, Maryland, Massachusetts, Michigan, Minnesota, Missouri, Montana, Nebraska, Nevada, New Jersey, New Mexico, New York, Ohio, Oregon, Rhode Island, South Dakota, Vermont, Washington, West Virginia.

Cities boosting pay

Municipalities around the country have raised the minimum wage within their boundaries. Here are some examples. (Note: Some of these cities are in states that already have minimum wages higher than the federal $7.25. Those higher state minimums are shown in parenthesis.)

Santa Fe, New Mexico: $10.66 ($7.50)

Las Cruces, New Mexico: $7.50 - will increase to $10.10 by 2019 ($7.50)

Albequerque, New Mexico: $8.50 with continued cost-of-living increases ($7.50)

Seattle, Washington: $9.47 - will increase to$15 over several years ($9.47 in 2015)

San Francisco: $10.7- will increase to $15 by 2018 ($9)

San Jose, California: $10 with continued cost of living increases ($9)

Oakland, California: $9 - will increase to $12.25 in March ($9)

Chicago: $8.25 - will increase to $13 in 2019 ($8.25)

Washington, D.C.: $9.50 - will increase to $11.50 in 2016

Source: NATIONAL LEAGUE OF CITIES

Read or Share this story: http://avlne.ws/1A4vG7A