Sharon Nieman-Koebert and Joshua Klingman star in “For Whom the Southern Belle Tolls,” one of four short plays. Credit: Zach Tomaich

By ,

Next year's Milwaukee theater season includes an In Tandem Theatre production of "The Glass Menagerie" with Angela Iaonne and a rare production of "Camino Real" from Dale Gutzman's Off the Wall Theatre.

But if you can't wait until then for a helping of Tennessee Williams, Theatre Unchained is offering a bent preview of what's to come, as seen through the fun house mirror known as Christopher Durang.

Or, if you'd like, "Durang Durang," which is what producer James Dragolovich is calling an evening of four short Durang plays, with the meat in this sometimes messy, unevenly acted sandwich provided by plays two and three, both of which send up Williams.

Following a tedious, turgidly paced introductory lecture about drama titled "Mr. Sorken" — a truncated version of Durang's "Mrs. Sorken," renamed to reflect a last-minute casting change — we move straight into "For Whom the Southern Belle Tolls" (direction by Raymond Bradford), a parody of "The Glass Menagerie" ensuring that you'll never again view Laura's glass animals in quite the same way.

Amanda Wingfield has become the exasperated Amanda Wingvalley (Sharon Nieman-Koebert), who holds nothing back in describing how it feels to raise her two troubled offspring. "Both my children are weird," she despairs at one point. "What have I done, O Lord, to deserve them?"

One feels Amanda's pain. Laura, recast here as Lawrence (Joshua Klingman), is a neurasthenic ninny with a psychosomatic limp, eczema and asthma who collects glass swizzle sticks, unique to him but collectively indistinguishable to us — a wry comment on Laura's collection as well as Williams' focus on how the imagination reshapes reality.

Tom (Paul Fischer-Zaragoza) is a leather-wearing frequenter of porn theaters who is apt to bring home a sailor. Or Durang's version of the gentleman caller: a partially deaf lesbian named Ginny (Kristin Johnson) who continually mishears what is said — true to a play in which characters talk more than they listen.

The better you know "Menagerie," the more you'll relish lines such as "play with your cocktail stirrers, Lawrence. And so, goodbye," or "maybe it's the trick of memory, or the memory of some trick."

But clever as this pastiche can be, neither Durang nor this overwhelmed cast quite controls its tonally unstable mix of farcical caricature and darker shadow. Reflecting Durang's own evident sympathy for Amanda's plight, Nieman-Koebert comes closest.

Nieman-Koebert also directs the night's one true hit: the screwball funny and wickedly smart "Desire, Desire, Desire," which showcases one of two standout performances — the second comes in "Naomi in the Living Room," a dumb and otherwise forgettable final piece — from Brianna Borouchoff.

In "Desire," Borouchoff delivers an over-the-top, hypersexual Blanche, cooped up in a steamy apartment with Stanley (Joshua Walker). Stanley periodically bellows for Stella (Johnson) — whose trip to the store for Blanche's coke has lasted six years.

That leaves plenty of time for Durang to interject characters from other plays, including "Cat on a Hot Tin Roof," "The Iceman Cometh," "Glengarry Glen Ross" and "Waiting for Godot." In giving their own two cents on the meaning and power of illusion, they assist Durang in paying zany homage to one of our greatest playwrights.

IF YOU GO

"Durang Durang" continues through June 8 at Theatre Unchained, 1024 S. 5th St. For tickets, go to theatreunchained.com.