[READ: Grappling With Misogyny and Murder]

The writers excluded Hurricanes Katrina (in 2005) and Audrey (in 1957) because the death tolls were so high in those storms that it would have skewed the numbers. Of the other 47 most damaging hurricanes, female-named storms killed an average of 45 people, compared to 23 for the storms named after men, the study found. The disparity was even greater if the male name was very masculine, and the female name very feminine-sounding, the researchers said.

There’s some trouble with this study – the sample size is rather small, and storms were named only after women until the 1970s. But it offers some useful guidelines for women as well as men.

Let’s not pretend that names mean nothing. Name your kid “Jeeves,” and you might as well buy him a butler’s outfit now. People with two middle names and initials after their names are probably going to be perceived as being more important (even if they are not). And if you give a girl a perfectly good name like Elaine, but then spell it in some ridiculous way (Ilaynh, with a silent “h”), well, then your daughter deserves whatever headaches and verbal abuse she gets once she’s old enough to change the spelling of her name legally and, while she’s at it, disown you as parents. Even pets pose a conundrum. It’s just so hard to discipline a dog or cat who has some cutesy name. “Stop that right now, Snowball!” just doesn’t sound all that menacing.

[GALLERY: Cartoons on Energy Policy]

So who knows whether people subconsciously take a hurricane less seriously, or imagine it to be less powerful, if it’s a female storm instead of a male storm? If women can’t stop it, they should use it.

Forget about arguing until you’re blue in the face that you should be paid at least what men are paid for doing the same job. Forget about trying to explain that a female U.S. Senator who is unhappy that the CIA was allegedly hacking into her staff’s computers is not being “emotional.” She’s being rightfully indignant over the invasion. And don’t bother pointing out the irony when your male colleague arrives late, noting that he was helping his kid pick out her dress for school, and people think it’s just adorable, but when you leave a half hour early because your child has a 102-degree fever, people roll their eyes and deem you unreliable and destined for the “mommy track.”

No, women, there’s only one strategic lesson to be learned here, and it comes down to this slogan: Take us seriously, or we’ll kill you.

Of course, that will be meant metaphorically, and if you do indeed die, it will only be because you yourself failed – refused, really – to honor our power. So when Hurricane Hillary (Clinton) or Hurricane Marissa (Mayer) or Hurricane Sheryl (Sandberg) or Hurricane Janet (Yellen) or Hurricane Meg (Whitman) or Hurricane Samantha (Power) or any of the other of Forbes’ top 100 most powerful women blow through your neighborhood, you’d better be prepared. It’s not just common sense. It’s your whole future.