Topics: aol_on, Beirut, Islamophobia, Paris Attacks, Racism, Terrorism, News, Politics News

On November 12, the day before the attack on Paris, ISIS committed a horrific terrorist attack on innocent citizens of Beirut. Like the Paris attack, it was coordinated and commanded by ISIS. Like the Paris attack, it was executed by a cell of terrorist suicide bombers. Like in Paris, a manhunt ensued to find a network of planners and associates behind the bombers, and the Lebanese authorities have arrested nine people for suspected involvement in the attack. The two tragedies, one in Paris and the other in the largely French-speaking city once known as the “Paris of the Middle East,” were remarkably similar. The most significant difference between the two attacks was the relative severity; the Beirut attack was far worse than the attack on Paris. Were the same proportion of the French population killed as in the Lebanon attack, Paris would have suffered 635 deaths. In fact, the attack exceeded the deadliness of 9/11 in terms of the proportion of citizens killed. The same magnitude of attack would have claimed almost 3,100 New Yorkers’ lives.

But according to news coverage in the West, those Lebanese lives effectively don’t matter. FAIR’s Jim Naureckas points out the striking disparity in coverage in the New York Times, which was generally reflective of the wider news media’s response. But it’s not fair to only blame the press; the public appetite for Paris news seemed insatiable. Even those of us who consider ourselves enlightened and proudly attentive to uninterrogated biases–in which camp I like to include myself–couldn’t help but be swept up in it, unwittingly revealing what really matters to us, whose lives we value. We say “Black Lives Matter” because black deaths at the hands of police don’t register in the national conscience to any degree commensurate to their tragic significance. The protest movement’s slogan is a dire appeal for black life to be valued as fully as white life is. In a country at whose founding black inhabitants were considered three-fifths of a person, if not simply animals, black citizens in 2015 still fight to be considered fully human.



But another dark dimension of the Black Lives Matter moment is the assumption that the dead deserve their fate. That’s made explicit in failures to indict or convict in the legal system and more implicit in the court of public opinion with the now-predictable conservative reaction of presenting posthumous evidence of the slain citizen’s moral failings or latent danger. That’s why a boyish photo of Trayvon Martin or Michael Brown is countered with a “scary”- and more “black”-looking visage from conservatives; the battle is to determine the character of the victim as much as the circumstances at the time of the killing. Wearing a hoodie or sagging pants–that is, the mere superficial participation in a culture–might become entered as evidence in the national popular litigation. Notions of generalized guilt can influence opinion as much as the matter of precise and particular guilt or innocence of the victim at the moment of his death. A preponderance of cultural guilt applied posthumously to the victim can make his innocence at the moment of his execution immaterial. Thankfully, Black Lives Matter has emerged to combat this vestige of the country’s original sin.