McLaren turns to federal exchange for small-biz health plans

McLaren Health Plan is phasing out its small-business group commercial point-of-service health plan in the open market to meet client demand for a hybrid-type plan.

McLaren is eliminating the plan over the next year to reduce losses and meet demand for a point-of-service benefit plan on the insurance exchange, said CEO Kathy Kendall.

A point-of-service plan combines a traditional HMO benefit package with a limited provider network and an out-of-network benefit option (such as a preferred provider organization) that offers greater choice of hospitals and physicians — but typically brings higher out-of-pocket costs.

About 10,000 people employed by businesses with two to 50 employees are covered in Flint-based McLaren's commercial point-of-service plan that will be phased out at the end of their policy period, the last one ending June 30, 2015, Kendall said.

"There is a lot more interest from employers in the exchange," Kendall said. "What many small employers are doing is they are giving employees a stipend, a small amount of premium" to purchase health insurance on the exchange.

Kendall said McLaren's new Rewards plan offers a narrow provider network that further lowers costs. Some 3,500 people have enrolled this year, she said.

"If you use a certain segment of physicians and hospitals, you have no copayment, no deductible, and there is no co-insurance," said Kendall, who said McLaren has partnered with four-hospital Oakwood Healthcare in Dearborn for its narrow network.

"You can also choose to use our (full) network of 33,000 physicians, hospitals and other providers and pay the normal deductible or copay," Kendall said.

Officials for Health Alliance Plan and Priority Health say they are not changing their commercial point-of-service plan strategies.

Scott Norman, Priority's vice president of sales and client services, said the Grand Rapids-based insurer is projecting increases in its point-of-service plans over the next several years because employers are looking for lower-cost options.

"Because of the (Affordable Care Act), PPO plans are seeing large rate increases," Norman said. "POS plans are popular, especially in Southeast Michigan, because employers believe it is a most cost-effective way to continue to deliver benefits to employees."

Norman said Priority has looked at offering a limited provider network as an option.

"The challenge with narrow networks is that it is a 'gotcha moment' for members," he said. "The perception is they are buying something they don't understand."

Norman said very few small-business clients have expressed interest in dropping their plans and moving to the public exchange.

"Almost 70 percent of clients are extending their current plan," Norman said. "That has stunted the marketplace and private exchanges. ... The jury is still out about going to the exchange for small employers."

Kendall said another reason McLaren, which has about 144,000 members, eliminated its off-exchange POS plan is to cut losses.

Over the past three years, McLaren Health Plan's profit dropped to a net loss of $172,000 last year from net income of $14.8 million in 2012 and $23.9 million in 2011, according to the Michigan Office of Financial and Insurance Services.

Driving McLaren losses in 2013 was a $7.4 million hit on commercial business. McLaren lost $3.3 million in its new Medicare HMO plan but generated net income of $11 million on its Medicaid plan.

Kendall said McLaren expects to improve efficiency this year after it installs a new claims computer system, which will enable members, employers and providers to review claims online, saving staff time for other duties.



Jay Greene: (313) 446-0325, jgreene@crain.com. Twitter: @jaybgreene