Birmingham, Alabama boosted its minimum wage to $10.10 per hour on Aug. 19, taking a major step to fight poverty and becoming the first city in the Deep South to successfully take up the issue.

“This is not the first time that Birmingham has shaken and surprised the world,” said Scott Douglas, a wage increase supporter and executive director of Greater Birmingham Ministries.

The $10.10 wage will start on July 1, 2017 and benefit as many as 40,000 workers in the Magic City, which is home to more than 212,000 people, supporters said.

Full-time workers who receive that dollar amount also will qualify for health insurance tax credits under the Affordable Care Act, Douglas said, adding that Alabama opted not to expand Medicaid coverage for low-income residents under federal law.

The new pay level shatters the $7.25 federal hourly wage that workers now earn in the city in which three out of 10 residents live in poverty and more than 70 percent are Black. For now, the city follows the lower dollar amount because Alabama is among five states that lacks its own minimum wage, according to the National Employment Law Project (NELP).

Under the ordinance, which passed by a 7-0 vote with one abstention, the wage will first rise to $8.50 on July 1, 2016, NELP and the City Council said. NELP, which supports higher pay, said that the 5 percent of Alabama state residents who earn $7.25 per hour, which is $15,080 for a person who works 40 hours per week for a full year, have not received a minimum wage increase since 2009.

Immediately after the vote, workers in the city said they were elated.

“Too many people work for a living, and then, at the end of the day, don’t have enough to do with,” Birmingham resident Mercutio Southhall said, according to a video interview released by the City Council. “Trying to get out of a hole, or something like that, is almost impossible.”

Another resident, Sherrette Spicer, works two jobs and uses food stamps. She is looking forward to earning more money so she can cover her monthly living expenses.

“I think I’ll be happy just to swipe my card and not have to fill out a report every six months about how poor I really am,” she said in the video from the City Council.

Mary Jones, direct services coordinator with Greater Birmingham Ministries, explained to Birmingham news media on Aug. 19 about how the new wage will help working families and low-income individuals.

“There is no decrease in food prices. Everything goes up, and I think an [employer] who really cares about his or her workers will consider the fact that their employees’ needs are increasing,” she said in a video from the organization.

According to the MIT Living Wage Calculator, the $10.10 hourly pay is close to the $10.30 dollar amount that researchers say is needed to meet the “living wage” definition for one adult in the Birmingham area.

Researchers at MIT estimate that one adult who works in the Birmingham area needs to earn more than $21,000 per year to cover living expenses.

While the idea to raise the minimum wage has stalled in the U.S. Congress, local officials in cities have given the green light to the idea. The cities that have bumped up pay include Los Angeles, Seattle, San Francisco, Chicago and Kansas City, Missouri.

In Birmingham, City Council President Johnathan Austin explained that elected leaders are listening to what residents are saying. “People need to know that they have representatives who are here, fighting for their best interest, on their behalf,” he said in a video statement released by the city.

In a statement, Christine Owens, executive director of New York-based NELP, praised the Birmingham City Council for supporting a higher wage, saying it will put more money in the hands of residents.

“This is a first good step to turn around the future, not only of low-wage workers, but also of the city’s economy, which has been struggling for a number of years,” she said.

Critics of having governments raise the minimum wage argue that it will harm businesses and force employers to cut back on workers because the cost of labor has increased.

Douglas disagrees with that analysis. “Restaurants will have more customers, buying more of their offerings, which will increase their profit. Low-income people spend their money locally,” he said.

“We know that this will be tremendously helpful to families in economic crisis. It’s a major step forward so that people can have basic necessities.”

Media reports in Birmingham have featured business owners who support raising the minimum wage. Some studies show that raising the minimum wage has not had an adverse effect on communities. Some economists argue that cities that have strong economies are more suited to raising the wage than others.

The issues of pay and poverty continue to receive national attention, especially as the United States experiences the largest wealth gap not seen since the Gilded Age.

As of last year, the United States is home to more than 45.3 million poor people, though one government study says the number is actually higher than 49 million residents.

In the South, Louisville, Kentucky increased its hourly wage last year to $9, though that is being appealed, according to Kentuckians for the Commonwealth, a grassroots organization.

In Lexington-Fayette County, the Urban County Council was expected on Aug. 20 to begin its formal discussion of raising the hourly wage in that region to $10.10. But that Urban County Council decided to push back the discussion until September.

While Birmingham supporters erupted into cheers after the vote, getting the proposal before local elected leaders for full consideration took several steps and much work from residents, Douglas said, adding that the city has done much in the past to fight for civil rights and support immigrants.

In February, supporters of the “Fight for $15” movement, which argues that fast-food and other restaurant workers should earn that amount, held rallies in Birmingham.

Those rallies created momentum for change in the city, and they continued through June, Douglas said. During this period, residents and grassroots organizations began speaking with members of the City Council about higher pay and fighting poverty.

With the help of NELP, Douglas said, residents, grassroots organizations, labor groups and faith leaders worked on drafting a minimum wage ordinance.

“At the time, people were saying that Birmingham couldn’t do it, that it was unconstitutional under the state Constitution,” he said. “But Alabama’s Constitution constricts counties. It gave powers to the cities, including the power to provide for the public.”

In April, Douglas said, the City Council approved a nonbinding resolution to increase the minimum wage. The signs of possible success were getting clearer.

About six weeks ago, supporters thought the City Council would consider the ordinance. There was much back and forth, Douglas recalled, and residents contacted their elected leaders to voice support for better pay.

All of this finally led to the Aug. 19 vote. The city’s law department is now reviewing the wage increase.

Douglas has a slight concern that this review period will give opponents of raising the wage time to stop its implementation.

After the law department finishes its review and should the ordinance go into effect, Douglas said the next step would be to make sure that employers follow what the law requires.

“Still, this is in our best tradition because it would not have happened if community folks were not organized,” he said.

___________

Brad Wong is news editor for Equal Voice News.

2015 © Equal Voice for America’s Families Newspaper