Photo

ALBANY — New York is enrolling a significant number of young subscribers on its health insurance exchange, but many of those already enrolled have raised questions about rules that limit which doctors they can see, or are having problems finding out if their doctors are covered, according to testimony at a State Senate hearing on Monday.

New York has been one of the most successful states in signing up people for new insurance plans under the Affordable Care Act and, as of Dec. 24, the deadline for enrollment for coverage beginning New Year’s Day, 230,624 had enrolled. As of Sunday, that number was 294,000. (People who sign up by the 15th of a month can get coverage the next month.)

About 30 percent of the people who enrolled in private plans in New York are under 35 years old, Donna Frescatore, head of New York’s insurance exchange, said at the hearing. Nationally, only 24 percent were under 35, according to statistics released on Monday by federal health officials.

Younger people are considered crucial to the health exchanges’ viability, since they tend to need less care and thus their participation keeps premiums relatively low for everyone. Ms. Frescatore said that the 30 percent number was in line with what state officials had predicted they needed to keep the exchange affordable and that she was “pleased with that as a very early indication” that the exchange was working.

In technical terms, New York has had one of the more successful start-ups of its exchange, with relatively high numbers of people enrolling and relatively few problems with its website. New York also is ahead of the nation as a whole in the proportion of people signing up for private plans, which are often subsidized, but not fully paid by the government, as Medicaid plans are. About two-thirds of enrollees have signed up for private insurance plans, with the rest qualifying for New York’s expanded Medicaid coverage.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

But Republican senators told Ms. Frescatore that they had heard widespread complaints from constituents unhappy with state rules that led insurance companies to limit their plans on the exchange to fixed networks of doctors and hospitals. Except in a small part of western New York, the exchange plans do not allow patients to go out of network without special permission.

Limiting consumers to smaller networks is one way of keeping costs down, and Ms. Frescatore said state officials believed that they had made the right choice for the most people. “We are aware that there are some individuals that would prefer a product with out-of-network benefit,” she said. But she added, “We believe that in the end, strong quality in-networks is really the answer for most consumers.”

Senator William J. Larkin Jr., a Republican whose district includes parts of Orange, Ulster and Rockland Counties, told Ms. Frescatore that her presentation merited an Academy Award because it ignored any problems.

A survey done by his office, Mr. Larkin said, showed “the biggest complaint is, ‘I can’t have the doctor that I want.’ ”

Ms. Frescatore reacted, as she did frequently, with silence and a tight smile.

Senator Martin J. Golden, a Brooklyn Republican, said his constituents had had a hard time figuring out whether their doctors were in the plans they were buying. He said he was concerned that if someone needed a major medical procedure involving several doctors, some could end up being out of the insurance plan network, leaving the consumer to pay that part of the bill.

Several doctors testified that many of their colleagues did not know which plans they were on, and that insurance company websites were riddled with mistakes. A survey by the state medical society found that many had not decided whether they wanted to participate in the exchange or did not know whether they were in an exchange plan, according to Dr. Andrew Y. Kleinman, president-elect of the society.

Doctors were also unhappy with payment rates on the exchange, Dr. Kleinman said.

Critics of the Affordable Care Act have pointed out that a number of the 2.2 million Americans who have signed up for coverage on the exchanges had not actually been uninsured until state and federal rules invalidated their previous insurance plans. Several insurance brokers testified on Monday that their clients had been happy with their insurance before it was canceled. Many canceled policies were for independent practitioners, known as “sole proprietors,” who are now finding they actually have to pay more in premiums or deductibles.

Ms. Frescatore was repeatedly asked how many New Yorkers had lost coverage last year. “That’s not data that we have,” she said.