Just a little over a month ago, Colorado was confronted with news of a brutal attack in Longmont that caused life-threatening injuries and the loss of a wanted and hoped-for pregnancy. Our hopes and prayers are with the victim, and with her family, as they attempt to recover and heal.

Unfortunately, some in our state are using this event as yet another opportunity to advance their “fetal personhood” agenda. Last week, Colorado saw the introduction of legislation authored by anti-choice extremists, Senate Bill 268, which would add a new definition of person to Colorado’s criminal statutes. The definition, which is listed three times in the bill, clearly redefines person as an “unborn child at every stage of gestation from conception until live birth.”

I would like to set the record straight. Colorado does not need to establish fetal personhood to provide justice after these terrible tragedies.

In 2013, I sponsored the Colorado Crimes Against Pregnant Women Act, which established a comprehensive series of misdemeanor and felony charges that prosecutors can employ whenever a woman loses a pregnancy, at any stage of development, owing to criminal conduct. This legislation received support from Republicans and Democrats, and from prosecutors, police and sheriff’s departments, and victim advocates. As the National Conference of State Legislatures has acknowledged, Colorado is in line with 37 other states that have adopted statutes to criminalize wrongful acts that result in a woman’s loss of her pregnancy.

Across the country, Colorado’s Crimes Against Pregnant Women Act is recognized as a careful and deliberate balance between reproductive rights – and particularly, the right to terminate a pregnancy through an abortion — and the protection of pregnant women from violent, criminal conduct. I am proud of the fact that Colorado is a leader in effective public policy on this issue.

The Boulder County prosecutors have determined they can use this law and the felony convictions it provides for, as well as others, to charge the perpetrator in this attack with multiple felonies. In total, for all of these charges, she is facing well over a life sentence in prison.

Let there be no mistake: Colorado law imposes severe criminal penalties on anyone who assaults or otherwise harms a pregnant woman and causes her to lose her pregnancy. And our state, unlike others, does so without opening the door to divisive debates about whether a fertilized egg is a “person,” a debate Colorado voters have rejected over and over and over again.

I am proud to have sponsored the Colorado Crimes Against Pregnant Women Act and to continue our support for careful and effective legislation.

State Rep. Michael Foote represents District 12.

To send a letter to the editor about this article, submit online or check out our guidelines for how to submit by e-mail or mail.