Catholic Health Care Sharing is Now Available for Catholic Institutions

Contact: Louis Brown, Christ Medicus Foundation , 517-974-0224TROY, Mich., Aug. 4, 2015 / Standard Newswire / -- The Christ Medicus Foundation announced its new effort to offer CMF CURO to Catholic employers last week at the Napa Institute in Napa Valley, California. This new effort will empower Catholic institutions with an intelligent, affordable option that is faith-filled, reduces costs, liberates financial resources and is focused on the improved individual health and wellbeing of the whole person.The CMF CURO ministry is the country's first Catholic health care sharing experience. Together with Samaritan Ministries International (SMI) and its 47,000 member households, CMF CURO empowers Catholics to share the costs of medical care with Christians across the country. Members of CMF CURO and SMI are exempt from the Affordable Care Act. With this new effort to expand the ministry, Catholic employers will now have a viable health care option for their employees that provides substantial cost-savings, advances religious liberty, and promotes the Gospel of Life."This new effort to bring Catholic institutions into CMF CURO's Catholic health care sharing experience is an important opportunity for the Church. Catholic dioceses, universities, lay ministries, and private employers should seriously consider CMF CURO," said Mike O'Dea, Executive Director of the Christ Medicus Foundation. "By offering the CMF CURO ministry as an option, Catholic employers are providing a unique and valuable health care option that is fully consistent with the Catholic faith. CMF CURO empowers employees to be authentic witnesses to their faith in health care and caring. The ministry is Christ-centered and offers significant cost-savings to employees and employers," continued Mr. O'Dea. "CURO is a beautiful health care alternative because its brings Catholics together with Christians nationwide to share each other's medical needs trusting that God will provide through the Body of Christ," said CMF CURO Director, Louis Brown.About the Christ Medicus Foundation ( christmedicus.org ): The Christ Medicus Foundation is a Catholic 501(c)3 non-profit. In addition to offering CMF CURO, the Christ Medicus Foundation is an active advocate for policy and legislation, such as H.R. 940, the Health Care Conscience Rights Act. It is also working to build a network of Catholic primary care clinics and to advance religious and lay vocations in Catholic health care.