Topics: AlterNet, Downton Abbey, healthcare, Obamacare, Innovation News, Business News, Entertainment News, Politics News

This article originally appeared on AlterNet

As the acclaimed PBS series “Downton Abbey” unspools its final episodes, some fans have criticized the producers’ decision to devote so much time to a debate about the future of Downton’s Cottage Hospital. The show makes the issue mostly personal with delightfully snippy exchanges between Violet, Dowager Duchess of Grantham, who speaks for a way of life that is passing, and her cousin Isobel, widow and daughter of physicians and trained as a nurse during WWI, who is the voice of modernity. But underneath the repartee lies a serious and persistent issue: what should be the relationship of the community to the emerging age of a high-tech, highly capitalized and highly specialized medical system?

As Mary Kay Clunies-Ross, senior vice-president of the Washington State Hospital Association, who has taken a keen interest in the show told me, “They’re asking the right questions. Who will be in charge? Will someone tell me what to do? Will we be able to continue to provide free care?”

The U.S. and British health systems, while dramatically different, have had to grapple with these same questions. And in their exploration they’ve discovered that a case can be made for big and for small but the weight of evidence suggests that the optimum medical configuration is when high tech and specialization is in service to responsible and accountable community hospitals.

In 1859, in real life, Albert Napper opened the first cottage hospital in Cranley. As Doctor Irvine Loudon at Oxford University observes, it was “built explicitly as a warm, clean, idealized version of the farm labourer’s cottage in order to reassure patients.” A familiar doctor would treat people in a familiar atmosphere. Communities rallied around the concept. Hundreds of cottage hospitals sprang up and over the decades evolved into relatively sophisticated operations, often with state-of-the-art medicine and surgery.

In a very early episode in “Downtown Abbey,” a farmer named John Drake was admitted to the hospital with a terminal case of dropsy. Isobel suggested to Dr. Clarkson that they use a new technique. He reluctantly agreed and Drake promptly revived. By 1925, the year in which the final season of the series is set, voluntary hospitals constituted about 40 percent of all hospitals. They were largely supported by contributions and staffed with volunteers. There were government hospitals as well: The infirmaries that grew out of the much-despised workhouses of the 19th century. But to many people, these remained an unwelcome venue. In 1913, the liberal/labour coalition passed a law that gave a cash benefit to workers ages 16-70 who earned below the poverty level and the right to receive medical treatment at no cost. (These benefits did not extend to their spouses or children.)

Early in the series, Isobel asks Robert, Earl of Grantham, how Downton Cottage Hospital was financed. He notes that his father had given the land and building and established an endowment and then he adds, “Mr. Lloyd George’s new insurance measures will help.” Violet is aghast. “Please don’t speak that man’s name, we are about to eat,” she archly announces.

In 1925, despite the federal money, cottage hospitals were still suffering losses. Demand was up while charitable contributions were stagnating, in part the result of the decline of the landed aristocracy. Meanwhile the price of medical equipment was climbing. Most hospitals filled the financial hole by introducing subscription medicine, a form of local and self-insurance. Many of these were based in the workplace. Some doubled down on their efforts to gain contributions. The Granthams have responded by opening their castle to paying visitors as a benefit for the hospital. Some cottage hospitals merged with bigger regional hospitals. That is the focus of the ongoing debate in “Downton Abbey.” Will their cottage hospital merge with the larger Royal Yorkshire Hospital? Some communities converted their voluntary hospital into a municipal hospital. That is what happened in real life when the city council of Bradford, located about 30 miles south of Downton’s village of Ripon, took over the running of hospital services in 1920.

Socialized Medicine and Community Hospitals

A Gallup poll in July 1944 found that 85 percent of former patients were satisfied with their hospital treatment. Two-thirds of these had been patients in voluntary hospitals. But the question of sustainable financing remained. Over 71 percent of Britishers said they would prefer a state-financed hospital system to one supported by contributions. At the stroke of midnight on July 4, 1948 they got their wish. The National Health Service came into operation. Hospitals became government hospitals. Doctors became employees or contractors.

It was Violet’s worst nightmare. In the series she declared another reason why she wants to maintain local control of Downton’s Cottage Hospital: “For years, I’ve watched government take control of our lives. And their argument is always the same: fewer costs, greater efficiency. But the result is the same too: less control by the people, more control by the state. Until the individual’s own wishes count for nothing. That is what I consider my duty to resist…Your great-grandchildren won’t thank you when the state is all-powerful because we didn’t fight.”

That the NHS began operation on the American day of independence would probably have struck Violet as a cruel joke. For to her it was a declaration of slavery, a sentiment that would make her at home with current Tea Party philosophy. Indeed, in 1961, Ronald Reagan opposed Medicare with a rant that would have made Violet proud: “One of the traditional methods of imposing statism or socialism has been by way of medicine….If you don’t do this [oppose Medicare], one of these days you and I are going to spend our sunset years telling our children and our children’s children what it was like in American when men were free.”

The NHS made it possible for cottage hospitals to survive. But it didn’t make that survival inevitable. Health policymakers were unsure about community hospitals. At almost every turn they undervalued their benefits and overvalued the benefits of centralization. In the 1990s the NHS announced a wave of closures. Communities fought back with equal resolve, writing petitions, packing public meetings, organizing marches. Some were successful. Others were not.

In Odiham, a four-year battle against the closure of its community hospital resulted in its becoming financially independent. The town of Rye, East Sussex, after discovering that its pleadings fell on deaf ears in Whitehall, took matters into its own hands, bought the local hospital and land, improved it and managed it. That protest had the benefit of being led by a local resident named Sir Paul McCartney, who gave a million pounds to the community’s initiative. “My mother was a nurse,” McCartney told the Independent. “I’ve got a lot of time for nurses and doctors because of what I saw her go through. The NHS is something our tax money buys. It’s like education. That was the deal, I always thought. We’re finding now that it isn’t quite the deal….”

British support for community hospitals has waxed and waned and waxed. In 2006, an Independent headline reported, “Cottage hospitals to make a comeback.” Eight years later, a headline in the Guardian announced, “NHS must end mass centralization, says new boss.”

But even while criticizing large, impersonal institutions for robbing people of “dignity and compassion,” the Conservative government cut another 20 percent from the NHS budget. Dr. Mark Porter, the Chair of the British Medical Association’s hospital consultants committee, worries that the happy talk about reviving community hospitals is simply a justification for turning the clock back and not in a good way. “Very deliberately the government wishes to turn back the clock to the 1930s and 1940s, when there were private, charitable and co-operative providers. But that system failed to provide comprehensive and universal service for the citizens of this country. That’s why health was nationalized.”

Community Hospitals in the United States

The U.S. hospital system began much as it had in the United Kingdom, as a charitable, often church-related institution governed locally and staffed by volunteers.

A bill for national health insurance made significant headway in Congress about the same time as the British Parliament enacted its first worker-based health insurance benefit, but ultimately failed when WWI made all things German distasteful, and after WWI the Red Scare undermined any further efforts. In 1946, Republicans took control of Congress, in part by charging that Truman’s proposal for a single egalitarian medical system that included all classes (and races) was socialism.

After Truman’s surprise victory in 1948, he doubled down on national health insurance. The American Medical Association assessed its members an extra $25 each and launched the most expensive lobbying effort in American history. One of its pamphlets echoed Violet’s warning, “Would socialized medicine lead to socialization of other phases of life? Lenin thought so. He declared socialized medicine is the keystone to the arch of the socialist state.” If you think that sounds an awful lot like Ronald Reagan’s rhetoric 13 years later it should. The AMA wrote his speech, too.

At the same time the British were rolling out the world’s first free universal health system that was based on citizenship, not premiums or payroll taxes, Truman’s plan died in committee. No political party in America ever again embraced a universal, national health insurance system.

After World War II, Congress appropriated billions of dollars to build hundreds of mostly rural community hospitals. Many of these are now threatened. Since 2010, more than 50 rural hospitals have closed and over 280 across 39 states are vulnerable to closure. In big cities, community hospitals built a century before are closing. Detroit boasted dozens of hospitals in the 1960s. It now has four. Since 1988, Milwaukee County has lost its public hospital and five city hospitals. Since 1990, New York has lost more than 20 hospitals even as its population has grown. From 1999 to 2008, according to the American Hospital Association, the number of independent hospitals fell by 290 by mergers and bankruptcies.