Houston Methodist sets career fairs Oct. 14-16

Photo: BananaStock RF Image 1 of / 1 Caption Close Image 1 of 1 A series of career fairs aimed at finding registered nurses is set for Oct. 14-16 at various Houston Methodist locations. Go to www.greatnursesworkathoustonmethodist.com for more. A series of career fairs aimed at finding registered nurses is set for Oct. 14-16 at various Houston Methodist locations. Go to www.greatnursesworkathoustonmethodist.com for more. Photo: BananaStock RF Houston Methodist sets career fairs Oct. 14-16 1 / 1 Back to Gallery

Houston Methodist, a world leader in advanced medical care and a leading employer of skilled health care professionals, is hosting a series of career fairs, Oct. 14-16, aimed at finding qualified and passionate registered nurses.

The hospital system's need for nurses is being driven by the stable growth in the health care industry; the recent and unprecedented growth of Houston Methodist, which is continuously adding new services, floors, units and even facilities; and the effects of the Affordable Care Act.

"We currently have a 'perfect storm' of sorts," said Willie French, Houston Methodist's director of talent acquisition. "The industry has been steadily growing for years due to our aging population and advances in health care. Also, as the greater Houston area grows, Houston Methodist is expanding to accommodate the increased demand for our services. Additionally, the Affordable Care Act has enabled new individuals to enter the market who may have not previously had access to health care. All of these factors contribute to our ongoing need to hire outstanding health care professionals."

Houston Methodist is expecting to fill a number of nursing positions with the help of the career fair. The hospital is seeking experienced nursing staff for specialty areas, as well as nurse practitioners and nurse managers.

"Although experienced nurses can 'walk in' to any of the events, Houston Methodist strongly encourages all nurses interested in attending to visit the RN Career Event microsite to pre-register. It is important to do so, as Houston Methodist recruiters will be reviewing qualifications and resumes and could contact qualified registrants prior to the events," French said. "Attendees who meet the minimum qualifications as indicated in the event microsite may bring a copy of their resume for review and expect speak directly with an employment specialist about our career opportunities."

In addition to the education and certification requirements that are unique to each position, Houston Methodist also typically requires at least 18 months of experience in an acute care setting.

"It is also critical that our new hires demonstrate an alignment with our organizational ICARE values- integrity, compassion, accountability, respect and excellence," French said.

Event schedule

Tuesday, Oct. 14: Houston Methodist San Jacinto Hospital, 10 a.m. – 1:30 p.m.

Wednesday, Oct. 15: Houston Methodist Sugar Land Hospital, 3–7 p.m.; Houston Methodist West Hospital, 7:30 a.m. – 4 p.m.; Houston Methodist St. Catherine Hospital, 7:30 a.m. – 4 p.m.; and Houston Methodist Willowbrook Hospital, 7:30 a.m. – 5 p.m.

Thursday, Oct. 16: Houston Methodist St. John Hospital, 3–7 p.m. ; and Houston Methodist Hospital, 2–7 p.m.

To preregister for the career event, visit www.greatnursesworkathoustonmethodist.com.