Photo

It isn’t easy to reform the campaign finance system. Ask Lawrence Lessig, the Harvard law professor who last year raised $11 million to elect candidates who favored restrictions on unlimited contributions and spending only to find he’d become the issue’s latest Don Quixote. But he’s back with a new plan, and other groups are trying new lines of attack, hoping to change the behavior of candidates and lawmakers through rewards and punishments.

Campaign finance laws aren’t usually changed until after scandals like Watergate, or when incumbents feel threatened by a new tactic (Congress quickly required disclosure after so-called 527 committees ran TV ads in the 2000 presidential primary season). Most other attempts to change campaign finance laws have been lengthy efforts to build support within Congress for a specific bill. As an election issue, money in politics is rarely a top concern of voters.

The impact of would-be reformers in 2014 bears that out. Mr. Lessig started Mayday, the super PAC to end super PACs, but it came up short in its biggest races. The new plan for 2016 ditches spending millions on negative advertising in favor of trying to recruit citizens to lobby incumbents to support legislation changing the fund-raising rules. Without the original idea of electing and defeating candidates, Mayday will need to refocus its supporters on a longer timetable, because the numbers aren’t there in Congress to pass proposals the group supports (and most of the support that exists comes from Democrats).

Trying to change the behavior of candidates by providing incentives during the campaign is a newer tactic (Mr. Lessig said Mayday would ask donors not to give money unless candidates supported reform legislation, for example).

CounterPAC is something like the first version of Mayday, but with a blunter approach. Funded mostly by Jim Greer, a Silicon Valley entrepreneur, the super PAC has no interest in legislation and cares mainly about eliminating the presence of undisclosed money in elections. In 2014, it picked a House race in West Virginia, where Nick Rahall, the Democratic incumbent, was ousted by Evan Jenkins, a Republican state senator. CounterPAC contacted both candidates, asking if they would sign a pledge calling for groups spending undisclosed money to avoid the race (the catch being that if a candidate signed and, say, a 501c4 group spent money on his behalf, the candidate would also agree to donate a similar amount to charity). To encourage participation, CounterPAC promised to spend money against whichever candidate did not sign, regardless of party.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Neither candidate ever signed the pledge, but they agreed to a public meeting with CounterPAC. When Mr. Rahall did not attend, CounterPAC spent $212,000 against him in the final weeks before the election and counted his defeat as a success. It’s unclear, though, what role CounterPAC played in the election. Multiple people involved in West Virginia politics gave it little or no credit in a race that attracted national attention and $10 million in outside spending.

Mr. Greer gave an additional $300,000 to the super PAC in January, suggesting another try in 2016. But few candidates seem eager to unilaterally disarm or penalize themselves when their political futures are on the line, and it’s debatable whether a pledge is really enforceable by the candidates, or by CounterPAC.

Rather than seeking pledges, another group of challengers is trying to harness small donations from many people to upend the campaign finance system. It, too, will face the question of whether it can have enough of an impact, but it tries to leverage citizen interest in issues before Congress rather than make campaign finance the main issue.

If.then.fund, created by Jonathan Zucker, a campaign finance lawyer, and Joshua Tauberer, (who also created GovTrack.us, a site tracking congressional activity) acts as a conduit, collecting money that will then be given to a candidate based on how current legislators vote. For example, if a donor is interested in a bill about privacy, she can pledge money to a particular lawmaker or race. If she agrees with the incumbent’s vote, the incumbent gets the money. If not, the money goes to a challenger.

There are a couple of complicating factors: If.then.fund relies on the strength of aggregating donations, so it will need to attract enough users to make it a force that legislators need to recognize. For example, a page devoted to a possible Senate vote to repeal the Affordable Care Act has, as of this writing, attracted 157 donors who have committed a total of $2,418. A legislator may not have an opponent at the time of the vote, so the money could end up going to someone the original donor may not have intended to support. If a Democrat is running unopposed, money designated for his opponent could instead go to the Republican National Committee (and vice versa). But the idea of small-dollar donors rewarding or penalizing legislators is closer to what established interest groups and donors already do than calling for bans on outside money.

That outsider status may help attract donors, but it also illustrates how little control donors have over the system. A clever lawyer or political operative finds the gaps in laws and regulations and exploits them. New practices spread from one party to another, from national races to down-ballot contests. In most cases, it is the political class that knows the law best and that is best able to defeat legislative proposals: Bills that would create a system of public financing stay bottled up in committee, for example. There may be public support for restrictions on campaign contributions or even for publicly funded elections, but they are not priorities. To get the attention of Congress, what matters is results: winning or losing (or even nearly losing) elections.

Harnessing the power of small-dollar donors isn’t new. On the Democratic side, the conduit organization ActBlue has become enough of a force that at a February panel of Republican digital strategists, Tom Newhouse, the digital director of the National Republican Congressional Committee, said that at least one Republican member of the House had complained to the committee about ActBlue’s ability to quickly pour money into a Democrat’s campaign.

That may give hope to supporters of changing campaign finance laws. But building a base of support large enough to attract attention took ActBlue years; without a high-profile success — or a scandal to focus voters’ attention — it will be difficult for campaign finance reformers to sustain their efforts.