Since the recent Republican presidential debate, I’ve become excited watching my son Liam, who turns 16 next month, become excited about politics.

Two years before voting age, he’s beginning to understand that democracy is a precious gift. When his friends come over to hang in our basement, Liam might be watching Rachel Maddow on MSNBC. When her show ends, his conservative pals insist on another perspective from, say, Bill O’Reilly, on Fox.

Upstairs, I sometimes hear these kids I’ve watched grow from tykes debating issues — immigration, Iran, Obamacare, jobs, abortion. It’s like watching saplings of democracy starting to leaf.

After I wrote about these kids commenting on the recent debate, Donald Trump sent me back a copy of my column with a handwritten comment: “Smart kids.” It was signed by the billionaire reality TV star turned presidential candidate.

I made copies for each kid who was excited that Trump had read their words.

When Donald Trump announced his candidacy for President, the election suddenly became a new reality show. Pure entertainment.

Listen, if you’re happy that kids are reading again, thank J.K. Rowling and her Harry Potter books. If you’re happy that more kids are interested in politics this year, thank Donald Trump and Bernie Sanders.

When my son told me that his friend Sam, 18, was undecided between Trump and Sanders in his very first presidential vote, I said that Sam, a sophomore at Washington University in St. Louis , might not get to vote for either.

Liam seemed confused. “Why can’t Sam just vote for the guy he likes?”

Donald Trump turned the GOP race for the nomination into a reality show, but that has gotten some younger people interested in the election, so maybe it's not all bad. (Scott Olson/Getty Images)

I explained that in the primary, Sam could only vote for the candidate running for the nomination of the party to which he’s registered.

“Sanders is a Democrat and Trump is a Republican,” I said. “Which party is Sam registered with?”

“The Green Party,” Liam said.

“Then Sam can’t vote in the Democratic or Republican primaries,” I said. “If Trump and Sanders both win their party’s nominations — which is unlikely — or if just one of them wins his primary, Sam can vote for one of ’em in the general election in November.”

“OK,” said my kid, frowning. “But if Trump and Sanders both lose their primaries, then Sam can’t vote for either one?”

“Depends,” I said. “Remember, Trump was the only guy who wouldn’t pledge to support whoever becomes the Republican Party nominee.”

“Yeah, that was the first question the candidates were asked,” said Liam.

“Right,” I said. “Which means if Trump doesn’t win the Republican nomination, he might run as a third-party candidate. That would really hurt the Republicans.”

Democratic presidential candidate Sen. Bernie Sanders, along with Trump, has garnered a great deal of excitement from young voters, and even from some people too young to vote still. (Troy Wayrynen/AP) Young supporters of Bernie Sanders hold signs that read 'Bernie For People' after a march from City Hall Park in Burlington, Vermont, earlier this year. (Scott Eisen/Bloomberg)

“And Sanders would be out?”

“Not necessarily,” I said.

“Huh?”

“See, the Green Party has been after Sanders to run as their party’s nominee. If he does, Sam might be able to vote for him on the Green Party line. Or he can always do a write-in vote for Sanders. Or Trump.”

“Politics gets pretty confusing, huh?”

“It gets more confusing once politicians get elected,” I said. “There’s a big difference between campaigning and governing.”

“I can vote in local elections in two years,” he said. “In my first presidential election in 2020. Can’t wait.”

I know the feeling.