In addition, Crinel is charged with wire fraud for allegedly filing fraudulent applications for relief relating to the explosion and fire which occurred on the Deepwater Horizon oil rig in April 2010. photo via Wikipedia

Operators of a Louisiana home care company, as well as 20 other accomplices, have been indicted for their alleged role in a $30 million Medicare fraud scheme, according to U.S. Attorney Kenneth A. Polite of the Eastern District of Louisiana.

Lisa A. Crinel, owner of Priority Care at Home -- which does business as Abide Home Care Services -- as well as her daughter and Chief Administrative Officer Wilneisha Harrison Jakes and 20 others are charged with conspiracy and dozens of other healthcare fraud charges.

The defendants allegedly participated in a criminal organization for the purpose of fraudulently billing Medicare, according to Polite.

Through her operation of Abide, Crinel and Jakes allegedly hired “house doctors” to sign orders and plans of care for Medicare beneficiaries who had no legitimate medical necessity for home health services, according to the indictment.

Follow Healthcare Finance on Twitter and LinkedIn.

In addition, Crinel is charged with wire fraud for allegedly filing fraudulent applications for relief relating to the explosion and fire which occurred on the Deepwater Horizon oil rig in April 2010, according to the U.S. Attorney’s Office. After the disaster, British Petroleum established the Gulf Coast Claims Facility to settle losses, including reduction in earnings due to the oil spill.

Crinel and a Georgia accountant allegedly created false documentation on behalf of Jakes and two others, Clara Aitch and Wendy Ervin, for fraudulent applications for reimbursement for lost wages, according to the indictment.

Aitch and Ervin were full time employees of Abide, it stated. After they received payments from BP, they kicked back some of the funds to Crinel, according to the indictment.

The loss to BP from the fraudulent claims totaled $37,800, it stated.

If convicted, Crinel faces a maximum penalty of 270 years in prison.

Each conviction count also carries a potential $250,000 fine. PCAH as a company faces millions in fines.

The indictment also charges forfeiture of property including real estate, bank and life insurance accounts, and jewelry purchased with the proceeds from the healthcare fraud, according to Polite.

Twitter: @SusanMorseHFN