Tiny houses, which seemed to be a micro-trend for many years, have grown in popularity.

Three conventions devoted to them have been scheduled in Colorado this summer, according to the Denver Post.

Cable television shows have focused on them, showing interested people what it can be like to select them and to live in limited space. Tiny houses are typically 100 to 500 square feet in size.

Anyone who has ever lived in a studio apartment or other small quarters knows it forces people to be selective about what they acquire and store, but many people going to small houses from bigger ones say they embrace the challenge of down-sizing and simplifying.

With less space to heat, the small houses also can save on utility costs.

And young people may find them attainable, unlike traditional real estate, which has been rapidly increasing in price in Colorado lately. Typical tiny house costs are $20,000 to $50,000.

Retirees also have been attracted to them, since they can sometimes allow people to live mortgage-free.

According to TheTinyLife.com, 68 percent of tiny-home owners surveyed had no mortgage. Nationwide, only 29.3 percent of all homeowners have no mortgage.

TheTinyLife.com survey also indicated 55 percent of tiny-house owners had more savings in the bank than the average American and 89 percent reported having less credit card debt.

Advertisement

The houses do bring some challenges, such as finding appropriate spots to place them and connecting to utilities from electricity to septic or sewer services, although some use water tanks, solar panels or composting toilets to get around those connections. But those infrastructure and site issues bring up zoning questions that many Colorado municipalities may have yet to resolve.

The fact that some are built on trailers and not secured to foundations brings up additional questions.

According to the Denver Post, Walsenburg has revamped its zoning code specifically to allow and regulate them. It's an idea other municipalities should consider.

Though they may be impractical for larger families, with rapidly rising house costs in Colorado, tiny houses may be a good option for some state residents.

Just as cities find appropriate places to allow apartments, trailer parks or homes on small lots, they should find areas where tiny houses could be located, and figure out what rules make sense for utility hook-ups and foundations.