Source: Florida MMTC Institute,"The FMA comes out against Amendment 2," floridammtc.org (accessed Aug. 7, 2014) The Florida Medical Association (FMA) has come out against a state constitutional amendment to legalize medical marijuana. The lobby representing 20,000 physicians in Florida now officially opposes any legalized form of medical cannabis.



On Nov. 4, 2014, Florida voters will consider the ballot initiative known as Amendment 2, which would allow the controlled use of cannabis for certain Florida patients who obtain a valid recommendation from a licensed physician and receive an identification card from the state. According to the Florida Times-Union, the proposed amendment "comes on the heels of the Legislature's statewide legalization of 'Charlotte's Web,'" a strain of marijuana low in the psychoactive ingredient tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) and high in the non-psychoactive ingredient cannabidiol (CBD), "that is said to treat childhood seizures without getting the patient high."



Dr. Alan Pillersdorf, FMA President, released a statement saying: "We believe the unintended consequences of Amendment 2 are serious and numerous enough for us to believe they constitute a public health risk for Floridians. The lack of clear definitions in the amendment would allow health-care providers with absolutely no training in the ordering of controlled substances, to order medical marijuana." The FMA has concurrently passed a resolution urging that marijuana products be regulated by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) and that smoking marijuana, even for medical reasons, be completely prohibited.



Interest groups in support of the amendment, including People United for Medical Marijuana and United for Care, have expressed disappointment that the FMA has chosen to take a stance against Amendment 2. They point out that the FMA represents fewer than 30% of doctors in the state. Ben Pollara, campaign manager at United for Care, was quoted in an interview for WFSU as saying: "I don't think the FMA represents all the doctors in the state, and they certainly don't represent the doctors and the nurses who I talk to on a regular basis who are for this and who would like medical marijuana as another tool in their toolbox of treatment options for their patients."



The American Medical Association (AMA), the umbrella organization representing the FMA, has encouraged the federal government to "review" marijuana's Schedule I status, but does not endorse any state medical marijuana programs. 23 states and the District of Columbia have legalized medical marijuana between 1996 and 2014.







Sources:



Jessica Palombo, "Florida Doctors' Association Opposes Medical Marijuana Amendment," news.wfsu.org, Aug. 7, 2014



Meredith Rutland, "Supporters of Medical Marijuana Amendment 'Disappointed' by Florida Medical Association's Opposition," jacksonville.com, Aug. 6, 2014



Jerome R. Stockfisch, "Florida Doctors' Group against Medical Pot Amendment," tbo.com, Aug. 5, 2014