A pro-Donald Trump Donald TrumpClinton: 'I won't give up' if Congress refuses to pass my immigration plan Trump demands share of profits in exchange for Keystone approval Trump: ‘I’d love to debate Bernie’ to raise M for charity MORE super-PAC has acquired a new top operative who previously served Sen. Rand Paul Rand PaulPaul blocks chemical safety bill in Senate Overnight Defense: VA chief 'deeply' regrets Disney remark; Senate fight brews over Gitmo Paul ties release of 9/11 docs to defense bill MORE (R-Ky.) and Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell Mitch McConnellPaul blocks chemical safety bill in Senate Dems to GOP: Cancel Memorial Day break Ryan seeks to put stamp on GOP in Trump era MORE (R-Ky.).

Great America PAC announced on Friday that it has made Jesse Benton its chief strategist, according to Politico.

ADVERTISEMENT

“There is a growing movement behind Donald Trump, bringing new voters to the GOP in an unprecedented way,” Benton said in an email of the Republican presidential front-runner.

“Great America PAC will help grow and harness that movement, unify Republicans and work to win not just the White House, but to also lengthen Mr. Trump’s coattails in races across America.”

Benton, 38, previously oversaw a super-PAC aimed at promoting Paul’s own run at the GOP presidential nomination, Politico reported Friday.

The libertarian darling suspended his White House run early last month, however, after an anemic showing in Iowa’s first-in-the-nation caucuses.

Benton also served as the top aide for McConnell’s Senate reelection bid two years ago.

The veteran Republican operative reportedly also has ties with Rand Paul’s father, former Rep. Ron Paul (R-Texas). Benton helped direct the elder Paul’s 2012 GOP presidential campaign after serving as a top aide for his 2010 Senate bid as well.

Trump has frequently boasted about his freedom from wealthy special interests, arguing his vast wealth makes super-PACs and fundraising irrelevant for him. He has expressed little love for such political organizations, often touting his lack of super-PACs on the campaign trail.

Politico reported on Friday that a lawyer affiliated with the billionaire pressured TrumPAC into changing its moniker earlier this year, arguing that Trump did not want his last name attached with a super-PAC.