Unequal health costs at center of new inquiry

When Republican and Democratic commissioners from Garfield and Summit counties came to three local state lawmakers before the start of this year’s legislative session about the rising cost of health care, the three knew they had a troubling issue on their hands.

That’s why Reps. Bob Rankin, R-Carbondale, and Millie Hamner, D-Frisco, and Sen. Kerry Donovan, D-Vail, didn’t hesitate to take their calls.

On behalf of those commissioners, the three lawmakers got the Colorado Legislature to approve a bill — one that Gov. John Hickenlooper signed into law on Tuesday — to study what’s driving those skyrocketing costs.

“We need to get some answers because the problem we’ve been having around the rising costs of health care ... is we can’t get to the reason why,” said Donovan, whose district includes Delta County. “It’s like throwing questions into a black box. Everyone seems to point to another aspect of the system.”

Even before the federal Affordable Care Act became law several years ago, the cost of private health care in the state’s mountain communities was high. That act, designed to provide health care coverage for everyone, sent it even higher primarily because it ended up placing many more people onto the state’s Medicaid rolls, the lawmakers said.

That led to cost shifting by providers and insurers, which helped send private rates even higher, said Rankin, who introduced HB1336 into the Colorado House with Hamner, whose district includes parts of Delta County.

“The whole issue of transference of costs is that private payers pay more so that (providers) can make up for their losses from Medicaid,” said Rankin, who serves on the Legislature’s powerful Joint Budget Committee with Hamner. “Medicaid’s killing us across the board. It’s our biggest state budget problem. Access is not adequate for the people who are on it, and doctors are not paid enough. It’s just a disaster.”

The two real forces behind the study were Garfield County Commissioner Tom Jankovsky and Summit County Commissioner Dan Gibbs, who both testified in favor of the bill when it was heard in the Legislature.

“This was a totally nonpartisan effort,” Rankin said. “This is their bill, their idea. There is no easy answer, so the best we could do is try to get some transparency and see where to go from there.”

The lawmakers said premiums for residents in the mountainous areas of the state saw a 26 percent rise in health costs this year, at a time when the average cost increase statewide was only 9.8 percent.

The bill calls on Commissioner of Insurance Marguerite Salazar in the Colorado Department of Regulatory Agencies to study what’s driving the cost of health care premiums in the state, and to see if creating a single geographical area — the entire state — to determine rates would be more equitable, rather than the nine that currently are used.

Mesa County is one of those geographic areas.

When the bill was being debated in the statehouse, it met with opposition from several Front Range lawmakers — all Republicans — who complained that such a change would only lead to higher rates for their constituents.

Rankin, however, said he doesn’t expect that to be the case, saying that putting the entire state together could dramatically lower premiums for mountainous areas of the state that have limited health care providers while having little impact on more populous regions of Colorado.

The new law also calls on the study to be completed by August, giving the lawmakers time to examine it and propose changes during the 2017 legislative session.