Following the Hamas Money Trial 3:51 After Israel's retaliation against Hamas and a concentrated effort to go after the terror group's financing began earlier, many are wondering where is the money is coming from to support Hamas? Matthew Levitt, Washington Institute Counterterrorism program director, joins Simon Constable to discuss. Photo: AP

THE Abbott government is set to introduce new anti-terror laws that could finally see political parties like Hizb ut-Tahrir banned in Australia.

The laws would be introduced in the next fortnight. The changes would broaden the definition of terrorism to supporting or advocating terrorism generally, as opposed to a specific act or incident.

The move is in response to the growing threat the Abbott government believes Australia faces from homegrown jihadists who are travelling to Syria and Iraq and may return to engage in acts of terrorism.

This is likely to lead to authorities banning Hizb ut-Tahrir, a party that supports the resumption of the “Islamic way of life in the world’’ in Australia.

Uthman Badar, a spokesman for Hizb ut-Tahrir in Australia, said yesterday successive governments had threatened to shut down the organisation but none had proved successful to date.

Australian Khaled Sharrouf posing with an AK-47 in front of a sports car from an undisclosed location within Iraq. Picture: Twitter

Mr Badar said the definition of terrorism was “complex’’.

“The working definition turns on this idea of violence for political, religious ends. That applies equally to the Australian government’s war in Afghanistan,’’ he said. “By that definition the entire invasion was an act of terrorism.”

The crackdown by the government comes as terrorist Khaled Sharrouf has again used social media to urge Australians to join the fight in Syria and Iraq, declaring “we live better than we lived in our country’’.

Posing in front of a white sports car, holding an AK-47 and wearing military clothes, Sharrouf, a member of the terrorist group Islamic State, has encouraged Australian Muslims to join the fight.

“My provisions are beneath the shade of my sword. We live better than we lived in our country,’’ Sharrouf wrote.

“Come and be a part of what we have dreamt for decades.”

The notorious terrorist’s call to arms follows threats against Australian soldiers and calls to “crucify’’ an Australian jihadist from a rival group.

Sharrouf, who recently posted a horrific image of himself smiling while crouching over an executed Iraqi, also retweeted another user, who stated: “I hope the real mujahideen ... capture some yahoodis and behead them. That would be some start to Ramadan.’’