One “can­tan­ker­ous” North Car­o­lina le­gis­lat­or is threat­en­ing to throw a wrench in­to the Re­pub­lic­an Party’s care­fully planned pres­id­en­tial primary cal­en­dar in 2016.

And right now, there’s no solu­tion in sight.

Un­like in re­cent elec­tion cycles, the 2016 cal­en­dar has so far fallen in­to place the way party lead­ers had hoped, with the tra­di­tion­al four early-vot­ing states (Iowa, New Hamp­shire, South Car­o­lina, and Nevada) on track to hold their primar­ies in Feb­ru­ary and oth­ers set to start in March. The not­able ex­cep­tion, however, is North Car­o­lina, where Re­pub­lic­an state Sen. Bob Rucho wrote a law two years ago to move his state up and is now lead­ing a charge to keep it there””in vi­ol­a­tion of party rules de­signed to pre­serve the early states’ prestige.

Rucho’s le­gis­la­tion in 2013 tethered North Car­o­lina’s primary date to South Car­o­lina’s in or­der to give his state more in­flu­ence in se­lect­ing pres­id­en­tial nom­in­ees. Since South Car­o­lina’s 2016 primary is ex­pec­ted to take place on Feb. 20, North Car­o­lina’s would be on Feb. 23 un­der that law.

But last year, the Re­pub­lic­an Na­tion­al Com­mit­tee passed new rules that would strip del­eg­ates from non­tra­di­tion­al states, like North Car­o­lina, that held too-early primar­ies. If North Car­o­lina holds its primary in Feb­ru­ary, it could lose at least two-thirds of its del­eg­ates, mak­ing the state less im­port­ant for can­did­ates, not more.

GOP Gov. Pat Mc­Crory and the state Re­pub­lic­an Party sup­port mov­ing the primary back. Last week, Dav­id Lewis, a state rep­res­ent­at­ive and Re­pub­lic­an Na­tion­al Com­mit­tee­man, in­tro­duced a bill that would es­sen­tially bump North Car­o­lina from Feb­ru­ary to March, cor­rect­ing the con­flict.

But the out­spoken Rucho co­chairs the le­gis­lat­ive com­mit­tee that over­sees state elec­tions, and he has al­lies in the Sen­ate who op­pose a later primary, mean­ing the meas­ure is un­likely to make any pro­gress any­time soon. That puts them at odds with the state and na­tion­al Re­pub­lic­an es­tab­lish­ment, who want the primary moved.

“Sen­at­or Rucho is kind of a le­gend here for be­ing one of the most can­tan­ker­ous and hard-to-get-along-with sen­at­ors,” said Nath­an Bab­cock, the polit­ic­al dir­ect­or at the North Car­o­lina Cham­ber of Com­merce. “He’s not a ‘go along to get along’ type per­son.”

Some North Car­o­lina GOP op­er­at­ives think those op­posed to a March primary will ul­ti­mately give in and real­ize that the down­sides of an earli­er primary would out­weigh the be­ne­fits. But they know that, above all, Rucho is the one who needs to be con­vinced.

“Oth­ers have told me be­hind the scenes, ‘Hey, we’re go­ing to move it,’” one seni­or North Car­o­lina Re­pub­lic­an of­fi­cial said, re­fer­ring to the state sen­at­ors who sup­port a Feb­ru­ary primary. “But Rucho’s nev­er cracked. He’s al­ways said we’re not go­ing to move it un­less we get something out of it.”

The way Rucho sees it, North Car­o­lina, where Re­pub­lic­ans have had a great deal of elect­or­al suc­cess in re­cent years, de­serves to have an early, po­ten­tially mo­mentum-swinging role in pick­ing his party’s pres­id­en­tial nom­in­ee. Plus, he feels the state shouldn’t be pen­al­ized be­cause its law was en­acted well be­fore the RNC’s reg­u­la­tions were put in place.

“We abided by their con­cerns, and then all of a sud­den a new ar­bit­rary rule said you can’t come in earli­er,” Rucho said. “We just don’t know why they’re tak­ing that ar­bit­rary ac­tion and dis­en­fran­chising North Car­o­lina voters since we abided by what their main con­cern was in not in­ter­fer­ing with the first four primar­ies.”

Rucho said he has yet to have the op­por­tun­ity to meet with the RNC to dis­cuss his con­cerns, and un­til he does, the Sen­ate isn’t likely to take ac­tion on Lewis’s bill.

It’s been clear for some time now that the tim­ing of North Car­o­lina’s primary would likely vi­ol­ate RNC rules, but the is­sue had re­mained on the back burn­er for the state le­gis­lature. Now, the pres­sure to move the elec­tion date is ratchet­ing up.

In late March, Re­pub­lic­an Lt. Gov. Dan Forest called for a March 22 primary in 2016. Lewis, the au­thor of the new House bill, said he’s re­ceived “sev­er­al phone calls” from RNC chair­man Re­ince Priebus about the mat­ter.

“We are con­fid­ent that all states will be in com­pli­ance with RNC rules,” RNC spokes­wo­man Al­lis­on Moore said.

Lewis’s bill would set North Car­o­lina’s primary for March 8. Un­like Forest’s sug­ges­tion, that date means del­eg­ates would be al­loc­ated pro­por­tion­ally in­stead of win­ner-take-all. But more than any­thing, Lewis said he wanted to get the con­ver­sa­tion star­ted in the le­gis­lature, adding that he’s open to any date that’s not in Feb­ru­ary to avoid los­ing a sig­ni­fic­ant share of Re­pub­lic­an del­eg­ates.

It’s happened be­fore. In 2012, the RNC slashed Flor­ida’s and Michigan’s del­eg­a­tions in half for hold­ing their primar­ies too early. Demo­crats pun­ished those states in 2008, too.

“North Car­o­lina can choose to com­ply and have the de­sired im­pact of the ori­gin­al le­gis­la­tion, which is to make North Car­o­lina voters’ voices heard in a more rel­ev­ant way, or we can stick to this date and gamble wheth­er or not the pres­id­en­tial cam­paigns will both­er with such a small num­ber of del­eg­ates to be picked up,” Lewis said.

Lewis and Rucho have worked to­geth­er on ma­jor is­sues be­fore, as the two headed up the state’s re­dis­trict­ing ef­fort in 2011. But state Sen­ate lead­ers have not got­ten along all that well with their coun­ter­parts in the House, the state party, or the gov­ernor’s of­fice in re­cent years. Last year, feud­ing with the state Sen­ate kept state House Speak­er Thom Tillis, who was run­ning for Sen­ate, off the cam­paign trail for ex­tra weeks at a time (Tillis won any­way).

Lewis said he hopes to have the primary is­sue re­solved by the end of May, though oth­ers spec­u­lated that the is­sue could drag through the sched­uled end of the le­gis­lat­ive ses­sion in Ju­ly. North Car­o­lina Re­pub­lic­ans an­ti­cip­ate Lewis’s bill will eas­ily pass through the House.

But Rucho hasn’t blinked yet, and it’s not clear that he will. A spokes­wo­man for Sen­ate Pres­id­ent Pro Tem­pore Phil Ber­ger said he is de­fer­ring to Rucho giv­en his po­s­i­tion on the state’s elec­tions-over­sight com­mit­tee.