Topics: 2016 Elections, 2016 GOP primary, Ben Carson, Donald Trump, Paris Attacks, Republican Party, Ted Cruz, Elections News, News, Politics News

When you think of Republican moderates, very few – if any – come to mind. There just isn’t a lot of space for pragmatic, policy-minded conservatives in today’s GOP. There’s good news, however, and his name is Ted Cruz.

Turns out Ted Cruz is really a moderate, and he’s deeply concerned about the rhetorical excesses of his fellow Republican candidates, particularly after the terrorist attacks in Paris. Indeed, a new AP report suggests that Cruz is attempting to rebrand himself in the wake of the latest attacks. His hope is to appeal to the supporters of people like Trump and Carson by emphasizing his experience and, I’m not joking, his moderation.

“Tone matters,” Cruz told the AP in a recent interview. “Are there some in the Republican Party whose rhetoric is unhelpful with regard to immigration? Yes.” When pressed about his affiliation with Steve King (the Iowa congressman who endorsed Cruz last week), who has described immigrants as disease-ridden and even “compared them to drug mules and livestock,” Cruz glibly replied: “I cannot help the language that others use. I can only help the words that come out of my mouth.”

You almost have to applaud Cruz’s chutzpah here. This guy has made a career of extremism. His strategy in the Senate, from the very beginning, has been to obstruct and to use his platform to appeal to the wingnut base of the Republican Party – showing little to no interest in advancing a credible legislative agenda. And he’s mouthed as many inflammatory idiocies as anyone currently running for president.

Politico was kind enough to compile some of Cruz’s rhetorical highlights in March. A similar list was assembled at Raw Story. Here are just a few examples:

“Look, we saw in Britain, Neville Chamberlain, who told the British people, ‘Accept the Nazis. Yes, they’ll dominate the continent of Europe, but that’s not our problem. Let’s appease them. Why? Because it can’t be done. We can’t possibly stand against them.’”

“I think President Obama is the most radical president this nation’s ever seen … And in particular, I think he is a true believer in government control of the economy and of our everyday lives. In my judgment, we are facing what I consider to be the epic battle of our generation, quite literally the battle over whether we remain a free market nation.”

“You know, back in the ’70s — I remember the ’70s, we were told there was global cooling. And everyone was told global cooling was a really big problem. … The problem with climate change is there’s never been a day in the history of the world in which the climate is not changing.”

“The Obama economy is a disaster, Obamacare is a train wreck, and the Obama-Clinton foreign policy of leading from behind — the whole world is on fire.”

“Net neutrality is Obamacare for the internet.”

“It’s not our job to be social workers in Iraq and put them all on expanded Medicaid.”