While Act 46, Vermont's recently enacted education statute that is the best attempt to date to seriously prod school districts into looking at ways to merge and consolidate with an eye towards eventually right-sizing a system that spends more money than it should educating fewer and fewer students, probably isn't in the same league in terms of global importance as say, the Affordable Care Act (Obamacare) or the Iran nuclear deal, it does share some common traits.

Number one, there's something for everybody to dislike. People of good will can drill down into the details of the recently negotiated package of agreements recently hammered out with Iran and find all sorts of flaws. You could repeat the exercise with the president's effort at coming up with affordable health insurance. And this being Vermont, many will say that Act 46 is riddled with flaws also. they already have, and we're just getting warmed up.

But number two, if there's a better alternative out there for any of those three compromises painstakingly arrived at over years or decades, we'd like to hear it.

Obamacare and the nuclear deal with Iran have been picked over relentlessly by just about anyone with the mildest of interests in both subjects. Hopefully the Supreme Court has finally settled the issue around the constitutionality of the Affordable Care Act. And for the next couple of weeks, we'll be hearing an awful lot about the virtues or lack thereof regarding the proposed agreement with Iran, designed to contain its nuclear ambitions. That leaves us with Act 46, just beginning its journey through the thicket of bringing legislative intent into the real world.

Advertisement

As with any change that attempts to solve a serious problem — in this case property tax rates that are higher than they should be because the state's public education system relies on a bewildering patchwork of school districts and supervisory unions to organize itself — Act 46 creates some new issues while opening a roadmap to at least making a start at fixing what ails the financial underpinnings of what is, from all evidence, a pretty good academic system when measured against national and international standards. That's worth keeping in mind. The problem is that it costs more than the average Vermonter should have to bear. You would think that any solution that held out the prospect of saving money would be welcomed with open arms, but the new statute runs into another age-old Vermont value — local control and the importance many folks attach to their own local school, be it large, small, efficient or inefficient. Finding the sweet spot between saving money and the attachment many communities feel about their local schools has been elusive, until now.

Act 46 — like Obamacare and the nuclear deal with Iran — may not be perfect, but it is by far the best plan put forward to date that pushes local educational leaders towards the discussion table of how to weave local districts together in a way that makes sense educationally and financially. These are difficult, complex decisions, and local school boards are already well into the process, with a possible district containing Manchester, Dorset and the Mountain Towns RED a possible central linchpin. We're a long way from setting anything in stone here, but it's encouraging to see meaningful dialogue occurring. School districts are being nudged along by the potential reward of some significant financial savings if they move quickly to establish new and larger districts by next year. Those benefits decrease each year until 2019. If by then a supervisory union or a given school district hasn't come up with a consolidation plan, the state will do it for them. There is no benefit to waiting. And that's good.

But a big question mark has arisen with Act 46 — school choice. If three or four school districts want to merge, and one of them has a high school, but the others don't, do the districts without a high school and who traditionally may have offered their residents choices about where they could send their students may now have to give up that choice, and send all of them to the district where the high school is located. That may not always be the one parents would have picked for their kids under the old model.

School choice is important. It's pretty much conventional wisdom that if parents are invested emotionally as well as financially in a certain school, they will prod their kids into working harder and performing as well as possible academically. The state school board, which was supposed to have come up with a clarification around the rules governing school choice during its meeting earlier this month, held off, wanting more time to think it through. It's worth taking the time to figure it out correctly. But by this time next month, school boards deserve clear, common sense guidelines on the subject.

We hope the state board settles on an approach of allowing the same level of choice as there is now. That may not be possible without undermining the financial savings Act 46 will hopefully wring from the system, although these initial savings may not be measurable in large sums of money. As a first step towards moving in that direction, we're fans of the new legislation.

What may be possible is some hybrid system where choice is maintained, but that costs for tuition differentials has to be paid out-of-parental -pockets. Or maybe choice exists at the elementary or middle school level, but not at high school.

Tough questions, tough issues, and ones we'll be hearing a lot more of in months to come. It will be worth it in the end. This is an exercise that is long overdue. Sometimes, when you want one thing, you have to give something else up. And unlike the Iran nuclear deal, the fate of the Middle East does not hang in the balance.