Amory, Miss. (WCBI) – Amory’s best kept secret also known as, Trent Harmon, traveled 2,000 miles across the country to visit his Blue Sea of Amory supporters cheering him on.

“At first I thought there was a ballgame going on and I said, ‘well guys, this is the right place, but they’re must be a game or something going on because I don’t think this is for me,’ and then I got to looking, and I was like, ‘what in the world, I think this is it,” says American Idol contestant, Trent Harmon.

Harmon makes it known that he is very proud to be from Amory, and says without his town and fans, he wouldn’t be where he is today.

“Folks have said, ‘man, it kind of has its disadvantage coming from a place that’s not very populated,’ but it’s so easy to localize movements like this, in a town this size, you know, I mean this is how you get a movement started, in a town this size, so I’m happy to see a lot of blue,” says Harmon.

Amory residents have been supporting their small town hero as he performs in front of millions each week.

“It shows a bringing together, it shows support, brings the community together. That’s so exciting, and to see a hometown boy do so well on a national stage, or even a world stage, is absolutely surreal, we’re so excited,” says Mayor of Amory, Brad Blalock.

The 25 year old is not only sharing his talent with America, he’s also turning his town into a family.

“It’s a once in a lifetime thing for Amory, it’s bringing a lot of excitement into the town, and I think everyone is just pouring out just to show their love for Trent, and it couldn’t be for a better person,” says Amory resident, Liz Davis.

One of Trent Harmon’s favorite things he’s got to do while being on the show is meeting Ray Romano. Harmon also says his favorite song that he has performed is Chris Stapleton’s song, “What Are You Listening To?”

“We got to sing it at a church, and it was at the Vibiana, a real, real, historic, beautiful church, and it was so unexpected you know, not a human being in the crowd knew the song, but at the end of it, everybody just kind of sat there and thought, ‘wow, that’s a really good song that I didn’t know, but love,” says Harmon.

The musician says he’s been able to do many incredible things through the show, and it’s all because of his fans and his hometown of Amory.

“Go Trent. Keep voting, let’s let him win the last season of American Idol,” says Amory resident, Candy Blalock.