America’s most admired liars

Manhattan: This must be a joke: President Obama is the most admired person in America, followed by Donald Trump and Pope Francis (“Holly poll-er,” Dec. 29).

Obama is a disgrace! The Iraq War was won until, ignoring his own military advisors, he withdrew all troops, destabilized the Middle East and allowed ISIS to form. His “agreement” with Iran gave them everything they want while we got little back — not even three innocent American prisoners held there. Obama will have almost doubled the federal debt to $20 trillion and he repeatedly lied about Obamacare when he said “you can keep your doctor.”

Also a joke: More Americans admire Hillary Clinton than Nobel Prize winner Malala Yousafzai. Clinton is a compulsive liar. There’s her lie about ducking sniper fire in Bosnia. Her lie about being named after Sir Edmund Hillary — who climbed Mt. Everest years after she was born. Her lie about making a killing in commodities trades thanks to reading the Wall Street Journal. Her lie — made directly to victims’ relatives — that four Americans were killed because of a video made in California.

And Trump is the second most admired American after Obama? Good luck, America! Manny Martin

Obama’s accomplishments

Ossining, N.Y.: I wonder where Voicer Richard Doll, who says President Obama is in “over his head,” has been living over the past seven years. Obama has outperformed both Presidents Bush and Reagan under far more difficult circumstances. He entered office while 700,000 people a month were losing their jobs. He created 12 million jobs, made the U.S. the world’s leading energy producer, cut the deficit by two thirds, gave 17 million more people access to health insurance, returned 100,000 troops from the Middle East, forced Muslim countries to confront the threat of radicals, forced Iran to give up its bomb-making fissionable material and brought together 195 nations to combat climate change. All this while facing unrelenting GOP opposition. Doll should take his head out of the ground. Robert Rundbaken

Trump’s immigrant problem

Jamaica: We should all remember that Donald Trump’s mother was a Scottish immigrant and his paternal grandparents were German immigrants. And that he has had two wives who were not born in the United States. Ivana Zelnickova is from the Czech Republic and Melania Knauss is a native of Slovenia. Should we send his ex- and current wives back to their countries? Why does he have a problem with immigrants? Shame on him! Charlene Black

‘It’s a cookbook!’

Monmouth Beach, N.J.: I’ve been reading your paper for 30 years and have seen it go from a newsworthy source of information to a slanted, back-tracking left-wing rag. The last time I looked, we live in a free country and can like and support whomever we choose. I am not a fan of Tom Brady, but where do you get the balls to tell him whom to like or dislike? It’s none of your business. And by the way, Donald Trump is no bigot. You people are just like all the other radicals: twisting the truth and hearing only what you want to hear. This country is in trouble because of the bleeding-heart liberals who run it. You should watch “The Twilight Zone” episode “To Serve Man.” Maybe that will wake you out of your stupor. Lucie Chimel

Bottom line

East Brunswick, N.J.: I have a question for everyone who cites Donald Trump’s poll numbers to defend him: Are these the same polls that had Mitt Romney winning in 2012? David Solomon

Lock up the real crooks

Manhattan: Voicer Valeria Kondratiev made Voicer Nick Enzminger’s point for him: She says gang members can’t be labeled conservatives because they’d love to have liberal judges to go soft on them. Exactly. She’s saying liberals are soft wimps, not violent criminals who commit crimes out of greed or ego. Liberals don’t like expensive watches and cars. That nonsense is for conservatives with low self-esteem. We liberals support a maximum wage, because too much money is like a drug and it makes people go crazy. Most rich people are miserable, and sometimes more miserable because money just brings more headaches. It brings out the worst in people. I’d add that it’s insane for any grown adult to say Chicago Mayor Rahm Emanuel — who admits to hiding the sick video of a police murder — should resign. Prison is what will teach him, and the other crooked politicians, a real lesson. Firing these guys does no good. They just get a job with a big corporation, for millions a year. Prison is the only option. Janice Amato

From reverend to cadet

East Brunswick, N.J.: Al Sharpton should go to the police academy and become a cop. He’ll soon find out how hard it is to make split-second decisions. What’s really disgraceful is people like him who don’t pay their fines (remember Tawana Brawley?) or their taxes. Evelyn L. Williams

A resolution

Manhattan: Although gun violence and traffic accidents remain the leading causes of death among young people, the most dangerous weapon for the rest of us is still our fork. Well over a million Americans are killed each year by high blood pressure, diabetes, heart disease, stroke, cancer and other chronic diseases linked to our meat-based diets. But times are changing. According to Gallup, 22% of American consumers are avoiding meat and 12% are avoiding dairy products. Supermarket chains, along with Target and Walmart, now offer a growing selection of delicious and healthy plant-based “meats” and dairy products. Hundreds of school, college, hospital and corporate cafeterias have embraced Meatless Mondays and vegan meals. Fast-food chains like Chipotle, Panera, Subway, Taco Bell and White Castle are rolling out vegan options. Let’s make a New Year’s resolution to explore the rich variety of plant-based entrees, meat substitutes, cheeses, ice creams and milks, as well as the more traditional green and yellow veggies. Nelson Yancy

What’s really wrong

Bronx: Voicer Arvin Anderson tells us he’s 78 years old and has “seen most of it,” then lectures readers on “what’s wrong with America.” What Anderson proves is that a person can live 78 years without having learned a damned thing. Anderson also reveals that he is a progressive — and this is what’s really wrong in America. Bob Pascarella

Telling it like it is

Little Egg Harbor, N.J.: I can’t stand to read Voice of the People lately, as so many people spew hate, prejudice and just plain garbage. For example, I am a 80-year-old lady, so I’m going to be lambasted for telling it like it is. It’s just that people of color are always complaining about how little work they get in entertainment and yet when they get the chance to be inclusive when they have a production, it always ends up all one color. Take “The Wiz” — where even the Munchkins were black. And don’t even ask about the new “Star Wars” movie. Disney decided that all major parts were to be given to those with a British accent because apparently there are not enough good American actors out of work. Can you tell me what is going on with the way people think in this day and age? Who is the role model in this show business war? Rose S. Wilson

Mail mystery

Forest Hills: Between Christmas cards and regular correspondence, I have had more than 20 pieces of mail returned to my office in the last three weeks with a yellow sticker: “return to sender, not deliverable as addressed, unable to forward.” I know I have the correct addresses because of previous correspondence, including emails, with the recipients. Are some (I know not all) letter carriers just too lazy to deliver mail, so they find it easier just to put the stickers on my envelopes? I should get a refund for every stamp wasted for a service I’ve paid for but not received. Sherri Rosen

Future shock

Brooklyn: Will hoverboards be insured? Regulated? Bikers and scooters frequently flaunt rules of the road, often causing accidents. What rights will pedestrians have when an accident with a hoverboard occurs? Technology is a wonderful thing , but there is more to think about before they are legalized on city streets. Dorothy Collins

Don’t stop believing

Stamford, Conn.: Finally Chicago is in (“Rock Hall of fame class with ‘Attitude,’ ” Dec. 18). It was a long time coming. Forty-eight years and still going strong. Aldo Vitti

First things first

Brooklyn: Two major problems in this city are violence against women and men who believe shooting guns is the best way to deal with their frustration, Of course, neither of these compares to the Yankees’ need for an All-Star closer (“He’s no pride of the Yanks,” Dec. 29). Mike Naylon