Republicans failed to override President Obama's veto of a bill passed in January to repeal his signature healthcare law.

The 241-186 vote fell short of the two-thirds majority required to block the veto and marked an end to a nearly six-year quest by the GOP to repeal the law during Obama's time in office.

The Affordable Care Act is now practically guaranteed to remain on the books for the foreseeable future unless Republicans in November can both win the White House and maintain control of the House and Senate.

The House has acted dozens of times to repeal all or parts of Obamacare, which they argued Tuesday has driven up healthcare costs and has hurt the economy by raising business costs. Republicans also noted polls show the law remains unpopular and has forced many to give up their health insurance plans and doctors, despite promises by Obama that they could keep them.

Stay abreast of the latest developments from nation's capital and beyond with curated News Alerts from the Washington Examiner news desk and delivered to your inbox. Sorry, there was a problem processing your email signup. Please try again later. Processing... Thank you for signing up for Washington Examiner News Alerts. You should receive your first alert soon!

The bill mostly gutted Obamacare, include Medicaid expansion and the mandate for purchasing health insurance. It also included a provision banning federal funding for Planned Parenthood.

The legislation passed the Senate last year using a parliamentary procedure called reconciliation requiring just 51 votes instead of the traditional 60 votes. The House cleared the bill last month.

But the GOP knew it would be a largely symbolic gesture because they lacked enough lawmakers to override Obama's guaranteed veto.

"The president is the only person standing in the way of what the American people want," said House Budget Committee Chairman Tom Price, R-Ga. "Our job now is to stand up to them. To demonstrate to them who is on their side and who is standing in the way of positive, patient-centered reform."

Democrats argued Tuesday that repealing the law would leave 22 million people without the health insurance they are provided under the law.

Also from the Washington Examiner CDC's Frieden urges Zika funding "We have a narrow window of opportunity for effective mosquito prevention measures," he says.

They also noted the dozens of times the GOP has taken up legislation to repeal parts or all of the law over the past six years.

"Here we go again, and again and again," said House Budget Committee ranking member Chris Van Hollen, D-Md. "How fitting it is we are here on Groundhog Day."

Democrats chastised the GOP for trying to repeal the law without a putting a replacement proposal on the floor for a vote.

Republican leaders said they are working on such a proposal but there would be no use voting on it this year, when Obama is president.