Andrew Cash, NDP MP for Davenport, visits The Common cafe, a favourite haunt in the Toronto riding where the campaign against 'pay to pay' bills began.

Companies tried to greenwash the fee by claiming it saved trees. However, instead of rewarding online customers by giving them a discount for making the switch to electronic billing they simply devised this new fee for the service of getting paper bills in the mail. Valued by some estimates at over $700 million annually, this fee especially targets seniors, immigrants, those with disabilities, folks with little access to the internet and people on a fixed income — in other words, some of Canada's most vulnerable citizens.

In the summer of 2012, a retired constituent complained to me that some companies were charging him an extra $2 to receive bills in the mail. He didn't have a computer, so online billing was not an option. Soon others began raising the issue with me, including those who managed their elderly parents' finances. They felt ripped off and powerless.

On the face of it, the fight against fees for paper bills may seem like an unlikely campaign to showcase the power of grassroots democracy. But when a micro ripoff reaps mega bucks for some of Canada's most powerful companies, while our federal government stands idly by, maybe it's a test case.

Between the lines is a search for something counter to the narrative that all is broken in our political process. Indeed a lot may be broken, but when people find ways to make tangible change it is worth considering how they did it.

Having been in rock and roll bands for 25 years, people often ask me now about my job as a politician: “Andrew isn’t it frustrating? Can you really get anything done?”

Based on constituent concern and the galling unfairness of it all, my office decided to launch a petition campaign in Davenport to pressure the Harper government.

Now, you may be surprised to hear that there are similarities between politics and rock and roll. For both, when you mount a project, the first thing you need is a good name. We asked one of our volunteers, Wyatt Shorter, who at the time was a high school student, if he had any ideas that would best describe this ripoff. “How about pay to pay,” he suggested, “because you have to pay a fee to pay your bill.” That was it!

With the help of another remarkable young Portuguese-speaking volunteer, Sara Marques, we met with immigrant seniors' groups in the area who wanted action. Aided by years of solid reporting on the issue, primarily by the Star, consumer and seniors advocates gave their support, and within days of its posting thousands had signed our petition online.

Still the government sat on its hands, claiming that a volunteer code of conduct was enough to protect Canadians from unfair billing practices. But as the pressure mounted, with the petition soon surpassing 10,000 signatures from people across the country, a shift began to take hold. The CRTC, Canada’s telecom and broadcast regulator, was initially dismissive but later sent a letter asking Bell to stop charging the fee to seniors. Other companies began considering exemptions.

However these were ineffectual measures and the government signalled in its Speech from the Throne last October that a ban was on the way. I laughed out loud in the lobby of the House of Commons when I heard the Governor General say the words “pay to pay,” doubtless the Queen's representative in Canada had no idea he was using a phrase coined by a high school student in Davenport.

Next the CRTC launched an exhaustive study, finding that some companies were charging up to $5.95 for a paper bill. After failing again to get companies to voluntarily do the right thing, the government was forced to announce this summer that it would finally table legislation to ban pay-to-pay fees outright.

Of course with the Harper government the devil is in the details and we will wait to see what, if any, legislation comes forward. However after the announcement I immediately thought of Wyatt, Sarah, the Portuguese seniors and the many other volunteers with whom I knocked on doors. This was their victory.

Does it spell the end of customers getting fleeced? Nope. Does it signal that this government is capable of standing up to those fleecing us? Likely not. Is it good for democracy that people fought back and won against some of the largest, most profitable corporations in Canada and forced their government to finally act? Absolutely!

Andrew Cash is the Member of Parliament for Davenport.