Associated Press/Pfizer

The cost of prescription medicines is not the only issue confronting the health care system. Vaccine prices have gone from single digits to sometimes triple digits in the last two decades, creating dilemmas for doctors and their patients as well as straining public health budgets, The New York Times writes in an interesting look at the issue. And one culprit is a widely used Pfizer vaccine.

In general, prices have been rising for several reasons, according to the paper. The Affordable Care Act mandates coverage at no out-of-pocket cost, and vaccines are generally required for school entry, the paper explains. And while vaccines were once a loss leader for manufacturers, because they are often more expensive to produce than conventional drugs, vaccines now can be very profitable, the Times writes.

These are excerpts from the story:

Between reformulations of older vaccines and new vaccines, the average cost to fully vaccinate a child with private insurance to the age of 18 rose o $2,192 from $100 since 1986, according to data from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention cited by the Times. Even with deep discounts, the costs for the federal government, which buys half of all vaccines for the nation’s children, have increased 15-fold during that period, the Times writes.

One example is Prevnar 13, which prevents diseases caused by pneumococcal bacteria, and requires multiple shots priced at $136 each, with every child in the U.S. required to get four doses before entering school. The Prevnar line generated $4 billion in revenue last year. Michael Haydock of the Datamonitor Healthcare consulting firm, tells the Times “it’s expensive in part because it’s a very effective vaccine and also because they’re exploiting their monopoly.”

Although the vaccine has not changed, the cost has risen an average of 6 percent each year since its 2010 FDA approval, the Times writes. “You have to make back your investment and pay your shareholders, but at what point do you say, ‘Look, you’ve had your steak, gravy and potatoes and this is enough?’” Steven Black, a vaccine expert at Cincinnati’s Children Hospital, tells the paper. He was on the government panel that recommended children get an earlier Prevnar 7 version.

Of course, there are some good reasons vaccines like Prevnar are more expensive, the Times continues. Vaccine trials, which once included thousands of volunteers, must now include tens, if not hundreds of thousands of people, as fears about side effects like autism have grown, even though many studies have found these concerns are unfounded, the paper writes. And as Pfizer says, some newer vaccines are complicated to manufacture, requiring significant investment.

“It’s a risky business developing vaccines, so you can explain, if not necessarily justify, the higher costs of vaccination, Alan Hinman, a former head of the immunization division at the CDC and now a senior scientist at the Task Force for Global Health, tells the Times. “A more difficult question is, after the research and development costs are recouped, why don’t prices come down?”

The answer may simply be that Pfizer does not have to lower prices. The company, by the way, also found ways to justify adoption of its vaccine. The Times points out that, before Prevnar arrived, children under 5 rarely died of pneumococcal illness — about 200 in the U.S. annually, according to the CDC. So, in urging countries to adopt Prevnar 13, Pfizer produced extensive studies emphasizing the vaccine’s broad indirect benefits.

Here is another nugget: When Prevnar 7 was first evaluated 14 years ago for universal vaccination of children in the U.S., a government advisory panel concluded it was not likely to be cost effective, according to Black, who was on the panel. In a study around that time, he and some colleagues concluded the vaccine would result in cost saving for society only if each dose was priced at $46. It was priced at $58 a shot, the Times writes.