Republican presidential candidate Ted Cruz drew national attention by opposing Obamacare. He's made no secret that he plans to repeal the Affordable Care Act, telling Healthcare IT News when he is elected president, "we'll repeal every word of Obamacare."Now he is facing heightened pressure to reveal his alternative. Republican leaders believe Cruz should offer a plan during the run-up to the Wisconsin primary April 5."As leaders, we have an obligation to put our best foot forward," said Speaker of the House Paul Ryan."No matter the consequences.""It would benefit him as a candidate, period, but especially in Wisconsin," said Brian Fraley, a Republican strategist, reports Politico . "The insurance industry is big in Wisconsin. The health care industry is big in Wisconsin. This is a race where every brick helps in the foundation."Ohio Gov. John Kasich and Donald Trump have said they are in favor of keeping popular parts of the law, such as coverage of preexisting conditions, according to the Chicago Tribune The only candidates who have offered Obamacare replacement details are now gone from the race: Wisconsin Gov. Scott Walker, Louisiana Gov. Bobby Jindal, and and former Florida Gov. Jeb Bush.Cruz has mentioned selling insurance between states on more than one occasion, but has not gone much further detailing how many people his ideas would cover or their costs.Some critics have said Cruz is missing a chance to press an advantage over Trump by delivering a health care plan."It's always seemed like it could be his best issue," said the Hudson Institute's Jeffrey Anderson.Cruz opposed Obamacare by talking on the Senate floor for 21 hours and 19 minutes in September 2013. However, his struggle against Obamacare was highlighted in Iowa in January, according to Politico An Iowa voter told Cruz his brother-in-law was able to afford insurance for the first time thanks to the Affordable Care Act, but died because an illness was found too late because he had no coverage.Others, however, believe the law is here to stay. Secretary of Health and Human Services Sylvia Mathews Burwell told the Tribune, "This is in the fabric of our nation."