More than 170 students received free services, information and school supplies at the Edinburg Housing Authority’s (EHA) Back to School Health Fair on Aug.13.

During the event, students received a variety of school supplies donated by members of the community like Attorney Marissa Hernandez, books on behalf of the South Texas Literacy Coalition and obtained free haircuts from the Mission Barber School.

About 32 organizations and individuals contributed to the Back to School Fair, including the UTPA ROTC and Edinburg Parks & Recreation who helped set up tables and prepare school supply bags.

Some of the city and state organizations that attended the Back to School Bash included: Edinburg Public Library, Edinburg Fire Department, Texas Department of State Health Services, WIC, Edinburg Scenic Wetlands & World Birding Center and the Hidalgo County Health Department.

Several local businesses and nonprofit organizations also provided information during the event like Nuestra Clinica del Valle, Rio Grande Regional Hospital, Dynamic Children’s Therapy, South Texas Training Center, Los Reyes Home Care Big Brothers Big Sisters of South Texas, UTPA HEP, Donate Life Texas, Easter Seals Hopes Program, Center for Pain Management, Hope, Tobacco Prevention and Control Coalition and the Texas A&M University Colonia’s Program.

A dental health outreach was also done by Smile Magic Dental & Braces, Rodeo Dental & Orthodontics and Aqua Dental.

Due to President Barack Obama’s Affordable Care Act, a federal statute which offers subsidies in an effort to expand access to affordable health insurance for low-income people, six health insurance companies also distributed information to residents about their services and this year’s Open Enrollment Period which will be from Nov. 1 to Jan. 31, 2016.

The health insurance companies that attended were: Health PSA Health Care, Driscoll Health Plan, Enroll America, United Health Care, Cigna Health Spring and Superior Health Plan.

According to EHA staff, the event was possible thanks to the efforts of six interns from the University of Texas-Pan American School of Social Work. The interns who helped were Fabian, Grimaldo, Danielle Vasquez, Jennifer Ledesma, Laura Pequeño, Stephanie Ramirez and Sulema Razo.

"The UTPA Social Work interns did an outstanding job in putting together our event," said EHA Public Housing Supervisor Liz Hernandez. "It was a big success. There was a lot of smiles."

Due to the great turnout of this year’s event, the Edinburg Housing Authority plans to continue offering events like the Back to School Health Fair to residents.