Affluent women are likely to have access to more-reliable forms of birth control, and they're more than three times as likely to have an abortion in the case of an accidental pregnancy.

There are lots of examples of the growing distance between the nation’s haves and have-nots, and the gap between unintended births for the most-affluent women and the least-affluent women is yet another area with a widening economic divide. About half of all pregnancies are unplanned, which can make the possibility of an unintended pregnancy seem like not that big of a deal. But the financial impact of unintended pregnancies, and subsequent births, can be significant—particularly for low-income women. Unplanned pregnancies were five times as likely for those at or below the federal poverty level in 2008, according to data from the Guttmacher Institute, a nonprofit that provides research and policy analysis of sexual and reproductive topics. There are economic consequences, for both tax payers and individuals: A 2011 study from the Brookings Institution estimated that healthcare costs for unintended pregnancies and resulting births total about $12 billion in tax-payer dollars each year through government-subsidized medical-care programs like Medicaid and Children's Health Insurance Program (CHIP). Studies have found that these pregnancies can negatively impact educational attainment for mothers. A 2010 paper from Boston University suggests that unplanned pregnancies and births can be detrimental to a woman’s economic status and income, and can reduce the probability of labor-force participation by as much as 25 percent. Unintended Pregnancies, by Income Levels 1981-2008 Guttmacher Institute A recent study from the Brookings Institution takes a look at women in various economic classes in order to assess what factors play a significant role in unintended births, and their prevention. The paper used data from the National Survey of Family Growth to look at 3,885 single women between the ages of 15 and 44 who said they were not trying to get pregnant. They were separated into five economic groups that measured their proximity to the federal poverty line, which is about $11,770 for a single individual in 2015. Researchers then tried to look at instances of contraceptive use, motivation to have—or prevent having—a child, and abortions in order to parse potential reasons for the differences in unintended births between the economic groups.

What did the researchers find? Well, it’s definitely not about sex. The report found that for every income bracket, just about two-thirds of women had sex in the past year. In fact, women in the highest income bracket reported the highest rate of activity, with 71 percent saying they'd been sexually active. That means that the actual level of sexual activity has little to do with why poorer women are more likely to unintentionally get pregnant and bear children. More From Our Partners $350 Million Might Not Be Enough to Save Las Vegas

Why the Gap Between Worker Pay and Productivity Is So Problematic

Why Are Developers Still Building Sprawl? It’s also not really about the lack of motivation to prevent pregnancy. “I do think there's something to the idea that there's a bit of a trade off, that the more you have to lose the more determined you are likely to be to use contraception and perhaps access abortion,” says Richard Reeves, one of the study’s co-authors and a senior fellow in economic studies at Brookings. “The danger of that idea is that it might make one a bit complacent about the sort of gaps we find. I think that the evidence is much more strongly on the other side of the equation, that it's access to effective and safe forms of contraception and abortion.” When it comes to the notion that poorer women may be less worried about getting pregnant than their more affluent counterparts (leading them to be more lax in contraception use)—the answer isn’t cut and dry. Across all income groups, the study asked women who were not trying to conceive whether they’d be upset if they did get pregnant. And for each income level the results were pretty much the same, with about one in three women saying they would not be all that upset if they got pregnant, while two-thirds considered such a possibility very upsetting. According to Reeves, intent to get pregnant—or the level of motivation not to—is particularly hard to assess. “You will find some people who are saying, ‘I never want to get pregnant, but I'm not using contraception,’” he says. Response to Question: How Would You Feel If You Got Pregnant Brookings Institution Unsurprisingly, the gaps in contraception use were significant between the most and least affluent. Among the wealthiest women, only 11 percent of those who had sex reported not using contraception, for those in the poorest group the rate was more than twice as high. Naturally, that led to a higher rate of pregnancy for lower-income women: 9 percent versus only 2.9 percent for those who had the highest incomes. Related Story Consider the Coat Hanger The study notes that while contraception coverage is a requirement for many federally-backed insurance plans, abortion (except in the case of rape, incest, or life-threatening emergency) is prohibited by programs that utilize federal funding, like Medicaid—leaving low-income recipients to pay for the procedure with their own money.