Time’s almost up to find a deal on health insurance.

Nevadans have through Sunday night to buy coverage through the Nevada Health Link exchange — the only marketplace in which consumers can qualify for a federal tax credit that helps cover premiums.

After Sunday, most Nevadans won’t be able to sign up for a subsidized plan until enrollment opens again Oct. 15. Exchange officials, insurance brokers and enrollment assisters will be out in full force this weekend for one last sign-up push.

The Ramirez Group and Nevada Health Link have scheduled a free “Get Healthy. Get Covered” enrollment fair Sunday from 11 a.m. to 7 p.m. inside Cox Pavilion on the UNLV campus, at 4505 S. Maryland Parkway.

The groups said they expect the fair to draw thousands of consumers looking to enroll. Attendees will be able to talk one-on-one with assisters and insurance brokers about income-based plans available through the exchange. There also will be a health fair with free medical screenings, educational information, wellness products and prize giveaways.

Consumers also can enroll through insurance brokers and enrollment assisters listed on Nevada Health Link’s website. Visit nevadahealthlink.com/GetHelp to search by ZIP code for a professional.

Help also is available at Nevada Health Link’s enrollment store in The Boulevard, 3528 S. Maryland Parkway. The store is near Macy’s and Bath &Body Works. Hours are from 10 a.m. to 9 p.m. Saturday, and from 9 a.m. to 9 p.m. Sunday. Insurance brokers and exchange officials will be on-site.

To enroll, consumers should have a Nevada driver’s license or identification card with a picture; a permanent resident or alien registration card, if applicable; Social Security cards for all members of the household; proof of Nevada residence, such as a utility bill; an estimate of 2015 income; and copies of current health insurance information.

From the Nov. 15 start of the sign-up period through Feb. 6, 59,623 Nevadans had signed up for coverage through the exchange, according to the federal Health and Human Services Deparment. That included 40,961 consumers in the Las Vegas Valley.

The exchange enrolled 36,000 customers during the first session, from October 2013 though last May.

Health and Human Services said 90 percent of Nevadans who have bought through the exchange have received a premium tax credit that averaged $248 per person per month as of Feb. 9. The credits cut monthly premiums by an average of 67 percent.

But consumers don’t automatically receive the subsidy just for buying through the marketplace. To qualify, buyers must meet income requirements: They can’t make more than 400 percent of the federal poverty level income. That’s $47,000 for singles and $97,000 for a household of four.

Nevadans who earn 138 percent or less of the federal poverty wage — about $16,000 for a single and $33,500 for a family of four — are eligible for the state’s expanded Medicaid program.

To determine whether you qualify for Medicaid or a tax credit to buy a private plan, visit nevadahealthlink.com.

Consumers enrolling in Medicaid or an off-exchange plan can enroll year-round, though waiting periods may apply.

Contact Jennifer Robison at jrobison@reviewjournal.com. Follow @J_Robison1 on Twitter.