New research indicates that the Affordable Care Act and other health policy developments in Ohio have cut in half the proportion of Ohioans without health care insurance. The Plain Dealer, citing Ohio Department of Medicaid survey findings, recently reported that the percentage of uncovered Ohioans is about 8.7 percent. The proportion was about 17.3 percent in 2012.

Demonstrably, one key reason for that positive development is the expansion of Ohio's Medicaid program by Republican Gov. John Kasich. The federal Affordable Care Act, so-called Obamacare, authorized Medicaid expansion in those states that opted for it. To date, 30 states, including Ohio and every state that borders Ohio, have done so.

About our editorials Editorials express the view of the Editorials express the view of the editorial board of The Plain Dealer and Northeast Ohio Media Group -- the senior leadership and editorial-writing staff. As is traditional, editorials are unsigned and intended to be seen as the voice of the newspaper. • Talk about the topic of this editorial in the comments below. • Send a letter to the editor, which will be considered for print publication. • Email general questions or comments about the editorial board to Elizabeth Sullivan, opinion director for the Northeast Ohio Media Group.

Kasich, despite criticism from partisan foes of the Affordable Care Act inside his own party, did the right thing for lower-income Ohioans, as well as for Ohio health care providers, who are now better able to serve those Ohioans. Kasich, via the state Controlling Board, in a 2013 move the state Supreme Court upheld later that year, expanded Medicaid to cover Ohio adults with incomes that are at or less than 138 percent of the federal poverty level. For an Ohio family of three, that's an annual income of $27,724 (or about $2,310 a month).

It is the case, as Medicaid expansion critics point out, that although the federal government is covering 100 percent of the cost of Medicaid expansion through 2016, states after that will be required to pay 5 percent of the costs of the expansion in 2017, 6 percent in 2018, 7 percent in 2019, then 10 percent in and after 2020. (That is, starting in 2020, the federal government will pay 90 percent of states' costs for Medicaid expansion.)

That, among other things, means that Ohio and other states must shrewdly manage Medicaid spending inside their borders. And on that front, there's also good news. Gongwer News Service, citing data from the state Budget Office, which is part of Kasich's administration, and from the legislature's nonpartisan research arm, the Legislative Service Commission, has reported that "underspending in Medicaid ... appears to be on a continuing path." That is, Ohio's Medicaid managers are watching the store, a good omen for when Ohio will be shouldering some expansion costs.

Editor's note: This post was updated Oct. 22 to correct the photo caption online.