If ever there were a year to closely follow how women are going to vote on November 4, it's this one: This year alone, the Hobby Lobby decision made it possible for a privately owned corporation not to provide certain types of birth control coverage for female employees via their health insurance policy, even though such coverage was supposed to be guaranteed under the Affordable Care Act; despite the fact that abortion is a legal medical procedure, in Texas, the majority of abortion clinics were forced to close their doors due to unnecessary regulations that seems to have less to do with a woman's safety and more to do with hindering her right to choose what happens to her own body. (The decision was successfully blocked, for now). This year also saw extensive coverage of the gender wage gap; Women still make just 77 cents for every dollar men make, and that widens even further for black and Hispanic women. The question, of course, becomes this: Are American women concerned enough about these issues, and many others, to actually turn out at tomorrow's midterm elections?

Democrats are hoping the answer is yes. As The New York Times reports, midterm elections are particularly tricky for left-leaning candidates because, "many single women do not vote, especially in non-presidential election years like this one.... The result is a turnout that is older, whiter, and more conservative than in presidential years." The lack of women voter turnout is no small challenge, considering that roughly 56 million adult women are unmarried, and that "single women have become Democrats' most reliable supporters, behind African Americans," according to the Times. Tomorrow's midterm elections will decide who gets (or keeps) seats in the Senate and House, as well as several gubernatorial races—including in Texas, where the stakes are particularly high for women. If Democratic candidate Wendy Davis is going to defeat Texas Attorney General Greg Abbott, one thing is certain: She'll need a big push from female voters. More specifically, single female voters. And other candidates will as well.

Why single women, in particular? For starters, they tend to be more liberal than married women (which is not to say that there aren't liberal married women as well) and also have less financial security, making them more inclined to vote for candidates who will protect their reproductive rights and also support policies that help them financially—whether by increasing minimum wage or making education more affordable.

In the 2010 midterm elections, "Democrats lost women for the first time in decades and subsequently lost the House and six Senate seats," reports Time. To prevent the same thing from happening this year, Democrats have publicly called out Republicans for what they've call the party's "War on Women"—a term that they hope could motivate women to protect themselves at the polls, so to speak. Republicans have also recognized the power of female voters by introducing bills on equal pay and flexible work schedules, although neither has actually been voted on.

According to a telephone poll of 1,000 drop-off voters for Emily's List, American Women, and Planned Parenthood, 70 percent said that voting against a pro-life politician was "very motivating" in terms of getting them to the polls this year, as was voting against politicians "who want to let employers decide what health coverage a woman gets."

On Friday, President Obama spoke to female business owners and working mothers at an event in Rhode Island as part of the effort to get women to the polls. "So while many women are working hard to support themselves and their families, they're still facing unfair choices, outdated workplace policies. That holds them back, but it also holds all of us back," he said, according to Reuters. "We have to do better, because women deserve better." The results of tomorrow's midterm elections will determine whether or not the Democrats will hold the Senate—a major factor in Obama's final two years in office.

How about you? Do you plan to vote in tomorrow's midterm elections?