Related Stories Health care: Illegal immigrants would get Medi-Cal under California bill

SACRAMENTO -- Closely watched California legislation that would extend free or low-cost health care coverage to immigrants who are in the country illegally is on hold until month's end, when it will either be moved to the full Senate for a vote or shelved.

The Senate Appropriations Committee on Monday agreed to refer Senate Bill 4, among dozens of other bills, to the committee's suspense file. That is where bills that would cost more than $50,000 in state general funds are held until they can be reviewed against the state budget.

A revision of the 2015-16 state budget proposed in January is expected to be released next week.

The SALUDos mobile health clinic, a program of the Santa Clara Valley County Medical Center, on a Morgan Hill visit to serve migrant farmworkers, April 20, 2015. (Josie Lepe, Bay Area News Group)

SB 4, authored by Sen. Ricardo Lara, D-Bell Gardens, is the legislator's second attempt to provide health care coverage to immigrants who are not covered under the federal Affordable Care Act.

The bill would expand Medi-Cal to cover more than a million low-paid illegal immigrants. Unlike traditional Medi-Cal costs, which are split between the state and federal government, California would be on the hook for the entire tab.

SB 4 would also allow those with higher income levels to use their own money to buy an unsubsidized private health plan through Covered California. However, the state would need a waiver from the federal government to allow it to sell private plans on the exchange to illegal immigrants.

Advertisement

The bill faces an uphill struggle. Even if it passes out of the suspense file and wins a vote on the Senate floor, it would still face votes in the Assembly and ultimately would need Gov. Jerry Brown's signature to become law.

A previous bill by Lara, projected to cost $1.3 billion, failed last year.

But Lara altered the bill this year so that it would not offer subsidies to those illegal immigrants who could afford to buy a private plan on the state's health care exchange.

Even so, a fiscal analysis of SB 4 shows that annual Medi-Cal costs needed to cover the undocumented would range from $175 million to $740 million, depending on whether President Barack Obama's executive order giving nearly 5 million illegal immigrants protection against deportation takes effect. The order, issued late last year, remains blocked for now in federal court.

If the president's order is eventually upheld in court, about 900,000 of California's illegal immigrants would become eligible for Medi-Cal without Lara's bill, the fiscal analysis shows.

On Monday, at least a dozen supporters of the bill, many of them representing nonprofit immigrant rights or health care advocacy groups, urged the committee to move the bill along.

"California does better when we all have health insurance and when we all have the health care we need," said Beth Capell, a lobbyist for Health Access California, a consumer organization devoted to statewide health care.

She pointed out that the bill is a more modest version of Lara's bill last year and argued that it would ultimately save taxpayers money. Illegal immigrants can access federally qualified health care clinics and hospitals in emergencies, but health care advocates say those services are more expensive than providing illegal immigrants with preventive health care.

A Davis resident, the only person who spoke against the bill Monday, said that while she "certainly wants everybody to be healthy here in California," it would be presumptuous of the state to interfere with federal immigration or health care laws.

Contact Tracy Seipel at 408 920-5343 and follow her at Twitter.com/taseipel.