This week on The Broke and the Beautiful, Dr. Dre lost a bankruptcy battle against Death Row Records, and Joe Giudice got some good news. Also, Debbie Reynolds is selling off her last batch of Hollywood memorabilia.

Dr. Dre is on the field before the Boston Red Sox take on the the New York Yankees on April 4, 2010, during Opening Night at Boston’s Fenway Park. Elsa/Getty Images

Y’all know that Dr. Dre hasn’t exactly been low key in his business venture Beats Electronics LLC, but the rapper’s been involved in something a little closer to Broke’s purview lately. According to Bankruptcy Beat, a judge recently said Dre’s request for priority payment of a $3 million claim against Death Row Records and founder Marion “Suge” Knight was just a bunch of gibberish. Dre’s lawyer in the case, who declined comment Wednesday, had said he was owed $1.8 million in royalties and $1.2 million in sales proceeds from allegedly unauthorized digital sales of music he wrote, produced or performed. But even though Dre will have to forget about the $3 million, at least he’s got something to say for Beats Electronics, which Apple Inc. has proposed buying for $3.2 billion. (Guess we’ll have to listen up closely to see how that pans out.)

Teresa, left, and Joe Giudice leave federal court in Newark, N.J. on March 4. Rich Schultz/Associated Press

We noted last week that “Real Housewives of New Jersey” star Teresa Giudice was cleared in a mortgage fraud lawsuit against her and husband Joe. According to RadarOnline, the lawsuit, which said Joe Giudice forged his ex-business partner’s name on mortgage-related documents, has now been thrown out entirely. “This is a HUGE victory for the Giudice family and for their ongoing criminal case that is taking new turns by the day,” Wendy Feldman, the Giudices’ legal coach and crisis manager, told RadarOnline. Not all is well for the couple, though. Let’s not forget about those multiple counts of fraud to which they’ve pleaded guilty.

Debbie Reynolds in May 2013. Chris Pizzello/Invision/Associated Press

Debbie Reynolds has been selling off Hollywood memorabilia since her planned museum entered bankruptcy in 2009, but the actress’s last batch of goods is about to hit the block. As Bankruptcy Beat reported, Profiles in History is holding an “auction finale” this weekend. In addition to myriad film posters and photos of stars, the auction will feature some more memorable goods, such as Orson Welles’s mink coat from “Citizen Kane,” Charlie Chaplin’s signature bowler and a hat made for Vivien Leigh as Scarlett O’Hara in the movie “Gone With the Wind.” The auction will also feature some vintage cameras, including a camera used to film the “Dracula,” “Frankenstein” and “Pinocchio” movies.

Curt Schilling is seen during a baseball game between the Philadelphia Phillies and the Atlanta Braves on Aug. 2. Michael Perez/Associated Press

Curt Schilling and his collapsed videogame company may be entrenched in never-ending drama, but the ex-baseball player will at least be raking in some money soon. The Boston Globe reported that Mr. Schilling and wife Shonda sold their Medfield, Mass., home for $2.5 million, a $500,000 price drop from its listing in August 2013. The seven-bedroom, 7,981-square-foot home sits on a 26-acre lot and includes a three-room “master sanctuary.” The home also has a “multi-seasonal sports court,” a game room, a movie theater, a wet bar and a wine room.

Write to Melanie Cohen at melanie.cohen@wsj.com. Follow her on Twitter at @MelanieLisa.