The 2010 election of Margo Davidson was hailed as a historic triumph by local Democrats. Never before had the 164th Legislative District been represented by a Democrat, an African-American or a woman. Suddenly, its state representative fit all three descriptions.

Yet, there are some Democrats that argue the district is still awaiting its first liberal representative.

Davidson, who sailed to re-election in 2012 by winning nearly 70 percent of the vote, has fallen out of favor with a faction of Democrats dismayed by her voting record on women’s reproductive rights, school vouchers and congressional redistricting. There is chatter that the party could withhold endorsing a candidate until after the May 20 primary.

David Landau, chairman of the Delaware County Democratic Party, declined to speculate on whether the party’s committee members would endorse a candidate at Thursday’s nominating convention.

Advertisement

“The committee members in the 164th will make their choice,” Landau said. “That’s the procedure we’re going to use. I’m not going to comment one way or the other what is going to happen at the convention.”

The Democratic primary could play a larger role in determining the district’s representative than the general election. Redistricting efforts made the district a fairly secure Democratic seat by adding Lansdowne and Yeadon.

Davidson will face at least two challengers in the primary — Billy Smith, a former Lansdowne councilman, and Dafan Zhang, an East Lansdowne resident who went from being homeless to an Ivy League graduate. Both oppose Davidson’s voting record on vouchers and women’s rights, though Smith has made his opposition a greater focus of his campaign.

A Republican candidate has not been announced.

Smith ardently has claimed the district needs a more liberal Democrat in Harrisburg. He has drawn the public support of a handful of prominent local Democrats, including Upper Darby Democratic Committee Chairman Ed Bradley.

“I am a liberal, progressive Democrat,” Bradley said. “Given that, I don’t feel comfortable supporting her, especially in light of her votes against a woman’s right to choose and her votes to defund public schools by supporting vouchers and charters. These are just issues that no liberal Democrat in a community like ours can accept.”

Though Bradley is backing Smith, Davidson has gained her share of Upper Darby supporters during her three years in office.

Newly elected Councilwoman Sekela Coles said Davidson understands that Upper Darby residents are not single-issue voters.

“I see her as being independent-minded,” Coles said. “I think people want somebody to represent them who thinks with their own mind.”

Davidson, who has been branded a conservative Democrat, stands by her voting record.

“In this day of extremism, I think I’m a bold moderate,” Davidson said. “You have to be bold to be in the middle these days because you’re going to be pulled either to the far left or to the far right.”

Davidson’s scrutinized votes mostly revolve around women’s reproductive rights and vouchers.

She favored a 2011 bill that required abortion clinics to meet the same safety standards as freestanding, ambulatory surgical facilities. She also voted in support of a 2013 bill preventing health insurance exchanges offered through the Affordable Care Act from covering most abortions.

Davidson said she has been painted as a radical by her opponents for supporting the bills, which received substantial bipartisan support. She was among about three dozen Democrats who voted in favor of each bill.

Though Davidson shied away from attaching a pro-choice label to herself, she said women “absolutely” have a right to choose.

“They have a legal right to choose, which was upheld by the Supreme Court and I support that,” Davidson said. “But I believe what Bill Clinton said — that abortions should be legal, safe and rare. So I stand with all of those Democrats that support that.”

As for her 2013 vote to limit abortion coverage, Davidson said she voted to uphold existing federal law preventing federal money from funding abortions.

“That (law) hasn’t prevented women from exercising their right to choose,” Davidson said.

Critics claim the bills are part of a nationwide trend of state laws being passed by Republican legislatures to circumvent Roe vs. Wade. As proof, they point to several Pennsylvania abortion clinics that have closed since the ambulatory standards bill was signed into law.

“I strongly believe in our constitution and the interpretation of the constitution,” Zhang said. “I want to oppose the (fight) to chip away women’s rights.”

If the 2011 bill truly was about safety, Smith said, the General Assembly could have better enforced the regulations already on the books.

“They could have given them some more teeth,” Smith said. “They could have made it so that legislation addressed those issues as it relates to safety — checking them out and making sure that they fit under the current regs, as opposed to creating new regs to shut them down.”

Though Davidson’s votes on reproductive rights aligned with dozens of House Democrats, her support of school choice was not the Democratic norm. She was one of just four Democrats to favor a failed voucher amendment to a 2011 bill.

“I just wanted to make a statement that we really need to discuss this further,” Davidson said. “It wasn’t something that was going anywhere, but we needed to have a real conversation about how we’re going to fund public education and how we’re going to improve outcomes for children and families. We’re not having that conversation.”

Ideally, Davidson said, traditional public schools would perform well enough that all parents would opt to send their children there. However, parents deserve the choice to enroll their child in the school that best fits, Davidson said.

Both Zhang and Smith argued that vouchers siphon resources that otherwise would be directed to the public school district. With resources scattered, Zhang said, it is difficult to fix public schools.

“Not everybody in the district has the same opportunity to send their kids wherever they want,” Zhang said. “By taking money from our public schools, it’s going to start a race to the bottom.”

Davidson’s voting record has cost her support from the political action committees of Planned Parenthood and the Pennsylvania State Educators Association — two PACs that generally back liberal candidates.

Both PACs endorsed her in 2010, but did not do so in 2012, citing her voting record. Campaign contributions from the PSEA totalling $39,000 in 2010 — which Davidson said were unexpected and forwarded to the House Democratic Campaign Committee — were not offered in 2012. However, Davidson received $37,000 in 2012 from Students First, a PAC advocating school choice.

Davidson also has won support from Philadelphia Democrats U.S. Rep. Robert Brady, D-1, and state Sen. Anthony Hardy Williams, D-8, who each represent portions of Delaware County. They, along with former Gov. Ed Rendell, have contributed to her previous campaigns through their respective PACs.

Yet, it’s the local support that Davidson will need to gain her party’s endorsement in the primary. Both Yeadon and Lansdowne will join the 164th District this election and could prove critical. The primary is the first step in selecting their new representative.

Audrey Harris, chairwoman of the Yeadon Democratic Committee, is among several local Democrats who have endorsed Davidson. She called Davidson a “visionary” whose voting record is reflective of the community her district is inheriting.

“I got to know her as the incumbent recently,” Harris said. “Now, I see her as a mover and a shaker. She does have a good track record for getting things done.”

Former Lansdowne Mayor Jayne Young said she believes borough residents are more likely to back a more progressive candidate. She has endorsed Smith.

“I’m a policy wonk,” Young said. “I can like you as a person, but really dislike how you vote. I think the state representatives are incredibly powerful people. We need to have a voice in Harrisburg that’s going to discredit some of the crazy that’s going on there.”

Zhang has not announced any endorsements.

Though committee members in the 164th District are split on who to back for the primary, Landau is confident the party will fully support whomever emerges as the Democratic candidate on May 20.

“One is always concerned about primaries in the sense that people campaign and emotions can run high,” Landau said. “I’m confident based on our past track record that the Democrats will come together. They will support whoever wins the primary.”