This is a movie I think I’ve seen before.

In Politico’s new magazine spinoff, an offering from the onetime Clinton pollster Douglas Schoen and the onetime Carter pollster Patrick Caddell carries a headline that sounded to me like a ghostly echo: AMERICA’S CRISIS OF TRUST .

“We are facing a profound crisis in American political life, with significant and arguably lasting implications for our country,” the authors begin.

The American people are at record lows in terms of confidence in government and American institutions, and the ability of the system to withstand the kind of shocks the recent government shutdown, debt crisis and controversy over Obamacare have produced is open to question.

This was not, they said, a “short-term development or trend”; it reflected something more “profound”:

The dip in the president’s honesty rating is not a blip, but part of long-term decline in confidence in government and institutions that represents and unraveling of a system where nobody is trusted at all.

That thought is followed by a summary of dismally familiar polling data. Only nineteen per cent of Americans trust “the government” to do what’s right, down from thirty-two per cent in Bush, Sr.,’s second term (and seventy-three per cent in 1960). Fifty per cent distrust President Obama. Approval ratings for Congress are in single digits. And so on.

Now, about AMERICA’S CRISIS OF TRUST —what does that remind you of?

Nothing, probably, if you’re under fifty. But if you remember leisure suits, est training, and Abscam, you may recall President Jimmy Carter’s 1979 address to the nation on what he called the “crisis of confidence,” better known as the “malaise speech.”

The malaise speech—which I helped write, and about which, in 2009, the thirtieth anniversary of its delivery, I blogged ad infinitum, not to say ad nauseum—was at once a moral zenith and a political nadir of the Carter Presidency. Carter himself was its impresario and auteur, but its intellectual father was Pat Caddell, then twenty-nine years old. The speech had its origins in a gigantic doorstopper of an eyes-only, book-length memo, written by Caddell and his then-sidekick Wayne Granquist, and it got its indelible tag from background briefings Caddell gave to the press. (The word “malaise” appears nowhere in the speech. It’s a French word, and Carter always crossed those out.)

From the speech:

The symptoms of this crisis of the American spirit are all around us. For the first time in the history of our country a majority of our people believe that the next five years will be worse than the past five years. Two-thirds of our people do not even vote As you know, there is a growing disrespect for government and for churches and for schools, the news media, and other institutions. This is not a message of happiness or reassurance, but it is the truth and it is a warning. These changes did not happen overnight. They’ve come upon us gradually over the last generation, years that were filled with shocks and tragedy.

Compare and contrast. Or just compare, because there isn’t all that much in the way of contrast.

The diagnosis is essentially the same, whether you call the malady a crisis of confidence (1979) or a crisis of trust (2013). True, the doctor has moved uptown. In his youth, Caddell was a liberal Democrat: pre-Carter, he was George McGovern’s pollster; post-Carter, he was Gary Hart’s. All that was a long time ago. Now he’s a Fox News Democrat, which is to say a Democrat in name only. (Schoen has made a similar, though less emphatic, journey.) Caddell and Schoen have a weekend show on the network of Hannity and Doocy. They have the odd tut-tut for Republicans, but their real ire—Caddell’s especially—is reserved for their allegedly fellow Dems. They occasionally gum the hand that feeds them, but their attacks on their own are red in tooth and claw.

Here, for example, are Caddell and Schoen last March, referring to the Democrat in the White House:

His self-righteous rhetoric obscures a bitter truth: Obama is not trying to unite the country. He’s waging a class-based battle for political gain.

Last month, the Democrats in the Senate decided that executive and lower-court judicial appointments will henceforth be confirmed or rejected by a simple majority vote. Caddell, writing by himself this time, called this long-overdue restoration of the Framers’ original intention a “crime against a government of rules,” an “institutional act of coup de etat [sic],” and “a stunning capstone to what has been already a steady erosion of a government of laws down to a sort of semi-political banana republic.”

(I have to say that my old comrade has a point about the United States becoming a semi-political banana republic. But the semi-shackling of the filibuster was a step away from chaos, paralysis, and the empowerment of reactionary juntas, not a step toward it.)

One more example. In a column boosting a Fox News “documentary” about the food-stamp program, formally known as the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program, or SNAP , Caddell mysteriously says that what he rather callously calls “America’s great food stamp binge” is “a direct result of the Obama administration’s surreptitious undermining of the law in the Stimulus Act in 2009 and the disingenuous gutting of President Clinton’s overwhelmingly successful Welfare Reform law.” (Soberer analysts recognize that what the spike in food-stamp eligibility is a direct result of is hard times: the financial crisis, the Great Recession, and the consequent growth of poverty and joblessness.)

Caddell writes that as he watched the Fox doc, “I began to see what was behind the SNAP program.” Feeding the hungry? No. “It is about changing the mentality of the nation, of Americans.” Its “utterly foul” purpose, under Obama, is to get people dependent on government “handouts” and to destroy “the tradition of tightening your belt and taking care of yourself when times get tough”:

Many of you have probably heard the Chinese proverb, “Give a man a fish and you feed him for a day. Teach a man to fish and you feed him for a lifetime.” The SNAP program is one big fish giveaway that leaves people reliant rather than reliable.

This sort of thing is of course deplorable, but there’s much less of it in the Schoen-Caddell piece quoted at the top of this post, and it doesn’t affect the validity of their main point. There was a crisis of public confidence in 1979, there is a crisis of public trust in 2013, and the similarities are striking.

The solution Schoen and Caddell offer is that hoary fantasy, a “centrist” third party. This is a fantasy for two reasons. In a winner-take-all electoral system like ours, the only concrete effect of any third party is to take votes away from whichever of the two main parties it is ideologically closest to. And third parties never actually achieve power. The only new party that ever did so was the Republican Party, in 1860. But that was a consequence of the total breakdown in national unity over the issue of slavery. The Whigs imploded, the Democrats splintered, and Lincoln won a four-candidate race with less than forty per cent of the vote.

I suppose one can imagine circumstances in which a sufficiently charismatic “centrist” third-partier could hope to win a Presidential election. Theodore Roosevelt and Ross Perot indulged that hope, and Colin Powell flirted with it. At the congressional level, though, any such upheaval is impossible as long as the present system of single-member districts prevails.

“For the first time,” Schoen and Caddell note,

voters want to defeat all members of Congress. Rasmussen figures show that close to 80 percent of Americans say that they’d throw out the entire Congress and start over.

Wouldn’t that be nice? Unfortunately, we don’t get to vote for (or against) “all members of Congress.” We each get to vote on two per cent of the Senate—and two-tenths of one per cent of the House. No matter what “close to 80 per cent of Americans” say, we already know to a moral certainty that there will be no change next year in a minimum of three hundred and seventy-four of our four hundred and thirty-five congressional districts.

Happy holidays, everybody. And to our friends at Fox News, Merry Christmas.

Photograph by Melina Mara/The Washington Post/Getty.