As a poultry farmer in Arkansas, I look across the state line and see many of my fellow farmers working hard to provide a good life for their families, honoring God and contributing to their communities. In many ways, we’re connected by a shared history, as both Arkansas and Oklahoma were once part of the same federal territory. We’re still connected today as neighbors with shared values.

But neighbors help one another and as I see the Oklahoma Legislature considering a plan to “rebalance” Medicaid, I want to help them avoid the same mistakes our state has made.

Login required We have used your information to see if you have a subscription with us. So far we have not found one. If you feel you are currently subscribed please click on the button to attempt to find your account. Screen Name or Email Password Forgot? Remember me on this computer Login Screen Name or Email Now I remember! Need an account? Create one now. Back Thank you for reading and relying on TulsaWorld.com for your news and information. You have now viewed your allowance of free articles. Login

You must login to view the full content on this page. Screen Name or Email Password Forgot? Remember me on this computer Login Screen Name or Email Now I remember! Need an account? Create one now.

The central component of the proposed “rebalancing” plan is to expand Medicaid welfare to a new class of able-bodied, working-age adults with no children and no disabilities keeping them from work. This Medicaid expansion was a central piece of President Obama’s disastrous “Obamacare” program.

In 2013, our Democrat governor and his friends in the Legislature passed a Medicaid expansion to cover these able-bodied adults, promising that it would be a compassionate extension of our state’s safety net to people in need. But our “Private Option” “Obamacare” expansion has been a disaster for Arkansas taxpayers and has hurt the truly needy ever since.

More able-bodied adults have been added to the new welfare program than state officials thought would ever even be eligible, costs have soared above expectations, and the added burden on our state budget threatens the funding for critical services like education, public safety and infrastructure. Nearly 300,000 able-bodied adults have moved to the front of the line to sign up for this new program, while thousands of kids and adults with developmental disabilities still languish on Medicaid waiting lists for the critical services they desperately need.

In 2014, Arkansans elected a new Republican governor and gave Republicans their largest legislative majorities since Reconstruction. I hoped that we could come together and put an end to this dangerous “Obamacare” expansion. Instead, pressure from special interests gave way to arm twisting, political dirty tricks and sneaky legislative maneuvers by Gov. Asa Hutchinson to pass a rebranded version of the failed “Private Option.”

We fell into this trap. Our decision will burden future generations with untold amounts of debt, make it harder for the truly needy to get the care they deserve and put other important state programs at risk. But you don’t have to repeat our mistakes.

Oklahoma’s Medicaid Rebalancing Act of 2020 could lead your state down the same dark road. Don’t be fooled: dressing “Obamacare’s” Medicaid expansion up in its Sunday best doesn’t make it a different program. Many of the proposed tweaks have made “Obamacare” worse, not better.

Like the Arkansas Medicaid expansion, Oklahoma’s plan will extend Medicaid to a new class of able-bodied adults, with as many as 628,000 of them newly eligible for this new program. That’s roughly the population of Oklahoma City and a huge increase in the amount of Oklahomans who would become dependent on government.

How are taxpayers supposed to fund this Medicaid expansion? Through new taxes, extra fees, and mythical “savings.” Besides a tax hike on tobacco sales, the plan could also levy a tax on health-care providers, which will surely be passed along to patients.

The list of empty promises made by Barack Obama about the benefits of “Obamacare” is endless. He promised that you could keep your plan. He promised that the typical family would save thousands of dollars a year in lower premiums. These promises had no basis in reality – and neither do the promises coming from those seeking to “rebalance” Medicaid in Oklahoma.

Don’t be fooled by the proposed Medicaid Rebalancing Act. It is merely a wolf in sheep’s clothing. This new plan is “Obamacare” expansion dressed up to disguise its true nature. From one neighbor to another, don’t let your state make the same mistake we did. Stand on principle and reject this disastrous plan.