Given how hard they worked to pass the Affordable Care Act, it’s unsurprising that President Obama and elected Democrats promote the narrative that the 2010 federal law has been an unalloyed triumph for truth, justice and the American way. But at some point, we hope politics gives way to candor.

ACA has done well in significantly reducing the number of Americans without health insurance. Its provision allowing adult children to stay on their parents’ plans until age 26 is humane and deeply helpful. Studies have found the law contributed in part to the recent slowing of the annual increase in health care spending.

However, major fundamental problems with the ACA that were predicted before its adoption have come to pass. The biggest is the fact that the health insurance options offered through state exchanges simply aren’t attractive to Americans who aren’t poor. A new study by three economists at the Wharton School of Business concluded that “even under the most optimistic assumptions, close to half of the formerly uninsured (especially those with higher incomes) experience both higher financial burden and lower estimated welfare. ... [They] consistently are worse off from purchasing coverage regardless of the assumptions made regarding spending increases and risk aversion.”

Hard data back up this conclusion. In 2014, the first year that the ACA exchanges offered coverage, 8 million Americans signed up. The ACA’s launch was marked by a series of computer fiascoes that made enrollment difficult in some states and a nightmare in others. When these starting pains went away, according to supporters of the law, sign-ups would explode. The Congressional Budget Office forecast an enrollment of 21 million Americans in 2016.

But the latest federal forecast predicts only 10 million enrollees after aggressive promotional efforts tied to the Nov. 1 beginning of exchange sign-ups for 2016, and that number will dwindle as the year goes on, based on past experience. At of the end of the 2015, federal officials predict only 9.1 million Americans will have policies through the ACA, down from 11.7 million at the start of the year.

California’s version of ACA, known as Covered California, has similar results. While enrollment in Medi-Cal has jumped sharply because of how the program was expanded under the federal law, the enrollment in the state health insurance exchange stands at 1.3 million, a modest gain from 1.1 million last year — and 90 percent of the policies are subsidized.

Even with government subsidies, insurers working with exchanges across the nation are seeking big premium hikes, citing evidence that the new sign-ups need significantly more and costlier care than predicted. But such hikes will only make health insurance even less attractive to Americans who aren’t poor and who either don’t fear the penalties for not complying with the individual mandate to own insurance or don’t believe they will be enforced.

This status quo must change. The extreme partisan divide over the Affordable Care Act needs to give way to a constructive attempt to make its policies more attractive and fiscally sustainable, both for individual purchasers and the taxpayers who fund the government. If this doesn’t happen, history will not be kind to the present stewards of the federal government.