ALLENTOWN – When nursing moms who work at South Mountain Middle School needed privacy, they would use a multi-purpose room in the nurse's office.

Sometimes they would have to wait if the room was being used by a sick student who needed to lie down. Other times, they would feel as if they had to rush so others could use the room, district officials said.

Now teachers and staff at South Mountain who need to breast feed or pump breast milk can do so in a private, enclosed 4-foot-by-8-foot suite called a Mamava.

The Mamava is more intimate and comfortable than the multi-purpose room moms were using at South Mountain. There's a bench, a lock on the door, a mirror, a fold-down table to change diapers, an outlet for a breast pump and enough space for a stroller.

The Allentown Health Bureau purchased two Mamavas for the distinct via grants. The other Mamava is at Allen High. Those two schools were chosen because they're the largest middle and high schools in the district. Other schools have rooms in their health rooms that moms use.

For South Mountain and Allen, the Mamava also serves as a solution to a law under the Affordable Care Act that says employers must provide a private place that isn't a bathroom and is free of interruptions for nursing moms.

Tina Amato, nutrition and activity manager with the Allentown Health Department, has been working with Allentown workplaces to comply with the law.

The Mamava is perfect for the district because it has limited space and most of its 2,000 employees are females, Amato said. At South Mountain, the pod fits perfectly against a wall in the health room.

South Mountain teacher Kristina Michener is a new mom who has been using the Mamava. The Mamava is a quiet, uninterrupted space that has eased the stress of coming back to work from maternity leave, she said in a news release from the district.

Sascha Mayer, co-founder of the Mamava, said the Allentown School District is one of the first in the country to have one.

Mayer and her co-founder, Christine Dodson, created the Mamavas in 2013 after many conversations about how difficult it was to travel and find a place to breast feed with babies. The first Mamava popped up at the Burlington (Vt.) International Airport.

Since then, other airports, convention centers and zoos have purchased and installed Mamavas, which in Spanish translates to "Moms on the go." Last fall, the Minnesota Vikings became the first football team to have a Mamava at their stadium.

"It's about providing a comfortable place to take a break in a hectic environment," Mayer said.

While the lactation pod works for South Mountain and Allen, Amato said other workplaces don't need to purchase Mamavas, which cost $11,000.

There are other, less expensive options, she said.

Some workplaces have renovated small closets and designated them lactation spots, she said. Other employers have added benches, tables and even pictures on the wall in a room to make it more welcoming to nursing moms, Amato said.

If employers have questions on how to better comply with the law, they can contact Amato at 610-437-7581.

jpalochko@mcall.com

Twitter @Jpalochko

610-820-6613