$41.5 million project completed to historic 1937 dormitory

Jeff Holderman, with Ludvic Electric, works on a outlet in the newly remodeled Baker Hall at the University of Colorado in Boulder on Wednesday. ( Mark Leffingwell / Daily Camera )

University of Colorado residence hall move-in 9 a.m. Monday through Thursday, Aug. 21

When University of Colorado students return to 77-year-old Baker Hall this fall, they'll move into a newly renovated, state-of-the-art dorm — with a few elements of 1930s style.

The original wrought-iron light fixtures that hang outside the building's entrances and in some rooms have been outfitted with modern, energy-saving LED light bulbs. Stone fireplaces from 1937 are juxtaposed with heating and cooling units that automatically shut off if someone opens a window.

The contemporary technologies are part of a 15-month, $41.5 million renovation to Baker Hall, one of the Boulder campus's oldest residence halls.

But rather than remove all of the historical character of the building, which is home to roughly 450 students, planners worked hard to incorporate bits and pieces of the dorm's original style into design plans.

The result is a tasteful mix of old and new, functionality and style and energy-saving features, said Baker Hall project manager Heidi Rogé.

Students will start trickling back into Boulder starting today, with move-in continuing through Thursday. Classes start Aug. 25.

"When we're here the building doesn't feel alive, when we're doing construction, and then when the students start moving in, the building becomes alive and it takes on a different spirit," Rogé said.

When it was first built in 1937, construction of Baker Hall cost $480,000, funding the university got in the form of a private loan from a private donor, according to historical records. At the time, Baker Hall was an all-male dorm.

The total cost of the renovation is being financed through available cash and bonds, which will be repaid through room and board fees. At Baker Hall, room and board ranges from roughly $6,000 to $8,000 per semester.

Baker is also home to the natural sciences and environmental studies residential academic program, which includes social events, classes, field trips and other opportunities.

To remind students of the importance of nature while they're on campus, crews hung photographs of outdoor scenes and landmarks on the walls in common spaces, said Cindy Carey, director of the Baker residential academic program.

Each floor is named after natural elements, such as the ocean, the desert and the sky, she added.

"As kids walk down the hallway and see some of these photos they'll say 'Wow that is really cool,'" she said. "We chose really some stunning photos and 'Gee I'd like to find out more about that.' Just to get them to think, because I don't think most of these students think about the outdoors in any way."

Other environmentally friendly components of the renovated Baker Hall include a switch that turns off the power to everything except the refrigerator when students leave for the day, energy-saving windows, water bottle refill stations and cold-water washing machines.

The 115,000-square-foot renovation also added air conditioning, created a new entrance on the building's south side and improved the courtyard on the east side between Baker and Libby halls.

In some parts of the building, windows were added or barriers were removed to allow for more natural lighting inside.

"The place was kind of dungeony, a little bit dark before," said Kambiz Khalili, director of housing and dining services. "It showed its age a bit because it was just built in a different era. The facility was basically an energy hog, taking a lot of energy.

"Now, it's built to save us a lot of energy in the long run every year. We have put in a lot of things to make this residence friendly for the 21st-century student."

Contact Camera Staff Writer Sarah Kuta at 303-473-1106 or kutas@dailycamera.com