As the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act reshapes the delivery of health care, investor interest in health care properties — particularly medical office buildings — remains strong in the Twin Cities and nation.

But a lack of supply has constrained investment activity, according to market observers.

Charles A. Greenberg, senior vice president of asset management for Minot, North Dakota-based Investors Real Estate Trust, said institutional investors tend to place a high value on the medical office building properties they own.

“There’s a lot of money out there that would like to be in medical office buildings,” Greenberg said. “But many … of the owners of quality ‘MOBs’ have no intention of letting them go right now.”

IRET owns various types of real estate in 11 Midwestern states. Because IRET is publicly traded, Greenberg said he can’t comment on whether the real estate investment trust is looking to acquire more health care properties.

Ben Thypin, director of market analysis for New York-based Real Capital Analytics, said the medical office category has been “the hottest by volume” for real estate investors not only in the Twin Cities but across the nation. The category includes doctors’ offices, urgent care clinics, and diagnostic laboratories and imaging centers. They typically produce stable cash flow that makes them particularly attractive to REITs.

In the Twin Cities area, 2014 purchase prices of medical office buildings tracked by Finance & Commerce have ranged from nearly $100 per square foot to $330 per square foot.

Thypin noted that the medical office building category has become more popular with investors because of the growing populations of insured consumers and senior citizens, and because hospital systems have been shifting more non-acute care to off-campus facilities, away from clinics in or near hospitals. Thypin also thinks sales activity this year has been limited due to a lack of properties available for purchase.

One major change within the past couple of years is that REITS and other institutional investors in the capital markets, which historically focused on on-campus facilities, have shown more interest in off-campus buildings, said Steve Brown, executive director of Cushman & Wakefield/NorthMarq’s Healthcare Advisory Group.

On-campus facilities have historically drawn higher prices because they were seen as a “safer bet” than standalone facilities, Brown said. But projects in good locations – such as suburban, residential areas – are attracting more interest. “There’s a lot of money chasing that type of product,” he said.

Brian Bruggeman, an associate with Colliers International’s Healthcare Services Group in Minneapolis, also sees institutional interest in acquiring health care real estate remaining high, with public entities and private REITS and equity groups “all chomping at the bit,” especially for properties anchored by a major health system.

Across the country, the supply of medical office buildings for purchase has been limited because health care REITS have continued to grow and become “more aggressive” in looking for places to deploy their capital, Bruggeman said.

“There’s very high demand, but just no supply,” he said.

With the growing population of seniors, facilities that serve the Medicare population are also attractive to institutional investors, Bruggeman said. “But those are also hard to find because a lot of them are still owned by the systems who run them,” he said. “For nonprofits, there are some tax advantages in continuing to own those senior care facilities, rather than having some third party run them.”

As a result, some health care REITs have become more active in developing senior care and other types of health facilities across the nation, he said. For example, IRET is investing about $14 million to expand its Southdale Medical Building at 6525 France Ave. in Edina with a 60,000-square-foot addition and five-story parking ramp.

IRET is currently developing one other health care property in the Twin Cities, according to Mark Reiling, executive vice president of asset management. As Finance & Commerce reported in June, IRET is building a $20 million 72,000-square-foot children’s and adolescents’ psychiatric hospital in Brooklyn Park for Twin Cities-based PrairieCare. PrairieCare will lease the facility, which is slated to open next year at 9400 Zane Ave. N. IRET paid about $2.62 million in cash for the 10-acre site.

With construction of stand-alone health care facilities at a high level in the Twin Cities, some of those newer properties may eventually become available for investor purchase. Many of the new, standalone facilities have long-term tenants and leases, giving their developers reason to hold them as long-term assets, Bruggeman said. “But other groups may look to sell them off, right away.”

Greenberg and others said they are still waiting to see how the Affordable Care Act affects health care delivery.

Bruggeman expects to see more consolidation of health care systems in the Twin Cities and elsewhere. “Systems are going to have to consolidate, just to cut costs,” he said, adding the consolidation will likely result in more clinic buildings and other real estate owned by medical groups and systems being put up for sale.

In addition, Bruggeman says he’s constantly fielding inquiries from landowners who want to get into the health care market as developers.

“But it’s not quite like the Field of Dreams concept of, ‘If you build it, they will come,’” he said. “Unfortunately, it doesn’t work that way. You have to have demand from a system or medical group to develop something.”

Sampling of 2014 medical office sales

Here are some 2014 sales reported by Finance & Commerce

Closed in January: Woodlake Partners LLC, an entity related to Los Angeles-based Laurus Corp., paid $20.3 million or $103.57 per square foot for the Woodlake Centre at 6601 Lyndale Ave. S. in Richfield. Tenants include an Allina Health clinic and a dental office. The 196,000-square-foot office complex was sold by Woodlake-VEF IV LLC, an entity related to New York-based Area Property Partners.

Closed in August: Unity Ventures LLC and the Bernardi Family Limited Partnership paid slightly more than $14 million for the Unity Professional Building, a 62,518-square-foot property at 500 Osborne Road NE in Fridley. The building is on the Unity Hospital campus. The deal works out to about $224 per square foot. The seller was Excel Realty Holdings LLC, an entity of San Diego, California-based Excel Trust Inc.

Closed in August: A Tennessee real estate investment trust paid $19.8 million for a neighboring medical office building, at 480 Osborne Road NE in Fridley. (The two Osborne Road deals were not related.) HR Fridley LLC, an affiliate of Nashville, Tennessee-based Healthcare Realty Trust, acquired the 60,477-square-foot Fridley Medical Center from Premier FMC LLC, an entity related to Ramsey-based Premier Commercial Properties. The sale works out to about $328.14 per square foot for a building constructed in 2010.

Closed in August: Bloomington-based Frauenshuh paid $14.45 million for the three buildings in the Valley Creek Office Park at 8301, 8401 and 8501 Golden Valley Road in Golden Valley. The properties are filled mostly by medical office tenants, and anchored by North Memorial Healthcare. The buildings total 128,628 square feet. The purchase works out to about $112.34 per square foot. The seller was an entity affiliated with New York-based Berkadia Commercial Mortgage.

Closed in August: South Park 7459 LLC, of St. Louis Park, sold South Park Center, a 10,168-square-foot Class B medical office building at 7450 S. Park Drive in Savage. The buyer, Savage Office LLC, of Edina (representing a private investor), paid nearly $1.82 million – or $178.55 per square foot.