Congressman Michael Grimm, who pleaded guilty on Dec. 23 to cheating on his taxes when he ran a health food restaurant, has finally realized that he can no longer represent his New York City district “100 per cent.” The Republican from Staten Island announced earlier this week that he would resign from Congress on Jan. 5 because it is time for him “to start the next chapter of my life.”

That next chapter could, of course, involve up to three years in prison when he is sentenced in June.

His soon to be former constituents, meanwhile, can look forward to a special election, probably in the spring. There won’t be a primary for this district, unfortunately: The political party leaders get to pick their favorite candidates — just like in the old days.



And the big name at the top of the Republicans’ list is also the most controversial: Staten Island district attorney Daniel Donovan. Mr. Donovan is best known nationally for failing to bring an indictment against the police officers who caused Eric Garner’s death — all captured on a bystander’s harrowing video.

Republicans deserve other choices. Assemblywoman Nicole Malliotakis and State Senator Andrew Lanza are possible alternatives, even though political insiders suggest they have little chance against Mr. Donovan when party leaders have the only vote.

Democrats, whose lackluster candidate last year failed against the flashy Mr. Grimm, are considering Assemblyman Michael Cusick, who lives in the area. Mr. Cusick is a relatively conservative lawmaker who works well with colleagues from both parties. Perhaps more important, he was a top aide to Senator Charles Schumer before becoming a legislator. With party regulars picking the candidate, Mr. Cusick’s connection to the senior senator can only help.

Another strong Democrat is former Congressman Michael McMahon, who lost after one term to Mr. Grimm in 2010. As a former New York City Councilman, Mr. McMahon worked hard for such difficult issues as a fair waste management plan for the city. In Congress, he fought for more federal funds for transit and better mental health care for veterans. His unfortunate vote against the Affordable Care Act in 2010 could nevertheless help his credentials as a centrist for this district.

New York Gov. Andrew Cuomo will have to call a special election very soon. Then it’s up to voters to replace Mr. Grimm with someone who is less of a national embarrassment.