What to look for in Obama's speech

With help from Sarah Karlin, Rachana Pradhan, Erin Mershon and Jennifer Haberkorn

OBAMA’S FINAL SOTU: WHAT TO EXPECT ON HEALTH CARE — The White House has stressed that the president’s speech will focus on big themes instead of running down a legislative wish list for President Obama’s final year in office. But since health care has been such a dominating issue for Obama, former administration officials are expecting to hear about it tonight. Obama’s final State of the Union address may include his long-term dreams for health care, such as Medicaid expansion, controlling health care costs and addressing drug prices, Pro’s Nancy Cook reports. The president may also touch on the link between mental health and access to guns. Your trusty health team will give you the rundown tomorrow morning. In the meantime, more from Nancy here: http://politico.pro/1N2V95M.

Story Continued Below

KENTUCKY PREPARES TO DISKYNECT — As expected, Republican Gov. Matt Bevin has officially notified HHS that he is dismantling Kentucky's state-based exchange, Pro’s Rachana Pradhan reports. He sent notice on Dec. 30 (but wasn't made public until Monday) — and it's possible the transition could be completed in time for the 2017 enrollment period. The feds said they'll work with the state to wind down operations, which will cost Kentucky around $23 million — that's according to estimates from former Democratic Gov. Steve Beshear's administration.

— In other Kentucky news, state insurance commissioner Sharon Clark will step down, SNL Financial reports.

WELCOME TO TUESDAY MORNING, where the State of PULSE is about to get even stronger as Erin and I prepare to pass off the baton to the newest addition to our team, Dan Diamond, who will take over your favorite morning health policy tipsheet tomorrow! Send him tips, scoops and a big, warm welcome to ddiamond@politico.com

All you need is PULSE …

PULSE is all you need …

CMS TAKING STEPS TO TIGHTEN EXCHANGE ENROLLMENTS AMID INSURER BACKLASH — The Obama administration is taking steps to tighten special-enrollment periods after insurers complained that exchange customers are waiting until they get sick to sign up for coverage, Pro's Paul Demko reports. Acting CMS Administrator Andy Slavitt indicated Monday evening that the administration will eliminate some of the reasons that it allows customers to sign up for coverage outside of the standard enrollment window. In addition, Slavitt said that CMS will be tightening the marketplace rules to make sure customers aren’t gaming the system, and it will terminate coverage for individuals who improperly signed up for plans through a special enrollment period. "There are some [special enrollment periods] that we need to clarify because they’re subject frankly to abuse,” Slavitt said during a speech at the J.P. Morgan Healthcare Conference in San Francisco. “There may be bad actors and others out there who are abusing those [special enrollment periods]." More from Paul: http://politico.pro/1ZXzzco

SCOOPLET: FISHER LEAVES HILL FOR DOWNTOWN — Karen Fisher, a long-time senior health adviser on the Senate Finance Committee, is leaving Capitol Hill, she told contacts in an email Monday. The Democratic staffer, who played a key role in crafting the new Medicare payment formula, will be the chief policy officer at the Association of American Medical Colleges. She's returning to the organization after serving as its senior policy counsel before coming to the Hill.

TODAY: HELP VOTES ON FDA NOMINEE — The Senate HELP Committee votes on Robert Califf's nomination to lead the FDA this morning. Califf largely breezed through his confirmation hearing in November and has the support of committee leadership.

GOP’S UPCOMING 'FAMILY DISCUSSION' ON OBAMACARE REPLACEMENT — Ways and Means Chairman Kevin Brady said that Republicans will have a "family discussion" on an Obamacare replacement plan at their retreat this week. He said it won't be a top-down plan led by committee chairs. "It will be collaboration of 246 members," Brady said Monday at POLITICO's Morning Money discussion. He said that he envisions a "health care backpack" plan - an array of options for workers who can take a plan from "job to job and state to state" and potentially into retirement.

** A message from PhRMA: Coverage does not necessarily mean access to care. More medicines are being excluded from coverage, deductibles and copays are going up and insurance companies are increasingly imposing other barriers to access. Know the 5 reasons you may not get the medicine you need. Learn more at AccessBetterCoverage.org - http://onphr.ma/1UzbZPw. **

USPSTF RELEASES FINAL RECS ON BREAST CANCER SCREENING — The U.S. Preventive Services Task Force published its final breast cancer screening recommendations Monday evening — and they were in line with its earlier draft recommendations saying women should start routine mammograms later and have them less frequently. The task force advises that women between the ages of 50 to 75 get biannual mammogram screenings, while women ages 40 to 49 should weigh the benefits and harms of screening every two years. The panel noted that while "screening mammography is effective in reducing deaths from breast cancer for women in their 40s, the likelihood of benefit is less than for older women and the potential harms proportionally greater," adding that the most serious potential harm is unneeded treatment.

— The USPSTF recommendations are gaining traction in some medical circles, but they are still opposed by many lawmakers who in the latest budget deal included language keeping existing screening recommendations in place for at least two years. That effectively makes these recommendations moot until 2018. My story here.

HEALTH INDUSTRY HAS ITS OWN CANCER MOONSHOT — A coalition of pharma, biotech, health insurers, academic centers and community oncologists, along with Bank of America, launched a coalition to accelerate the use of combination cancer immunotherapies. Dubbed the National Immunotherapy Coalition, the group is launching their Cancer Moonshot 2020 Program, which aims to complete clinical trials in as many as 20,000 cancer patients at all stages of disease for up to 20 different tumor types by 2020. The drug companies will make available more than 60 novel cancer drugs as part of the project. Independence Blue Cross will provide insurance coverage of whole genome sequencing for trial patients. Immunotherapy treatments are designed to harness the body’s own immune system to fight off cancer. The group already met with Vice President Joe Biden in December after he had called for a "moonshot" to end cancer. More here: http://bit.ly/1Zo92bn

PLENTY OF CHURN FOR ACO PROGRAM, BUT SOME NEW PARTICIPANTS, TOO — More than half of the 19 remaining Pioneer ACOs dropped out, and about 70 shared savings ACOs also withdrew, according to a new list of participants CMS released Monday. But there was some news for CMS to celebrate, too: the agency added 100 new shared savings ACOs, and quite a few participants chose to take on substantial risk: 22 ACOs are in Tracks 2 or 3 of the shared savings program, and 12 are in the End-Stage Renal Disease track. CMS deputy administrator Sean Cavanaugh told PULSE that some dropouts make sense. "This is a new model of care," he said. While some were ready to transition to risk, some weren't. "They're all figuring out what the right level of risk is," he said. "That's why we offer a number of models."

— There are 21 participants in the new Next Generation ACO program, which was developed to attract more experienced providers. That program signed up several former Pioneers, including ThedaCare, Deaconess, Park Nicollete and OSF Healthcare System. The full list is here: http://1.usa.gov/1RHstWr

— Still, that list of Next Gen participants is missing some of the bigger names in health care (like Atrius or Sharp). While CMS signed up frustrated Pioneer participant Beacon Health, it didn't nab Dartmouth-Hitchcock — which dropped out of the Pioneer program last fall while pledging to take a good hard look at NextGen. Executive vice president Rob Greene told PULSE the financial targets still would have had them losing millions. Greene said the program is still aimed at providers who have a lot of waste in their systems, and at Dartmouth-Hitchcock, there just "isn't that much fat for us to cut out."

ANOTHER TWO-MIDNIGHTS LAWSUIT — Fifty more hospitals are joining the fight against the payment reduction associated with CMS's two midnights rule, Modern Healthcare reports. (Remember, CMS drastically modified how the rule is enforced last year, but didn't end the 0.2 percent payment reduction that went with it.) This is the fourth such lawsuit. More here: http://bit.ly/1RHpOfv

CORNYN PUSHES OBAMA ON MENTAL HEALTH REFORM — Ahead of Obama’s State of the Union address, the No. 2 Senate Republican called on the president to work with Congress on mental health reform in response to recent mass shootings. “He needs to roll up his sleeves, and he needs to work with us to move legislation forward that focuses on the commonsense thread found in many of these mass incidents, and that has to do with the mental health issue,” John Cornyn said Monday during a speech on the Senate floor. Cornyn is pushing his reform measure that is expected to get a hearing in the Senate Judiciary Committee as early as this month. The NRA-backed bill faces pushback from Democrats who say it weakens restrictions on gun purchases. As POLITICO reported earlier, Cornyn is hoping to eventually couple his measure with a larger mental health overhaul bill still awaiting a markup in the HELP Committee.

— Speaking of SOTU, here's POLITICO's scorecard on how policy proposals mentioned in Obama's previous SOTU addresses have fared: http://politico.pro/1PTpg4p

IMPORTANT BIRTHDAY UPDATE: We’d like to wish an extremely happy birthday to our ace pharma reporter, Sarah Karlin, who will be celebrating by covering the Califf hearing this morning! Send her birthday scoops to skarlin@politico.com

WHAT WE'RE READING — By Jennifer Haberkorn

About 15 state attorney generals have joined the Justice Department investigation into the two insurance mergers, Reuters reports. http://reut.rs/1P5ECzs

The House on Monday approved a bill to require child-resistant packaging for the liquids in e-cigarettes, USA Today reports. The legislation was already approved by the Senate. http://usat.ly/1SL7umD

The changing politics around health care mean that a Republican president wouldn't have an easy time repealing the Affordable Care Act, Jill Lawrence opines in USA Today. http://usat.ly/1Kars2Q

HHS Secretary Sylvia Burwell was in Orlando on Monday to encourage Floridians to enroll in Obamacare http://bit.ly/1N3TpJA

Rumors in the insurance world suggest Marilyn Tavenner is the "wrong" person to lead AHIP now, Modern Healthcare reports. http://bit.ly/1mRQ37a

** A message from PhRMA: Everyone has a story. We want to hear yours. Whether you are a patient like 9-year-old Ellie, a caregiver like Diane, or a general supporter, we want to hear your story about the positive & transformational impact that medicines have had on you or your loved ones. Submit your story to be part of the “I’m Not Average” campaign today at http://onphr.ma/1PI5n1T. **

** A message from National Community Pharmacists Association (NCPA): Many Medicare drug plans effectively require the use of “preferred” pharmacies that are inconvenient for patients. That means a long trip or higher copays to stick with the pharmacies that patients like. In urban areas, these plans often fail to meet the government’s standard for pharmacy access. In rural areas, “preferred” pharmacies are often 20+ miles away! Support H.R. 793 / S. 1190. This bipartisan legislation is supported by leading consumer advocates and would let patients use any pharmacy willing to accept the “preferred” pharmacy terms and conditions. Learn more at www.ncpanet.org/pharmacychoice. **