The Obama administration’s latest employer mandate delay is causing some to question their support of the law, or at the very least, express frustration with the way in which President Obama’s signature domestic achievement has been implemented.

Among those expressing frustration is Ron Fournier, the senior political columnist at the National Journal.

In a column yesterday, Fournier explained that he is “getting sick of defending Obamacare,” pointing the White House’s politicization of the law, the thoughtless manner in which it was implemented, and changes and delays of various regulations. The journalist also made some of the same comments on Fox News on Monday evening.

“Advocates for a strong executive branch, including me, have given the White House a pass on its rule-making authority, because implementing such a complicated law requires flexibility,” Fournier wrote. “But the law may be getting stretched to the point of breaking. Think of the [Affordable Care Act] as a game of Jenga: Adjust one piece and the rest are affected; adjust too many and it falls.”

“If not illegal,” he continued, “the changes are fueling suspicion among Obama-loathing conservatives, and confusion among the rest of us. Even the law’s most fervent supporters are frustrated,” latter adding that he falls in the “frustrated category.”

Fournier says he still supports the law because he “want[s] health insurance provided to the millions without it, for both the moral and economic benefits.” But then he wrote something profound. He explained that he also wants Obamacare to work “because, as Charles Lane wrote for The Washington Post, the link between work and insurance needs to be broken.”

That last point is really one that hasn’t been mentioned enough in the continuing debate over Obamacare, at least not until last week when the Congressional Budget Office explained that 2.5 million Americans will be disincentivized from working because of subsidies provided under the law.

Fournier is right on the mark in that the “link between work and insurance needs to be broken.” This is a policy goal for which most conservative and libertarian healthcare wonks have advocated.

Most Americans are used to receiving health insurance benefits through their employer, a practice currently encouraged by the government through generous tax deductions. But this practice means workers will change health plans multiple times. That’s a real problem, according to Rep. Tom Price (R-GA).

“We ought not have a system where if you change your job or you lose your job, you lose your health coverage,” Price told United Liberty last month. “Right now, between 60% and 65% of the American people get their health coverage through their employer. If they changed their job or they lose their job, they ought not have to get a different kind of health coverage when they move to the next job that they have.”

“The way that we solve that is very simple, we make it so everybody owns their own coverage regardless of who’s paying for it — so it’s like a pension plan, it’s like a 401(k) plan. If you change your job or you lose your job, you simply take your health coverage with you and plug it in there,” he added.

Rather than providing generous tax credits to employers, why not reform the system in a way that empowers individuals to purchase their own health insurance coverage, something that allows them to keep a plan regardless of whether they change jobs.

By extending these tax credits to individuals through some sort of a voucher system or a tax deduction, we could actually accomplish what Obamacare purports to do without the effect of creating an incentive for people not to work.

But Obamacare isn’t about breaking the link between employment and health coverage. It is, however, another redistributive scheme, which is why the White House and supporters of the law have been hailing the CBO report rather than acknowledging how absolutely devastating it is.