As Gov. Rick Scott and the Florida Legislature look to pin down responsibility for the state’s rising health care costs for the poor and uninsured, they should look in the mirror.

As Gov. Rick Scott and the Florida Legislature look to pin down responsibility for the state's rising health care costs for the poor and uninsured, they should look in the mirror. It's not the hospitals, which are their favorite target. It's the Medicaid managed care system they created that is costing money rather than saving money. It's their refusal to accept billions in federal dollars to subsidize health coverage for more low-income Floridians. And it's their failure to create an economy that produces enough good-paying jobs that offer private insurance that employees can afford.

The latest projections show the state's Medicaid costs will rise another $593 million next year, eating up more than 44 percent of the state's anticipated new revenue created by the recovering economy. And that trend is going to continue. Budget forecasters say that over the next three years, rising Medicaid costs will suck up nearly half of the additional revenue, leaving less to invest in public education and other areas.

Scott and some Republican legislative leaders blame the hospitals for the state's rising health care costs. The governor has ordered audits of nearly 130 hospitals, and his politically motivated Commission on Healthcare and Hospital Funding is rooting around for proposals to lower hospital costs. Yet the state's budget forecasters predict Medicaid spending for in-patient services at hospitals will barely increase next year. Hospitals have their issues, including a lack of transparency in pricing. But they are not driving up the state's health care costs for the poor.

The main reason for rising Medicaid costs is that more than 302,000 additional Floridians are expected to sign up for coverage next year. Scott blames "Obamacare" for the state's rising costs, and more uninsured residents are discovering they are eligible for Medicaid when they try to sign up for health coverage through the federal exchange. But these are primarily pregnant women and children who have always qualified for Medicaid in Florida. They would be entitled to coverage regardless of the Affordable Care Act.

The state's shift to a privately run managed care system also is costing more money. Scott once projected Medicaid managed care would cut costs by 5 percent. Instead the managed care plans sought a 12 percent increase for next year, and the state approved a 7.7 percent increase. Rep. Janet Cruz, D-Tampa, was right to question last week whether "we were sold a bill of goods'' by the governor and Republican lawmakers about the cost-savings promise of managed care for Medicaid patients.

In addition to rising Medicaid costs, the state faces another $400 million hole next year in covering the costs for charity care at hospitals. That is federal money that the Obama administration plans to quit sending to the Low Income Pool, because it prefers to spend that money for health insurance for the poor to help keep them healthy rather than on expensive treatment in hospital emergency rooms after they get sick.

Of course, Scott and House Republicans would avoid that problem and save state tax dollars if they would accept billions in federal Medicaid expansion money to subsidize private health coverage for more than 800,000 Floridians. Instead, Rep. Richard Corcoran of Land O'Lakes continued to demonize hospitals last week in his speech after being named by Republicans as the next House speaker. He warned of one health care system for the rich and another for the poor, declaring "it's time people realized that conservatives aren't against health care for the poor people; we're against giving them poorly run government health care.''

It's time people realized that "poorly run government health care" is a privately run Medicaid system that the governor and Republican legislators like Corcoran created. It's time they realized that system is not saving money but costing taxpayers more. And it's time they realized that it's the governor and the Republican-led Legislature who are responsible for Florida's health care mess — not the Affordable Care Act or the hospitals.