Cyber classes came early last week to the students of Monsignor Bonner and Archbishop Prendergast High School in the Drexel Hill section of Upper Darby.

A pilot project that was originally scheduled to be launched at the Roman Catholic high school Monday — the Presidents Day holiday — it was moved up to last Thursday when Old Man Winter provided the perfect snowy scenario for staying home, said Principal William Brannick.

“As the nor’easter developed a week ago, we began discussing internally as to whether to use Thursday as a cyber day, our first cyber day. Based on the forecast, it was pretty definitive we were going to have the day off,” said Brannick.

With the approval of the school’s academic board, the principal last Wednesday morning informed the 900 students, as well their parents, faculty and staff via mass phone calls, e-mails, the school website and other social media outlets that the co-educational high school would have its first “cyber day” of classes as an experiment for off-setting the increasing number of class days lost to severe winter weather. As of Feb. 12, the high school had had six snow days and needed to make up four to meet the Pennsylvania School Code for 180 instructional days by June 30.

Advertisement

“We’re doing this as a pilot to really leverage the technology we have in place as a school to use efficiently in cases like this with inclement weather so we don’t lose instructional days from the calendar,” said Brannick.

All students are already equipped by the school with computerized iPad Minis that they can take home with them. On a cyber day, they can use GradeConnect or My Big Campus computer web-based applications to receive assignments for that day from all of their teachers by 9 a.m. The cyber school day ends at about 5 p.m., noted the principal.

“We ask the teachers to have assignments be a little more in-depth, a higher-ordered thinking in approach. For example, it shouldn’t be to just read an article and respond to five questions. It should require students to provide real world assessment to demonstrate knowledge and understanding of the topic,” said Brannick.

Each student is expected to have six or seven assignments to complete from home during the cyber school day.

“Many teachers were online Thursday reviewing work as it was submitted. Each teacher has 150 to 160 students over five classes, so they were pretty busy getting that number of assignments in a short time frame. Normally, they would be staggered throughout the week,” said Brannick.

Cyber “office hours” are even provided from 9:30 to 11:30 a.m. during which teachers answer students’ questions via e-mail or chatting through the My Big Campus program. Students who are sick are expected to follow the school’s normal call-out procedure and to make up the cyber assignments upon return to school.

Loss of power due to icy and windy conditions is taken into consideration for both students and teachers, noted Brannick. Monday was the second cyber day, which was scheduled for then because the Catholic high school students would not have the public school buses for transportation due to the Presidents Day holiday. As it was in progress, Brannick was assessing feedback from last week’s first cyber session, which he noted was positive overall.

“We still need to look at specific data for participation rate. The teachers have been very happy with the depth and quality of work students have produced and the parents have been very happy for the students to be engaged in school work on what would normally be a school day,” said Brannick.

With students, faculty and staff members traveling to the school from Delaware, Chester and Philadelphia counties, the cyber day enables them to avoid hazardous driving conditions, he noted.

The principal said the cyber day project is valuable not only as a way to complete classes from home when the weather creates dangerous travel conditions, it is a way to prepare students for the cybernetic world of computers in which they will have to learn to function for their jobs.

“We want to make sure we help them prepare for that world,” said the principal.

He can relate to the challenges of launching large cybernetic projects, such as the Affordable Care Act’s Health Insurance Marketplace, just in the glitches he is trying to address with the cyber day of classes.

“We are learning as this goes on and we know it’s not going to be perfect. We have a lot to work on,” said Brannick.

The principal said Bonner-Prendie is the first of the 17 high schools in the Archdiocese of Philadelphia to experiment with cyber days, which have also been tried at Catholic high schools in the Pittsburgh area.

“We received permission from the archdiocese to run this as a pilot. We will re-engage after we get feedback and data as to how the cyber days worked, determine as a system if a project like this is appropriate, then discuss it with the archdiocese and the state as to whether they count as instructional days,” said Brannick.

He noted that, judging from the latest weather prediction, Bonner-Prendie students may just get another chance to try attending classes from home via computer.

“Knowing Mother Nature, she has bigger plans for possibly the next one,” said the principal.