Topics: Abood v Detroit, Antonin Scalia, Editor's Picks, Merrick Garland, Supreme Court, Business News, News, Politics News

Justice Scalia’s empty seat at the Supreme Court generated two orders this week that demonstrate yet again the essentially political nature of our highest Court.

First, in a widely watched case involving a First Amendment challenge to the mandatory payment of public sector union dues, the Court divided 4-4 (presumably among partisan lines) which meant no opinion, no precedent, and the affirmance of the lower court decision rejecting the challenge. The lower court had to rule in favor of the unions because of a binding Supreme Court case directly on point (the current controversy was fast tracked to the Court so the conservative justices could change the law). The case, Abood v. Detroit Board of Education, had been a specific target of Justice Alito and the conservatives for a long time, but with the passing of Justice Scalia, the conservatives did not have the votes they would have had to change legal doctrine.

The only reason that the Abood decision was up for grabs in the first place was because the people sitting on the Supreme Court had changed since that case was decided. Dramatic shifts in other areas of the law such as free speech (Citizens United), abortion (Roe to Casey), guns (Heller), and voting rights (Shelby County), among many other important issues, occurred not because of a change in legal doctrine or newly discovered facts but because the values writ large of the justices on the Court had changed.

On Tuesday, the Court also decided to try and address the legal objections by religiously affiliated organizations to the Affordable Care Act’s contraception requirements. The justices took the unusual step of, less than a week after the oral argument, putting forth their own plan, one might say law, and asking the parties to either adopt the judicially crafted solution or create a new one consistent with the Court’s guidelines. This is judicial lawmaking for all to see and, according to Adam Liptak of the New York Times, almost certainly the result of the justices’ fear of a 4-4 tie vote which would lead immediately to different results under federal law depending on where in the country one lives or works. Effectively, 4-4 ties in the Supreme Court on important, national cases mean that lower court judges, who often disagree over how these cases should be decided, have the final say. Few want that result.

The GOP’s intransigence on replacing Justice Scalia brings to the surface normally latent ideas about how constitutional law is actually made by the Supreme Court. The important thing to know about the process, as Justice Brennan used to remind his clerks, is the number five, which is the number of votes it takes to achieve a majority of the Court (most of the time).