Sioux Falls, SD

The nursing industry is expecting to grow faster than any other through 2022 and Augustana College is ready to train the workforce.

With Sanford, Avera and the VA Hospital in town, Chair of the Nursing Department Pam Schroeder says Sioux Falls is a great place to get experience.

"So our nursing students are right here on the forefront of all the latest happenings in health care," Chair of Nursing Pam Schroeder said.

Today Augie students are getting hands-on training through a simulation.

Because nurses are in such high demand, many students at Augie have positions lined up before they graduate. That list includes senior Megan Kalda.

"We're graduating at the end of the month and almost all of us have jobs," Kalda said. "I will be working at Sanford. I'm excited about that."

The nursing program is growing with the field. A new $35 million renovation of the Gilbert Science Center will be complete in 2016.

"This is a new beginning for Augustana. We're so excited," Schroeder said.

It will change the way Augie teaches nursing students for the better.

If there is one downside, WalletHub says South Dakota ranks 46th for annual average salary for nurses. It's not something Kalda is worried about.

"It's not all about pay. I mean that definitely is a huge part of it because you have to make a living. Nursing is more than pay. It's about the job. It's about what you're doing. I'm ok with that," Kalda said.

South Dakota ranks third for educational opportunities and fourth for number of health care facilities per capita. Augustana is currently seeing 100 percent placement for nursing students.

Education

College {{Title}} Remove Change News General Courts Web Only Crime Outdoors Events Center Non-Homepage Boredom Busters Pipeline Positively KELOLAND Technology Hunger Affordable Care Act Shops Flooding Remembering 9/11 Drought JazzFest Spring Storm Honor Flight Spencer Anniversary

DoApp Health News Business News Sports

Agriculture Markets Livestock Crops Politics

HealthBeat Cancer Children's Health Heart Health Wellness & Nutrition General Health Beat Women's Health RX Resources What's Going Around OTC Diabetes Recalls Dental Health Men's Health

Politics South Dakota Legislature Budget Congress Taxes General Local Campaign President US Senate New Laws US House Iowa Ballot Issues Local Races Minnesota Gubernatorial

Education Funding College Elementary High School Pre K School Supplies Middle School

Sports Professional College High School Sports Zone Headlines Summit League Tournament Olympics

Business Industry Your Money Matters Development Gas & Energy Legislation Economy/Stocks Employment General Health Care Technology Education Funding Tourism Banking/Finance Housing Transportation Insurance Meetings & Events Retail & Restaurants All Industries On The Move Shops Agriculture

Featured Stories Eye on KELOLAND Inside KELOLAND

Weather Snow Forecast Records Rain Flooding Drought WX Corner General

World News

Investigates GEAR UP

Sponsored Done

© 2016 KELOLAND TV. All Rights Reserved.