Mark Campbell won the 2012 Pulitzer Prize for Music with the work "Silent Night." ( Courtesy photo )

(This story was updated June 8 to clarify that Leigh Holman will conduct Scenes 2-7 and 11 of "Susan Smith.")

CU NOW events • "Susan Smith" Workshop: 7:30 p.m. Friday, June 12, and 2 p.m. Sunday, June 14, Atlas Black Box Theater, 1125 18th St., Boulder. Free. • Composer Fellows' Opera Showcase: 7:30 p.m. Saturday, June 13, Imig Music Building Music Theater, 1020 18th St., Boulder. Free.

Mark Campbell, a 1975 graduate of the University of Colorado Department of Theater and Dance — now a renowned opera librettist and Pulitzer Prize winner — returns to his alma mater this week with a new opera based on a scenario he conceived 17 years ago.

CU NOW — the Eklund Opera Program's annual summer workshop of a new opera in progress — presents seven scenes from "Susan Smith" at the ATLAS Black Box Theater next weekend. The work — with text by Campbell and music by composer Zach Redler — is a psychological drama from the perspective of the title character, a woman who infamously drowned her two young sons in a South Carolina lake in 1994.

Campbell's road back to CU is almost coincidental, with Redler having done much of the "legwork" for both the conception and the workshop itself.

Campbell has written 15 opera librettos, culminating in "Silent Night," set by Kevin Puts. That piece, premiered in Minnesota under the baton of former Colorado Music Festival director Michael Christie, won the 2012 Pulitzer Prize for Music.

But "Susan Smith" has much earlier roots.

"It was my second attempt at a libretto," Campbell told the Camera. "I wrote it in 1998, and it sat on the shelf for years."

He met Redler four years ago at the John Duffy Composers Institute, part of the Virginia Arts Festival.

Added Redler: "Mark was a librettist in residence when I attended the Institute, and we stayed in touch."

In fall 2013, Redler's wife, Brittney, a vocal student at New York University, wanted him to compose a piece for her first doctoral recital.

Redler (Courtesy photo)

"I reached out to Mark," Redler said, "and he told me that he had this 17-year-old libretto that opened with a very long female solo that could stand on its own."

Redler set the opening soliloquy of "Susan" as a 15-minute aria for Brittney and thought the entire text was worthy.

That opening scene was later orchestrated and performed last year with that orchestration, again at the Duffy Institute. CU voice professor and CU NOW co-director Patrick Mason was there, and the seeds were planted for the work's selection for the program's sixth season.

Although Campbell was not actively involved in the selection, he was thrilled about the turn of events and is excited to return to CU for the workshop.

That opening aria will not be presented as part of the workshop, however.

According to co-director Leigh Holman, the idea is for the student singers to present totally new material that hasn't been heard before.

Not only was the opening scene performed in Virginia and New York, it was staged just last month in Fort Worth, Texas.

Scenes 2-7 and 11 will be performed at the Black Box under the direction of Holman. Collaborative pianist Christina Lalog Seal will serve as accompanist and music director. Scene 3 is the only one previously seen, in Fort Worth.

The ending of the opera has not been composed, and Campbell said the original text is being revised.

"It's a librettist who has advanced in his career and had success looking back on one who is just starting," he said.

Both composer and librettist stressed that although the piece is written with some sympathy and understanding for Smith, they were careful not to minimize the horrific nature of her act.

"We are aiming not only to explore what was going on in Susan's heart, but also what was going on around her," Campbell said. "You can't write anything for a character to sing without making an effort to understand them on some level."

Redler said the music leading up to the fateful moment when Smith lets the car roll into the lake is "actually lyrical and beautiful because, in her mind, it was the moment when things would get better."

Redler explained that Smith's perspective is balanced by that of the Union, S.C., community.

"We cover the reaction to her initial story about the African-American carjacker, and then the mob mentality when her guilt was discovered," he said.

He described his musical style as "accessible and naturalistic" and said he aims for speech-like rhythms in his text setting. He also is heavily influenced by musical theater composers such as Stephen Sondheim.

In conjunction with the workshop — performances are Friday and Sunday, June 7 — CU NOW has expanded its Composer Fellows' Initiative, which debuted last year.

Saturday in the Imig Music Theater, five CU composition students will stage newly composed opera scenes. Four are six minutes long, but Daniel Cox will present a 30-minute scene.

Cox won that invitation based on last year's effort, and since then, he has become one of the composition department's brightest stars. The winner of a competition, he had an orchestral work premiered by Pro Musica Colorado Chamber Orchestra in February.

According to Holman, the scenes will be fully staged, with costumes, lighting, props and projection. Bud Coleman, chair of CU Theater and Dance, will direct them, and CU emeritus professor Robert Spillman will provide piano accompaniment.

All events are free and open to the public. Holman said the admission fees were discontinued last year because "we want it to feel like a workshop or seminar and don't want patrons to come expecting a finished product."