Goal of SBDC Advanced is to spread economic gardening opportunities throughout the state

A technician recently works on an optical assembly that is part of a larger system at Redstone Aerospace's facility at 105 S. Sunset St. in Longmont. ( Redstone Aerospace / Courtesy photo )

Colorado Small Business Development Center Network For more information on the state SBDC Advanced Economic Gardening initiative, visit coloradosbdc.org/consulting/sbdcadvanced

Economic gardening is an economic development concept designed to help speed a company's growth through the gathering of specific data and access to experts that can help business owners understand how to use that data.

The original concept goes back to its inception in Littleton more than 30 years ago, but since then many Colorado communities, including Longmont, have instituted their own economic gardening initiatives.

But this year, for the first time, the state is giving it a try. Thanks to two bills passed by the Colorado Legislature last year, a program called SBDC Advanced was launched this year.

And Sharon King, director of the Small Business Development Center in Boulder, is heading up the statewide initiative.

The program is designed to help 20 mid-stage companies to grow over the next three years.

""We're doing it out of our center but it's actually for the whole state," King said.

King's SBDC work locally, specifically a program set up in the Boulder office called Colorado Emerging Ventures, provided her with an excellent background to head up the statewide initiative, she said. So far, companies in Longmont, Broomfield, Durango and Pagosa Springs have applied for and been accepted into the statewide program, King said.

Advertisement

"One of the goals of the SBDC is to match our market areas," King said.

In Boulder County, that meant working with a lot of advanced technology companies. The CEV was set up specifically to help these companies by tapping into a large group of experts in various fields that would volunteer their time to provide consulting services. As examples, King said, obtaining financing, setting up a company's legal structure, converting technology into a marketable product, human resources and marketing are often common issues companies face. The CEV program was built around addressing these challenges, she said.

It was through the CEV group that Bob Levendusky, co-founder of Longmont's Redstone Aerospace, first became acquainted with the SBDC's services. His company has since signed up for and been accepted into the new SBDC Advanced program.

"We've had two meetings," Levendusky said. "At the first meeting we talked about our business and some of our challenges for growth."

Among the experts King brought to Redstone were a market researcher; a business adviser who is an expert at growth strategy; and another who was an expert at helping smaller companies such as Redstone win more contracts in the defense industry, one of Redstone's two areas of focus. (The other part of the business is working with NASA.)

"At the second meeting they provided some data, some marketing information for us, and then they walked us through an opportunity assessment process," Levendusky said, adding that meant prioritizing what actions the company needed to take next to prepare for both short- and long-term growth.

"(The program) is very beneficial to companies like us, because we need to plan for the growth," Levendusky said. "It's coming, and we don't want to screw it up. Any information we can get from seasoned professionals is very helpful — it's very valuable."

King said that her network of experts has been what helped make the CEV program a success and now, an easy transition into the statewide economic gardening program for her office.

"Because of our expertise in working with these companies we were a natural for moving into this (statewide) program," King said.

Kelly Manning, state director for the SBDC network, which operates out of the Colorado Office of Economic Development and International Trade, said that companies need to meet certain criteria for the SBDC Advanced program: they need to have between six and 99 employees, and $500,000 to $50 million in annual revenue.

She said the fact that King is based out of the Boulder SBDC office is merely a coincidence.

"As a matter of fact we are really ensuring that we are getting companies applying that are from all over the state," Manning said.

She also noted that there are actually three levels to the statewide economic gardening initiative. Aside from the gold level, which is what Redstone is a part of , there are also the silver and copper levels, designed to help businesses that are not as far along as companies such as Redstone.

Any of the dozens of SBDC centers around the state can help companies at the silver and copper levels, Manning said. And the statewide program itself is not meant to supercede any of the work being done by any of the municipalities that have economic gardening programs.

"We by no means want to duplicate what they're doing," Manning said. "We want to work with them and enhance what they already have going.

"The bottom line is to help these businesses grow and stay in Colorado."

Seven years of SBDC help in Longmont

King has been conducting small business consulting in Longmont a day or two a week since 2007. The Longmont Area Chamber of Commerce lets the SBDC use an office and its conference room in its building at 528 Main St.

Kathy Weber-Harding, president and CEO of the chamber, credits local real estate agent Nelson Miner, a former chairman of the chamber's board, for pushing to bring SBDC help to Longmont.

"We went to the city and said we really need this for the small businesses in Longmont," Weber-Harding said.

In exchange for the $27,000 in city funding the SBDC receives, it guarantees 400 hours of consulting in Longmont and six "business plan essential" workshops each year in the city. That class is a requirement for small businesses who want to apply for other grants to get their business going. The Longmont Economic Gardening Initiative also contracts with King to put on other workshops for new and aspiring business owners.

Along with funding from the city and LEGI, the chamber also contributes $5,000 annually along with allowing the use of its physical space.

"My first business was a retail store, and you can be very smart, but there's so much to know that sometimes you're embarrassed to ask," said King.

Contact Times-Call staff writer Tony Kindelspire at 303-684-5291 or tkindelspire@times-call.com