Bloomberg

A well-known bitcoin company has been ordered by a judge to produce and deliver the virtual currency to a New York investment firm that accused it of reneging on their contractual agreement.

Judge Robert W. Sweet of U.S. district court for the southern district of New York barred CoinLab Inc. from delivering the virtual currency to any other parties before it meets its obligation to Bitvestment LLC.

The dispute underscores the frenzy surrounding bitcoin, a virtual currency that isn’t backed by a central bank. It is produced electronically using computers, and enthusiasts trade it on exchanges and privately. Some merchants are now accepting bitcoin as a method of payment.

Bitvestment sued CoinLab last week for breach of contract, contending that the Bainbridge, Wash.-based company isn’t living up to its obligation to provide 8,000 bitcoin under an August arrangement between the two firms. One bitcoin was worth $295 Thursday afternoon on the volatile Tokyo-based Mt. Gox exchange on Thursday, giving the disputed 8,000 bitcoin a value of $2.36 million.

The process of generating bicoin is known in the industry as “mining.”

CoinLab Chief Executive Peter Vessenes has said that the lawsuit was a contributing factor in last week’s bankruptcy filing of CoinLab’s mining unit, which is called Alydian Inc. Mr. Vessenes is also chairman of the Bitcoin Foundation, a nonprofit trade group that promotes the virtual currency.

Mr. Vessenes noted in an email on Thursday that CoinLab itself has no mining operations, but “of course we will comply (with the judge’s order) as well as we’re able.” It isn’t clear if Alydian is still generating bitcoin while it is under bankruptcy protection.

He also said that CoinLab was pleased that the judge denied other requests from BitVestment, such as seeking certain financial data from officers of CoinLab and Alydian.

“We continue to treat this as a simple contract dispute case, and feel confident on the merits of the case,” Mr. Vessenes said.

Bryan Reyhani, a lawyer representing Bitvestment in the case, declined to comment on the judge’s ruling.