As the head of IU Health retires, he will leave behind a legacy of leadership amid consolidation and health-care delivery challenges for Indiana's largest health system.

Buy Photo John Ketzenberger is president of the Indiana Fiscal Policy Institute. (Photo: Frank Espich/IndyStar 2009 file photo)Buy Photo

Daniel Fraley Evans Jr. plans to slip out of the IU Health board meeting later this month and drive to North Carolina for his daughter’s wedding. He will miss his last day of work as chairman and chief executive of the state’s largest health system.

To people who know Evans, this is an unusual turn since he has been ever-present his entire career. Evans has never ducked responsibility or attention, whether he was helping then-Mayor Richard Lugar in the first administration following Uni-Gov, establishing a significant law practice at Baker and Daniels or sorting out the late-1980s federal savings-and-loan meltdown.

The same is true of his nearly 14-year run atop IU Health, a period that saw incredible consolidation and presented formidable management challenges. Since 2002, Evans has navigated the combination of Methodist Hospital, Riley Hospital for Children and the IU School of Medicine through monumental changes in health-care delivery and finance, drawing on his experience all the way.

Now the system of 2,111 physicians and almost 30,000 staff that generated nearly $6 billion in revenue has a detailed management plan and an experienced successor, Dennis Murphy, who has been groomed to take over May 1.

“It’s time for the next phase for the organization,” Evans said last week. “It’s time to establish a more robust partnership with the other side of the house and that’s a five- to 10-year play at minimum.”

Daniel Evans, IU Health’s chief executive officer and president, will retire in May 2016. He has led the health-care system through unprecedented growth for the past 13 years. (Photo: Provided by IU Health.)

The “other side of the house” involves those who provide medical care, and the challenge is to help them understand the health system’s business plan. It requires taking the charts that line three walls of a conference room at the Fairbanks Hall headquarters — and all the thinking behind them — and making it relatable to those who interact with patients.

It’s a tall order, and Evans employs two methods for conveying the information. He starts by describing the three phases of IU Health since the integration of Methodist, Riley and IU Hospital in 1997, then known as Clarian Health.

The first five years, the entities were “separate but equal.” They all were hospitals, but they each had a strong identity and unique heritage. Negotiations were even necessary to determine the placement of the hospitals' names in the Clarian logo.

Next came what Evans calls the “Federation period,” which he said ran from 2002 to 2010. This was a strong period of growth as the combined entity scooped up physician practices and regional hospitals. The Simon Cancer Center and the Neuroscience Center were established, and Riley experienced rapid growth.

The past five years have been marked by an integration that began by rebranding the enterprise IU Health and centralizing administration. It also meant enacting a consistent and high quality of care to make it standard across the entire system, a difficult process.

Two years ago, nurses in the system got serious about organizing as a union before the effort stalled last fall. Earlier this month, a prominent transplant doctor resigned to take a position at the University of Alabama, complaining that the IU Health system’s priorities were out of whack.

All of these things were happening at the same time as the Affordable Care Act, further complicating the executive team’s ability to mesh medical education, research and clinical care in a single entity.

Underlying these changes are questions about who pays and how much they pay for health care. Evans sees the trends as two curves. The first is the existing curve, a fee-for-services model that is often unfathomable for the patient, insurer, doctor and hospital. The second curve, when payments are made to forestall medical problems or improve conditions when they occur, is emerging thanks to moves by the federal government through Medicare and locally through the Healthy Indiana Plan 2.0. The shift is profound.

“This causes a lot of anxiety in the system,” Evans said. “It’s what has caused the bumps in the road.”

Evans’ experiences equipped him to deal with those bumps, to develop and implement a business model that Murphy and others will use to make IU Health succeed. The experience included transgenerational ties with Methodist hospital.

Evans’ great-great grandfather, Benjamin F. Crabbs, was among the Methodists who agreed in 1899 to raise money for a hospital. Evans’ grandfather, Frank C. Evans, married Crabbs’ daughter and was among the hospital’s early board members. Frank's son, Evans’ father, also served on the Methodist board.

Dan Evans Sr. was the head of the L.S. Ayres department store and imparted a retailer’s sensibility to his son. Like his dad, Evans walks the floors of the IU Health hospitals to hear what people are saying and to see what they’re doing. He was walking the hospitals of Methodist Hospital on Christmas Eve in 2014 when he first learned of discontent among the nursing staff.

Evans’ preparation included serving clients in his law practice, but it also stems from his stints as a young staffer to Lugar and relationships he made then. It stems from his political activity on the 1976 campaign of former Gov. Otis Bowen and Dan Quayle’s 1980 and ’86 U.S. Senate campaigns.

And Evans holds a rare distinction: two presidential recess appointments — both for the same post. One hanging on the wall of his office is signed by Secretary of State James Baker and President George H.W. Bush. It is from 1990, when Bush appointed Evans to lead the Federal Housing Finance Board, which was created to clean up the mess created by the collapse of the savings-and-loan industry.

Evans chaired the federal board from Indianapolis and used the power granted by the Financial Institutions Reform, Recovery and Enforcement Act to right the industry and regain the confidence necessary to spark economic recovery. He served into President Bill Clinton’s term before resigning.

“By the time I got here,” Evans said of IU Health, “complex environments and how they impact social issues wasn’t really new to me.”

Evans turns 67 on Tuesday (April 19) and has plenty of energy and time to pursue his many interests. He’ll remain engaged on several civic and corporate boards and spend a little time investing in worthy local ventures.

And Evans plans to be present with his family, sorting through the vast personal records that stretch across generations and spending time with his grandchildren, too, to ensure a worthy legacy.

John Ketzenberger is president of the Indiana Fiscal Policy Institute, a nonpartisan and nonprofit organization to research state budget and tax issues. Email him at jketzenberger@indianafiscal.org. Follow him on Twitter: @JohnKetz.

Read or Share this story: http://indy.st/1Sel5BF