The 2016 Blast The latest POLITICO scoops and coverage of the 2016 elections. Email Sign Up

Tweets from https://twitter.com/politico/lists/team-politico



Jeb Bush has gone all out in South Carolina — a state seen as central to his fortunes. | AP Photo Bush-backing super PAC goes after Kasich

Jeb Bush, who’s counting on a strong showing in South Carolina, is increasingly turning his fire on a rival who could cause him problems there: John Kasich.

With some polls showing the Ohio governor sneaking up on Bush in the state, there is increasing concern on the part of some Bush allies that Kasich, who is also seeking support from establishment-minded Republican voters, could siphon off votes that would otherwise go to him. On Wednesday, the pro-Bush super PAC Right to Rise released a hard-hitting ad tying the Ohio governor to liberal presidential candidate Bernie Sanders.

“Which presidential candidate voted with Nancy Pelosi to cut troop levels and military funding? And supported expanding Obamacare? If you guessed Bernie Sanders, you’re half right. It’s also John Kasich,” says the ad, which pairs images of the Ohio governor and Vermont senator.

“Kasich also had the worst rating of spending of any governor in the country, Republican or Democrat,” it adds. “And he jokes that he ought to run as a Democrat. But with Kasich’s record, maybe he should.”

Spokespersons for Right to Rise and the Kasich campaign didn’t respond to requests for comment. A media buying source said the commercial was set to run in several markets covering South Carolina, including Charleston.

In South Carolina, Bush has directed most of his fire toward Marco Rubio, his chief rival in the establishment lane, and Donald Trump. Yet he has also gone after Kasich. Following the Ohio governor’s second-place showing in the New Hampshire primary, Bush has repeatedly criticized Kasich for his decision to expand Medicaid.

The former Florida governor has gone all out in South Carolina — a state seen as central to his fortunes. He has campaigned with his brother, former President George W. Bush, and will also appear with his mother, former first lady Barbara Bush.

Kasich’s aides have conceded that he is unlikely to fare particularly well in South Carolina, a conservative Southern state that isn’t a natural fit for the governor’s politically moderate style. They say they are focused on Michigan, which votes on March 8. Indeed, while most candidates are camped out in South Carolina, Kasich spent the early part of this week in the Midwest.