Eleven months ago, I lost my good-natured 36-year-old brother, my only sibling, after a 15-week hospitalized battle with severe acute pancreatitis. I was by his side throughout it all, working with both the hospital and hospice to ensure he had the best care. I took on that role because four years prior to that, we lost my 61-year-old sweet father to what we believed to be a heart attack. My mother, through choices of her own, isn't in my family picture anymore. So it's just me holding up the fort for my withering tree of biological relatives.



It would be far less stressful if I had a defibrillator implanted in my chest, which would shock my heart if I ever go into cardiac arrest. That's the understood course of action for someone with Brugada syndrome: to surgically place an ICD (implantable cardioverter defibrillator) inside the chest, wiring the heart with tech-savvy skill to send electrical shocks of power to jolt my heart back into normal rhythm. I've heard it's much like a horse kicking you in the chest. I'll take that over death any day.



So why did Blue Cross Blue Shield of Georgia decide mere days before my scheduled surgery in late January that my ICD "is not medically necessary" and merely "investigational"? Because some mystery determiner of my fate didn't care for my results on one of the tests I had done in December called an EP study. The procedure, which was performed by my electrophysiologist, a respected cardiologist specializing in the electrical workings of the heart, involves threading two catheters from the groin to the heart and watching it on multiple screens while simultaneously injecting medicine meant to provoke abnormal rhythms in the heart. In other parts of the world, ajmaline is used. It's not legal in the United States, so procainamide is used instead.



The EP study is just one way to view the inner workings of a person's heart, but it is not the deciding factor for a diagnosis of Brugada syndrome. The American Heart Association, the Oxford Journal and Dr. Brugada have all published studies indicating that there are numerous Brugada patients who do not have a positive reaction to the EP study, and there are cases of false negatives as well. A more indicative factor for Brugada syndome is the unmistakable pattern on the EKG, which I have without a doubt. It's a cove shape, recognizable at once to electrophysiologists and apparent to anyone else once their attention has been drawn to it. The Brugada pattern appears on multiple EKGs of mine. It is my understanding that no one has this distinctive pattern on their EKGs if they don't have Brugada.



The specific EKG readings of a Brugada patient were discovered in the early '90s by Dr. Ramon Brugada, a cardiologist from Spain, during his and his brother's investigation into a dizzying number of sudden, unexplained deaths. It was a joyous moment, I'm sure, when the brothers realized that there was a link, not only on the EKGs of patients with Brugada, but also in a lot of other scientific evidence that you can read about on brugada.org, such as sodium channel blockers and even a possible gene mutation.



Since Dr. Brugada's a-ha moment, the arrhythmia specialists the whole world over have been learning about this rare disease. Currently, it's believed that 1 in 10,000 people have it, it's inherited from one parent, it usually occurs in men, it's most often seen in Southeast Asia, people who die from it tend to be around 40 years old, and it often strikes in the early morning while the person is sleeping. I'll turn 36 on March 1, two days after the year anniversary of my brother's death. I don't want to die young. I want to watch my children grow up; to teach them to love to read and, from them, to glean patience and how to better enjoy the small details; to hold hands with my wife and share a watery glance when our boys graduate high school and then college; to help my brother's children never forget their dedicated father who left this earth too soon; and to soak up the sunshine, walk on crisp leaves and welcome the stomach cramps from laughing with my friends.



I have a responsibility to myself and to my family to strive for living. And I believed that my insurance company had a responsibility to honor the comprehensive plan my self-employed wife and I have been earnestly shelling out hundreds of dollars for on a monthly basis.



But what has happened instead has surprised me. After I read the rejection letter from BCBS, I called my doctor's office. They were as surprised as I was, though they'd received the letter a day before I had, and had already attempted on numerous occasions to get in touch with BCBS to demand answers, a peer-to-peer review (in which my doctor would speak to a doctor employed by BCBS) or to file an appeal. During the last two weeks of January, voicemails for the insurance company were left by my doctor's office and by me amidst perilously long holding times, during which an automatic recording would say over and over that the long wait times were due to the implementation of the Affordable Care Act. One time, the recording told me that because of the Affordable Care Act and the increased call volume, they knew they'd be unable to answer my call that day and then I heard a dial tone. It was only 1 p.m. I was enraged and quite scared of the implications. Finally, during the first week of February, the wheels have slowly begun to turn as my electrophysiologist (EP) was at last able to speak to the doctor who turned me down for my ICD. And yet, that wasn't enough. Because surprisingly, the doctor who decided my fate is not qualified in electrophysiology but instead is a general cardiologist. I don't think I'm going out on a limb by thinking that this doctor likely does not know that much about my rare disease, and, of course, I'm reeling that he gets to decide whether or not I shall live based on something he isn't informed about. My EP is now waiting for an electrophysiologist employed by Blue Cross Blue Shield to review my case.