Even before state legislators mangled the public school pension system in 2001 by vastly escalating benefits while deferring payments, runaway employee health care costs posed a huge challenge.

While presiding over the unfolding pension disaster, lawmakers also have ignored the health care cost problem, even though the state government could play a constructive role.

State Rep. Sid Michaels Kavulich, a Lackawanna County Democrat, is cosponsor of a bill that would take a halting step toward producing some cost savings for school districts. But, unfortunately, it does not go far enough.

The bill would create a statewide board to study consolidating 500 school district health care plans into a statewide plan or a group of regional plans. But the Legislative Budget and Finance Committee, a joint committee of House and Senate members, already has concluded that a consolidated statewide health care plan for school district employees would save at least $200 million a year by 2020. In 2015, taxpayers paid more than $2.6 billion for school employee coverage.

Such a plan would vastly expand the risk pool, create fierce competition among health care insurers that could reduce prices, and vastly reduce the redundant administrative costs inherent in 500 plans.

At a recent legislative hearing a school administrator objected that a statewide plan could diminish cost savings that some districts have achieved with their teachers unions. But those cases are a tiny minority; in Pennsylvania benefits for teachers most often are far greater than in the private sector, and full coverage at public expense is common.

Under the Affordable Care Act’s definition of plan benefits, the highest is platinum-plus. The Budget and Finance Committee found in 2015 that coverage for 71 percent of school employees is in that category, whereas only 8 percent of average taxpayers have that level.

Creation of a statewide board would, in effect, delay reform for at least several more years. Rather than launching that ponderous process, lawmakers simply should commission a study from a consult. Or, as costs continue to mount, lawmakers should accept the findings of the Budget and Finance Committee and aggressively move to realize the projected savings through a consolidated health care plan.