Angela Ahrendts, chief executive officer of Burberry Group Plc, speaks as she holds an Apple Inc. iPad at the 2011 World Business Forum in New York, U.S., on Wednesday, Oct. 5, 2011. Bloomberg News

Angela Ahrendts, the high-profile boss of Burberry, has just left the FTSE 100′s most exclusive club.

The announcement early this morning that she’s leaving the fashion house and heading to Apple, where she’ll head the retail and online stores business, leaves the U.K.’s index of leading companies with just two women in the top executive role.

That looks like something of a backward step.

In 2012, the index of top U.K. companies boasted five female chief executives, but the exits of FTSE darling Marjorie Scardino from Pearson and Cynthia Carroll from Anglo American that year left just three. Now it’s two: Imperial Tobacco boss Alison Cooper and EasyJet’s Carolyn McCall. A boost will likely come in December when Royal Mail, whose chief executive is Moya Greene, is eligible to be included in the index.

It’s two-and-a-half years since Evan Mervyn Davies, a life peer in the U.K., pushed for more women at the top of FTSE companies and called for 25% of board to comprise female members by 2015. His focus was at board level, where he suggested that female representation be increased. “Women are successful at university and in their early careers, but attrition rates increase as they progress through an organisation. When women are so under-represented on corporate boards, companies are missing out, as they are unable to draw from the widest possible range of talent.”

Vince Cable, the business secretary, said earlier this month that 19% of the FTSE 100’s board directors are now female, up almost two percentage points from May this year, and a huge rise from 12.5% in 2011. But the breakdown between executive and non-executive directors was telling: 23.8% of non-executive directors were female, up from 15.6% in February 20122, and 6.1% of executive directors were women, up from 5.5% in 2011. It means that despite a huge focus on parachuting women into top board positions, only marginal improvements are being made in ensuring women are appointed to top executive roles.

Recruitment firm Robert Hall found in May that the average FTSE 100 CEO is a 53 year old male accountant.

Perhaps Ms. Ahrendts herself offers clues to the disparity.

In an interview last year, Ms. Ahrendts, who has three teenage children, talked about the balance of managing a tough work schedule with family life. She limits working outside normal hours to one day a week, and ensures she’s home by Friday nights from business trips. But in other telling details, she admitted that her working day starts at 4.35 a.m, admitted that women can’t do it all, and said “balance is a really big word for me”.

The issue isn’t just one that exists at chief executive level. Earlier this month, Martin Gilbert, chief executive of Aberdeen Asset Management, said he didn’t understand why there were not more female chief financial officers in the FTSE 100 “given the 50% intake into chartered accountant training courses.”

Helena Morrissey, chief executive of Newton Investment and founder of the 30% Club, which aims for board to comprise one third women, told sister title Financial News earlier this month: “The work that the 30% Club is doing is very much focused on the executive director as well as non-executive director [positions]. In discussions of what has not yet been achieved, we cannot just wave a magic wand. We do have to be patient before we see gender balance.”

While her daily schedule might give clues to the tricky balancing act, her career record gives insight into why that gender balance is worth being patient for. In a wide-ranging profile of Ahrendts with WSJ magazine in 2010, Paul Charron, a senior adviser at Warburg Pincus who was chairman and CEO of Liz Claiborne when Ahrendts was hired as a top merchandising executive there in 1998, said: “People want to work for her because she’s completely unadorned and she has a life.”

Linda Wachner, the tough, unsentimental CEO who ran Warnaco when Ahrendts worked there in the ’80s, echoed the sentiment: “She was one of the few people who knew not to take things personally. She never flinched, never whined, never shirked. She was a class act, and I can’t say that about too many people.”