Does your surgeon make the cut?

Posted: 6 am ET

Forget for the moment the ongoing, labyrinthine problems with medical billing, the random cruelty of Medicaid non-expansion and the unconscionable statistics on U.S. medical harm. Set aside, if you will, the health insurance hiccups of health reform.

Look past all of that because there is very good news to report in health care today: The impermeable black box of surgeon performance has finally been breached. If you've noted an unusual number of dudes in scrubs at your local pub in the past week, here's why.

The nonprofit news organization ProPublica just released its breakthrough Surgeon Scorecard to share with consumers for the first time the information most surgeons already know: who the best and worst surgeons are in their profession.

A rare peek at surgical stats

As outrageous as it sounds, many hospitals don't collect this data, those that do often use it only internally, and -- except for Medicare -- the federal government doesn't routinely take a comprehensive look at the batting averages of our surgical corps either.

"Guided by experts, ProPublica calculated death and complication rates for surgeons performing one of eight elective procedures in Medicare, carefully adjusting for differences in patient health, age and hospital quality," the news group explains. "Use this database to know more about a surgeon before your operation."

Using data supplied by Medicare, Surgeon Scorecard posts the complication rate for 17,000 surgeons performing common procedures across the country. Medicare has been on an Obamacare-prompted tear to cut hospital readmission rates nationwide, in part by shaving Medicare reimbursements for hospitals that exceed national averages. Medicare readmissions cost taxpayers in the neighborhood of $17 billion annually.

'Scorecard' reflects millions of surgeries

ProPublica analyzed 2.3 million common, low-risk procedures, including hip and knee replacements, spinal fusions, gallbladder removals and prostate surgeries done between 2009 and 2013 on patients in Medicare. The researchers focused exclusively on elective procedures that would typically involve healthier patients with better odds of recovery.

They then ran the results by two dozen physicians, who looked closely for the most common surgical complications, such as infections, blood clots, misaligned orthopedic devices and uncontrolled bleeding. Patients who died in the hospital or who were readmitted within 30 days were counted against the surgeon.

So how did the surgeons measure up? Overall, complication rates ranged from 2 to 4 percent, depending on the procedure. While that may seem reasonably low, surgical experts say they should have been significantly lower. Here are a few reasons why:

11 percent of the surgeons studied accounted for 25 percent of the complications.

Hundreds of surgeons across the country had complication rates double or triple the national average.

Some of the outliers hail from the nation's most prestigious medical centers, while statistically at least, some of the best surgeons practice in small-town clinics.

Seen as a win for transparency

Consumer groups generally hailed the Surgeon Scorecard as a long-overdue breakthrough in medical transparency. While some physicians expressed concerns that the scorecard would shame surgeons rather than improve them, Dr. Marty Makary, a surgeon and professor at Johns Hopkins in Baltimore, welcomed the news.

"If you leave it up to the altruism of hospitals, you end up with what we have now -- just a few that use meaningful data to improve quality," he told ProPublica. "Broader transparency, if done fairly and accurately, can drive this improvement with greater force."

Follow me on Twitter: @omnisaurus

Get more news, money-saving tips and expert advice by signing up for a free Bankrate newsletter.

Veteran contributing editor Jay MacDonald is co-author of "Future Millionaires' Guidebook."