The 2015 FIRST Robotics Competition Mid-Atlantic Robotics season opened, with the top award, the Chairman’s Award going to Bridgewater-Raritan Regional H.S.

Students from West Windsor-Plainsboro North & South high schools cheering on their team as it competes on the FRC Field. (Photo: ~Courtesy of Ed Murray) Story Highlights This year’s competition is titled Recycle Rush and each match involved two alliances of three teams.

Team played 12 matches to qualify for each competition’s playoffs to determine the winning alliance.

The 2015 FIRST Robotics Competition (FRC)/Mid-Atlantic Robotics (MAR) season opened two weeks ago and Central Jersey teams have met with early success.

This year’s competition is titled “Recycle Rush” and each match involved two alliances of three teams. Each team plays 12 matches to qualify for each competition’s playoffs to determine the winning alliance. Robots score points by stacking totes on scoring platforms located on specific spots on the 54-by-27-foot playing field and capping those stacks with recycling containers and properly disposing of pool noodles that represent litter. In keeping with the game’s recycling theme, all game pieces used are reusable or recycled by teams back at their schools.

On March 8 and 9, a district competition was held at Mount Olive High School. In the field of 38 teams from New Jersey, Pennsylvania and Delaware were 14 teams from Central Jersey, including Team 41: Watchung Hills Regional H.S.; Team 56: Bound Brook H.S.; Team 136: Plainfield H.S.; Team 224: Piscataway H.S.; Team 293: Hopewell Valley Central H.S.; Team 303: Bridgewater-Raritan Regional H.S.; Team 869: Middlesex H.S.; Team 1228: Rahway H.S.; Team 1257: Union County Vo-Tech H.S.; Team 1279: Immaculata H.S. (Somerville); Team 1923: West Windsor-Plainsboro North & South; Team 2554: J.P. Stevens (Edison); Team 2577: Pingry (Martinsville); and Team 4281: The Center School (Somerset).

At the Mount Olive competition, the top award, the Chairman’s Award, was won by Bridgewater-Raritan Regional H.S. The team known as “PTM Panther Robotics” received the honor as the best team that represents a model for other FRC teams to emulate and as the best team to embody the purpose, values and goals of FIRST.

Other Central Jersey teams that won awards included Union County Vo-Tech that received the Industrial Safety Award, Hopewell Valley Central that was honored with the Industrial Design Award, West Windsor-Plainsboro with a Judges Award, Watchung Hills with a Gracious Professionalism Spirit Award, Middlesex with the Quality Award and Bound Brook with the Imagery Award in Honor of Jack Kamen, father of FIRST founder and noted inventor and entrepreneur Dean Kamen.

As to the actual competition, after 12 rounds of qualifying matches for the 38 teams, Bound Brook was ranked No. 1, Bridgewater-Raritan No. 2, Hopewell Valley No. 4 and Union County Vo-Tech No. 10. These teams, as well as Middlesex, Rahway, Immaculata, Watchung Hills and West Windsor-Plainsboro, advanced to the playoffs.

In the playoffs — three rounds of the best 2-of-3, Bridgewater-Raritan, Union County Vo-Tech, Immaculata and West Windsor-Plainsboro were eliminated in the quarterfinals, while Bound Brook, Watchung Hills, Hopewell Valley and Middlesex were eliminated in the semifinals. Rahway finished as a member of the first-place alliance that also included Honesdale/Western Wayne (Pa.) H.S. and Abington Heights (Pa.) H.S.

In the first week (Feb. 28 and March 1) of the 2015 FRC season, an event was held on March 1 at Hatboro-Horsham H.S. in Horsham, Pennsylvania. In the field of 37 FRC high school teams, 12 teams were from New Jersey — with seven teams from Central Jersey. The Central Jersey teams that competed were Team 25: North Brunswick H.S.; Team 75: Hillsborough H.S.; Team 102: Somerville H.S.; Team 1089: Hightstown H.S.; Team 1403: Montgomery H.S.; Team 3607: South Hunterdon H.S.; and Team 3637: Hunterdon Central Regional H.S.

After the 12 qualifying matches, Montgomery was in first place, while North Brunswick was fifth and Hillsborough ninth.

Montgomery, North Brunswick, Hillsborough, Hightstown and Hunterdon Central advanced or were selected to compete in the 24-team field for the playoffs — three rounds of best-of-3 matches.

North Brunswick and Hightstown were eliminated in the quarterfinals, while Hillsborough was eliminated in the semifinals. Montgomery and Hunterdon Central were partners in a three-team alliance that advanced to the finals. In the finals, the three-team alliance that included Montgomery, Hunterdon Central and Downington (Pa.) Area Robotics finished in second place, with a three-team alliance of Robbinsville H.S., Archbishop Wood (Pa.) H.S. and AIM (Pa.) Academy winning the competition.

Two of the seven Central Jersey teams were honored with awards. The Montgomery team was awarded the Industrial Design Award, while Somerville received the Innovation In Control Award.

The 2015 FIRST Robotics/Mid-Atlantic Robotics FRC season includes seven competitions held in New Jersey and Pennsylvania and serves 121 teams from New Jersey, Pennsylvania and Delaware. Two of the competitions that will involve many Central Jersey teams will be held at area high schools — one at Bridgewater-Raritan on March 28 and 29 involving 38 teams and one at North Brunswick on April 3 and 4 that has 35 teams participating.

More on FIRST Robotics can be found at www.usfirst.org and information or on Mid-Atlantic Robotics at www.midatlanticrobotics.com.

Read or Share this story: http://mycj.co/1C9UeAg