Lower income families are being encouraged to save at least $50 of their tax refund, as part of a "Save Your Refund" contest.

Free financial events will be offered in Waterford as part of "Show Me the Money Day" Saturday. (Photo: Show Me the Money) Story Highlights A "Show Me the Money Day" will be held Saturday in Waterford to offer free financial workshops.

Form 8888 can be used to directly deposit tax refunds into more than one account, including IRAs.

The Consumer Financial Protection Bureau wants to promote savings during tax season.

Rick Pacynski, who prepares income tax returns for free for lower-income families at Accounting Aid Society sites in metro Detroit, is encouraging consumers to try to win big by saving a small part of their tax refund.

For many who qualify for the Earned Income Tax Credit, their federal tax refund is the largest lump sum of money they'll see during the year. Consumer watchdogs would like these folks to improve their financial picture by rebuilding some savings.

One such effort: A half-day program Saturday in Oakland County called "Show Me the Money Day." The workshops and other programs are scheduled for Saturday at the Oakland Schools Conference Center at 2111 Pontiac Lake Road in Waterford. The free event will run from 10 a.m.-2:30 p.m.

Seminar topics include: How to avoid foreclosure, how to prepare to buy a new home, ways to avoid getting scammed or being a victim of ID theft and tips on better understanding the Affordable Care Act. Details are listed at www.accountingaidsociety.org.

Oddly enough, a sweepstakes has been part of his responsible money management crusade this tax season, too.

The Save Your Refund program has several $100 prize drawings, as well as a $25,000 grand prize. Save part of your refund, enter to win a prize.

"Instead of spending money on a lottery ticket, all you have to do is something that's healthy for you," Pacynski said.

Pacynski, who works as coordinator of personal finance programs at the Accounting Aid Society, said he's worked on developing "Show Me the Money" into a major event to encourage responsible money management.

This year, Save Your Refund is promoting is its contest through the network of Volunteer Income Tax Assistance sites, where taxpayers can learn about prizes and get free help filing returns.

Eligibility for free tax preparation depends on annual household income limits, which are $54,000 or less for families and $35,000 or less for individuals.

Pacynski said many tax filers he's worked with say they can't save anything because many families live on extremely limited incomes and have unpaid bills.

Even so, Pacynski said he still likes to tell families about a legitimate chance to win a little bit of money if they set aside some portion of that refund on the spot.

It works like this: Save at least $50 of your refund money when you file your return and you're entered in a contest to win cash prizes. The savings can be set aside in a U.S. savings bond, a myRA retirement account or in other ways.

As part of the Save Your Refund rules, you must direct your 2015 individual tax refund to be paid into two or more accounts during the sweepstakes period using IRS Form 8888 (Allocation of Refund form).

In addition, at least one of the accounts must be considered a qualified savings product, such as a U.S. Savings Bond, a savings account, a certificate of deposit, an IRA, a TreasuryDirect account, a myRA account, a prepaid card or a 529 college savings plan.

Save Your Refund is a program created by two nonprofit-related entities, the Doorway to Dreams Fund and America Saves. The program notes: "The annual federal tax refund is the largest sum of cash many American households receive all year, often amounting to up to 20% of annual household income."

It is not always easy, of course, to get people to consider setting aside some of their money during what one major player calls "tax refund season."

H&R Block CEO Bill Cobb said in a phone interview Wednesday that Form 8888 isn't used very often to set aside savings by many people. People aren't necessarily splurging on big vacations or big TVs. Many times, they're using that tax refund to cover old bills.

Cobb said H&R Block is working on some pilot programs in St. Louis and Omaha, Neb., to promote Form 8888 for some added savings with tax refund money. The program is working with the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, which wants to promote tax season as a time for savings.

"There is some frustration in Washington about the lack of savings that occurs," Cobb said.

The Consumer Financial Protection Bureau issued a report in August 2015 on the challenges for increasing savings during tax time.

The report noted that about 85% of households with incomes less than $50,000 received a refund.

Then, roughly 63% of those tax filers directly deposited their refund.

But only 1.5% of filers split their refund using IRS Form 8888 into different accounts and had a portion directly deposited into a savings account.

Clearly, there's more room here to Save Your Refund for a rainy day emergency or longer-term goals, like college or retirement.

If someone has some money in savings, he or she could be less likely to be forced to take out a high-cost payday loan in an emergency.

So why not Save Your Refund?

"Show Me the Money" is hosted by the Accounting Aid Society and sponsored by the Oakland County Community Reinvestment Association, in partnership with the Community Economic Development Association of Michigan, the Oakland County Treasurer and Jewish Financial Services.

Contact Susan Tompor: 313-222-8876 or stompor@freepress.com. Follow her on Twitter @Tompor.

Read or Share this story: http://on.freep.com/1TsqlE7