President Obama’s top public lands officials and western governors are convening in Denver to announce a federal decision Tuesday on whether to protect the greater sage grouse as an endangered species.

A chicken-size forager famed for fancy mating displays, greater grouse once numbered in the millions but have declined to an estimated 200,000 to 500,000. Survivors are clumped around 165 million acres of sagebrush steppe that stretches from Colorado and up to the Dakotas to California along with 300-plus other species.

Interior Secretary Sally Jewell will lead officials in announcing the decision at the Rocky Mountain Arsenal National Wildlife Refuge, just north of Denver in Commerce City. The announcement will be related to historic conservation efforts, federal officials said Monday.

The long-term decline of the grouse — due to agriculture, building and industrial development — has led to an unprecedented conservation effort aimed at protecting and restoring prime habitat.

Officials scheduled to join Jewell include: U.S Department of Agriculture Under Secretary for Natural Resources and Environment Robert Bonnie; U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service Director Dan Ashe; governors John Hickenlooper, Matt Mead (Wyoming), Steve Bullock (Montana) and Brian Sandoval (Nevada); U.S. Forest Service chief Tom Tidwell; Bureau of Land Management director Neil Kornze; and U.S. Geological Survey acting director Suzette Kimball.

Fish and Wildlife in 2010 determined grouse needed protection under the Endangered Species Act, which mandates federal intervention to prevent extinction. But the feds, facing western state resistance, delayed action due to other priorities, saying states should seize the moment and prove, by 2015, that state-led work could reverse the decline of sage grouse.

Now the USFWS has decided, ahead of a court-ordered Sept. 30 deadline, whether a federal rescue still is warranted to prevent extinction.

Hickenlooper and other western governors who favor flexibility have been pressing for state-led voluntary conservation. They’re concerned federal intervention would put unprecedented limits on people — stifling economic development across a Texas-sized area of the West.

Colorado leaders last week asked federal bureaucrats to approve a state-run “habitat exchange” to let drillers, ranchers, builders and others offset harm to grouse habitat by paying for efforts to improve habitat at other locations. Other states have proposed similar exchanges in hopes of averting a federal listing of grouse as endangered.

Since 1985, grouse have dwindled rapidly amid continued grazing, house-building, oil and gas exploration and other activity. This decline triggers, under the ESA, a federal intervention to avert extinction on the roughly 165 million acres where grouse have survived.

Larger populations have survived in Wyoming and Nevada. In Colorado, state wildlife officials estimate there are about 20,000 grouse. Their habitat within Colorado spans public lands (53 percent) and private lands (47 percent).

Grouse can be hard to count due to their wide range, camouflage coloring and knack for hiding in sagebrush. A decades-long storm over grouse has kindled interest in population sizes but there’s no effective, accepted way to count these birds.

State wildlife agencies focus on the most visible grouse: males puffing their chests and making blooping sounds in sunrise mating dances on communal mating sites, called leks. The agencies use lek data to calculate trends. Some agencies also collect grouse wings from hunters.

The federal Bureau of Land Management, which oversees 8.4 million acres in Colorado, plays a key role in whether grouse will survive. BLM officials lease land for grazing, drilling, mining and installation of powerlines and windmills.

Federal agencies dealing with wildfire also increasingly prioritize needs of sage grouse. They’ve mapped habitat where wildfire is considered a primary threat to survival of the bird.

Bruce Finley: 303-954-1700, bfinley@denverpost.com or @finleybruce