Buy Photo The Tennessean launched a new opinion and analysis section called Insight on Sunday, Feb. 28, 2016. (Photo: The Tennessean)Buy Photo Story Highlights The new section is called Insight and can be found in section H of the Sunday newspaper.

Articles from the new section are embedded in the article below.

The Tennessean launched a new weekly print opinion and analysis section on Sunday called Insight.

The section, presently at four pages, expands the opportunities for viewpoints and analysis from journalists, columnists and the public.

There are more letters and there is a weekly point-counterpoint on an important issue of the day.

This week's issue is on affordable housing, considered one of the biggest challenges for the Nashville area.

Below find links to the articles that appear in the new section. Please buy the Sunday newspaper or go to the e-edition's H section if you would like to read the material as it is presented in print.

Page 1:

Editorial: SEC Primary counts for Nashville and Tennessee

Synopsis: Voters in 12 states, including Tennessee, could help secure the nominations of Trump and Clinton, on Tuesday.

Bonus: Register for the Meet the Tennessean political team event on March 8 at Emma to watch a live panel of journalists discuss the primary and also record the weekly "Music City Politics" podcast before a live audience.

Page 2:

Executive Editor Michael A. Anastasi explains the reason for creating Insight and gives a historical account of user-generated content.

You will also find letters to the editor on an assortment of issues as well as a featured letter by Bitsy Riegle Gulbenk on the future of Ft. Nashborough. Mrs. Gulbenk argues that while Nashville's first settlement has been demolished, efforts to restore the monument should move forward quickly.

The GOP's Donald Trump "lump." (Photo: Cagle Cartoons)

Page 3:

Point-counterpoint on affordable housing.

One view: Tennessee Housing Development Agency Executive Director Ralph Perrey takes the position that the conversation on affordable housing needs to change because the Nashville area "needs people who need affordable housing."

Another view: Council on Aging of Middle Tennessee President Vicki Harris explains that senior citizens are at risk of losing their homes because of Nashville's booming housing market.

You will find more letters to the editor, this time on presidential politics.

Page 4:

This page is dedicated to op-eds and analysis.

Author, former journalist, communications professional and columnist Keel Hunt writes "Why youth vote matters in 2016 presidential election."

Synopsis: Amid this raucous presidential primary season, a bright spot is the growth in new young registered voters in Nashville.

Journalist, columnist and Middle Tennessee State University faculty member Beverly Keel writes "Kesha and Erin Andrews stand up for themselves."

Synopsis: The singer and the sportscaster were both in court seeking to right wrongs they say were committed against them.

The Tennessean's Washington correspondent Mary Troyan writes an analysis piece on the state's federal senators and representatives in Congress called "Tennessee congressional delegation avoids primary drama."

Synopsis: The state's August congressional primary may help minimize anti-incumbent fervor at play in the presidential race.

We welcome your feedback, your letters and your input. You can contact me by phone at (615) 259-8063, by email at dplazas@tennessean.com or tweet to me at @davidplazas.

To send a letter to the editor, email letters@tennessean.com. Letters should be 250 words or less. Please include your full name, address and telephone number. Only your name, city and ZIP code will be published.

Thank you for your readership.

David Plazas is the opinion engagement editor of The Tennessean and a member of the Editorial Board.

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/1oQlO2e