SOUTH BEND — Monica Santa had just turned 47 when she was diagnosed with breast cancer.

She had no family history of it.

But as a mammographer at Memorial Regional Breast Care Center, she had annual mammograms. And, in 2004, her screening showed an anomaly, so she had a biopsy.

It came back positive for an aggressive form of cancer. But it was considered stage zero because it was caught so early and she underwent treatment.

In July, she will have been cancer-free for 12 years.

"If I would have waited until I was 50," she said, then paused. "That's the reason why I'm so adamant about people coming in at age 40 to get their mammograms."

While many women can relate to Santa, other women tell stories of false positives or biopsy complications brought about by an early mammogram screening.

To reduce what they feel is unnecessary testing, some medical experts recently made a recommendation that has created a stir in the medical community.

In the past, it was universally agreed that a woman should start annual mammograms at age 40. But last month, the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force published a new set of guidelines recommending that women from age 50 to 74 have mammograms every two years. It also recommended earlier screenings for women at high risk, like those with a family history of breast cancer, genetic factors or lifestyle factors such as obesity or smoking.

The task force, an independent board of doctors and other experts appointed by the Department of Health and Human Services, emphasized that women should be able to make an informed decision to begin screening before age 50.

But other medical groups say the screenings should start earlier and happen more often in order to prevent the most deaths. Both the American College of Radiology and the Society of Breast Imaging recommend annual screenings begin at age 40.

In October, the American Cancer Society, which used to agree with the other groups, changed its recommendation to annual mammograms for those ages 45 to 54 with screenings every other year beginning at 55.

The three sets of recommendations have left many women confused about what they should do.

Why the debate?

One reason for the medical debate is insurance related. The Affordable Care Act requires insurers to offer certain preventive services for free if the task force recommends them. Currently, women ages 40 and older can get screening mammograms at no cost every one to two years. To stop private insurers from immediately raising the age to 50, in line with the new guidelines, Congress passed a bill in December requiring them to continue to offer coverage for women at 40 for the next two years. After that, the situation could change.

And it has some medical professionals and advocacy groups concerned.

Dr. Samir Patel, of Radiology Inc., which serves five hospitals and several outpatient clinics in Elkhart, LaPorte, Starke and St. Joseph counties, was the principal author of the American College of Radiology practice guidelines for screening.

"If a woman undergoes mammography once a year beginning at age 40, based on American College of Radiology guidelines, their likelihood of dying of breast cancer will be 70 percent less than if they follow the guidelines that were published by the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force," he said.

He explained that the majority of women who develop breast cancer have no family history or risk factors for it and that about 20 percent of all breast cancers occur in women under 50. Under the new guidelines, he feels not as many of these cases would be caught.

A mammogram is an X-ray of the breast, which can detect breast cancer before it is big enough to feel or cause symptoms and while it is easier to treat. But screening mammograms are not a diagnostic tool. To be certain a woman has breast cancer, she must still undergo a biopsy or ultrasound.

The task force cited the reduction of false positives and overtreatment as two reasons for its recommendation. A false positive is when a mammogram shows a possible lump that turns out to be nothing serious. In such a case, a woman could be called back for another screening, ultrasound or biopsy. And some women diagnosed with breast cancer receive treatments the task force deems unnecessary.

NPR took a look at the task force's estimates of the lifetime consequences of screening women at different ages. If screening begins at age 40, it reported, an estimated one additional death was averted per 1,000 women. But there were 576 more false positive tests and 58 extra benign biopsies.

For some women, Patel said, the idea of a false positive is preferable to undiagnosed cancer.

A woman who is screened annually for 10 years is likely to be called back for additional imaging only once, he said. And, in recent years, new 3-D mammography technology — which allows radiologists to manipulate the images and zoom in — has reduced false positives without increasing radiation levels and allowed even earlier cancer detection.

As for overdiagnosis, he said, "How can you say there is overdiagnosis when you can't even tell which cancers are going to kill and which won't? If you can say that, then we can say a certain percentage of cancers don't need to be treated and no major organization has come out and said, 'These cancers don't need to be treated.'"

But other medical experts say that mammograms are just one part of cancer detection and prevention.

"You shouldn't rely on one test," said Dr. Robin Zon, a medical oncologist at Michiana Hematology Oncology. "A screening is not meant to diagnose cancer; it's meant to detect things early."

She agrees with the task force recommendation and says that screening should be considered on a case-by-case basis.

Paying the cost

For more than two decades, Zon said, the Canadians have screened women for breast cancer every two years starting at age 50, but fewer Canadians die from breast cancer than do Americans. The World Health Organization also recommends screening start at age 50, and in Europe, mammograms are given to those aged 50 to 69 every other year and detection rates are similar to those of the U.S.

But the United States has a higher overall health care expenditure per person than most other countries, Zon said, partly because of overtesting and overtreatment.

About $4 billion is spent nationwide each year on follow-up tests and treatments stemming from false positive mammograms and overdiagnosis, according to a study published in April in Health Affairs, a health policy journal. The average cost to a woman with a false positive mammogram was $852.

And women ages 40 to 49 have a 30 percent higher incidence of false positives than those older than 50, Zon said.

"We need to get wiser about how we spend those monies," she said, explaining that she would like to see more research focus on investigating who benefits from screenings.

Mammograms, while important, were developed at a time when medical experts didn't have as much information as they do today, she said. "We now have medications for folks who have a high risk. We didn't understand genetics, didn't have a prevention drug, didn't know how lifestyle affected it."

And, she hopes, that as scientific knowledge of cancers grow, insurance would adapt to fit those discoveries.

Medical experts today are able to easily share data and research that leads to cancer breakthroughs and a better understanding of risk factors, she said. In time, doctors may determine that some women need screenings as early as their 20s — and therefore would get expanded insurance coverage — while others might not need anything routine until they are 50.

In the meantime, there is one bit of advice all the medical experts and organizations can agree on: a woman should discuss breast cancer screening with her doctor and reach the decision that's best for her.

Screening recommendations

All recommendations are for men and women at average risk of getting breast cancer. Those with a high risk — family history and genetic or lifestyle factors — should talk with their doctors about whether to begin sooner or not.

American College of Radiology and the Society of Breast Imaging: Annual screenings begin at age 40. High-risk patients should begin by age 30 but not before 25.

American Cancer Society: Annual mammograms for those ages 45 to 54 with screenings every other year beginning at 55. After age 40, women should have a choice to begin screening and screening should continue as long as a woman is in good health and expected to live at least 10 more years.

U.S. Preventive Services Task Force: Every other year for women age 50 to 74. Starting earlier should be an individual decision taking patient history into account. There is not enough evidence to assess the benefits and harms for screening in women age 75 and older.