Next time, Danny Trevathan says he’s going to throw the ball to a fan.

Better yet, maybe he should hand it to a fan. Or deliver it to a fan. Or really not let it out of his grip until the points are confirmed on the scoreboard. After all, some of his teammates were already celebrating his pick six on Thursday in the fourth quarter of the Broncos’ 49-27 victory over Baltimore when they realized Trevathan had actually fumbled the ball on the one-yard line.

It was supposed to be a celebration toss. Instead, it was a fumble, and it cost the Broncos a touchdown and Trevathan the first score of his NFL career.

“Man, it was just a little mistake,” Trevathan said after the game. “I think it was kind of selfish. That’s the type of player I am. I’ll take full responsibility, and I’ll grow from it.”

Even after the big win, Trevathan didn’t make any excuses for fumbling the ball just inches before he stepped into the end zone. It stung, but the fact that it came in a 49-27 Broncos blowout win must have helped.

“In the end, I knew it was all on me, dropping the ball,” he said. “I really did not mean to do that. I was just so caught up in the moment.”

Trevathan may not have cost his team its opening night win, but he did incur the wrath – and laughter – of his fan base and teammates. As he ran off the field after the clock wound to zero, he was the subject of plenty of heckling, including from defensive end Derek Wolfe. No margin of victory was going to erase the sheer carelessness of the play.

It doesn’t seem like he’ll be dwelling on the mistake for too long, though, especially when he’s already talking about next time. That’s the right mindset to have, according to teammate Julius Thomas.

“I’ve made my fair share of mistakes,” the third-year tight end said. “I know that’s something he’s going to learn from. I had a fumble early in the preseason, and that’s what’s sticking in my head. I’ve been concentrating on ball security. I’m sure he’ll do the same. I hope he makes another interception, runs one in and holds onto it that time.”

jniesen@denverpost.com

@JoanNiesen