They believe with a religious fervor that government is inherently evil and want to exorcise it by drowning it in Grover Norquist's bath tub.

As Americans are reacting with shock and disgust to the Tea Party-inspired shutdown and the looming probability that these same extremists will force a default on the debt ceiling, people sure are throwing around words like "patriot" and "traitor" with careless abandon.

Waving a flag and picking a nostalgic Americana name does not magically and instantly make an organization patriotic. Patriotism is defined by a true love of country and the sincere desire to help "create a more perfect union." Obviously, the various parties in our democracy have different ideas on how to make that happen, but they all believe in government and the rule of law.

Except for the Tea Party. They hate the U.S. government. They think laws and the traditions of our democracy are just removable barriers to their unrealistic demands for European-style austerity and irresponsible laissez-faire economics.

They believe with a religious fervor that government is inherently evil and want to exorcise it by drowning it in Grover Norquist's bath tub.

That's not patriotic; that sounds more like treason, sedition or the type of extremism one only sees in radical cults.

The revolting hypocrisy of the Tea Party Republicans is that, while they proclaim that they love America, they are working feverishly to destroy our government. Rather than take a sensible approach to reducing government spending, they LOVE the indiscriminate axe of the sequester and don't care who or what gets chopped next. Just as long as there is some chopping going on! They'll just chop till we drop.

Patriots aren't hell-bent on the economic destruction of America, but as the Tea Party pushes the United States toward default, their actions fit the very definition of sedition.

Patriots seek to continually improve America and make it stronger, not force it into an abrupt and unnecessary economic collapse.

Recently, Rep. Mo Brooks said the Second Amendment was in place primarily so citizens could just overthrow the government when they thought tyranny might be lurking around the corner. Does that comment inspire patriots, traitors, or is it just a thinly veiled call for sedition?

Brooks and his Tea Party buddies, like Ted Cruz, play only one card in their distorted deck ... the Fear Card. They do this because it fits into a bizarre narrative of economic doom they espouse that ignores the facts. Facts like: The deficit has been cut in half since Obama took office, corporations and the wealthy are paying their lowest share of taxes since the 1950s, the Affordable Care Act is working, and the nation's debt can only be paid down with an approach that increases revenue in conjunction with intelligent and targeted cuts.

But in the zero-sum game of Tea Party politics, as played by Brooks and Cruz, it's all just "cut, cut, cut" or the whole thing will be destroyed no matter who gets hurt.

That's not what being an American is about, and it certainly isn't a plan that will make our Union more perfect. Every American knows that we face hard economic choices as a nation, but the solution will never be found by adopting the Tea Party strategy of threatening economic jihadism using strong-arm tactics.

Traitors are produced when there is a constant drum-beat of anti-government sentiment and they flourish in cultures that seek to divide everything into an arbitrary and rigid dichotomy. Patriotism has always been about unity, about progress and the celebration of our diversity.

The Tea Party isn't patriotic, and they're getting dangerously close to being traitors.

Instead of trying to destroy America through economic sedition, let's move America forward like real patriots.

Clete Wetli is head of the Madison County Democratic Party, and volunteer community blogger for AL.com.