Buy Photo Gibson Russell, 9 (left), pets Cloudy, a rabbit belonging to Emily Backe (far right). Campers in the Get Set to Be A Vet Camp at the T.R.E.E. House Children's Museum are learning this week about how to care for animals. (Photo: Melinda Martinez/The Town Talk)Buy Photo

Kids shouted yes and no answers to questions from T.R.E.E. House Children’s Museum Executive Director Kara Edwards on Tuesday.

“Do you like math?” she asked. The response was mixed but loud. “Do you like science?” There were more “yes” answers this time. “Do you like animals?” Even more shouts of “yes.” “Do you like solving mysteries? Do you like learning new things?” Everyone was in agreement.

“Then you might make a good veterinarian,” Edwards said.

The kids, ages 4-10, are attending Get Set To Be A Vet Camp at the T.R.E.E. House this week. Camp started Tuesday with a lesson about what a veterinarian does and the schooling and work it takes to become one.

Buy Photo Stella Voorhies (far left,), Alyssa Talley, Arianna Pacchiarotti and Lillian Hilborn write and draw in their journals. Campers in the Get Set to Be A Vet Camp at the T.R.E.E. House Children's Museum are learning this week about how to care for animals. (Photo: Melinda Martinez/The Town Talk)

Alyssa Talley, 7, said she wants to be a vet but not in Louisiana.

“I want to be a vet in the Antarctic,” where she can take care of penguins and polar bears, she said.

Penguins are her favorite, so she drew one in her camp journal. Campers are asked to draw or write something after every activity during the week, just like a scientist records observations.

Stella Voorhies, 9, drew dolphins, her favorite animal “because I like to swim,” she said. She even got to swim with dolphins on a trip to Florida, she added.

The camp runs through Friday and features visits from real animals as well as the kids’ stuffed animals.

“They’ll bring their stuffed animals one day and we’ll give them a checkup,” Edwards said.

Buy Photo Kara Edwards, executive director of the T.R.E.E. House Children's Museum, talks to children about being a veterinarian in the Get Set to Be A Vet Camp on Tuesday. (Photo: Melinda Martinez/The Town Talk)

The first visit was from Cloudy, a real rabbit belonging to Emily Backe, on Tuesday. Campers learned about what bunnies eat and how to take care of them as they took turns petting Cloudy.

They also will learn how to meet a dog in a safe way with help from a dog and its trainer.

Read or Share this story: http://www.thetowntalk.com/story/news/local/2015/07/21/kids-get-set-vet/30470445/