Panama seized $7 million in drug money this week after national police announced that they have caught and are detaining three Honduran men who they believe were trying to bring in millions worth of drug money in a major smuggling case. The capture occurred this week at the Panama City Tocumen International Airport. An investigation is ongoing as eCanada Now shares the breaking updates on this massive bust this Tuesday, Jan. 14, 2014.

Having Panama officials seize up to $7 million in drug money is a feat in and of itself, but local authorities believe that the capture of these three Honduran men may only be a piece of an even bigger drug ring. The Panamanian police noted in their report that the suspects were carrying all of the cash in separate suitcases. An inside tip was used to inform them that the drug money was being brought in at the airport, allowing them to catch the attempted smugglers without major incident.

All of the men were arriving on an inbound flight from Tegucigalpa, and had planted the money in $100 bills that were cleverly hidden within the folds and secret inner compartments of the individual suitcases. Panama has been a frequent site in the past where drug money laundering and laundering has been successful, particularly in cases where people can use crafty banking laws and loopholes to their advantages in hiding money (usually illegally begotten).

According to the press release on the “Panama seizes $7M drug money” story:

“It is still possible that the bust is a ruse meant to give the appearance that the police are winning some battles in a drug war that has long since been lost, though these allegations remain entirely unconfirmed. Drugs flow easily through this impoverished nation with smugglers having superior speed boats, technology, and certainly weaponry. Additionally, they have well paid connections much as they have in throughout the rest of Central America and Mexico.”

Nonetheless, this prevented smuggling attempt is a step in the right direction in stopping the all-too-common drug trade in South America and beyond. The national authorities have said they are currently continuing their investigation as they examine the three Honduras men separately at a local headquarters.