If you believe the website bearing her name, Holly Grange was in cahoots with Hillary Clinton to conspire for war in Libya so Grange could get rich.

If you believe a certain Facebook page, Woody White abused his position as a county commissioner and member of the Cape Fear Public Utility Authority board so he could have a wooden walkway in his backyard.

If you believe some press releases, U.S. Rep. David Rouzer betrayed Republican Party principles and is really a supporter of abortion and the Affordable Care Act.

If you believe a certain video, New Hanover County Board of Commissioners Chairwoman Beth Dawson is a Democrat in disguise and has abandoned her Republican principles for personal gain.

These range from ridiculous to plausible, but all of them have common themes: they contain at least nuggets of truth and are examples of something people say they hate, but really love. Negative campaigning.

Never mind the venom of a scorned Donald Trump or the campaign trickery of Ted Cruz. Even on the local level, politics can be nasty.

Negative campaigning doesn't involve just flashy and often misleading ads. The advent of social media has bestowed upon us more numerous, and cheap or even free, ways candidates can besmirch each other. Tweets, emails, Facebook pages and websites didn't exist when Lyndon Johnson famously ran the "Daisy" ad promising a nuclear annihilation if he wasn't elected.

While nobody local has gone nuclear, the lure of negative campaigning is still too much to resist.

It's too bad, really. Last month, Grange felt compelled to hold a press conference to denounce Tammy Covil, her opponent in the March 15 primary for the N.C. House District 20 seat, for using hollygrange.com to make fiery claims (really, there are flames on the site).

The problem, and I have written about this before, is that this stuff is more fun and shiny and easier to understand than the inner workings of things that actually matter.

And, as I predicted several weeks ago, the press coverage (including mine) about these kinds of things dominated viewer interest.

Before you blame me, though, I'll point out that we have run profiles detailing positions Grange and Covil have on everything from teacher pay to the merits of increasing incentives for the local film industry.

But those stories, unsurprisingly, never prove as popular as ones about candidates throwing each other under the proverbial bus.

So instead of arguing about transportation or infrastructure or economic development, Grange and Covil got more of an audience by bickering over a website whose content bears no direct impact on the governance of North Carolina or representing northern New Hanover County in Raleigh.