Topics: Atheism, Books, Does God exist, New atheists, Religion, Richard Dawkins, Innovation News, Life News, News

Our first concern will be Richard Dawkins’s efforts to refute standard arguments for theism. These efforts suffer from a variety of logical mistakes. His critique of the cosmological argument confuses an implication with a presupposition, while his critique of the ontological argument makes an illegitimate move from distaste for a conclusion to its invalidity. His critique of arguments from religious experience ignores the distinction between when we can explain an experience as illusory and when we should explain an experience as illusory.

The cosmological argument, one of the most popular theistic arguments, is an effort to support a negative answer to this question: Can something come from nothing? Here’s an elementary formulation of the argument:

There is something that is caused. Whatever is caused must be caused by a cause other than itself. If every cause is caused, then there is an endless series(an infinite regress) of causes. An infinite regress of causes is impossible. Therefore, there is an uncaused cause (i.e., the first cause: the cause of the series of causes that are themselves caused).

Dawkins thinks the argument is readily refuted: the theistic argument makes “the entirely unwarranted assumption that God himself is immune to the regress.” In other words, there is no answer to the intelligent child who, when told that God made everything, asks, who made God?

But, contrary to Dawkins, the argument does not assume that God is “immune to the regress”—that is, has no cause other than himself. Rather, it states premises (1)–(4), from which it logically follows (5) that there is an uncaused cause (God). But none of these premises state (or assume) that God has no cause. Dawkins’s criticism works only if we make the elementary logical mistake of thinking that, because the argument’s premises imply its conclusion, it has presupposed the conclusion. That doesn’t mean the argument is compelling—we’ll see below that it isn’t, even in a more sophisticated form. But Dawkins’s comment isn’t even the beginning of a cogent critique.

Dawkins’s treatment of the famous ontological argument, first developed by St. Anselm of Canterbury in the eleventh century, is even less satisfactory. He correctly states the central idea that God, understood as a perfect being, would have to exist, since “a being that doesn’t exist in the real world is, by that very fact, less than perfect”. But he then goes on to express the argument as a playground taunt: “a really really perfect thing would have to be better than a silly old imaginary thing. So I’ve proved that God exists. Nur Nurny Nur Nur”.

Dawkins’s critique of the argument goes little beyond the emotional reaction of his mocking formulation: “The very idea that grand conclusions could follow from such logomachist trickery offends me aesthetically” and “isn’t it too good to be true that a grand truth about the cosmos should follow from a mere word game?” How can our distaste (or puzzlement or outrage) at the conclusion of an argument substitute for a cogent account of why it is logically invalid?

But here Dawkins’s critic also needs to be more careful. There are arguments that we rightly reject just because their conclusions strike us as absurd. Dawkins himself gives the case of Zeno’s paradoxes, a set of arguments concluding that motion is impossible. Zeno argued, for example, that even Achilles, the swiftest soldier in the Greek army at Troy, can never catch a tortoise who has a headstart in a race. This, he said, is because in the time it takes Achilles to reach where the tortoise was, the tortoise will have moved a bit further on. It’s not easy to say exactly what’s wrong with this argument without getting into higher mathematics, but it’s reasonable to conclude that there’s something wrong with the argument simply because its conclusion (that a faster runner can never catch up with a slower runner) is obviously, absurdly false. Isn’t the same true of Anselm’s argument?

No. Its conclusion is that God exists—a claim that is controversial but not, like Zeno’s conclusion, in direct contradiction to what we see every day. To carry out Dawkins’s comparison of Anselm’s argument with Zeno’s, he would have to say that he knows, without evaluating Anselm’s or any other theistic argument, that God obviously doesn’t exist. This is not a criticism but a gratuitous assertion that the argument’s conclusion is false.

As a final example, consider Dawkins’s critique of theistic arguments from personal religious experience, where he focuses on visions or voices of God or other supernatural entities such as angels and the Blessed Virgin. He rejects the veridicality of such experiences (the truth of what they present) in view of “the formidable power of the brain’s simulation software”. This software, he says, “is well capable of constructing ‘visions’ and ‘visitations’ of the upmost veridical power,” even if they are false. Almost all of his discussion consists in giving examples of hallucinations and other deceptive experiences and explaining how the brain is able to produce them.

Here we need to formulate Dawkins’s argument more fully than he does. His claim is that we shouldn’t think that religious experiences are veridical because the brain’s “simulation software” is capable of producing them whether or not what they present is in fact true. But does the mere fact that an experience can be produced by simulation software show that the experience is not veridical? The question should give us pause, since almost any experience at all, including my experience of writing this sentence and your experience of reading it, could also be simulations occurring only in the brain. As Descartes famously argued and neuroscience confirms, any experience that seems to be of the world outside my mind could in fact be a dream or some other sort of illusion or hallucination. If the possibility of simulation is enough to cast doubt on an experience, then we need to doubt almost all of our experiences. Dawkins’s rejection of religious experiences holds up only if he is willing to doubt almost all of our experiences.

Dawkins’s critique of religious experience goes wrong by starting from the question, Can we explain this experience as illusory? He should instead ask, Is there a specific reason to think that we should explain this experience as illusory? To make his case, he would have to reflect philosophically on the conditions that make it appropriate to dismiss an experience as illusory, and then show that all religious experiences meet those conditions. There is an extensive epistemological literature—often very critical of religion—on how to evaluate the veracity of religious experiences. Dawkins’s argument needs to engage this literature.

Another problem is that Dawkins doesn’t take into account a much more common, though much less dramatic, form of religious experience. Many believers report experiences— often frequent—that they describe as a vivid (nonvisual and non-auditory) sense of the presence of a divine being. William James, in his classic discussion of religious experience, cites the following as one of many reports:

There was not a mere consciousness of something there, but fused in the central happiness of it, a startling awareness of some ineffable good. Not vague either, not like the emotional effect of some poem, or scene, or blossom, or music, but the sure knowledge of the close presence of a sort of mighty person, and after it went, the memory persisted as the one perception of reality. Everything else might be a dream, but not that.

Even if there is a strong case against accepting reports of dramatic apparitions and visions, this case would not automatically apply to these more ordinary experiences.

Dawkins’s Atheistic Arguments

We turn to a discussion of Dawkins’s major arguments against the existence of God: the no-arguments argument, his evolutionary argument, and his complexity argument.

The no-arguments argument maintains that we ought to deny God’s existence because there are no good arguments for his existence. To test this claim, we will try to construct a good cosmological argument by formulating and criticizing a series of principles of causality. Here we will use crucial distinctions between what needs explaining and what does not need explaining and between the contingent and the necessary. We will see that the cosmological argument needs a principle for avoiding an infinite regress of causes. Here we will need to distinguish between a principle that says an infinite regress is impossible and the (preferable) principle that says an infinite regress itself requires an explanation.

Assessing the force of the argument—and therefore of the no-arguments argument—will depend on a crucial distinction between what a rational person must believe and what a rational person can believe.

The No-Arguments Argument for Atheism

Although Dawkins’s critiques of theistic arguments are remarkably weak, he and most new atheists are convinced that they need make no special case for their position, but need only point out that theists offer no good arguments for their position. I call this the no-arguments argument for atheism.

Many atheists are fond of claiming that the case against God is the same as the case against Santa Claus, the Easter Bunny, or the Tooth Fairy: there are no good reasons for believing in any of them. At least at first blush, it seems odd to compare the argumentative case for God with that for Santa Claus et al. There are, after all, well-known arguments for God’s existence, formulated by respected philosophers, that intelligent and informed people have found convincing. No one much over the age of six thinks there is a remotely plausible argument for the existence of Santa Claus.

Of course, the mere existence of theistic arguments doesn’t refute the no-arguments argument. More careful examinations than Dawkins offers may still show that all such arguments are worthless. I myself think that there’s no argument that decisively establishes that God exists. But, I will argue, this doesn’t support the no-arguments argument. To see why, let’s dig deeper into the cosmological argument, which, I claim, can be formulated in a way that refutes the no-arguments argument.

The Cosmological Argument

The idea of a cosmological argument is to move from certain known effects to God as their cause. To construct such an argument, we need a principle of causality: a statement of which sorts of things need causes to explain them. The simplest such principle would be: everything has a cause. But this is too strong a claim, since if everything has a cause, then God will have a cause and so be dependent on something else, which would, therefore, have a better claim to be God. A cosmological argument will work only if we have a causal principle that will not apply to God. (This is the way serious versions of the cosmological argument respond to the “Who made God?” objection.) So we need to look for an improved principle.

Here’s a philosophical line of thought that seems like it might do the job. We are always looking for explanations. Why did my car break down? Why did the apple tree bloom early this year? Why do my children do so poorly on standardized math tests? Much of science is the relentless extension of this quest for explanations. Sometimes we find an explanation by referring to things we already know about. My car broke down because I haven’t changed the oil for three years; the tree bloomed early because we had an exceptionally warm spring; my children do poorly because they don’t study enough. But sometimes seeking an explanation leads to a discovery: perhaps my car broke down because a computer chip I didn’t even know about failed; or the tree bloomed early because of an increase in local radiation levels; or my children do poorly because they lack a special “math” gene.

A cosmological argument is an effort to carry the search for an explanation as far as it can go, to see if we can discover not just an explanation of some single thing but an explanation of everything—for, we might say, the world (kosmos in Greek) as a whole. Let’s call this an ultimate explanation. We want, therefore, an argument that will show that God is the ultimate explanation. Perhaps, then, the causal principle we need is that there must be an ultimate explanation (provided by an ultimate cause).

Now, however, we need to think more carefully about what an ultimate explanation would explain. We’ve said it’s an explanation of everything, but just what does this mean? Something that needs explanation is, by definition, not self-explanatory. It needs to be explained by something other than itself. As we’ve seen, if we sought an explanation of literally everything, then there would be nothing available to provide the explanation.

If there is to be an ultimate explanation, then, it must be something that itself requires no explanation but explains everything else. The world that the cosmological argument is trying to explain must not be everything but everything that needs an explanation. But what things require explanation?