Tomaszewski, 43, an electrical contractor, touted his family business, S.T. Electric Inc., which operates in five states. He said his grandfather, 98, who attended the luncheon, inspired him to get involved in politics.

"I want to protect the ideals he fought for," Tomaszewski said.

He said he wanted government to be more accessible, recalling his father's government job and the frequent trips local residents made to see elected representatives.

"We should be able to see where the money goes," he said.

Chapman, 59, is a paralegal in a Philadelphia law office. This is her fourth attempt at the seat. She said this year had been especially difficult because of a lack of town hall meetings, debates, and invitations to public events.

"It's like no one wants to acknowledge an election's going on," she said after the event. "The Democrats think it's [Norcross'] seat, and they're just hoping people will blindly pull the lever.

She said this was the first time in 23 years the district has to vote for someone new.

"It's time to make a change in our world, our life, our incomes," she said. "It's time to end the control, give some people insight into how people live. Vote outside the paid party box."

Cobb criticized "corruption in South Jersey" and partisanship in Washington. He said House Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi and Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid - both of whom have campaigned for Norcross - "don't have solutions in mind."

Pelosi attended a fund-raiser for Norcross after the luncheon.

Cobb said he wanted to improve veteran services, make higher education more affordable, and amend the Affordable Care Act.

In an awkward moment, after he was given a one-minute warning, Cobb told the audience, "The best social program is a job," a catchphrase used often by Norcross. Norcross said he was glad to see his opponent had adopted his slogan.

Norcross said he also wanted to make college more affordable; pointed to economic development in Camden resulting in part from legislation he said he drafted; and noted he was part of a bipartisan bail-reform effort.

"It's not about what letter's behind your name, it's about what gets done," he said.

Bayode Olabisi, an independent challenging Republican Rep. Frank LoBiondo in the Second District, said Washington needed to focus more on how technology can solve South Jersey's problems and how to address climate change.

The First and Second Congressional Districts include parts of Gloucester County.

Democratic Freeholders Lyman Barnes and Heather Simmons face challenges from Republicans Joseph Bennis, vice president of the Joseph Fazzio metal supply company, and Jack Scheidell, a longtime South Jersey educator.

The South Jersey Chamber of Commerce will host a members-only event for First District candidates Oct. 31.