The Note's Must-Reads are a round-up of today's political headlines and stories from ABC News and the top U.S. newspapers. Posted Monday through Friday right here at www.abcnews.com

Compiled by ABC News' Jayce Henderson, Amanda VanAllen, Carrie Halperin and Jordan Mazza

IRAN ABC News' Isobel Markham: "Sen. Robert Menendez Says U.S. Should Move Forward with New Iran Sanctions" This morning on "This Week," Senate Foreign Relations Committee Chair Sen. Robert Menendez, D-N.J., told ABC's George Stephanopoulos that he's confident the U.S. should move forward with new sanctions on Iran, despite efforts by the Obama administration to delay such a move. "I think that the possibility of moving ahead with new sanctions, including wording it in such a way that if there is a deal that is acceptable that those sanctions could cease upon such a deal, is possible," Menendez said on "This Week" Sunday. LINK

The Wall Street Journal's Jay Solomon and Laurence Norman: "U.S. Tries to Rekindle Iran Deal After Miscues" A series of miscalculations by the Obama administration and world powers were behind a failure to complete a first-stage agreement to curb Iran's nuclear program this weekend despite days of rising expectations of a deal, said diplomats involved in the process. Washington sought to take the developments in stride, quickly moving to salvage a deal by dispatching senior American diplomats to Israel and the Persian Gulf to try to win over skeptical allies and show the delay could lead to a better agreement with Tehran. LINK

HEALTH CARE USA Today's Gregory Korte: "New tool in GOP battle against Obamacare: hearings" Republicans have tried 46 times to repeal all or part of the Affordable Care Act. They've challenged it in court and at the ballot box, and even shut down the government in an attempt to delay it. But their most recent tactic has also been their most effective: congressional oversight. LINK

The Hills' Alexandra Jaffe: " Christie: Obama apology 'not enough'" New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie (R) on Sunday said he told President Obama to apologize for suggesting Americans could keep their insurance under ObamaCare, but that the president's apology wasn't enough. Speaking on CBS's "Face the Nation," Christie suggested he was the inspiration for the apology. LINK

The New York Daily News' Adam Edelman: " John Kerry on Iran nukes: 'No deal is better than a bad deal'" A day after world leaders failed to reach a deal to curb Iran's nuclear ambitions, Secretary of State John Kerry tried put a positive spin on the unfruitful talks. "No deal is better than a bad deal," Kerry said Sunday on NBC's "Meet the Press," about the latest round of talks in Geneva between Iran and Western nations. "We're not in a rush. We need to get the right deal." LINK

60 MINUTES Politico's Dylan Byers: " Lara Logan: "60 Minutes' is 'very sorry'" "60 Minutes" correspondent Lara Logan issued an on-air apology Sunday night for the now-discredited Oct. 27 report in which Dylan Davies, a security contractor, claimed to have been a witness to the Sept. 11, 2012, attack on the U.S. consulate in Benghazi. "We realized we had been misled and it was a mistake to include him in our report. For that, we are very sorry," Logan told viewers at the end of the broadcast. "The most important thing to every person at '60 Minutes' is the truth, and the truth is: we made a mistake." LINK

AFGHANISTAN

The Washington Post's Kevin Sieff: "In Afghanistan, interpreters who helped U.S. in war denied visas; U.S. says they face no threat" A growing number of Afghan interpreters who worked alongside American troops are being denied U.S. visas allotted by Congress because the State Department says there is no serious threat against their lives. But the interpreters, many of whom served in Taliban havens for years, say U.S. officials are drastically underestimating the danger they face. Immigration attorneys and Afghan interpreters say the denials are occurring just as concerns about Taliban retribution are mounting due to the withdrawal of U.S. forces. LINK

SECRETARY OF STATE JOHN KERRY The Washington Times' David Sherfinski and Guy Taylor: " Kerry: Obama prepared to use force in Iran" Secretary of State John F. Kerry defended the Obama administration's carrot-and-stick approach to nuclear negotiations with Iran, saying Sunday that the conciliatory strategy needs to be given a chance to work - while vowing that the U.S. is prepared to use force if necessary to keep the Islamic republic from developing a nuclear bomb. "We can't let mythology and politics start to cloud reality," said Mr. Kerry, who dismissed criticism that the administration has done a poor job leveraging American power in international talks - the latest round of which closed over the weekend without a breakthrough - over Iran's disputed nuclear program. LINK

TEA PARTY The Boston Globe's Matt Viser: " Harvard Law outsider became Tea Party hero" As the lights rose, Ted Cruz held center stage, dressed in black and kneeling at a bedside. The first-year student at Harvard Law School delivered his lines with the emotions of a man gripped by anger, fear, and worry for his reputation. "Do you understand that I have many enemies?" he thundered. "There is a faction that is sworn to drive me from my pulpit. Do you understand that?" Cruz, then a devoted amateur thespian, was playing the role of the Rev. Samuel Parris in "The Crucible," Arthur Miller's allegorical play about McCarthyism. LINK

ABC NEWS VIDEO "Gov. Chris Christie on 'This Week'" LINK

BOOKMARKS The Note: LINK ABC News Politics: LINK George Stephanopoulos' Blog: LINK ABC News on Twitter: @ThisWeekABC | @ABCPolitics ABC News Mobile: LINK ABC News Apps: LINK ABC News YouTube: LINK