Finally, Nuggets coach Michael Malone had to break the emergency glass and put Mike Miller into the game.

In the first quarter.

The situation demanded shooters be on the court. The Nuggets’ field-goal percentage had been dwindling fast as the quarter moved along.

But it was soon clear that making shots wasn’t their only problem, or even their biggest. The Nuggets’ 121-101 loss to the Boston Celtics on Sunday afternoon at the Pepsi Center was built on myriad shortcomings — defense and turnovers topped the list.

Nuggets Mailbag: Pose a question for Christopher Dempsey

“It was a lack of fight, a lack of togetherness,” Malone said. “We quit on a number of plays, and I thought we were a very selfish team — two things I hate to see from any team.”

It left Malone scratching his head as to why it happened.

“It hasn’t been who we’ve been,” he said. “But sometimes what happens is that after the all-star break, and once that trade deadline is over with, sometimes you see true colors come out. I hope (Sunday’s game) was just an anomaly and not who we are.”

A mad scramble with about 10 minutes left in the game said all that needed to be said about where each team was in its focus. Jusuf Nurkic lost the ball on Denver’s offensive end and, after being knocked around, was rolling with a ton of pace away from everyone toward the Boston basket, headed out of bounds it seemed.

But no.

Evan Turner turned on the jets and ran down the ball just before it hit out of bounds. He saved it, flipping it behind his back to Avery Bradley, who was the only other player to not give up on the play. Bradley caught the pass and laid it in to put the Celtics up 15 points. Two Celtics hustling on the play. No Nuggets in the picture.

Timeout, Nuggets.

It was just was well. Save for a couple of stretches, the Nuggets had been generally out-worked all game long. The Celtics played harder, smarter basketball. And they put the pressure on from the very start, establishing a cat-quick pace in the first quarter and never letting up. The Nuggets found it difficult to get back and set their defense, whether they missed or made a bucket. And the basketball was whipped around the perimeter so quickly, the Denver defensive rotations were constantly a step slow altogether.

PHOTOS: Here are the best action shots from the Nuggets loss

The first sign it was not going to be the Nuggets’ day came after they took a 7-4 lead in the first quarter. Boston hit them with a 13-2 run to take a 17-9 lead, and the Celtics never trailed again.

“They had more energy than us from the jump,” said rookie guard Emmanuel Mudiay.

The Celtics created a 26-point lead in the second quarter before the Nuggets woke up. They started chipping away. Finally, their energy was higher. Finally, their efficiency was better. By halftime they had Boston’s lead down to 15 points. They chopped that lead to five to start the third quarter.

But in the blink of an eye the Celtics were back up by 16, and only Will Barton’s 3-pointer late in the third quarter saved the Nuggets from that deficit going into the fourth.

Boston cruised from there, sweeping the season series and handing the Nuggets their second consecutive loss coming off the NBA all-star break.

Denver turnovers piled 24 high. The Celtics happily cashed in those for 29 points.

The Nuggets were led by Nikola Jokic’s 23 points and 13 rebounds. Danilo Gallinari added 17 points. Boston was led by Isaiah Thomas’ 22 points and 12 assists.

“We’ve got to learn from this game,” said Denver guard D.J. Augustin, “and come out in our next game and play harder than we did tonight.”

Christopher Dempsey: cdempsey@denverpost.com or @dempseypost