To use the outdated cliché “Life is a journey” shouldn’t register as profound intellectual wisdom with most. As redundant as this phrase is, however, it’s a fact. “Life is a journey.” It’s a journey for all of us in the obvious physical sense, but also within the realm of the emotional, mental, spiritual and intellectual. All of us, whether we like it or not, are on a daily path of growth or possibly stagnation that, when it’s all said and done, accounts for our personal little “journey.” I would like to think that most desire to cover at least a moderate amount of distance during their lifetimes with respect to these intangible components that make up our psyches.

I often wonder where I am in the journey that is my life. From a physical perspective I would like to think that I still have some ground to cover. From a mental, emotional, spiritual and intellectual sense I hope that I’m making satisfactory progress in attaining new levels of understanding on a consistent basis.

I generally find myself in a state of steady self-awareness pertaining to my progression as it relates to one’s intangible personal makeup, often taking personal inventory regarding my emotional and spiritual progress, my mental state(s) and most of all my intellectual understanding.

Though I quickly admit to not possessing the mental capacity to understand many things within our world, I still have a deep desire to grasp as much as I possibly can. Oftentimes easier said than done, the desire exists nevertheless.

One aspect of intellectual understanding that has always fascinated me and creates a strong desire to attain as much perspective as possible are the differences of thought, opinion and life perception among individuals. What causes one person to possess a drastically different outlook about specific situations versus that of another? What life events have formed the theories held by people that can cause certain opinions on many mainstream issues to range so vastly? This is a topic I have obsessed about for many years, and I enjoy the challenge of trying to make sense of it all.

Read Rocker’s firsthand account of his public battle with the PC thought police: “Scars and Strikes,” at the WND Superstore

As I study social, fiscal and political issues and generally form my opinion from that of a conservative viewpoint, I strive for the capacity to fathom the reasons behind those opinions that lie at the opposite end of the spectrum. As the gap in ideological philosophies between liberals and conservatives seems to be growing at a pace more rapid than we have ever seen, I want to know why. It is this question I ponder relentlessly – and I think I’m starting to understand.

The underlying basis for much liberal ideology seems to emerge from the basic emotion of pity. With most issues, particularly those of a social-fiscal nature, the liberal feels sympathy (which isn’t always a bad thing) and wishes to right the wrongs created by an evil, unfair society and make everything right with the world. This is why one would be hard-pressed to find any liberal who would speak harshly of any social program. To the liberal the social program exists to cure the ills of the social order that have befallen these poor unfortunate souls; the liberal rarely takes into account the personal responsibility or lack thereof that has created this overwhelming need.

I could expound at great length to further prove my hypothesis, but have not the space or inclination at this time. Based on decades of observation, I think this is a largely undisputed fact. I have recently, however, by monitoring the utter disaster that has been the early days of Obamacare, created a new theory to further explain the genesis of thoughts, opinions and ideologies of our liberal friends: Many seem to stem simply from the inability to merge ideas and strategies with real-world practicality.

Barack Obama is the “messiah” of today’s liberal/socialist movement. He is the great leader (or at least was) the left had been waiting for to take liberalism to a level of which many could only once dream. This smooth-talking hipster would make all who looked upon him finally see that liberalism/socialism was indeed the one true “religion.” There’s only been one slight problem, which we’re finally seeing emerge … practical reality.

Very few liberal ideologies, particularly those of a socialist nature, play well with the realities of a capitalistic society. Whether it’s a bloated Medicaid program or a welfare-food stamp system ripe with fraud and abuse or Obamacare, at some point the haves of capitalism will no longer be able to provide for the have nots of socialism. No matter how badly the liberal mentality wishes this reality to exist, there simply is no way.

With this president, the great spokesman for American socialism, the breakdown of his ideology goes far beyond a fundamental flaw of dollars and cents, however. President Obama, in his efforts to speak on behalf of the new age of liberalism, is failing, along with many liberal ideologues, to see that his escalating efforts at socialism and liberal policy (most notably with Obamacare) simply do not translate into common-sense reality.

Not a more obvious picture could have been painted alluding to this phenomenon as when our esteemed president attempted to reverse the effects of the Obamacare individual mandate just a few weeks ago. Speaking to insurance executives and state insurance directors alike, Obama asked that these individuals massively reverse course and recall the 5-plus million cancellation notices burdening many Americans and his law’s popularity numbers.

Just like that! Years of logistical planning and strategizing on behalf of insurance commissioners and executives, corporations and state governments that produced the cancellation notices were all supposed to be unraveled in less than six weeks surrounding two holidays – POOF, it’s all done! Really?

But this is the mentality. Our president, influenced by the misguided ideology of liberalism/socialism, which only functions in theory, really believed this could happen. He also believes that millions of young healthy Americans, out of “civic duty,” I suppose, are going to flock like moths to a flame to register for expensive, largely unnecessary health care in order to subsidize the elderly. Well, not if reality has anything to say about it. The concept we call reality is and will always be the disconnect between liberal and conservative viewpoints.