Opportunity lost? (AP Photo/Timothy D. Easley)

This story has been updated.

Thursday's unsuccessful Senate vote to start debate on disapproval of the Iran nuclear deal marked the end of a months-long partisan war -- or at least the end of its first stage. While some Republican donors brainstorm ways to make Democrats suffer for backing the deal, they succeeded in building unanimous opposition in their own party. And their biggest coup might have been Sen. Rand Paul (R-Ky.), the closest thing the modern GOP has to a foreign policy dove. Paul had co-signed Sen. Tom Cotton's (R-Ark.) hectoring pre-deal letter to Iran's mullahs, and opposed the deal almost as soon as he was able.

That left some supporters of his father, former Texas Congressman Ron Paul, wondering what might have been. The elder Paul, from a perch at his eponymous think tank, backed the nuclear deal and compared it to detente with the Soviet Union. "The tone has been changed," he told NewsMax in July. "It's to our benefit; it's to the benefit of world peace." The paleoconservative scribes of LewRockwell.com penned column after column praising the deal and President Barack Obama's bucking of "the Israel Lobby." But they could not find an ally in the GOP field.

“What does [Rand] Paul imagine pro-peace voters put at the top of their agenda at this point?” asked Justin Raimondo, the editorial director of the libertarian news site AntiWar.com. “The Iran deal is certainly the most high profile foreign policy issue right now.”

Opposing the deal was, and is, an ultra-minority position for Republican voters. Then again, so is support for Rand Paul. In the last CNN/ORC poll before the Senate vote, a poll that reflected dipping overall support, 16 percent of Republicans – and 21 percent of “conservatives” – favored the deal. A Pew Research poll, which found an even bigger swing against the deal, put the Republican support at 6 percent.

Rand Paul's libertarian critics see a missed opportunity in those numbers. The decline happened in the hothouse of a partisan debate, one in which anti-deal groups like the Foundation for a Secure and Prosperous America lit up TV screens, and which no current elected Republican endorsed an agreement with Iran. Political scientists have found, for years, that polarization happens at the supply end and the demand end. If no one from an opposing party endorses an idea, that idea -- regardless of its origins -- is seen as partisan. The Affordable Care Act was the ultimate example of this, and the Iran deal could find a place in the books. No one can say how the debate would have changed if a high-profile presidential candidate had endorsed the deal.

And Paul was bludgeoned anyway for insufficient hatred of the deal. After he signed the Cotton letter, he told skeptical libertarian audiences that he did so to help the Obama administration "negotiate from a position of strength." Last month, he told The Washington Post that -- if he won the presidency -- he would see whether Iran was actually abiding by the deal before he make any call about tearing it up. Modest answers like those became fodder for a FSPA TV ad, in which a family sits down to dinner and is vaporized by Iran's bomb, because Rand Paul did not "stand up to Iran."

Paul has argued that endorsing the deal would have gained him nothing. "We think that for the people who want less intervention, like I do, that this is not their number one issue," he told the Post last month. "If that’s your number 10 issue, and you have nine above that, I have to compete with everyone on those other nine issues.”

But without the Iran debate -- even as Paul has consistently, pointedly, attacked "hawks" in his party on other aspects of foreign policy -- nothing has inspired liberals or libertarians to sign up with him. Today's Quinnipiac poll from Iowa found Paul winning only 4 percent of "liberal" caucus-goers, well behind candidates who have proposed nothing that really appeals to liberals, such as Carly Fiorina and Ben Carson.

On the busy online forums and radio shows that flourished for Ron Paul's campaigns, the younger Paul's Iran stance has been a source of frustration. The Voices of Liberty podcast debated whether the Iran deal was "the straw that finally broke the camel's back." Mark Edge, the co-host of a New Hampshire-based libertarian radio show, said that discussion of Paul's campaign had fallen, even if he personally understood that Paul needed to "play a game." Paul's position may have gotten him on the right side of most GOP voters, but the liberty movement had gotten kind of used to outsider candidates backing no-hope positions in the hope that minds, eventually, get changed.

"There is no magic point where Rand gets to stop doing it like this," sighed a commenter called Wizard Watson in a long RonPaulForums thread. "That's why I get so frustrated with this. It's like everyone who supports him 'no matter what' is looking forward to some future PSYCHE! moment. It doesn't work like that, folks."

Yet neither the senator or his detractors could view the Iran deal the way Ron Paul viewed the Iraq War. To support the deal was to oppose Israel's prime minister, and the American-Israel Political Action Committee. Plenty of libertarians wanted that -- Raimondo even said that a particularly off-key Paul quote seemed to come straight from the "lobby."

Yet the support for Israel among evangelical voters made any criticism of Israel supremely risky, if not toxic. Paul's elected allies were not breaking from him on the deal. They just wondered if there was a better way to hold President Obama to account.

"This should be a treaty," said Rep. Thomas Massie (R-Ky.), an early Paul endorser. "I voted against the Corker deal for that reason. I want to take the path that is least likely to lead to war, and one thing I found compelling was the exchange between Secretary Kerry and Rep. Pete Roskam. Pete told Kerry: You got a better deal by threatening to walk away, so how can you tell us that if we don’t walk away we’ll get a better deal? It was an interesting flaw in Kerry’s logic."

On Friday, Massie voted 'present' on a bill to approve the Iran deal. On Thursday, Paul voted to start debate on a resolution of disapproval.