Gary Andersen raises his arms questioning the officials after the final play of the game. Credit: Rick Wood

SHARE YouTube Video Loading... Badgers Chat Monday, Sept. 16

UW FOOTBALL

Jeff Potrykus, beat writer

Read Transcript

By of the

Tempe, Ariz. — Gary Andersen didn’t lose his composure after his first loss at Wisconsin, a loss that was as controversial as it was stunning.

Yet as Andersen explained to reporters how he didn’t receive a satisfactory explanation why the final 15 seconds ticked off the clock after quarterback Joel Stave knelt down at the Arizona State 15 to center the ball for a field-goal attempt, it was obvious he was steaming.

“I don’t have a lot to say,” Andersen said after UW suffered a 32-30 loss when time expired after Stave lost 2 yards on the play.

The plan, according to Andersen and the players, was for UW to line up and spike the ball, a sequence the team works on every Friday in practice. But Stave bounced up too quickly, by his admission, and set the ball down on the ground.

Although whistles were audible immediately after Stave set down the ball, Arizona State linebacker Anthony Jones jumped on the ball with 13 seconds left. Jones stayed on the ball until only four seconds remained on the clock.

The umpire spotted the ball with three seconds but didn’t allow UW to line up over the ball until one second remaining.

By the time center Dallas Lewallen was able to snap the ball time had expired and the Sun Devils had prevailed.

“It was a shame it went down the way it went down at the end,” Andersen said, “and that’s really all I want to say about it. It is a shame it went down that way.

“We (knee) it with 15 seconds left and never even got a chance to snap it again. I don’t know how that happens.”

Neither did Stave, who completed 4 of 6 passes for 70 yards on the drive to move UW from its 17 to the Sun Devils' 13.

“I took a knee and set it down," said Stave, who asked the referee if the play could be reviewed. "At the end I can’t spot it myself I guess. I’ve got to make sure I’m hanging onto the ball and giving it to the ref...

“It is a tough situation. I’m not really sure what happened. I’ve got to make sure I watch the film on that to make sure we’re all learning from it.

“Because we executed the drive like we wanted to. We’ve got to make sure everything is precise.”

Andersen explained Stave attempted to run the play just as UW does each week in practice.

“Again, there’s 18 seconds left," Andersen said. "The way we teach the kids to do it is center the football. His cleats slipped a little bit but he obviously centered the ball.

“He put it there so the officials could get on the football and get us set so we have an opportunity to spike it.

"We practice that exact same scenario, with that time on the clock. And we would be worried that now we would have a kickoff coming our way.”

Why didn't UW attempt a 30-yard field goal after Stave's 6-yard completion to Abbrederis with 18 seconds left?

“We wanted to center it because it was the best place for Frenchie to kick the ball,” Andersen said. “We felt like we had plenty of time.

“It wasn’t like it was a stressful situation to get the ball centered and spike it.

“No way that is a stressful play with 18 seconds left on the clock.”

Andersen was asked if he discussed the final sequence with the officials before they left the field.

“I got no answer,” he said.

Andersen's coaching career begain in 1988, when he was the assistant head coach and offensive coordinator at Southeastern Louisiana. He was asked if he had ever witnessed such an ending.

“I’ve never been part of one,” Andersen said.

Senior safety Dezmen Southward was asked the same question.

“Not in my life,” he said. “Not in my life.”

Tight end Jacob Pedersen reiterated the plan was to center the ball for a spike and field-goal attempt. However, he still had no idea how the final seconds ticked away.

“I don’t know,” Pedersen said. “That’s the answer I have for you guys. I don’t know what happened.”

Andersen was asked if he planned to pursue the matter in an attempt to get a clear explanation.

“I don’t know where it goes,” he said. “We’ll just have to see. I’d like to get an explanation. I wish I could have got one out there but I didn’t.

“It is just gut-wrenching when... you have to learn in these situations when they take something so special away from kids.

“Or at least an opportunity. Maybe we make the kick, maybe we don’t.”

Andersen won’t ever know what might have happened.