Scott McFadden, clinical director; Ray Moore, executive director; and Jackie Hanssen, business manager, stand in front of the House of Hope at Rocky Mountain Behavioral Health at 3239 Independence Road. (Carie Canterbury / Daily Record)

Helping, Overcoming, Planning and Empowering.

Hope is offered to those who walk through the door at Rocky Mountain Behavioral Health. The nonprofit agency's new HOPE program is a day treatment program that kicked off this summer, and aims to help people of all ages with substance abuse. The program runs Monday through Friday, a minimum of four hours a day.

"It entails not only treatment for the individual, but we offer family services because it impacts the family," said Ray Moore, executive director. "We bring the family in — children that have been impacted by substance abuse and that lifestyle."

Scott McFadden, clinical director, said the program a "miracle-working" program for individuals like a drug-addicted single mother in the process of losing custody of her children. She may be court appointed to go to the House of Hope for treatment and counseling.

"We have seen this time and time again where that's the starting place," he said. "It's really a miracle-working program where things get totally turned around, she gets her kids back, gets her life on track — and that just starts with a little bit of hope."

That process is what keeps Moore and his staff coming back day after day.

Advertisement

"There is a whole room full of people crying because it's not a happy day for them," McFadden said. "I can't get myself to feel that way because I just know that this is ultimately a good thing because she is being stopped and given an opportunity to get turned around."

Because each person is different, staff at RMBH builds a treatment plan around the individual's needs, Moore said.

"We have a ton of different programs," Moore said. "The push of the present is trauma-informed care. Just about everybody that comes in here has some kind of trauma that drives their addiction.

He said many times, drug use is secondary, not primary.

"We can treat the addiction, but after we're done, and they go out and we haven't dealt with the trauma, it's just another cycle," Moore said. The bottom line is you've got to treat the whole person."

Business Manager Jackie Hanssen said she is not a clinical provider, but she still gets the privilege of seeing the success stories walk through the door. Many people initially walk in the office, coming just across the street from court where they may have just been sentenced for any number of things.

"They come in here and we're the first people they see after that and they are very angry, very angry," she said. "You get to watch the whole transition of their life and you see them when they finish and they are so happy."

What's even better, Moore said, is when they stop by a year later to show their success.

"It does a heart good," Hanssen said. "That's why we are all here."

The organization has served the community since 1976, and has been at its current location at 3239 Independence Road since 2007. RMBH partners with probation, the Department of Human Services, the school districts, healthcare systems and other entities.

They offer counseling for individuals, groups settings and as families, as well as alcohol and drug testing.

RMBH accepts Medicaid and other insurances. For more information, visit http://rmbh.org/" title="rmbh.org">http://rmbh.org or call 275-7650.