Sioux Falls, SD

A Sunday watching football is a normal activity for any sports fan. Watching the game for some people is just not enough. They choose to dive into the world of fantasy sports.

"Instead of just having one team you root for, now you've got a vast majority. You've got players from different teams and it makes you root for other teams more than just your own," Alan Bentson said.

From coast to coast and right here in KELOLAND, about 35 million people take part in fantasy sports, and the most popular one of them all is fantasy football.

"When I got into fantasy football, I was just so turned off for five or six years because I would finish last, the first three or four years I did it I was literally last every year," ESPN 99.1's Jeff Thurn said.

That is a sentiment that many other fantasy football players share. It is an activity that is as much based on skill as it is luck. For Bentson, he has been playing fantasy football for nearly 15 years.

"One of the first teams I had, I had Brett Favre, and that worked out pretty well for me," Bentson said.

You can never guarantee an outcome, no matter how good your team could look on paper. For people like Travis Kuemper, you try to get an upper hand any way you can.

"Watching ESPN and you can buy the fantasy book and it kind of tells you who is your best receivers and running backs and quarterbacks," Kuemper said.

It is easy to go from the highs of victory to the pits of heartbreak.

"This last week was the first time I probably had a heartbreaker. I lost 91.52 to 91.56, so a .04 loss somehow," Thurn said.

Yet, just like any other long-time fantasy football player, they know exactly which player to look at when they lose.

"Kenny Britt at .9 points! Yes, Kenny Britt. I added him and sat somebody else," Thurn said.

It is a feeling of anguish some fantasy players go through the day after a loss. People often go to Twitter to complain to the player in question, but Jeff Thurn knows Kenny Britt personally and sent him a message directly.

"I sent him a text after the game and said ' You will be buying me dinner next time we see each other because I can't continue to lose by .04 because you can't catch a pass.' He responded with a 'haha' but I don't know how 'haha' it was," Thurn said.

It may seem like all fun and games on the surface, but fantasy football is a blooming business.

"It's huge. Not a whole lot of people don't do it anymore," Kuemper said.

The Fantasy Sports Trade Association says, on average, a person spends $111 on fantasy football fees, equating to a business worth over $3 billion.

"Sometimes you can spend up to a couple hundred dollars, that's the most you'll spend. I've won several thousand before, too," Bentson said.

It is a big reason why the world of fantasy football is now so large.

"Money. Clearly, it's all about the bottom line, especially when folks like Yahoo! and ESPN saw the interest initially, and they had all these free games right away to get all these people enticed," Thurn said.

In Thurn's eyes, that strategy has worked to perfection.

What is next for fantasy football, and how does it evolve from a billion-dollar business?

Add more revenue to it by involving the league at the focus of the game.

"I think, eventually, the NFL will somehow get into the game of trying to figure out a way to make more money off of fantasy football, because they are always innovative when it's talking about creating green. They print money in the league basement office, so I'd imagine they'll find a way to make more money off fantasy football," Thurn said.

Whatever comes next, the 35 million fans of the game will be ready to add to the frenzy.

While there are some free fantasy football leagues out there, almost half of players pay for their league. The average player also spends just shy of ten hours a week on fantasy football related activities.