Florida’s decision not to expand Medicaid means Palm Beach County taxpayers will pay an extra $12 million to cover “working wounded” people who can’t afford insurance but aren’t poor enough to qualify for existing state and federal aid, officials said at a news conference this morning.

“The failure to close the Medicaid gap is dangerous to Floridians’ health and harmful to Florida’s economy,” said U.S. Rep. Lois Frankel, D-West Palm Beach. “The gap has created a new category of citizens. I call them the working wounded – these are low-income people, many who are working full time in important jobs to our society but we pay them small wages and they’re now left in a coverage gap.”

Frankel also touted a recent White House study that says Florida will lose 63,800 jobs by not expanding Medicaid.

“Let’s get on board here, Florida, and let’s save lives and let’s pump up this economy,” Frankel said.

The Palm Beach County Health Care District, which uses local property taxes to provide coverage to low-income people who don’t qualify for Medicaid, expects enrollment in its Coordinated Care program to increase from around 12,000 a year ago to about 18,000 in late 2015, a spokeswoman said. That will add about $12 million to the district’s overall $269.5 million budget, Chairwoman Carol Roberts said.

“The local taxpayer has already paid taxes to fund the Affordable Care Act and will wind up paying twice for these services,” said Roberts, a former Democratic county commissioner who ran unsuccessfully for Congress in 2002.

The Affordable Care Act gave states the option to expand Medicaid eligibility by raising the income level to qualify for the program. The federal government agreed to pay 100 percent of the added costs from 2014 to 2017, then pay at least 90 percent of the expansion costs after 2017.

Florida, in position to get $51 billion in federal money over the next decade, is one of 24 states to reject the Medicaid expansion. Gov. Rick Scott opposed it initially, then announced his support in 2013, but the GOP-controlled legislature did not approve it largely because of opposition by House Speaker Will Weatherford, R-Wesley Chapel.

Weatherford and other Republicans argued the federal government could not be trusted to keep its promise, potentially leaving Florida taxpayers on the hook for more costs than the advertised $3.5 billion over 10 years.

Democrats, including leading governor candidate Charlie Crist, have accused Scott of not pushing aggressively enough for the Medicaid expansion after he announced his support.