We need more games to cheer conservatives in these trying times. Let's play one now. The name of the game is "How many examples of Bernie Sanders hypocrisy can you find in four sentences?"

On the stump, Mr. Sanders pledges to take direct aim at the wealthy, diminish their power, expose their tax havens and break up the largest financial institutions in the country. He tells working-class Americans that he would fight for higher wages, guaranteed health care, family and medical leave and paid vacations. “This grotesque level of [income] inequality is immoral.... It is unsustainable, and it is not what the United States of America is supposed to be about,” Mr. Sanders said in Madison.

1) Diminish the power of the wealthy. The wealthy can't arrest anyone or confiscate anyone's money. Who is the real powerful entity that Bernie isn't talking about? (A hint: he works for them.)

2) Expose their tax havens. Companies don't repatriate income from other countries because of high corporate tax rates and double-taxation. They are havens only because American tax policies are so punitive.

3) Break up the largest financial institutions. Is Bernie referring to the Federal Reserve? Because that is the largest and most powerful one there is.

4) Bernie will work for higher wages – presumably higher mimimum wages, which means that fewer people will have jobs, and the costs of everything produced will become more expensive, impoverishing everyone else.

5) Bernie will fight for guaranteed health care. There is guaranteed health care in Cuba and North Korea as well, but that doesn't mean anyone gets treatment. Why aren't Bernie and his staff on Obamacare plans, by the way?

6) Family leave and medical leave laws. Will Bernie be pushing to apply these to the general population, or specifically to his staffers on Capitol Hill?

7) Bernie finds income inequality immoral – the idea that one person with greater ability and who works harder makes more money than another person who doesn't. In a perfectly moral society, we will all make the same amount of money no matter how hard we work and no matter what we do. Now, isn't that moral?

8) Bernie says income inequality is unsustainable, but the economy is sustainable because people with money invest in businesses that keep the economy going. How else does the economy keep going, if not by capital investment from the wealthy? Eliminate them, and then the economy becomes unsustainable.

9) Where did it say in the Constitution that everyone should have the same income? Are you sure Bernie is reading the right constitution?

Well, that's nine examples of blatant hypocracy in four sentences – a new record, even for Bernie.

By the way, thanks to the Wall Street Journal for this fawning piece of journalism. Hard left, corporatists...they are so hard to tell apart anymore.