Learn how to save 20% to 50% on your dental with Dental Solutions. Enter to win a new Nexus tablet. (Photo: Business Wire)

Learn how to save 20% to 50% on your dental with Dental Solutions. Enter to win a new Nexus tablet. (Photo: Business Wire)

SOUTHFIELD, Mich.--(BUSINESS WIRE)--Today, Dental Solutions, one of the most affordable discount dental cards in the country, launched its ‘Win a Tablet’ Facebook campaign and educational video to help Americans save on dental care. The campaign is designed to encourage and educate new customers to save 20% to 50% on most of their personal and families’ dental services.

About Dental Solutions

DenteMax, one of the largest leasable dental networks in the United States with more than 29 years of experience, designed Dental Solutions with the understanding that dental services can be expensive, and paying for services without a discount card can cost even more. At the same time, DenteMax dentists recognize this dilemma and in most cases would rather provide you dental services at a discount than lose you as a patient. Dental Solutions is designed to connect you with these dentists.

Dental Solutions includes you and everyone in your home for one low monthly cost of $9.95 a month. It also features:

Save 20% to 50% on most dental services

One of the largest dental networks in country, so finding a dentist near you is easy

Qualified credentialed dentists

Savings on all the most popular procedures including: check-ups, cleanings, fillings, root canals and more

Orthodontics, Teeth Whiting, Cosmetic, Oral Surgery and Children's Specialists included

No red tape or pre-qualifiers

Additional vision, hearing, prescription drugs, chiropractic and LASIK discounts for only $3 more per month

Watch the Video - Learn How to Save, Enter to Win a Nexus Tablet!

The video explains the three easy steps to sign-up for dental solutions

1. Join Dental Solutions at edentalsolutions.com

2. Find a dentist near you with our ‘Dentist Finder’

3. Present your card at your appointment

To see the video on Facebook go to www.facebook.com/DentalDiscountCard. While on the page make sure to ‘Like Us’ and enter to win a new Nexus Tablet.

DISCLOSURE

THIS PLAN IS NOT INSURANCE and is not intended to replace health insurance. This plan does not meet the minimum creditable coverage requirements under M.G.L. c.111M and 956 CMR 5.00. This plan is not a Qualified Health Plan under the Affordable Care Act. This is not a Medicare prescription drug plan. The range of discounts will vary depending on the type of provider and service. The plan does not pay providers directly. Plan members must pay for all services but will receive a discount from participating providers. The list of participating providers is on this website. A written list of participating providers is available upon request. You may cancel within the first 30 days after receipt of membership materials and receive a full refund, less a nominal processing fee (nominal fee for MD residents is $5, AR and TN residents will be refunded processing fee). Discount Medical Plan Organization and administrator: Careington International Corporation, 7400 Gaylord Parkway, Frisco, TX 75034; phone 800-441-0380.

This plan is not available in Vermont or Washington.

About DenteMax

DenteMax is one of the largest leasable dental networks in the United States. It is part of the Healthcare Service Corporation (HCSC) family of companies, the largest customer-owned health insurer in the United States and fourth largest overall, operating through its Blue Cross and Blue Shield® Plans in Illinois, Montana, New Mexico, Oklahoma and Texas.