With high-deductible health plans becoming more common, a new wave of companies are using smartphone technology to offer health care on demand in the form of home doctor visits or video or phone consultations for a set fee. (Photo: Mark Bowden, Getty Images/iStockphoto)

Disruptive business models have long been the lore of business schools, and the springboard of legendary entrepreneurs. Steve Jobs' creation of iTunes made music portable and songs a la carte, significantly disrupting Music City's record industry, which was built to sell albums. In the current business environment, Uber is the newest example of a disruptive business model. Utilizing Uber, riders order cars with their smartphones, know the driver and vehicle before it approaches, and pay automatically without exchanging cash. Meanwhile, traditional taxi companies, built off a regulated model, are scrambling to find out what has hit them.

The implementation of the Affordable Care Act has launched a major transformation of health care, including a wave of consumerization. As the health care transformation continues, many are asking the question, "Is health care the next target for Uberization?"

As it turns out, an Uber co-founder, Oscar Salazar, has also founded "Pager," a New York-based start-up that makes physician house calls in short order and for a flat fee. A first-time urgent care visit is $50 and $200 for each visit thereafter. A physical is $100 and a phone consultation is $25. Pager is not alone. Others working in the same space include Atlanta-based "MedZed," which offers home visits by nurses for $150 and real time video communication with physicians. "RetraceHealth" in Minneapolis arranges video nurse practitioner consults for $50, but also offers a $50 per month membership for unlimited visits. Meanwhile, "Heal" in California commits to "Get a doctor to your sofa in under an hour" for $99, with a medical assistant riding sidesaddle for driving and parking. Finally, "True North" in Denver is offering on-site medical care to 911 callers as an alternative to the emergency room for $200-$300 per visit.

What do all of these new health care companies have in common? Immediate access, transparent pricing and smartphone accessibility. To simplify the business model, the start-ups are built off a cash (electronic cash) model. Consumers are free to file their insurance claims afterward, but any hassle with the insurance company becomes the job of the consumer, not the provider.

With more and more health insurance policies structured around high deductibles, it is fair to say that health care is a "target rich environment" for enhanced consumerism. Physician and nurse practitioner visits are the examples noted above, but that space is not reserved for start-ups. CVS, Walgreens and Walmart are already aggressively pursuing self-pay health visits, and CVS is now the largest primary care provider in the nation with 25 million annual visits. Additionally, there are many other health care experiences that may involve significant self-pay, including optometrics, dental care, physical therapy and cosmetic procedures.

Where is Nashville in this movement? The entrepreneur community in Nashville is especially robust and health care savvy. Later this month, Health:Further will host a conference of over 400 creative entrepreneurs. Stay tuned for some innovative ideas and energetic enablers.

As Nashville continues to flex its health care entrepreneurial muscles, let's hope a future Uber moment for health care has its origins in Middle Tennessee.

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/1LjiKEC