Not enrolling in Obamacare will hit home at tax time

The linchpin of the federal health care overhaul is a tax penalty for going without insurance. Here's what you should know.

But in most cases that won't be possible, Silnes tells them. If consumers miss their chance to enroll this time around, the next chance is mid-November, with a few exceptions.

Some reply that they'll swallow the penalty — and maybe get coverage later this year.

Health care navigator Barb Silnes has been warning consumers that they will pay a tax penalty if they don't sign up for insurance very soon.

Navigators Michilla Blaise, left, and Vivian Ezeji, center, assist Mary Cross with signing up for health care coverage that complies with the Affordable Care Act, at Heartland Health Center in Chicago. (Phil Velasquez, Chicago Tribune)

"That's when I get their attention," said Silnes, who works out of the Jane Addams Resource Corp. in Chicago's Ravenswood neighborhood.

The Obama administration has long said that consumers must enroll in a health insurance plan by March 31 or face financial consequences. On Tuesday evening, the Washington Post reported that federal officials had granted applicants a little more breathing room. People who have begun to apply for coverage on the HealthCare.gov federal marketplace site, but do not finish in time, will have until about mid-April to ask for an extension.

But the basic equation doesn't change: Decisions made now on health insurance have an impact that stretches to tax time 2015.

The mandate that most people obtain insurance or pay a penalty is the linchpin of the federal health care overhaul. Without it, younger, healthier people might not enroll in high enough numbers to compensate for those who have preexisting conditions, who often cost the system more.

The Supreme Court focused on the tax penalty in its decision upholding the Affordable Care Act in 2012, ruling that while the federal government does not have the constitutional power to require people to buy insurance, it can levy a related tax.

For consumers, the flip side of the tax penalties is the law's tax benefits. To make insurance more affordable, the law qualifies most low- to moderate-income people for government credits that can be used to lower the cost of monthly premiums of plans obtained through the federal or state insurance marketplaces.

The basic penalty for going without insurance is $95 or 1 percent of modified adjusted household income, whichever is higher. But many complicating factors can increase the burden.

"The $95 thing is a myth for most folks," said Brian Haile, senior vice president for health policy with Jackson Hewitt Tax Service, which has made it a point of business strategy to help its customers avoid the law's tax penalties. He said most uninsured people will pay much more.

"If you choose not to get insurance, we respect that choice, but what we absolutely want to ensure is that you're not surprised," Haile said.

The mandate to buy insurance remains politically controversial. Some Republican members of Congress have argued that it has too many exceptions to be effective, including 14 hardship exemptions such as having a recent death in the family, being a victim of domestic abuse, being unable to pay medical expenses in the past 24 months or having a policy canceled and considering the available options unaffordable.