Wisconsin Gov. Scott Walker took aim Thursday at potential 2016 presidential rival Hillary Rodham Clinton with a web video that paints the Democratic front-runner as a pioneer of Obamacare’s flawed promises.

Mr. Walker, part of a crowded GOP field, released a plan this week to repeal and replace President Obama’s signature law with a system that gets rid of insurance mandates and doles out of tax credits based on age instead of income, overhauls Medicare and pursues tort reform so that doctors do not perform unnecessary tests.

Over a somber piano, Mr. Walker’s new campaign video depicts Mrs. Clinton in 2007 seemingly making the same promise that caused the White House heartburn in fall 2013, when millions of Americans received cancellation plans for that did not comply with the Affordable Care Act’s coverage requirements.

“You can keep the doctors you know and trust, you keep the insurance you have if you like it,” Mrs. Clinton says in the clip.

The video pivots to Mr. Walker touting his plan to scrap Obamacare, standing on a stage in Minnesota to a soundtrack of triumphant strings.

“Like I did in my state, I’m going to tell you, I’m willing to stand up against anyone, including members of my own party, to get the job done,” Mr. Walker says. A lot of candidates talk about repealing Obamacare, we’ve actually got a plan to make sure Congress acts because they’re going to have to live under the same rules as everyone else in America.”

Mr. Walker has boasted that he is one of few GOP candidates to propose concrete ways to replace the health care law as president, although one of his party rivals, Louisiana Gov. Bobby Jindal, blasted the plan as “Obamacare lite” and challenged Mr. Walker to a health care debate in Iowa.

For her part, Mrs. Clinton has defended Obamacare on the campaign trail, although she has called for certain fixes to address high deductibles and a “glitch” that determines the affordability of an employer’s plan based on an individual instead of the cost of insuring a family, locking some people out of subsidies on the Obamacare marketplace.