Topics: abortion rights, antiabortion, Justice Anthony Kennedy, Supreme Court, Life News

2015 was a discouraging year for the abortion rights movement. In the past 12 months, an Indiana woman was convicted for feticide and sentenced to 20 years in prison, restrictive antiabortion laws were passed in a number of state legislatures, the government almost shut down over funding Planned Parenthood, and the violent rhetoric employed by and tolerated within the pro-life movement materialized in the form of the murders in Colorado Springs.

Here’s what we already know about the year ahead. In 2016, the U.S. Supreme Court will decide Whole Women’s Health v. Cole, a case challenging 2013’s Texas House Bill 2 (HB2), which places far-reaching restrictions on abortion providers and clinics for the purpose of shutting them down. If the Supreme Court and, specifically, Justice Anthony Kennedy, who has been known to green-light abortion restrictions and will likely be the deciding vote, finds that forcing 30 or more clinics to close does not place undue burden on Texan women (an unbelievable assertion, considering a recent report estimated that between 100,000 and 240,000 Texan women have self-induced home abortions since the clinic closures began), we could see an acceleration in the state-by-state dissolution of abortion access – a basic constitutional right.

We also know that legislators calling themselves pro-life are likely to continue to introduce many new restrictions on abortion at state and federal levels, all while continuing to block proposals that address how unchecked access to guns kills American children every day. And, of course, we know that in November voters will select a new president who will have the power to nominate new justices to the Supreme Court.

The first reaction to the opposition and violence of 2015 and the possibilities for 2016 can be fear; fear that 2016 will be the year antiabortion advocates finally get their wish to turn back the clock to the decades before Roe, which celebrates its 43rd anniversary in January. This is no sunny nostalgia. Fifty years ago, almost 200 women died each year after having unsafe, illegal abortions; a number that plummeted after the legalization of abortion. The “pro-life” label is therefore hypocrisy at its finest: If these restrictions are written into law, our country will be one step closer to a time when women died senseless, preventable deaths.

But a second possible reaction, a more productive one, is action. We cannot accept violence against women in the form of deadly attacks on abortion facilities. We cannot accept women being forced to resort to unsafe abortions because of abortion funding restrictions, unrealistic burdens placed on abortion patients and providers, and clinic shutdown laws. We cannot accept abortion stigma that segregates abortion from other forms of basic healthcare that is a human right.