Former Sen. Mark Pryor Mark PryorEx-Sen. Kay Hagan joins lobby firm Top Democrats are no advocates for DC statehood Ex-Sen. Landrieu joins law and lobby firm MORE (D-Ark.) will be joining the K Street ranks at law and lobby firm Venable, a partner at the firm confirmed to The Hill on Friday.

Pryor lost his Senate seat in last year’s elections after a bitter battle with Republican Rep. Tom Cotton Tom CottonDems to GOP: Cancel Memorial Day break GOP senator: Reid's 'ramblings' are 'bitter, vulgar, incoherent' Reid: We're not breaking the budget deal MORE. Immediately after, headhunters began sizing him up for potential private-sector positions.

He will serve as a partner at the firm and may begin as soon as next week. As a former Senator, Pryor is prohibited from lobbying his former colleagues for at least two years. He can, however, give clients strategic legal, policy and advocacy advice – or put his law degree to use.

“I think it’s a terrific hire for Venable. Senators are the American version of legislative royalty and it’s always great to have one as part of your team,” Ivan Adler, a principal at the McCormick Group, told The Hill on Friday.

“He's got an excellent congressional pedigree and will add a lot value to the firm,” the headhunter said.

ADVERTISEMENT

The National Law Journal was first on Friday tothe Pryor hire, citing “three people with knowledge of the lobbying industry.”

The ex-senator also looked into working for Greenberg Traurig, Hogan Lovells and Arent Fox, those sources told the publication.

He spent more than a decade in the Senate, and served on several influential committees including the Senate Appropriations Committee. Pryor also sat on commerce, homeland security and small business-focused panels.

Pryor also has a term as Arkansas attorney general under his belt during the administration of former Gov. Mike Huckabee.

Venable earned nearly $8 million in lobbying fees during 2014, a decline from previous years. However, the firm also handles a large amount of regulatory work – which often does not factor into that lobbying total.

The firm has clients in several sectors, including Marriott, Experian, American Airlines, Amazon.com, Lockheed Martin and tobacco giant Altria Client Services. It also boasts a team of well-connected lobbyists and former lawmakers, including former Reps. Bart Stupak (D-Mich.) and Jim Gerlach Jim GerlachBig names free to lobby in 2016 Ex-Rep. Gerlach ditches K St. in return to campaign world Ex-Sen. Pryor heading to K Street MORE (R-Penn.).

The Hill reported in December that the executive job market could be tough for the large number of defeated lawmakers exiting Capitol Hill following the midterms, but Democrats with experience cutting deals with Republicans -- like Pryor – would be highly prized.

Venable did not return a request from The Hill for an official comment by the time of this posting, and declined to comment for the National Law Journal. The partner who spoke with The Hill is not authorized to speak on the record about the hire, and asked for anonymity.