Buy Photo Freshly printed shirt worn by U.S. Secretary of Labor Thomas E. Perez during discussion of raising the federal minimum wage on Saturday afternoon April 5, 2014. (Photo: Bill Neibergall/The Register)Buy Photo

Iowa’s minimum wage has been stuck for almost eight years at just $7.25 — barely $15,000 for a full-time worker. But Gov. Terry Branstad and Iowa’s largely Republican-controlled legislature have blocked efforts to raise it to a more realistic level. With the state gridlocked, the Johnson County Board of Supervisors did what cities and counties across the US are doing: It voted last month to raise the county’s minimum wage to $10.10 by 2017 — and other counties are likely to follow.

The increase is smart policy for addressing the needs of the county’s workforce — and contrary to suggestions by some opponents — is well within the county’s legislative powers.

In the past year, almost one-fifth of Johnson County residents had an income below the poverty level. More than 80 percent of Johnson County families with incomes below the poverty level have children, and over 4,000 County households receive government-funded food assistance. Nationally, real median wages declined for workers by 4 percent from 2009–2014 despite growth for the economy, as a whole, and low-wage workers were hit hardest. Workers whose real median wages fall in the bottom 20 percent saw the value of those waged drop 5.7 percent.

As the wage crisis deepens for workers, especially in high-cost areas, cities and counties are raising the minimum wage for their residents. Almost 30 cities or counties, including Los Angeles, Seattle, Kansas City, Chicago, and Louisville, have successfully adopted local minimum wage laws in the last four years. Cities and counties are also increasingly calling for a minimum wage of $15 or more.

This nationwide trend is not surprising given state and federal inaction, as well as mounting evidence that raising the minimum wage boosts earnings and employment without hurting businesses. In San Jose, for example, the Wall Street Journal reported that employment gains in the city exceeded gains in the entire state of California.

The recent evidence confirms what economists studying minimum wage increases for 20 years have concluded: Higher city minimum wages have boosted earnings without significant evidence of job losses. One explanation is that the bulk of minimum wage jobs are in fields such as home health care, restaurants, and child care that serve city-based customers.

The Johnson County ordinance marks the first time that a city or county in Iowa has raised the minimum wage, but opponents of the law — like Iowa Labor Commissioner Michael Mauro — have suggested that localities in Iowa may not have the legal power to raise wages. However, careful analysis shows that the Legislature granted Iowa counties broad police powers to address local needs — powers that comfortably include the power to adopt a higher local minimum wage when local conditions so warrant.

The Iowa Supreme Court has made clear that such local authority is broad, and, except where local action is barred by state law, localities may adopt legislation to set standards for their communities. As the Iowa Legislature has not acted to restrict local authority around minimum wages, localities remain free to adopt local minimum wages that are higher than the state-wide wage. Lawmakers and experts in many other states have reached this same conclusion.

The Johnston County’s Board of Supervisors estimates that the minimum wage increase could affect as many as 10,000 workers. Ultimately, Johnson County has every reason (both legal and policy-wise) to stand by its efforts to step in where the state and federal governments have failed to help its poorest residents. A higher minimum wage in the county will bring many workers one important step closer to economic recovery and security.

LAURA HUIZAR is a staff attorney at the National Employment Law Project. Contact: nelp@nelp.org

Read or Share this story: http://dmreg.co/1LpYlMT