A day after it endorsed Hillary Clinton in the Democratic primary, The Boston Globe editorial board gave its blessing to John Kasich for the Republican nomination.

The paper praised the Ohio governor Monday evening for running a “largely positive’’ campaign and being willing to compromise for results.

“New Hampshire Republicans can do their party a critical service on Feb. 9 by voting for an experienced political figure with a record of results, and thus dealing a blow to the divisive, demagogic candidates running on nativism and other political simplicities,’’ the Globe wrote, calling Kasich “a pragmatic, fiscally responsible executive.’’

The Globe’s piece was as much an endorsement of Kasich as it was an un-endorsement of Republican frontrunner Donald Trump, who the paper slammed for his anti-immigrant and anti-Muslim rhetoric.

Advertisement

“His bigotry is toxic — and it requires a resounding electoral defeat,’’ wrote the Globe.

As for Kasich, the paper proclaimed the Ohio governor as the best choice of the candidates in the “sanity bracket,’’ heralding his acceptance of Medicaid under Obamacare, his resistance against voter ID laws, and his work to equip police with body cameras.

It’s the fourth straight election year the Globe has endorsed a John (or Jon) in the Republican primary. In 2012, the paper endorsed Utah Gov. Jon Huntsman for the Republican presidential nomination, and picked Arizona Sen. John McCain in 2000 and 2008.

At around the same time Monday evening, the Boston Heraldendorsed Chris Christie for the Republican nomination. The New Jersey governor — also running in the Republican primary’s “sanity bracket,’’ as the Globe puts it — was also endorsed by New Hampshire’s largest paper, the conservative-leaning Union Leader, in November.

Kasich was also recently endorsed by a pack of New Hampshire papers, including the Nashua Telegraph, Foster’s Daily Democrat, and the Portsmouth Herald. Like Christie, the Ohio governor has been focusing his campaign’s efforts on New Hampshire.

Read the Globe’s full endorsement here.