Ohio Gov. John Kasich talks about Ohio's 2016-2017 operating budget before signing it Tuesday, June 30, 2015, in Columbus, Ohio. 2016 GOP long-shots plan early-state ad blitz

The 2016 ad wars have begun.

Allies of at least four long-shot Republican presidential hopefuls are planning to blitz Iowa and New Hampshire with paid advertisements in the coming week with the hope of cutting through the clutter of a 17-candidate field.

Story Continued Below

The ads are being paid for by super PACs with one thing in common: The candidates they support are in danger of failing to qualify for the first presidential debate, scheduled for Aug. 6. The bet is that the ad buys will lead to a rise in poll numbers in one of the key early states. And that, in turn, is expected to help the candidates break through and generate enough positive news coverage to boost them into the top 10 — the threshold for earning a spot in the first debate. Even if they fall short of the goal, each candidate at least will have invested in a state that is central to his or her candidacy.

The Iowa caucuses are nearly eight months away, but super PACs aligned with Louisiana Gov. Bobby Jindal and former Texas Gov. Rick Perry are going up in the Hawkeye State with significant ad buys over the next few weeks. Opportunity and Freedom PAC, which is backing Perry, on Wednesday purchased at least $142,000 of airtime in Iowa over the next week, ad tracking sources tell POLITICO.

Meanwhile, Jindal’s super PAC, Believe Again, is spending $706,000 on three weeks of television, the Washington Post reported this week.

Ohio Gov. John Kasich has made little secret of his need for a strong finish in New Hampshire — and his PAC, New Day for America, is spending more than $527,000 over the next five days to improve Kasich’s standing there ahead of his campaign roll-out on July 21.

Even former Hewlett-Packard CEO Carly Fiorina’s lightly funded super PAC, CARLY for America, is getting into the act — though on a smaller scale. The Fiorina-linked group has purchased a little over $1,000 in radio ads on New Hampshire AM stations in Keene and Laconia.

These aren’t the first ads of the campaign: Texas Sen. Ted Cruz ran positive spots that highlighted his faith on early-state NBC affiliates over Easter weekend, and the Jindal and Perry super PACs have been on the air in Iowa before. But the surge in 2016 campaign ads over the next week represents a new phase in the campaign — one driven not only by the large field but by the urgency of the first debate.

Four years ago, Minnesotans Tim Pawlenty and Michele Bachmann were advertising in Iowa during the month of July to boost their poll numbers ahead of the Iowa Straw Poll. (Pawlenty’s third-place finish in the straw poll — and his inability to reach double-digits in Iowa surveys — led him to drop out of the race in August.)

But now that the straw poll has been canceled, the first debate represents the first real test of a candidate’s viability.