Chris King, Chairman of RideWise, Donna Allison, Executive Director and Michele Siekerka, President and CEO of NJBIA. (Photo: RideWiseTMA) Story Highlights 64 businesses and 5 municipalities were honored as 2015 New Jersey Smart Workplaces

RideWise is now accepting and reviewing applications from Somerset County worksites



BRIDGEWATER Somerset County business and government leaders gathered at the Raritan Valley Country Club, Sept. 30 for RideWise's ninth annual employer recognition breakfast. In all, 64 businesses and five municipalities were honored as 2015 New Jersey Smart Workplaces for making outstanding transportation benefits and incentives available to employees.



New Jersey Smart Workplaces is a statewide program that recognizes employers who show vision and leadership by providing commuter benefits and alternative transportation options for employees. Recipients earn a bronze, silver, gold, or platinum designation based upon the types and levels of activity provided. This year, 11 new worksites were added to the list and another 8 recipients implemented additional activities to advance to a higher level.

"The breakfast is an opportunity for the agency to honor businesses and municipalities for having the vision and foresight to provide these benefits," said Christopher King, chairman of RideWise. "More and more employers are finding that by providing incentives and services such as ridesharing, shuttles, and van-pooling, they are more accessible and attractive to new talent."

Michele Siekerka, president and CEO of the New Jersey Business and Industry Association, delivered the keynote address which focused on the importance of sustainability and improving New Jersey’s business climate.

RideWise is now accepting and reviewing applications from Somerset County worksites for the 2016 list and can help businesses and municipalities qualify for a bronze, silver, gold or platinum level award. For more information, contact Vicki Becker at 908-704-1011. ext.12, or vicki@ridewise.org.

New Jersey 2015 Smart Workplace Recipients

Platinum Award: AkzoNobel Surface Chemistry; Allergan, Inc.; AON Hewitt; Bridgeway Senior Healthcare; Brother International Corp.;

Citi; Duke Farms Foundation; Ethicon Inc.; Financial Resources Federal Credit Union; Henkel Corporation; Hillsborough Township; Janssen Pharmaceutical Companies; Johnson & Johnson Bridgewater; Johnson & Johnson ITS; Matheny Medical and Education Center; McKesson Corporation; MetLife - Bridgewater; MetLife - Somerset; Pfizer Inc.; Philips Lighting North America; Qualcomm Incorporated; Raritan Valley Community College; Robert Wood Johnson University Hospital Somerset; Sanofi; Somerset County Park Commission; Township of Bridgewater; VA New Jersey Healthcare System; Verizon Communications.

New Jersey Smart Workplaces Gold Award

Anadigics Inc.; Costco Wholesale - Bridgewater; Eli Lilly and Company; Infosys Limited; Ortho Clinical Diagnostics; PVH Corp.;

Reckitt Benckiser; Somerset County; The Olde Mill Inn; The Palace at Somerset Park; Township of Franklin; Verizon Wireless, Bedminster, NJ (NEW); Verizon Wireless, Warren, NJ (NEW).

New Jersey Smart Workplaces Silver Award

ADESA; Affinity Federal Credit Union; Costco Wholesale – North Plainfield; Courtyard Somerset by Marriott; Doubletree by Hilton Somerset; Hamamatsu; Hilton Garden Inn Bridgewater; J. Knipper and Company; JM Sorge, Inc. (NEW); LifeCell; Raritan Americas, Inc.;

SHI International Corp.; Somerset Patriots Baseball Team; Somerville Bicycle Shop; The Spaulding Group; Township of Warren (NEW).

New Jersey Smart Workplaces Bronze Award

Borough of Manville; Bridgewater Marriott (NEW); Fairfield Inn & Suites; Greater Media New Jersey Inc.; Hyatt House Bridgewater (NEW);

MICRO (NEW); Natural Systems Utilities (NEW); Parsons (NEW); Saint-Gobain Performance Plastics Corporation (NEW); Somerset County Recycling; Somerset County Vocational & Technical Schools (NEW); The Oscar and Ella Wilf Center for Senior Living.

Read or Share this story: http://mycj.co/1LihFeS