U.S. Sen. Ted Cruz R-Texas filled the Gateway High School auditorium with cheering western Pennsylvanian supporters of his presidential candidacy during a Saturday morning rally in Monroeville. They heard Cruz criticize his Republican rival Donald Trump as strongly as he attacked Democratic front-runner Hillary Clinton and the the federal government programs Cruz wants to eliminate.

FULL VIDEO: Ted Cruz campaign rally in Monroeville

"If I am elected president, we will repeal every word of Obamacare," Cruz promised as supporters cheered.



VIDEO: Watch Bob Mayo's report



Cruz called for a simple flat tax and tax returns that could fit on a postcard.



"And when we do that, we should abolish the IRS," Cruz said to still more cheers. He also promised to rein in the Environmental Protection Agency and end what he called a "war on coal."



The Republican primary hopeful attacked the Democratic candidates, former Secretary of State Clinton and Vermont Sen. Bernie Sanders.



"A wild-eyed socialist with ideas that are dangerous for America and the world --- and Bernie Sanders," Cruz said.



Cruz targeted fellow Republican Trump for repeated criticism.



"Donald Trump is a Washington insider who has been supporting liberal Democratic politicians for 40 years," said Cruz, who described Trump as a supporter of "political correctness" now. Trump has said he is against a North Carolina law that bans transgender people from using the restroom of the gender that they now identify as their own.



"That grown men should be allowed to use the little girls' restrooms," Cruz said as the crowd booed Trump. "Now that's just nuts."



"I have to give Donald credit. He's betraying us before he got elected," said Cruz. "We don't want to nominate a candidate who hands the general election to Hillary Clinton as a Christmas gift. Donald Trump may be the only person on the face of the planet that Hillary can beat."



In his news conference following the rally, Cruz continued to attack Trump, who he earlier called a phony and a liar who would lose the general election.



"Donald Trump and Hillary Clinton, they're flip sides of the same coin," Cruz said. Asked if Trump should leave the Republican Party in the event Cruz wins the nomination, Cruz did not answer, instead immediately restating, "Donald Trump and Hillary Clinton are flip sides of the same coin."



Cruz dismissed the third Republican presidential primary candidate, Ohio Gov. John Kasich, as a spoiler and said Trump can't win in the fall, but he, Cruz, can.



"We will win the general election and beat Hillary Clinton and turn this country around," Cruz said as he closed his speech to supporters.



Pennsylvania's primary election is Tuesday.

#Cruz says will repeal Obamacare & abolish IRS. Says Trump would hand election to Clinton as gift. Live on #WTAE pic.twitter.com/HUzlJV3EOW — Bob Mayo (@BMayo_WTAE) April 23, 2016

New polls: Trump & Clinton lead in Pennsylvania

Related: Cruz wins citizenship case in Supreme Court; will stay on Pennsylvania ballot