DETROIT, Nov. 24, 2014 /PRNewswire/ -- Meridian Choice added family plan options to the 2015 Federal Health Insurance Marketplace in southwest Michigan after exclusively offering individual plans in 2014.

Meridian Choice, a Marketplace product of Meridian Health Plan featuring the Bronson Healthcare network, provided a variety of individual plans in the Catastrophic, Bronze, Silver and Gold categories during the inaugural year of the Marketplace.

"We took a measured approach as we entered this new marketplace; wanting to learn the commercial industry and all elements of the Affordable Care Act," said Sean Kendall, Vice President of Business Development for Meridian Health Plan. "This past year was a great learning experience and we were pleased to create a plan connected to Bronson, a health system we've had a long-standing relationship with. We are now prepared to expand our Meridian Choice offerings to include family plans for 2015 and are looking forward to providing more options along with access to high quality care for our members."

Meridian Choice is an affordable option for anyone in the Marketplace looking for health insurance. While other plans in Kalamazoo, Van Buren and Calhoun counties are increasing costs for members in 2015, Meridian Choice is decreasing rates by nearly 14 percent.

"Our decreased rates make us a strong competitor in the marketplace," Kendall said. "With four levels of coverage including individual and family plan offerings at each, and our reduced rates, we are certain consumers in southwest Michigan will find a Meridian Choice plan that meets all of their healthcare needs."

Meridian Choice is a Qualified Health Plan (QHP) under the Affordable Care Act (ACA). All members who join the plan receive healthcare services from Bronson providers while experiencing the customer-centered, high-quality services offered by Meridian Health Plan.

With 7,700 employees, more than 1,000 physicians and nearly 800 licensed beds, Bronson Healthcare is the largest employer and leading healthcare system in southwest Michigan. Bronson offers a full range of services from primary care to critical care across more than 60 locations in Calhoun, Kalamazoo and Van Buren counties. Key member organizations include: Bronson Methodist Hospital, Bronson Battle Creek Hospital, Bronson LakeView Hospital, Bronson Vicksburg Outpatient Center, Bronson Commons, Bronson Home Health Care, Bronson Medical Group, Bronson HealthCare Midwest, Bronson Advanced Radiology Services, Bronson Lifestyle Improvement & Research Center and the Bronson Athletic Club.

Open enrollment for Marketplace insurance plans began Nov. 15, 2014 and ends Feb. 15, 2015. You must sign up for insurance by Dec.15 for coverage effective Jan. 1, 2015. For more information on Meridian Choice, visit www.mhplan.com/meridianchoice or call 855-537-9746. For more information on the Marketplace or to sign up for health insurance, visit www.healthcare.gov.

Meridian Health Plan is a family owned and operated health plan with extensive experience in its subsidiary operations in Michigan, Illinois and Iowa. Meridian's affiliates include Medicaid and Medicare health and prescription drug plans, a commercial plan available through the Health Insurance Marketplace and MeridianRx, a Pharmacy Benefit Management company. Meridian Health Plan currently serves more than 500,000 members. For more information, visit www.mhplan.com.

SOURCE Meridian Health Plan