The Joint Powers Board reviewed the article, “Eleven Signs a City Will Succeed” published in the March 2016 issue of The Atlantic magazine. The article is a summation of James and Deb Fallow’s 54,000-mile journey around the United States in a single engine plane.

1. Divisive national politics seem a distant concern. The article authors traveled the country during the midterm elections of 2014 when the Supreme Court ruled on same sex marriage and Obamacare, but those issues did not come up in discussion. “The focus is on successful towns and not on national division, but on practical problems that a community could address.”

2. You can pick out the local patriots. “Who makes this town go” was the questioned asked and what mattered in the towns was there was an answer where that person be a mayor, city council member, a historian, an artist, a civic activist a business titan or real estate developer.

3. Public and private partnerships are real. “Through the years I had assumed this term was just another slogan or a euphemism for sweetheart deals between big government and big business, but in successful town, people can point to something specific and say this is what a partnership means,” according to the article. The more specifically a community can explain what their public-private partnership mean, the better the city will be.

4 People know the civic story. America has a story that everyone understands and successful cities have their own story, too. “Their value is giving citizens a sense of how today’s efforts are connected to what happened yesterday and what they hope for tomorrow.

5. They have a downtown. This may be the quickest single marker of the condition of a town. The classic Main Street-style structures built from the late 1800's through World War 11 are the best downtown areas. Most cities we visited were pouring attention, resources and creativity into their downtown.

6. They are near a research university. Research universities “In the short term, they lift the economy by bringing in student population, and over the long-term they transform a town through the researchers and professors they attract.” Research universities have become powerful start-up incubators.

7. They have and care about a community college. Every world-historical trend is pushing the United States toward a less equal, more polarized existence with labor replacing technology, globalized trade and self-segregated, residential housing patterns. “Community colleges are the exception, potentially offering a connection to high-wage technical jobs for people who might otherwise be left with no job or one at minimum wage.” The more often a town talked about their community college, the better the feeling was about the town’s direction.

8. They have unusual schools. The traveling authors asked what the most distinctive school was to visit and if the four or five answers came quickly to mind, that was a good sign. Some schools were private, career, technical or parochial, but the common theme was intensity of experimentation.

9. They make themselves open. “Politicians, educators, business people, students and retirees frequently stressed the ways their communities were trying to attract and include new people,” the article contends.

10. The town has big plans. The article contends that “when a mayor or city council member shows me a map of how new downtown residences will look when completed or where the new greenway will go, I think: I’d like to come back. Cities still make plans because they can do things.”

11. The town has craft breweries. A city on the way back will have one or more craft breweries, and probably some small distilleries, too. A town that has craft breweries also has a certain kind of entrepreneur and a critical mass of mainly young customers.