Buy Photo Republican Dr. Ben Carson greets well wishers Tuesday after a brief stop at the His Hands Free Clinic in Cedar Rapids. (Photo: Michael Zamora/The Register)Buy Photo

In his first trip to Iowa as an official presidential candidate, Republican Ben Carson waded into the shark-infested ethanol issue up to his neck and then did a leisurely lap around the climate change pool.

Asked about the Renewable Fuel Standard during a Des Moines stop, Carson joked: "What is that?"

"I don't particularly like the idea of government subsidies for anything because it interferes with the natural free market," he said, sounding exactly like most of the GOP field.

MORE: 6 things to know about Ben Carson

Then he took a sharp turn away from the pack. "Therefore, I would probably be in favor of taking that $4 billion a year we spend on oil subsidies and using that in new fueling stations" for 30 percent ethanol blends. He said the result would be access to fuel that is 50 to 80 cents a gallon cheaper than regular gasoline and better for the environment without an ongoing cost for taxpayers.

It appears Carson is looking beyond the immediate issue of the Renewable Fuel Standard, which has been in danger of being watered down by the Obama administration's Environmental Protection Agency. Instead, he's trying to address the problem of market access for ethanol more directly.

The federal government used to provide subsidies for installation of blender pumps for 15 percent ethanol, or E-15, but that money was carved out of the 2014 farm bill.

Carson's approach is fresh but likely would not please those who want to get rid of all subsidies rather than funneling money from the oil industry into renewable fuels. It also won't put Carson in line for campaign donations from big-oil interests. But it doesn't necessarily delight ethanol interests that want to preserve the Renewable Fuel Standard.

ON THE BUS: An insider's look at campaigning with Ben Carson

"You've correctly diagnosed the problem, but there might be an alternative remedy," Monte Shaw, executive director of the Iowa Renewable Fuel Association, said. He said he appreciates that Carson acknowledges the billions going to oil subsidies, but says Carson may be unrealistic in thinking he'll be able to pry that money away from powerful petroleum interests who have held on to subsidies for over 100 years.

"We already have a course of treatment, called the Renewable Fuel Standard," that will work, Shaw said.

Carson, who formally launched his presidential campaign Monday in Detroit, spoke to about 70 Republicans at the Bull Moose Club meeting in Des Moines. He wasn't asked about climate change, but volunteered a position:

"Am I a climate change advocate? I'll tell you what I think about climate change. The temperature's either going up or down at any point in time, so it really is not a big deal. What is a big deal is that the environment is under our control. We do have a responsibility to pass it on to those behind us in at least as good a condition as we found it, hopefully an improved condition."

MORE: Presidential candidate Ben Carson stops at Iowa Capitol

Again, Carson is just a bit apart from most of the GOP field. He's downplaying concerns about rising temperatures across the planet, as other candidates have, while at the same time stating that humans have control and responsibility for the environment.

We already knew Carson, a neurosurgeon who has never run for office before, would be a different kind of candidate. His comments about ethanol and climate change in Iowa show he's taking his own road on some issues and not just following the partisan map.

Read or Share this story: http://dmreg.co/1IdNinB