The Arizona Taxpayers Action Committee erected campaign signs in Legislative District 15 that say that Rep. Heather Carter, R-Phoenix, voted to raise taxes. Carter has also put up her own signs saying that she voted to cut taxes. azcentral Fact Check looks at who’s telling the truth. (Photo: Tom Tingle/The Republic)

THE MEDIA: Print.

WHO SAID IT: Arizona Taxpayers Action Committee.

TITLE: Independent-expenditure campaign committee.

THE RACE: Arizona House of Representatives, Legislative District 15.

THE TARGET: Rep. Heather Carter, R-Cave Creek, incumbent seeking re-election.

THE COMMENT: "Carter voted to raise your taxes."

THE FORUM: Campaign signs erected over the weekend of June 28 in LD 15, which covers far-north Phoenix and Cave Creek.

WHAT WE'RE LOOKING AT: Whether Carter voted to raise taxes.

ANALYSIS: The Arizona Taxpayers Action Committee last month erected signs on corners in Legislative District 15 stating that Carter voted to raise taxes. The signs do not specify which taxes the group is referring to.

Shane Wikfors, the group's treasurer, said in an interview with The Arizona Republic that the reference is to the Legislature's 2013 vote to expand the state's Medicaid program.

That vote on House Bill 2010 approved an assessment, to be paid by hospitals, to fund the state's cost of expanding Medicaid coverage to people who earn between 100 percent and 133 percent of the federal poverty level. The federal government covers about 90 percent of the cost; the hospital assessment picks up the remainder.

In a hotly contested move, the Legislature determined the assessment was not a tax and therefore did not require the constitutionally mandated two-thirds vote needed to impose any tax increase. The assessment was approved in June 2013 with a simple majority of lawmakers in favor.

Since then, a legal battle has ensued over whether the minority of lawmakers who voted against the assessment have the right to sue and argue in court that the assessment is actually a tax, requiring a two-thirds vote.

A Maricopa County Superior Court judge threw out the lawmakers' case, deciding that the lawmakers lacked standing to sue. The judge did not address their charge that the hospital assessment is a tax.

But the state Court of Appeals determined the 36 lawmakers have a right to make their case in court, sending the case back to the lower court. Gov. Jan Brewer intervened and asked the state Supreme Court to settle the issue by dismissing the lawsuit. The high court is expected to decide in late August if it will take up the the governor's case.

The hospital assessment, which varies by institution, has been steadily supplying funds to the Arizona Health Care Cost Containment System, Arizona's Medicaid program.

Proponents note the hospitals lobbied the Legislature to impose the fee because it would draw down federal dollars under the Affordable Care Act, making health insurance more broadly available and reducing the strain on hospital emergency rooms.

The Arizona Taxpayers Action Committee put up signs saying Rep. Heather Carter, R-Phoenix, voted to raise taxes. The group’s treasurer said the reference is to the Legislature’s 2013 vote to expand the state’s Medicaid program. But azcentral Fact Check determined the expansion vote was not a tax. (Photo: Mary Jo Pitzl/The Republic)

The Arizona law creating the assessment forbids the hospitals from passing the cost on to customers.

Carter put up her own sign asserting that she cut taxes. She is referencing her votes on two "jobs bills" that lowered various tax rates, as well as legislation that prevented a property-tax increase for homeowners in north Phoenix's Desert Ridge neighborhood.

BOTTOM LINE: The vote expanding the state's Medicaid program was not a tax increase, and the political campaign sign that says "Carter voted to raise your taxes" is not accurate.

THE FINDING: No stars, false.

SOURCES: Signs paid for by the Arizona Taxpayers Action Committee; Wikfors interview June 30 with The Arizona Republic; House Bill 2010 from the 51st Legislature, first special session; Republic articles: "GOP lawmakers vow appeal of tossed Medicaid-expansion lawsuit," "Arizona appeals court keeps Medicaid challenge alive," "Brewer asks Arizona Supreme Court to throw out Medicaid expansion challenge"; Arizona's supermajority requirement for tax increases.

Read or Share this story: http://azc.cc/1md2qre