The Author's Response to Reader Comments

MICHAEL KITCES: Many readers are clearly skeptical about the overall levels of compensation that employers are going to pay–and the challenges of real wage stagnation are real and have been documented elsewhere already. But the comments seem to imply that wage stagnation will somehow be “worse” in a world where employers compensate primarily/solely in wages, rather than in a combination of wages and other employee benefits.

I’m not sure that view necessarily holds. After all, the entire transition from defined-benefit plans to defined-contribution plans has already been a form of adjustment in compensation. The declining percentage that employers pay for health insurance–compared with a decade or two ago–is another.

In other words, for better or worse, the stagnation of wage growth is already present across all compensation and benefits–because from the employer’s perspective, it’s all part of the cost of maintaining employees–but that doesn’t necessarily mean it will be worse in a world more wage-centric and less employee-benefits-centric. In fact, I could also make the case that employees would be able to better negotiate for compensation if part of the negotiations weren’t mired in certain “opaque” employee benefits that many employees don’t necessarily know the cost of anyway.

There are also some questions about the relative differences of these outcomes from a tax perspective. While it’s true that, technically, not all employee benefits and wages are completely “interchangeable” under the tax code as it stands now, remember that the tax code can–and does–change over time. After all, we didn’t add broad employer deductibility of health insurance until after World War II when companies were already starting to do it and we adjusted the tax code to support it.

Similarly, we didn’t have a wide range of options for deductible contributions to retirement plans (from 401(k) plans to IRAs)…until we decided to encourage that as a means of savings, and then the tax code was adjusted to fit the policy goal. Which means ultimately, if we decide broadly to continue the trend toward a primarily wage-based world (where employees simply take their wages and purchase their own benefits as desired), there’s no reason why we can’t adjust the tax code going forward to support those goals.

In reality, that’s how most provisions in the tax code come about in the first place, and change as our country’s policy goals change.

Michael Kitces is a partner and the director of research for Pinnacle Advisory Group, and publisher of the financial planning industry blog Nerd’s Eye View. You can follow him on Twitter at @MichaelKitces, or connect with him on Google+.