With plenty talent returning, Mountain Lions focused on improving defensively

After helping Mountain View win 11 games last year, Dennis Landry, left, and Jose Orrantia are hoping to build off that success this season. ( Steve Stoner / Loveland Reporter-Herald )

The Mountain View boys basketball team went 11-13 last year and finished in a tie for fifth in the Northern Conference.

For a lot of schools, such results would be rather insignificant. But for a team that averaged just four wins the previous five years, last season could prove to be a real program changer.

"It just shows us that we have the pieces," junior Jose Orrantia said. "We only lost two guys, we have everyone else coming back, so it just shows us that we can do something this year."

While the Mountain Lions lost some key contributors to graduation, including leading scorer and rebounder Jerrod Klug, the arrow certainly appears to be pointing up for MVHS entering the 2014-15 campaign.

Few coaches like to get too specific about a team's goals before the season. But after last year's success, it's safe to say expectations for the Lions this season are greater than they've been in quite some time.

"Our goals are a lot higher this year," said coach Mike Jobman, who helped orchestrate the turnaround last year in his first season with the team. "As far as postseason goes, our goal was definitely to get in last year. This year it's to take that next step and win a game, win a couple games, get as far as we can in the playoffs."

With Klug gone, Orrantia appears to be the team's go-to offensive option after averaging 11.7 points, 4.3 rebounds and 3.5 assists last year as a sophomore. But he's not the only Lion returning with previous varsity experience. Seniors Zack Jobman and Marshall McKinley were also in the rotation last year, as were juniors Jordan Kress and Dennis Landry.

Advertisement

A trio of newcomers will be in the mix as well, which includes Blesson Thrash, a junior transfer from Fossil Ridge, sophomore Jeremiah Greylock and junior Isaac Adamson.

The Lions were right in the middle of the conference in offense last year, and they don't expect to have much trouble scoring again this season. However, the defensive side of the ball is a different story.

MVHS gave up a league-worst 60 points a game in conference play in 2014, making it easy for Coach Jobman to identify where his team needs to improve in order for it achieve that expected improvement.

Sophomore Jeremiah Greylock is expected to be part of the Lions' rotation this year. (Steve Stoner / Loveland Reporter-Herald)

"One glaring thing I saw last year was we struggled defensively. We put a lot of emphasis on that in the offseason and here at the beginning of the season. Defense, defense, defense," he said. "Offensively we have a lot of skill sets there. So I think we'll be fine offensively. If we can just hone in on defense and get better defensively, that's going to help us take that next step conference-wise and wins-wise."

So far players have bought in — especially since they're so confident with their ability to put up points.

"Defense wins games, and that's what we do in practice," Orrantia said. "If we get it down defensively, the offense will just come, fastbreaks and stuff, that's what we're good at."

Then there are the intangibles. Having come up through the ranks together, the core of the roster has plenty of experience playing with one another, perhaps the biggest asset any hoops team can have.

"All of us know each other and have been playing together for a long time, and I think that helps," Zack Jobman said. "And we have a lot of talent."

Sean Star: 970-669-5050 ext. 512, sstar@reporter-herald.com or twitter.com/rhpreps