September 2013's memorable flooding continues to reshape our landscape.

We have seen the rapid increase in rabbit populations and heard concerns about tularemia, "rabbit fever." Yet there's a notable increase in another animal of concern — rats. We've read recently about rats on the Pearl Street Mall (Daily Camera Open Forum, Aug. 14) and, informally, I've heard many stories of backyard infestations.

But in public, people don't like talking about rats — just the word conjures up images of sewers and other dark, dank spaces. Yet our stalled acknowledgment of their increased presence will act in their favor.

Rats need shelter, food and water — three necessities readily provided by a typical urban lot. Shelter is found under a garden shed or front porch. Bird feeders, vegetable gardens and compost bins offer a veritable buffet. Water is abundant from ponds or through rain that gathers in the base of flower pots or in dimples along a flagstone path. Our gardens provide excellent habitat.

The knowledgeable green vests at McGuckin's note they speak with 2-5 persons daily, sometimes more, struggling with rat challenges in their homes and gardens.

We have an obligation to ourselves, our families, pets, and neighbors to deal with rats swiftly. Rats can carry disease, damage property, and Discover magazine reports a pair of brown rats can produce as many as 2,000 descendants in a year. Rats are sexually mature by 3-4 months, hence the hurry.

Advertisement

In New York, Hurricane Sandy reportedly drove rats inland from shorelines, with phone calls to exterminators soaring. Writers for Scientific American, the New York Times, the Huffington Post, and National Geographic all speculated as to the hurricane's impact on rats — and all agreed that some rats were pushed away from shorelines. In London, heavy rains forced rats indoors through drain pipes and other small gaps, and Boulder's 2013 flood may have shifted the distribution of local rats as well.

As fall approaches, rats may seek shelter indoors in crawl spaces, walls, attics. They can cause structural damage as well as electrical problems due to chewing on wires. Extermination options include live traps and relocation, or snap traps (like the little wood mouse traps, but bigger). Poison is controversial but still used, although glue boards are widely considered inhumane.

Don't ignore any carefully crafted holes in your yard, particularly those leading under hard surfaces. Given that rats can rapidly spread, we all depend on each other to act quickly. Once gone, seal entry points and use repellents such as moth balls to prevent future infestation.

The alternative? Given that cooler days are around the corner, if left unchecked, rats will join us as we head indoors.

You can learn more here.

Lori Hunter lives in Boulder.