An Oklahoma City police officer, accused of committing sex crimes while on duty, was arrested Thursday in northwest Oklahoma City.Oklahoma City police officer, Daniel Ken Holtzclaw, was arrested at 3 p.m. Thursday in the parking lot of Gold's Gym near Memorial and Penn.He has been charged with rape in the first degree, rape by instrumentation, three counts of forcible sodomy, two counts of sexual battery and two counts indecent exposure.Police Chief Bill Citty says Holtzclaw started with the department in September 2011, and he patrolled the Spring Lake Division in northeast Oklahoma City from 4 p.m. to 2 a.m.

6/23/2014 Related Story: OKC Woman Claims Police Officer Forced Her To Perform Sex Act



Oklahoma City police have identified seven victims, but have only collected statements from six females.



Police say the victims were black females, aged 34 to 58, and all of the crimes occurred between Lincoln Boulevard and Interstate 35, as well as between N.E. 14th and N.E. 50th Streets.



Citty says investigators started reviewing previous stops by Holtzclaw after they received a complaint in June. They say the results of their investigation show the crimes were committed between February and June, all during traffic stops or to some who were walking in a neighborhood.



Police say most of the crimes occurred at the location the victim was stopped, but some were transported to another location to perform the acts.



“It taints all of us, and the officers know that and they take it very personally,” said Citty. “And it angers us that one of our people, one of our officers, that people trust to keep them safe, is doing just the opposite.”

Several African American community leaders are now calling for a thorough investigation.

"We have some good officers on the force, but yet as we see today, we have a problem when it comes to African Americans and police officers," Oklahoma NAACP President Anthony Douglas said.

Holtzclaw was booked into the Oklahoma County jail on a $5 million bond.

The first-degree rape charge alone can carry a sentence of five years to life or life without parole.