Metuchen native Connie Hope penned a cookbook about side dishes entitled, "In Addition…to the Entrée" and the first of a three-part trilogy, "The Bonnie Neuk Tea Room – Friends and Uninvited Guests."

The author, Connie Hope (Photo: PHOTO COURTESY OF CONNIE HOPE) Story Highlights Bonnie Neuk Tea Room follows author's first cookbook about side dishes.

Author's great-grandfather, William R. Thornhall, was first mayor of Metuchen.

The author believes her grandmother, Daisy Thornhall, inspired her to pursue writing.

The spirit literally moved Connie Hope to take her dream of capturing readers' imaginations and making it a reality.

"Write your book! Now! Get to it! It's your time," are the words that came to the Metuchen native as she was taking in some sun on her lanai in Fort Myers, Florida. "And that is what I did."

The vocal motivation, believes Hope, came from her grandmother, Daisy Thornhall, who owned a tea room in Metuchen in 1932. A very spiritual person who believes in ghosts, Hope didn't learn about her grandmother's business until she delved into the first of five books her father compiled which chronicled her family's rich history in the borough.

Since that extraordinary encounter, Hope has penned a cookbook about side dishes entitled, "In Addition…to the Entrée" and the first of a three-part trilogy, "The Bonnie Neuk Tea Room — Friends and Uninvited Guests."

"I come back to Metuchen a few times a year," noted Hope, whose great-grandfather, William R. Thornhall was the borough's first mayor.

Holding dear the memories she has of her life in Metuchen, the author has shared cherished photographs, deeds and letters with the Borough Improvement League and Metuchen's historical society, so that her family history may be further preserved.

"A lot of 'The Bonnie Neuk Tea Room' is based on the history of the borough," she said, adding that she called upon many of the historians to help her conduct the research for her book.

"Metuchen was such a wonderful place to grow up. You knew our neighbors, they always helped you out," she opined.

In explaining her family history, Hope stated, "My grandfather died very young, leaving my grandmother with young children that she had to support."

The urge to write about that history, as well as her passion for cooking, also has a history of its own, dating back to when the author was in the fifth-grade and entered a writing contest entitled, "What is Patriotism?" for CAR (Children of the American Revolution).

"My mother said that I had to earn a living and that I wasn't going to do that being a writer," she recalled. "I went to Trenton State (now The College of New Jersey) to become certified as a teacher, although I never taught. I finished in 1985 and they were letting teachers go at that time. So, I worked as a credit assistant and an office manager."

"Still, I kept thinking of how much I would love to write," added Hope, who married, raised three children and divorced before moving to Florida.

A bad housing market put the brakes on Hope's goal of working as a mortgage clerk. But, it was the day that she heard that phantom voice on her lanai that her true dream was realized.

"I thought, 'This is weird' because there was no one there," she said, stressing that she believes it was in fact a visit from her grandmother. "She's always been my touchstone in life. We had a close relationship."

Hope's first book, "In Addition…to the Entrée," underlines her love of cooking, which echoes memories from past culinary collaborations with her relatives. Selling 600 copies of the book that took approximately a year and a half to write, Hope tantalized palates with her recipes for appetizers, salads, soups, chutneys, and all side dishes that complement entrees.

"After that book, I kept thinking that I had a story in me that I needed to just sit down and write," said Hope, who became a member of the Gulf Coast Writers Association, which provided a plethora of feedback and pointers to the writer.

As "The Boonie Neuk" book started to take shape, Hope found that the writing process was not laborious, but that the words flowed freely, even as she carried around a notebook in her purse to jot down ideas and story angles.

In the self-published book, the main character of Victoria Storm grapples with divorce and the urge to do something different with her life when she receives a mysterious telephone call from someone who tells her to open a tea room similar to her grandmother's in Metuchen.

Acknowledging that her life mirrors Storm's, Hope added that her book takes readers on an adventure filled with mystery, romance, emotion and encounters of all kinds.

Since "The Bonnie Neuk" is going to be a trilogy, the author has been busily working on its second installment. When the trilogy is completed, Hope seeks to work on a book about five women who went to school together, became widows and disconnected from each other until meeting up at their reunion. The book will chronicle what happens when the women decide to live together.

Until then, Hope has been organizing Metuchen High School's 50th class reunion. She graduated in 1965.

For more information, visit www.thebonnieneuktearoom.com. Paperback copies can be purchased through Createspace.com using this link: https://www.createspace.com/4775503.

Connie Hope has also written a cookbook, "In Addition…to the Entrée," which can be purchased at www.cookingbyconnie.com or by contacting the author at conniehope@comcast.net.

RECIPES:

White Bean and Lime Chicken Soup (signature soup from the Bonnie Neuk Tea Room)

2 tablespoon butter

1 medium yellow onion, diced

2 to 3 cloves garlic, minced

1 can (7 oz.) green chili peppers, chopped

1 tablespoon cilantro, chopped

1 small jalapeno pepper, remove veins and seeds

1 can (29 oz.) diced tomatoes

1 tsp. oregano

1 tsp. cumin

Dash of cinnamon

Lime juice from 1 fresh lime

1 cup chicken pieces – cut small

8 cups chicken broth

Salt and pepper to taste

Saute butter, onions, garlic in a large soup pot until translucent, about 10 minutes. Add the chopped Jalapeno pepper and green chili peppers and saute with other mix for five minutes on low heat. Add chicken broth, tomatoes and beans to the onion mixture. Add cilantro, oregano, cumin, cinnamon and diced tomatoes. Simmer for 30 minutes. Add lime juice and pieces of chicken. Heat for five minutes until chicken is warm. Serve with a garnish of cilantro sprig. Serves 4 to 6.

Fig and Pistachio Stuffing for Pork Loin (This is the main dish that Victoria Storm fixes for Hilliard (a character in the Bonnie Neuk Tea Room, for dinner)

1 cup figs (trimmed and sliced thin)

½ cup bread cubes (stuffing bread)

4 tablespoons butter

¼ cup onion, chopped

1 stalk celery, chopped

1 clove of garlic

2 teaspoons rosemary

1 cup pistachios, chopped

½ cup chicken broth (if needed)

Cord soaked in water

Pork loin

Melt butter in a frying pan. Add onion, celery, garlic and rosemary. Cook vegetables until soft, stirring occasionally. Mix vegetables in bowl, add figs, bread cubes, pistachios, and a little broth. Slice pork loin almost all the way through. Stuff with fig and pistachio mix. Tie the pork loin with the soaked cord. Cook at 350 degrees for 40 to 60 minutes. Test for light pink inside.

Read or Share this story: http://mycj.co/1rwgOzJ