Oklahoma City small-business owner Jeff McKenzie said he's “fingers-crossed” that he'll stay healthy for three more months.

He let his health insurance policy — which he'd held for 20 years — lapse nearly two years ago.

“We were in the thick of the recession, and it came down to paying my monthly premium or our electric bill,” said McKenzie, 64, who's owned and operated a T-shirt shop downtown for 37 years.

“Business had gotten so slow, and my premium so high” — $1,200 a month for an annual policy with a $500 deductible — “that I panicked,” he said.

Come Oct. 1, McKenzie plans to buy a new policy in Oklahoma's federally run online health insurance marketplace so that he'll be covered starting Jan. 1, when new laws require him, and most Americans, to have insurance or pay penalties on their tax returns.

The new marketplace — and a companion marketplace for employers who want to shop for group plans — are mandated under the Affordable Care Act. Signed into law in March 2010, the act is meant to provide affordable quality insurance to people who don't have it through work, Medicare or Medicaid, the state-federal welfare program.

McKenzie said he's hoping to find a reasonably priced, high-deductible policy that will cover him until July 12, when he turns 65 and will become eligible for Medicare.

Preparing for the worst

Cheryl McEvoy, 55, a self-employed nail technician who leases a storefront in northwest Oklahoma City, also plans to shop the new health insurance marketplace.

She currently has medical insurance through Insure Oklahoma, but new, stricter income requirements, which were recently imposed by the Obama administration on individual participants in the state-federal premium assistance program, will force her to leave the program Dec. 31.

“I'm fairly healthy, but that could change at any time,” McEvoy said. “I want something in case I have an emergency and need to go to the hospital.”

She currently pays $50 a month for insurance, and about all she can afford is $300 a month, she said.

Participating companies

According to a report by Oklahoma Watch, published in The OklahomanSept. 14, most monthly premiums on the marketplace will range from $200 a month to $700 a month, based on consumers' ages, tobacco use and where they live in the state. In addition to monthly premiums, the most any individual consumer in the exchange would pay per year is $6,350, including doctor’s office and hospital co-pays and prescription co-pays, the news agency reported.

Any Oklahoma resident is welcome to shop in the marketplaces, and individuals who have incomes between 100 percent and 400 percent of the federal poverty level ($11,490 to $23,550, or $31,322 to $94,200 for families of four) will be eligible for variable subsidies, depending on income and family size. For example, a resident who qualifies for discounts, starting in January, might pay monthly insurance premiums of $200 versus $400, and the federal government would pay the insurance carrier the remainder.

The Kaiser Family Foundation has posted a calculator at kff.org/interactive/subsidy-calculator/ for people to estimate costs and learn if they qualify for subsidies.

But Larry Gundlach of Oklahoma Business Insurors cautions premium estimates are based on “silver” plans designed to cover 70 percent of all medical costs incurred by an average policy holder, when he suspects most people will want “gold” plans that cover 80 percent of costs or, if they're offered, “platinum” plans that cover 90 percent.

“If they pick the plans with more benefits, they'll have to pay for that difference,” he said.

Blue Cross and Blue Shield of Oklahoma, Aetna, Coventry, Community Care and Global Health will participate in the state's individual health insurance marketplace, Oklahoma Watch reported. Federal officials won't speculate which carriers will participate in the business marketplace for employers shopping for group plans; only that they'll have more information on Oct. 1.

Blue Cross and Blue Shield spokeswoman Ashley Hudgeons confirmed her company's participation, and at least one observer believes only three other carriers will join them.

Mandates prompt work changes

The Affordable Care Act not only makes it a law that individuals have health insurance but also that employers with 50 or more full-time-equivalent workers offer quality, affordable insurance to those who work 30 or more hours a week. If they don't, they face annual penalties of $2,000 per employee.

The employer mandate was set to take effect, alongside the individual mandate, on Jan. 1, but President Barack Obama on July 3 announced a one-year extension to the employer mandate. That was one week after Rose State College President Jeanie Webb issued a staff memorandum on a new policy that, as of July 1, limits the hours of many employees, effectively disqualifying them for the university's health plan next year.

“Part-time hourly employees will be restricted to working no more than 20 hours per week & Human Resources will only approve Appointment Requests listing up to 20 hours per week,” the memo reads. “Adjunct professors may work up to 12 credit hours per semester or a total of 24 credit hours per calendar year,” it continues.

For at least one professor, the policy means a cut in salary.

“It results in me teaching less hours, even though I have health care through my husband's organization,” she wrote in an email to The Oklahoman.

Even before the health care act, Oklahoma City Community College had a similar policy that part-time employees aren't allowed to work more than 25 hours per week, officials there said. Some local restaurants, retailers and other employers apparently are joining universities in officially capping staff hours.

Meanwhile, one retiree of Tinker Air Force Base, who asked that his last name not be used, suspects that, even with the new marketplaces, he'll continue to pay the $207.27 monthly premiums on an individual health insurance policy he carries on his stepson, who's 36 and single, and works as a clerk for an area convenience store.

“His company offers health insurance, but it's too expensive for the money he makes — $21,310 a year,” said Kenneth, of Moore. “Even if he qualifies for a subsidy (in the new marketplace), I doubt they can beat $207 a month.”