Topics: Democratic National Convention, Democratic Party, DNC, Editor's Picks, Gary Hart, Geraldine Ferraro, History, Interviews, Jesse Jackson, Mario Cuomo, Ronald Reagan, The Left, Walter Mondale, Politics News

Gary Hart had one more move. It was Sunday, July 15, 1984, the eve of the Democratic National Convention, in San Francisco. He had won the California primary on June 5, seven of the last 11 contests, and more overall than frontrunner Walter “Fritz” Mondale. But Hart was way behind in delegates. Mondale had announced he had enough to be nominated to oppose incumbent Ronald Reagan in the fall. Hart had neither conceded the race nor suspended his campaign.

“Surprises could happen,” Hart recalled to Salon in an interview for this article.

Staying at the old St. Francis Hotel in Union Square, Hart walked across the square to the Hyatt to visit Reverend Jesse Jackson. Jackson had been as much of a revelation as Hart in the primaries and became the first black candidate to mount a very competitive White House run, finishing third in delegates.

“I sat outside Jesse’s door for about half an hour, and finally he let me in,” Hart said. “I wanted him to endorse me and turn his delegates over to me.”

Hart was polling 10 points better than Mondale against Reagan. A deal with Jackson could elevate him closer to Mondale’s delegate total but still short of a majority. “That would have gotten me up to 1,500 and some, and who knows what would have happened then,” Hart said.

Jackson wasn’t ready to quit. He wanted to be officially nominated for president. “Any idea of placing the delegations together went out the window, but at least I made a try,” Hart said.

Suspense over the nominee is only one factor that distinguishes the 1984 Democratic National Convention from all 15 major party conventions that have followed. There were also historic candidate breakthroughs by race, gender and generation. There was a most memorable keynote address. There were fights over the party platform. It was the first time there were “super” delegates — office holders and party activists who can play a decisive role in the nomination. And there was a huge television audience. Subsequent conventions might have one of these elements, but none had them all, and the gatherings in Cleveland and Philadelphia next summer probably won’t compare to the Democrats in 1984 either.

“Everything was still up in the air. We were shaping policy,” Mondale told Salon in an interview for this article. “We were calling super delegates. We were trying to get everybody committed.”

“It was exciting, because no one exactly knew how it was going to come out,” Jackson said in an interview for this article. “Now we have cookie cutter conventions – you buy the bread already packaged, or you just heat it up. There we made the bread on the spot.”

###

Only nine years apart, Mondale, then 56, and Hart, then 47, were of different generations. Mondale was a New Deal-nurtured, Great Society liberal who spent two terms in the Senate. Like the mentor he succeeded, Hubert Humphrey, Mondale was out front on civil rights, for example, as lead Democratic sponsor of a 1968 fair housing law that prohibited discrimination in the sale, rental and financing of homes. Mondale served as Jimmy Carter’s vice president from 1977 to 1981, until Carter vacated the White House for Reagan. With Massachusetts Senator Ted Kennedy forgoing a 1984 run, after challenging Carter in 1980, the party establishment closed ranks around Mondale.

Hart, a JFK and RFK acolyte, had managed George McGovern’s insurgent 1972 presidential campaign and arrived in Washington in 1975 as a member of the reform-minded congressional class of 1974, Democrats elected in a wave of Watergate discontent with Republicans months after President Richard Nixon had resigned. Hart relished breaking with party orthodoxy, such as when he opposed the 1979 Chrysler bailout.

In 1980, when nine Democratic incumbent Senators were swept out of office in the first Reagan election – including McGovern, of South Dakota; Frank Church, of Idaho; Birch Bayh, of Indiana; and Gaylord Nelson, of Wisconsin – Hart survived. Democrats in other states, like Nebraska gubernatorial hopeful Bob Kerrey, started inviting Hart to campaign for them.

In 1983, Mondale racked up endorsements from labor and teachers’ unions, women’s groups, environmentalists and politicians, but only half of Democrats polled said they would vote for him in primaries.

“What I saw was 50 percent of the Democratic voters looking for a different kind of candidate,” Hart said. “It wasn’t that they were opposed to Mondale or found anything wrong with him, particularly, it was a search for new leadership, and that propelled me into the race.”

When almost nobody owned a computer, Hart talked about technology, the information revolution, globalization, and a post-Cold War foreign policy. Reduced to a slogan, this was his New Ideas.

“That wasn’t just image. That was a sense that the traditional New Deal message, which conservatives reduced to ‘tax and spend,’ had partly run its course. What activist Democrats were looking for was a way to support the social safety net by accommodating to changes going on in the economy,” Hart said.

Mondale’s motivation stirred from the moment in 1981 when Reagan stated in his inaugural address, “Government is the problem.”

“Reagan was a very radical new voice in American life, and he really wanted to tear down good things we thought we’d accomplished, and we hoped that would help us defeat him,” Mondale said.

Candidate Reagan had promised to cut taxes and erase the $79 billion annual federal budget deficit left by Carter. Instead, lower income taxes and greater military spending caused the deficit to balloon to $208 billion in 1983. Mondale wanted to reduce the deficit and reset priorities for education, health care and the environment.

“The idea that there is some magic compelling reality that you can never increase a government program of any kind – can’t do it – and you can’t raise taxes to do it, that is anathema to me,” Mondale said.

Mondale easily won the first-in-the-nation Iowa caucuses, on Feb. 20, 1984, but Hart finished second, gaining notice and momentum, and then won the first primary, in New Hampshire, in a stunning upset eight days later.

“We stumbled quite a bit after that,” Mondale said, “And it took us a while to get our feet underneath us.”

The other “Anybody But Mondale” candidates, including space hero John Glenn, then an Ohio Senator, never gained traction or won a single primary or caucus. Mondale and Hart traded victories for four months. Mondale won in Georgia, Illinois, Michigan, New York, Pennsylvania and Texas. Hart won in Nevada, Florida, Massachusetts, Wisconsin, Ohio and Indiana. Meanwhile, Jackson won in Louisiana, South Carolina and Washington, D.C., capturing at least 20 percent of the vote in eight states.

Overall, Mondale won 7 million votes, or 38 percent. Hart won 6.5 million votes, or 36 percent. Jackson won 3.3 million votes, or 18 percent. Democratic rules had shifted from “winner take all” primaries to “winner take more” primaries whereby winners earned an extra delegate in each district where he was the top voter getter. This helped Mondale. So did the 550 super delegates; four out of five were for him.

Heading into the convention, Mondale was only slightly worried the nomination would slip from his grasp. “I had some concern, but I could figure out how I could get there. I was more worried when I lost New Hampshire,” Mondale said.

On June 6, a day after he lost the California primary but won in New Jersey and West Virginia, Mondale announced at a St. Paul news conference, “I will be the nominee.”

That day Mondale claimed he had 2,008 delegates pledged to him, or 41 more than the magic number of 1,967 needed to nominate.

“There were a lot of uncommitted delegates who I thought would be with me at the convention, and I just had to call them and urge them to speed it up for me,” Mondale said.

Hart had a more difficult time working the phones. “My wife and I called every super delegate. I don’t think we got one super delegate, and that was the difference.”

Some told Hart and his wife, Lee, it was politically impossible to switch sides. He said, “One woman from a Southern state said to my wife, ‘Look, I love your husband. I wish I could vote for him. But my husband works for the state highway [department], and I’ve been told if I don’t vote for Mondale, he’s going to lose his job.’ There was a lot of strong-arming going on.”

Two weeks before the convention, Mondale and Hart had their first post-primary sit-down, in Manhattan. “The things that divide us are modest compared to the things that divide us from President Reagan,” Mondale told reporters. They shared a “profound fear of a second Reagan term,” Hart added. Unity did not necessarily mean Mondale would offer Hart the vice presidential nomination. Hart quipped Mondale was on his Veep list.

###

Mondale’s running mate search included African-Americans, Hispanics and women paraded to Minnesota – Mayors Diane Feinstein, of San Francisco; Henry Cisneros, of San Antonio; Tom Bradley, of Los Angeles; and Wilson Goode, of Philadelphia. White men were also interviewed, such as Massachusetts Governor Michael Dukakis and Texas Senator Lloyd Bentsen. Halfway through the vetting, Mondale was disappointed. “I think it looked like a cute routine,” he told me. “It could have been easier to manage privately.”

Tip O’Neil, the Democratic Speaker of the House of Representatives, had steered Mondale toward three-term congresswoman Geraldine Ferraro of New York City. She was 48, Catholic, daughter of an Italian immigrant, and had previously worked as a teacher, a prosecutor, and stay-at-home mother of three. As a sign of her bipartisan appeal, Ferraro boasted she represented Archie Bunker’s district, the Queens location where the fictional conservative star of TV sitcom “All In The Family” lived.

“Tip O’Neil told me, ‘Take a look at Gerry. She’s really very well respected here. She is a very effective congresswoman. She’s someone you ought to seriously think about putting on the ticket.’ And I got that from others,” Mondale said. “She could play with the big boys.”

When Ferraro went to Washington, in 1979, she was one of only 16 women in the House, and there was only one woman senator. Ferraro wrote laws permitting “flex time” for federal employees and creating retirement accounts for homemakers and single mothers. She sponsored a bill requiring employers to grant unpaid family leave, which finally became law under President Bill Clinton. Ferraro envisioned rising in House leadership or running for Senate in 1986.

“She wasn’t thinking beyond that. She loved being a member of Congress,” Donna Zaccaro, the eldest of Ferraro’s three children with real estate developer John Zaccaro, said in an interview for this article.

Thanks to O’Neil, the party appointed Ferraro to chair the convention’s platform committee crafting the party’s vision. “It was a big deal back then,” Zaccaro said. “It’s also how she really learned about all the issues all around the country. That really was her prep, which was fortunate.”

Ferraro emerged with a handful of women talked about as possible running mates. She and Feinstein graced a Time magazine cover asking, “Why Not a Woman?” The National Organization for Women, which had endorsed Mondale, passed a resolution calling for a woman on the ticket. Ferraro told friends she did not believe a man would pick a female running mate unless he was 15 points behind in national polls. Mondale was.

###

Jesse Jackson’s base had been Chicago since Martin Luther King’s Southern Christian Leadership Conference dispatched him there in the mid-1960s to oversee a black business development and jobs program called Operation Breadbasket. Jackson worked with King from Selma to Memphis, where King was assassinated in 1968. Jackson broke with the SCLC in 1971, became an ordained Baptist minister, and started his own justice and empowerment organization, People United to Save Humanity.

After Jackson helped Harold Washington win election as Chicago’s first black mayor in 1983, he started musing about recruiting a black candidate to run for president in 1984. Fellow civil rights pioneers, like Atlanta Mayors Andrew Young and Maynard Jackson, turned him down. There were no black senators or governors to consider. There were 22 black representatives in the House of Representatives, and black mayors ran Birmingham, Charlotte, Detroit, Newark and New Orleans. But no candidate emerged.

Speaking at voter registration drives, Jackson, then 42, heard crowds chant “Run, Jesse, Run!” When he heeded the call and entered the presidential race himself, Jackson labeled his following the Rainbow Coalition.

“The Rainbow really is America – a multiracial, multicultural coalition,” Jackson said. “It was a crusade for change, and we took unpopular, not poll-driven, positions on issues.”

Jackson called for tougher enforcement of the Voting Rights Act, affirmative action in hiring and college admissions, gay rights, a Palestinian state and ending apartheid in South Africa.

“We were raising issues that had not been raised – for example, Free Mandela. At that time, he was on the terrorist list,” Jackson said.

At the height of the Reagan military buildup, Jackson advocated real cuts in Pentagon spending and applying the savings to domestic programs.

“Dr. King’s point was we shifted the War on Poverty resources to the War in Vietnam. He said bombs dropped in Vietnam explode in American cities, metaphorically speaking,” Jackson said. “And to be certain, we’ve stayed right there.”

Jackson appealed beyond his urban base to distressed farmers in Iowa, coal miners in West Virginia and Campbell’s Soup workers in Ohio. He overnighted on Native American reservations and in the homes of people with AIDS shunned by their families.

“I had no doubt that there had been more people locked out of the process than had been previously considered,” Jackson said.

His vote total ranged from a low of less than 1 percent in Maine to highs of 20 percent in Alabama, 21 percent in Georgia, 25 percent in South Carolina and 34 percent in Arkansas. He dominated the black vote – winning 50 percent in Alabama, 61 percent in Georgia, 77 percent in Pennsylvania and 87 percent in New York.

Jackson won among black voters younger than 50, but Mondale won the older ones. “They had adjusted to their predicament,” Jackson said. “Those who want change must be maladjusted.”

Jackson had attended national conventions since the 1960s, but the San Francisco convention at the Moscone Center was different for him and the movement.

“We used to go to conventions and try to get notes to candidates back in their trailers. We had our own trailer for the first time, and our floor plan for the first time, our own whips on the floor for the first time,” Jackson said.

Jackson tried to change Democratic Party rules – to make presidential primary delegate allocation more proportional to vote totals and to get 10 Southern state parties to repeal primary runoffs triggered when no candidate achieved 50 percent of the vote. Jackson argued those runoffs disadvantaged a black candidate who might come in first, because voters tended to coalesce around a white candidate in a runoff, sending a black candidate to defeat.

“We were fundamental to change – democratizing democracy, democratizing the rules, democratizing access to the process,” Jackson said.

As the convention neared, the Jackson and Hart campaigns targeted 250 Hispanic delegates and 400 black delegates ostensibly pledged to Mondale. Had 100 of them agreed to switch their votes to Hart or Jackson or simply to abstain on the roll call, it could thwart a first ballot nomination for Mondale.

“It wasn’t a threat to me,” Mondale said. “The delegates I had who were black were for me. It wasn’t about color; it was about my position in civil rights, which, I think, was as solid as it could be.”

###

On Sunday night, July 11, a week before the convention, Ferraro was in San Francisco to chair platform hearings. She was in her room at the Hyatt Regency Embarcadero when she got the phone call.

“Will you be my running mate?” Mondale said.

“That would be terrific,” she replied. “I want you to know, Fritz, I am deeply honored.”

Donna Zaccaro, then 22 and working on Wall Street, was in her Manhattan apartment ironing her outfit for the next day. “She called each of us,” Zaccaro said, referring to her brother, John, 20, who was in Hawaii, and her sister, Laura, 18, who was at home with her father.

“It was a total shock. We knew she was being considered, but we never thought it was really going to happen,” Zaccaro said. “We all knew that everything was going to change.”

The Mondale campaign snuck Ferraro out of her hotel for a late-night charter flight from Oakland – a better chance to take off undetected than from San Francisco – to Minnesota for the next morning’s announcement.

“This is an exciting choice!” Mondale told the cheering crowd inside the state capitol. He intended to shake up the race and lock in his victory.

“It quieted all challenges to the nomination,” Mondale said. “All the polls showed me in bad shape, and I knew I had to do something to reshuffle the deck, to open things up, to have a more energetic and courageous approach to the election.”

Zaccaro said of her mother, “She was the first one to say, I would never have been chosen if my name was Gerard Ferraro. She recognized that she was chosen because she was qualified, but she also was a woman.”

###

Convention opening nights featured a thematic keynote address, and on Monday, July 16, the Democrats tapped first-term New York Governor Mario Cuomo, 52, who had a reputation for eloquence. Cuomo’s words were like daggers directed at Reagan’s tale of America, which Cuomo reimagined as a Dickensian tale of two cities.

”A shining city is perhaps all the president sees from the portico of the White House and the veranda of his ranch, where everyone seems to be doing well,” Cuomo said. ”But there’s another part to the shining city. In this part of the city, there are more poor than ever, more families in trouble, more and more people who need help but can’t find it.”

He challenged Reagan to visit unemployed steel workers in Buffalo or people living in homeless shelters in Chicago. Speaking to him directly, Cuomo said needy families could not get help to feed their children, because “You said you needed the money for a tax break for a millionaire or for a missile we couldn’t afford to use.”

In contrast to his articulation of compassionate liberalism, Cuomo said Republican policies “divide the nation into the lucky and the left out, into the royalty and the rabble.”

He argued the Democratic Party was a better defender of the middle class — “the people not rich enough to be worry free but not poor enough to be on welfare… those who work for a living because they have to.”

Cuomo decried the president’s “trickle down” economics, which theorized tax cuts for the highest earners would spur economic growth. He said the recovery from the 1982 recession was paid for by “bankruptcies, unemployment, and the largest government debt known to humankind.”

Reconstructing a line from Reagan’s inaugural, Cuomo said, “We believe in only the government we need, but we insist on all the government we need.”

He criticized the “macho intransigence” of the Reagan defense buildup that presumed the nation could “pile missiles so high that they will pierce the clouds, and the sight of them will frighten our enemies into submission.”

Democrats believed in an affluent society that “can spend trillions on instruments of destruction ought to be able to help the middle class in its struggle,” Cuomo declared.

He concluded by celebrating the saga of immigrant families like his and Ferraro’s, whose hard work and commitment to education enabled them to ascend from pennilessness to the middle class in one generation.

During his 40 minutes at the podium, interruptions for applause were frequent and sustained. CBS News anchor emeritus Walter Cronkite commented how the entire hall was quiet, listening all the way through. Commentator Bill Moyers called the speech “brilliant.”

Years later, while still in office, Cuomo told C-SPAN the convention delegates had been “desperate to hear something that would make them feel good about themselves, about the party, about the country, and about possibility.”

“Whatever pictures I chose worked for them,” Cuomo said. “The message and the moment came together.”

###

On the convention’s second day, Tuesday, July 17, after four hours of floor debate, the party adopted its 45,000-word platform. It was mostly a Mondale document calling the budget deficit “intolerable” and pledging to reduce it without a Constitutional Amendment requiring a balanced budget every year. The platform vowed to “reassess” defense spending and promised to protect Social Security. It supported nuclear arms control, gays serving in the military and ending military support for Nicaraguan anti-communist rebels.