Medical waste containers are stored in preparation for Scott County residents looking to exchange used needles at the Community Outreach Center in Austin. (Photo: AP)

Health disparities

plague rural areas

Indiana is currently experiencing the largest HIV outbreak in its history. Gov. Mike Pence issued an executive order March 26 to declare a public health emergency in Scott County, the center of the epidemic, but that order will expire on April 25.

What are we going to do next? How is Indiana going to respond? This public health crisis could have a long-lasting impact not only on the physical health of individuals in this Southern Indiana community, but also on the mental, social, political and socioeconomic circumstances of families, communities and our state as a whole.

Indiana State Health Commissioner Jerome Adams has urged the public health community to listen and learn from the valuable lessons in Scott County. One lesson is that we absolutely need to improve public health preventive measures in Indiana and put a spotlight on the disparities experienced by people living in rural areas.

While the media and the public may be tempted to attribute the HIV infections solely to drug abuse and other individual behaviors, it must be noted that the current public health crisis in Scott County reflects a complex mix of deeper root causes. That mix includes the stark disparities experienced in that community in education, economic opportunity, socioeconomic status and access to health care.

According to the most recent U.S. Census data, just 78 percent of Scott County residents graduated from high school, compared with 87 percent for the state of Indiana. Only 11.5 percent of all Scott County residents hold bachelor's degrees, compared with 23 percent of all Hoosiers. Economically, 19 percent of the Scott County population lives below the poverty line, compared with 15 percent statewide.

Perhaps the most striking disparity is the gap in access to health care. Scott County has been designated by the U.S. Health Resources and Service Administration as having shortages of primary, dental and mental health care providers. These disparities are all interrelated, with lower education levels leading to lower socioeconomic levels leading to higher risk of mental health conditions and drug abuse. Further, the sociocultural environment and lack of education and economic opportunity exacerbate the health care shortage.

Upon closer examination, Scott County is not alone with this profile of disparities. Many of our rural counties in Indiana have similarly disparate statistics for education, economic opportunity and access to health care.

What can we do about this? The problem is complex, and there's no magic bullet. However, one component of preventing future public health emergencies is to have a health care workforce that is well trained in analyzing all public health problems through a "health disparities lens."

Shannon McMorrow

Director, Master of Public Health program, University of Indianapolis

Read or Share this story: http://indy.st/1yGcly5