Last week, Congressman John Mica penned an open letter to President Barack Obama, telling the president that he would be better off spending time talking to violent "thugs" about guns than hosting a town hall on CNN.

I shared that letter here , (And if you look in the comments, you'll see the congressman weighed in as well.)

Not surprisingly, the president didn't respond to Mica.

But one local resident -- Charles Smith of Orlando -- did. In fact, Smith drafted the response that he would send if he were in the president's shoes.

It follows.

TO: Congressman John L. Mica

FROM: President Barack Obama (as written by Charles Smith)

SUBJECT: Response to your memo 01/06/2016 – “Stemming Gun Violence”

Congressman:

Sorry for the delay in getting back to you, but it appears that posting your memorandum on your website and Facebook page prior to actually sending the memorandum to me may have created a transmittal problem.

Please see my responses (in italics) to your comments (in bold).

TO: President Barack Obama

FROM: Congressman John L. Mica

SUBJECT: Stemming Gun Violence

Most gun homicides are attributed to:

1) Mental health issues;

2) Illegal drugs;

3) Stolen weapons; and

4) Prior criminal records.

POTUS: All gun homicides – not some or most, but 100% of them, share a common factor – a firearm. Rather than pointing the finger at everything but the elephant in the room, let’s address the common denominator through required training, licensure, and monitoring of firearms, just as we do with other dangerous instrumentalities, like automobiles and medicines. If the government can require training and licensure of massage therapists and barbers (because oil and scissors are deadly in the wrong hands), and you personally can propose Federal legislation to police the fairness of airline baggage fees, due to the burning need to mandate reporting by airport skycaps, I think we might have the ability to address a problem that leads to the death of thousands of innocent U.S. citizens a year, and the injury of thousands more.

Please consider these initiatives:

Direct federal agencies to adopt policies that strengthen families and promote fatherhood;

POTUS: I have just the agency for you – it’s called Planned Parenthood. Unfortunately, you and your colleagues have consistently voted to defund the very agency you state could help address two issues at once – responsible parenthood and gun violence.

Reform Health and Human Services’ community mental health services as recommended by psychiatrists and mental health professionals;

POTUS: The primary reform to community mental services recommended by not only mental health professionals, but the medical community as a whole, is affording greater access to healthcare to our citizens. A great step in the right direction was passage of the Affordable Care Act, which extended healthcare benefits – including the mental healthcare benefits you suggest - to millions of individuals who would otherwise have no healthcare whatsoever, much less mental healthcare,. You and your colleagues have voted to repeal or defund the Affordable Care Act how many times?

Stop encouraging drug legalization;

POTUS: Using your own logic: it’s not the drugs that are illegal, it’s the individuals using drugs; individuals who are suffering from things like mental illness, lack of supportive parents, and easy access to guns in order to obtain cash and drugs. The crucial difference is: when a drug addict uses drugs, they primarily hurt or kill themselves. When a gun owner uses, they primarily hurt or kill others.

Enforce federal narcotic trafficking laws;

Direct the Department of Justice to enforce illegal weapons trafficking laws;

POTUS: Wonderful suggestions, except that some organization and various individuals with financial and political ties to said organization keep trying to convince the public that any enforcement activity regarding guns is “nothing but a giant conspiracy by the government, trying to pry your gun from your cold dead hands.”

Expand successful reward programs that pay informants about those with illegal weapons;

POTUS: I can’t even get you and your colleagues to fund enough ATF agents to respond to armed squatters on Federal lands, and you want me to provide the NRA with the sound bite “Federal government secret snitches getting millions to help steal your gun rights?”

Conduct town hall meetings, not on CNN, but rather with young thugs in homicide prone cities like Chicago, Baltimore, Detroit, and New Orleans;

POTUS: Prior to becoming President, one of my jobs was to go into communities (Chicago and Detroit are particularly fond memories) and talk to “thugs” - young thugs, old thugs, red thugs and blue thugs. It was called community organizing, and my understanding from Republican campaign rhetoric is that it has absolutely no value whatsoever.

Produce a public service spot directed at young males to put down their guns and pick up a book or learn a trade;

POTUS: Instead, why don’t I save you and the taxpayers a boatload of money by doing a town hall meeting on CNN and getting nationwide television coverage and an audience of millions for FREE!