Four Florida residents, plus part-time Palm Beacher Donald Trump, are seeking the Republican nomination for president. Ahead of Wednesday’s GOP debate, PostOnPolitics recaps each candidate’s last debate performance, spotlights what to watch in the coming candidate clash and — perhaps most importantly — examines how each candidate has handled the Trump Factor.

(Click here for an earlier post on former Arkansas Gov. and current Panhandle resident Mike Huckabee.)

BEN CARSON

Florida connection: Moved to West Palm Beach in 2013, in part because he was “a little unhappy with the taxation situation that existed in Maryland.” Registered to vote in Palm Beach County with the Independence Party of Florida before switching to the GOP last fall.

Polls: Has surged to 2nd in the RealClearPolitics.com average of national Republican polls with 16.8 percent — up from 5th place and 5.8 percent before the first GOP debate. In a recent Gallup poll, Carson has the highest net-favorable rating (difference between favorable and unfavorable scores) in the GOP field, up 16 points since early August. In Iowa, he’s within striking distance of front runner Donald Trump in several polls.

Last debate: After fielding an early question about whether he knows enough about foreign affairs to be president, Carson wasn’t called on by the Fox News moderators for more than 30 minutes. “I wasn’t sure I was going to get to talk again,” he quipped. Carson said “there’s no such thing as a politically correct war,” put in a plug for a flat tax system based on the model of tithing in the Bible, called Hillary Clinton “the epitome of…the secular progressive movement” and vowed to strengthen the military. Asked about race relations, the lone black candidate from either party decried “purveyors of hatred who take every single incident between people of two races and try to make a race war out of it.”

Trump Factor: While Carson has criticized Democrats like Clinton and President Barack Obama, he hasn’t gone after other Republicans — until last week, when he questioned the depth of Trump’s Christian faith. “You know, one of my favorite Bible verses, Proverbs 22:4, it says, ‘By humility and the fear of the Lord are riches and honor and life’ and that’s a very big part of who I am — humility and the fear of the Lord. I don’t get that impression with him.” Trump accused Carson — who discussed his Christian beliefs in his 1990 autobiography and keynoted National Prayer Breakfasts in 1997 and 2013 — of only recently becoming “a big man of faith.” Carson soon apologized for his remarks, saying he didn’t mean them as a personal attack.

What to watch Wednesday: Now that he’s a top-tier candidate, Carson won’t be ignored for a half-hour stretch as he was in the first debate. Carson speaks softly, but has been known to make some controversial statements — he might be asked to explain his past description of political correctness as “very much like Nazi Germany” in suppressing speech or his contention that Obamacare is “the worst thing that has happened in this nation since slavery.” With a majority of GOP voters currently preferring a non-politician for president, look for Carson to present himself as an outsider like Trump, but with a cooler demeanor and more consistent conservative ideology.