A federal judge has ruled the administration is unconstitutionally subsidizing medical bills for millions of people.



According to the Associated Press, the ruling from U.S. District Judge Rosemary Collyer was a victory for House Republicans who brought the politically charged legal challenge in an effort to undermine Affordable Care Act, which passed in 2010.

The issue is the $175 billion the government is paying to reimburse health insurers over a decade to reduce deductibles and co-payments for lower-income people. The subsidies help lower-earning customers afford out-of-pocket costs, such as annual insurance deductibles and co-payments when they seek medical care.

The Republicans argued that Congress never specifically appropriated that money and has denied an administration request for it. Collyer agreed that the administration is exceeding its constitutional authority by spending the money anyway.

Collyer said that subsidizing was ignoring congressional power over government spending.

Collyer said her ruling would be put on hold while it is appealed. The White House expressed confidence it would be overturned.

House Republicans started the lawsuit in 2014. The GOP-led House had already voted dozens of times to repeal all or parts of Obamacare, but those efforts failed to overcome opposition from the president. The House then turned its focus on freezing the money spent on the law. Republican House leaders noted that the Obama administration couldn't spend money that lawmakers refused to provide.

According to the AP, the House Speaker Paul Ryan called the decision "an historic win for the Constitution and the American people."

"The court ruled that the administration overreached by spending taxpayer money without approval from the people's representatives," Ryan said in a statement.

Two local residents said that Obamacare has been beneficial for their families.

“It would affect us big time with our budget if it were done away with,” said Michayla Best, a local small business owner. “Before our girls through my husband’s work it was $330 per month with a family out-of-pocket max of $12,500. For all four us, we pay a little over $200 now and we have a good out-of-pocket max. We need it to go the doctor, because we have infant twin girls. If we didn’t have our plan through the marketplace, it would be about $700 per month. I feel that if we don’t have the subsidies there will be more families struggling to make ends meet or they will just go without insurance.”

“Without the insurance I would not be able to go to the doctor,” said Justin Martin, a local photographer. “I am self-employed and without the subsidy, I wouldn’t be able to afford it. Luckily, when I dropped off my parents’ insurance, I was able to get on ObamaCare.”

The administration is expected to appeal Thursday's ruling to the U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit, where a majority of active judges have been appointed by Democrats.

About 12.7 million people are covered through Obamacare.

If congressional approval is required, Congress' GOP majority can just stop the spending. If that happens, the administration says the only option for insurers would be to significantly raise premiums.

In another case last year, the Supreme Court threw out a challenge to the law's subsidies for premiums.