When the Sixth and Chew Winter Shelter opened Nov. 1, finances prompted the Lehigh Conference of Churches to only staff one of two planned shelter monitors.

But the demand for shelter space forced the conference to add a second monitor by late November, according to Executive Director Jack Felch.

"We haven't even gotten into the bad winter yet," he said.

The Lehigh Conference of Churches continues searching for money to operate the new emergency shelter. It opened in Allentown this winter as a temporary alternative to a shelter that drew strong criticism last winter from homeless advocates.

In its first six weeks, the shelter has served 152 separate people, many of whom are repeat visitors, according to Felch. Attendance at the shelter in Alliance Hall, 245 N. Sixth St., hovered in the low 50s during particularly cold stretches in November, he said. Some of those no longer come to the shelter after the Bethlehem shelters opened Dec. 1.

Alliance Hall and the Allentown YMCA-YWCA were used last year as temporary shelters.

Safe Haven

A great deal of "critical debate" arose last winter over the Safe Haven shelter in St. Paul's Church, Felch said. The church opened its basement for homeless seeking shelter, but offered little more than a floor on which to sleep and no monitors.

The particularly harsh winter left Safe Haven over capacity, prompting members of the city's Commission to End Chronic Homelessness to seek out an alternative this winter, Felch said.

The city settled on the gym in Alliance Hall and asked the conference to run the shelter. Felch said officials developed a $160,000 budget to staff and operate the shelter from Nov. 1 through April 30, but fundraising did not materialize.

The conference has raised about $80,000 and Felch said he needs to raise another $25,000 to commit to hiring another person.

The shelter features 50 cots in the gym and single men's and women's bathrooms, Felch said, and it lacks laundry facilities and shower facilities to accommodate everyone. What the shelter does provide that's an improvement over Safe Haven are case workers to complete intake forms to establish an accurate count of those utilizing the shelter and directing them to necessary social services, he said.

Case managers have been able to move five people toward transitional housing and eight people toward necessary social services, according to Felch. The shelter also provides a medical clinic once a week to provide basic medical care.

Felch said he's not critical of St. Paul's and the Safe Haven shelter. The church showed compassion and did the best it could, he said.

"That has demonstrated the need for something better, and it's only slightly better," Felch said of the Sixth and Chew Shelter.

The Lehigh Valley as a whole needs to improve how it addresses homelessness, Felch said. The newest shelter is only a temporary solution, and the community will need to find the next solution next winter, he said.

He likened the issue to a stool with location, money and an agency to run the shelter representing its three legs.

"And this year's stool is still pretty wobbly," Felch said.

Need remains high

Dale Smith, chairman of the seasonal sheltering committee on the city's homelessness commission, said he was pleased at how the city's faith-based community and service agencies came together to come up with an alternative to to Safe Haven. He was also happy to see the conference of churches act on the recommendation to maintain the shelter Nov. 1 through April 30 as the low temperatures are a danger well before the traditional Dec. 1 sheltering open date.

Smith said the importance of case managers at the Sixth and Chew streets shelter can't be understated as their work helps develop a clear picture of need in Lehigh County and connecting people with necessary social services that can, in some cases, end their cycle of homelessness.

The numbers seen at Sixth and Chew so far this year shows a clear need for "those on the margins," Smith said.

"If we're seeing 35 people a night, each night, what will we need next winter?" he said.

Smith said he expects an economy that continues to rebound from the recession is still pushing people over the edge and that "financial and health catastrophes happen more than people realize."

And it all points to a need for more affordable housing in the Lehigh Valley, Smith said.

The Allentown Rescue Mission expanded its emergency shelter in September from 48 beds to 66 beds in response to last winter's bitter cold, said Tom Gibson, the shelter's interim executive director and board chairman. In total, the mission serves about 750 individual men annually, he said.

Like the shelter at Sixth and Chew streets, the rescue mission, which only accepts men, completes intake forms for each man, directing them to social services where appropriate, Gibson said. The shelter has yet to exceed or even near capacity this winter, he said, although the mission will not turn anyone away.

"If we exceed space ... in the shelter, we'll put them in the chapel," Gibson said.

He said he's amazed the number of men served at the mission continues to hover around 750 a year, even four years removed from the recession.

"Intuitively, I would have thought that number would have slipped, but it hasn't," Gibson said.

There's likely enough shelter space for Allentown's homeless men, Gibson said, but there still exists a need for shelters to house families and women and children.

Felch said a few families have registered at Alliance Hall this year, and the conference has managed to find them alternative housing.