Decades ago, the Rev. Cynthia Jackson recalled, people from across religious lines gathered at a North Hills church to speak out after a spate of cross burnings in the area.

“It was saying, ’We will not have that in our community,’” said Rev. Jackson, a Presbyterian minister from Richland. So when she heard of menacing online comments directed against a Richland mosque, she joined an interfaith coalition to deliver the same message.

“It’s the responsibility of all of us to speak up and make sure everybody is safe,” she said Friday at the Muslim Association of Greater Pittsburgh in Richland.

She and several members of NORTH (Neighboring Organizations Responding Together for Hope) gathered at the relatively new mosque after its weekly Friday afternoon prayer service to talk about their ongoing efforts at cooperation.

The action comes as Muslim organizations locally and nationally are reporting numerous cases of bias and mosque vandalism following the deadly attacks in Paris and San Bernardino perpetrated by terrorists claiming the mantle of Islam — even as Muslim leaders have repeatedly denounced such attacks as un-Islamic.

Local Muslim leaders are calling the shooting of a Muslim cab driver in Pittsburgh a hate crime, although police are still investigating that aspect of it.

Calls by Republican presidential candidate Donald Trump to ban Muslim immigrants, and by several political leaders to refuse entry to Syrian Muslim refugees, have further stoked religious tension.

The threats to the Muslim Association actually began in the summer, when it sponsored a booth at a Richland community event and received an email from a man telling Muslims to get out of “my country” in boxes, preferably dead.

When members of the interfaith group heard of a similar message arriving in early November, they stepped up their support. On Sunday, when the mosque holds religious education, some members of the coalition stood vigil outside, hoping to help create a sense of security there.

Theresa Orlando of Shaler said she told the members, “We’ll be your security.”

The mosque, which has occupied a plain one-story building for the past year and a half, drew about 100 people to the prayer service Friday, and it typically draws more than 80 to classes on Sunday. It has become a hub for the small but growing numbers of Muslims in the North Hills, many of them professionals and their families.

Mosque members said they appreciated the support — and also weren’t surprised, saying the township and the vast majority of their neighbors have welcomed them.

“This is who we are as Americans,” said Aleem Gangjee of Hampton.

Several mosque members agreed, adding that local Muslims has often been involved in under-the-radar volunteering such as providing Thanksgiving turkeys to needy families and other activities, and by supporting other beleaugered minorities.

Mr. Kokan said mosque officials are working with local police on security issues.

He said “we need to be vigilant” about threats and hate speech.

“We can’t wait for the next generation,” he said. “The problem is now.”

Mosque member Nadia Khawaja of Pine cited a recent Pew Research Center survey showing that anti-Muslim sentiment is highest among people who don’t know Muslims personally. Once they do, she said, they realize they have much in common.

Mr. Gangjee added that the mosque also works to educate its young people before they can be enticed by incitement propaganda by groups such as the so-called Islamic State.

For such groups, “human life is of no consequence,” he said, which is “totally against Islam.”

“We convey to youth that human life is sacred and needs to be protected at all costs,” he said.

Peter Smith: petersmith@post-gazette.com or 412-263-1416; Twitter @PG_PeterSmith.