Tea Party figure Mark Meckler's latest initiative to "take this nation back to its founding principles" has come to Illinois.

Meckler's group Citizens for Self-Governance kicked off a national project called "Convention of States" back in August. And, according to a press release from those involved with the effort, the "nonpartisan, grassroots initiative" is now "out of the gate" in Illinois.

The initiative seeks to convince at least 34 state legislatures to convene an Article V convention "for the purpose of limiting the power and jurisdiction of the federal government," according to its website.

In addition to Meckler, who co-founded the Tea Party Patriots organization, leaders from the conservative Patrick Henry College are on the Convention of States' leadership team.

Victoria Deppe, the project's legislative liaison in Illinois, argued that the push for a state-called convention, allowed under the terms of Article V of the U.S. Constitution, is something voters across the political spectrum can get behind.

“Just about everybody is upset about some things that are going on in Washington,” she said. “Congress’ approval rating has been down as low as 6 percent in recent months, and so everybody is upset about how things are going in Washington, whether they would describe themselves as liberals or conservatives or libertarians. We all have issues about how things are working or not working there.”

But Neil Sroka, spokesman for the progressive political organization Democracy for America, stressed that the Convention of States project is something "that no progressive organization or group of individuals is advocating in any way."

"To call this a nonpartisan approach, when every single person involved in propagating this is a right-wing conservative, is kind of ridiculous," he said. "It's just funny that the individuals who run around the country wearing Uncle Sam costumes and preaching the love of the Constitution actually want to go ahead and potentially erode the rights that are already laid out in the Constitution."

Sroka pointed out that one of the frequently asked questions on the Convention of States' website reads, "Is a convention of the states safe?"

"When you're proposing an idea and you have to ask the question of is it safe and then provide the answers to it, you know you're not exactly pushing for a mainstream idea," he said.

So what exactly is the Convention of States project looking to do?

First, some background.

Under Article V of the Constitution, 34 state legislatures would have to pass legislation called an application in order to call a convention of the states. The applications, which have to be filed with Congress, must request a state-called convention for the same issue -- in this case "limiting the power and jurisdiction of the federal government."

At a state-called convention, delegates from each state could propose, debate and vote on amendments to the Constitution. At Citizens for Self-Governance's hypothetical convention, these amendments could only involve limiting the scope of the federal government. Thirty-eight states have to approve any proposed amendment in order for it to be ratified. Only 27 state legislatures, by the way, are actually controlled by Republicans.

Some of the amendment topics the group has floated involve a balanced budget, imposing term limits on members of Congress and the Supreme Court and limiting the use of Executive Orders and federal regulations to enact laws, among many others.

Meckler held a telephone townhall Thursday evening to discuss what America could look like after the states hold a convention and ratify constitutional amendments to limit the federal government.

A "reality" that could emerge from a state-called convention, Meckler said, is having a voter ID requirement in every state, which would restrict individuals without state-issued photo identification from voting. Voter ID laws, which are being pushed by Republicans across the country, make it harder for student, elderly, minority and disabled voters to cast ballots.

"I can tell you, voter ID is going to come out of a convention," Meckler said during the townhall. "It's going to come out of an Article V convention. We're going to prove it, and in the end, we're going to have it."

He also talked about an imagined world in which Supreme Court decisions could be overturned with a three-fifths vote among the states.

"If you don't like Obamacare, we could have gotten three-fifths of states to vote for that override," Meckler said.

Sroka said he can understand why the group is taking this specific Article V convention approach.

"Tea Party conservatives think that because they've been able to gerrymander state houses in some parts of the country that this is how they can legislate and finally get through their right-wing grab bag of legislation that the American people broadly oppose," he said. "If they actually thought that these things were worth changing, then go ahead and compose constitutional amendments to get them passed through the Congress the way we've changed them since the starting of this country."

The Convention of States project reports to have so-called "leadership teams" in 42 states. The initiative has spread to Illinois, though it is only in its early stages here. So far, Deppe said she is the only state-level leader in Illinois with the project, but the group is working to assemble a full team tasked with promoting the effort in the state.

These state-level teams work to recruit a "district captain" in each of the legislative districts in the states. Then, each district captain works to finds at least 100 voters who will contact their legislators and ask them to support legislation that calls for a convention of the states.

The group wants to get 100 people to volunteer in at least 75 percent of the legislative districts in at least 40 states.

So far, the effort has convinced state lawmakers in 10 legislatures to introduce a convention of the states resolution. Thus far, the legislation has only passed through Georgia's state legislature. (Georgia's Senate approved the measure earlier this month, and the House OK'd it on Thursday). Some of the other states with pending applications include Alabama, Florida, South Carolina and West Virginia.

During the telephone townhall, Meckler said that progressives are "welcome to join us in our convention." But they are "welcome to try" organizing their own movement too, he added.

"There are folks on the left, and I hear this all the time, the left wants to organize around Citizens United, and they want to overturn that decision," Meckler continued. "They're welcome to, and in fact, if they were to return the power, to give the power to the states, and take that power away from the federal government to regulate election law, I'd rather have the states doing that. And then maybe state by state they can get the kind of election reform or campaign finance reform that they want."

Wolf-PAC, a political action committee founded in 2011 and focused on removing money from politics, has actually been pushing for the same state convention process to get a constitutional amendment to overturn Citizens United.

Ryan Clayton, Wolf-PAC's executive director, said the group has at least 10 resolutions currently pending in state legislatures calling for a convention to propose an amendment to "restore free and fair elections in America."

Clayton argued that campaign finance reform and overturning Citizens United are issues that have more of the "critical mass of support" needed to amend the Constitution than what the Convention of States project is proposing.

"I don't see their effort amending the Constitution," Clayton said.

But, he added, "I think they’re drumming up support for using the process. I think that can have an impact. I think more and more Americans are looking away from Washington as they look for a way to solve the problems rather than looking to Washington.”

Sroka said Democracy for America has no immediate plans to push back against the Convention of States project, explaining that the effort is nothing more than a pipe dream.

"From start to finish this is a right-wing effort. This does not have the support of progressives in any meaningful way, and this is going to go exactly nowhere," Sroka said. "I'm shocked that they think that they can even get this through the Illinois State Legislature."

Meckler acknowledged that critics of his group's project will "laugh at an effort like this for a very long time."

"Meanwhile, we’re building the army," he warned. "We’re setting up the troops. We’re arming everybody with what they need to get this passed in their states."

Stay tuned.

Image: Thinkstock/larryhw