ANNOUNCEMENT

Readers: Do you have questions about the 2016 presidential race? Washington Bureau Chief Jerry Seib would be happy to answer them in an upcoming Daybreak video ahead of next week’s GOP debate. Send your questions to editor Kate Milani at kate.milani@wsj.com. We look forward to hearing from you!

HIGHLIGHTS

SANDERS TAKES GLOVES OFF AGAINST CLINTON IN INTERVIEW: Democratic presidential candidate Bernie Sanders is drawing sharper distinctions with front-runner Hillary Clinton, casting her policy reversals over the years as a character issue that voters should take into account when they evaluate the Democratic field. Sen. Sanders of Vermont, in an interview with The Wall Street Journal on Wednesday, also said the federal investigation of the security surrounding Mrs. Clinton’s private email account is appropriate.

JIM LO SCALZO/EUROPEAN PRESSPHOTO AGENCY

In the Democratic debate last month, Mr. Sanders said voters were “sick and tired” of the focus on Mrs. Clinton’s “damn emails.” Afterward, many Democrats and political analysts said that he had appeared to dismiss her use of a private email account and server in her four years as secretary of state. Mr. Sanders rejected that assessment on Wednesday. If her email practices foiled public-records requests or compromised classified information, those are “valid questions,” Mr. Sanders said. Mr. Sanders’s pointed comments mark a turning point in what has been a polite Democratic contest. When he entered the race in the spring, Mr. Sanders barely mentioned Mrs. Clinton by name. When he did, it was merely to spell out plain-vanilla differences over policy. Peter Nicholas reports.

More on 2016: Rebranded and energized, Republican presidential contender Jeb Bush is tooling around New Hampshire on a bus to broadcast the message that he can troubleshoot his sagging campaign and the nation’s economy … Republican presidential candidate Florida Sen. Marco Rubio is defending his use of an American Express card issued to him by the Republican Party of Florida when he served in the state’s legislature, a day after rival Donald Trump called his credit card use “a disaster” … When Sen. Bernie Sanders files paperwork on Thursday to run in New Hampshire’s presidential primary, a question looms: Is he a Democrat, and if not, can he run in that party’s primary? Republican Matt Bevin’s victory in the Kentucky governor’s race Tuesday highlighted the enduring power of public sentiment about the federal health law to energize GOP voters … New Jersey Democrats will start 2016 with the largest majority in the state Assembly in 36 years, after they exceeded expectations in local elections Tuesday, picking up three seats and potentially a fourth. But one of the biggest winners wasn’t on the ballot: General Majority PAC … Donald Trump hosts “Saturday Night Live this weekend. Watch the previews.

PATRICK O’CONNOR: GOP Voters Find Jeb Bush Likable, But His Challenges Run Deep

The news isn’t all bad for former Florida Gov. Jeb Bush. Republicans give him high marks for being easygoing and likable and for possessing the experience and knowledge to handle the presidency. He also scores much higher than businessman Donald Trump on having the right temperament for the job, according to the latest Wall Street Journal/NBC News poll. But the numbers get pretty grim from there. Read Patrick O’Connor’s full post in Washington Wire.

WSJ STORIES YOU SHOULDN’T MISS

AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE/GETTY IMAGES

U.S. DETECTS FLURRY OF IRANIAN HACKING: Iran’s powerful Revolutionary Guard military force hacked email and social-media accounts of Obama administration officials in recent weeks in attacks believed to be tied to the arrest in Tehran of an Iranian-American businessman, U.S. officials said. The Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps, or IRGC, has routinely conducted cyberwarfare against American government agencies for years. But the U.S. officials said there has been a surge in such attacks coinciding with the arrest last month of Siamak Namazi, an energy industry executive and business consultant who has pushed for stronger U.S.-Iranian economic and diplomatic ties. Jay Solomon reports.

MOHAMMED BADRA/EUROPEAN PRESSPHOTO AGENCY

U.S., ALLIES TO BOOST AID TO SYRIA REBELS: The U.S. and its regional allies agreed to increase shipments of weapons and other supplies to help moderate Syrian rebels hold their ground and challenge the intervention of Russia and Iran on behalf of Syrian President Bashar al-Assad, U.S. officials and their counterparts in the region said. The deliveries from the Central Intelligence Agency, Saudi Arabia and other allied spy services deepen the fight between the forces battling in Syria, despite President Barack Obama‘s public pledge to not let the conflict become a U.S.-Russia proxy war. Adam Entous reports.

Plus: Democrats in Congress have grown increasingly critical of President Obama’s strategy in Syria after his decision last week to send special-operations forces to assist in the fight against Islamic State militants.

OBAMA LOOKS MORE LIKELY TO CLOSE GUANTANAMO VIA EXECUTIVE ACTION: President Obama appears increasingly likely to have to resort to executive action to close the detention center at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, a move that would fulfill one of his earliest promises. The president is making a last-ditch effort to work through Congress to shut down the prison, but his timing is expected to trigger a battle with lawmakers that allies said he can’t win. Guantanamo Bay held 112 detainees as of Oct. 30, down from 240 when Mr. Obama took office. Mr. Obama plans to send a revised plan on the prison to Congress in coming days. Carol E. Lee and Kristina Peterson report.

REP. BRADY GAINS EDGE TO BECOME HOUSE WAYS AND MEANS CHAIRMAN: Rep. Kevin Brady will likely become the next chairman of the House Ways and Means Committee after winning an intraparty contest Wednesday. Mr. Brady beat Rep. Pat Tiberi of Ohio in a vote of the House Republicans’ steering committee, a group where new House Speaker Paul Ryan had outsize sway to select his successor as Ways and Means chairman. The choice must be ratified by the full Republican conference, which is set to meet Thursday morning. Mr. Brady will become one of the party’s leading voices on tax, trade and health policy. He said in a statement that he wanted to implement a “pro-growth agenda” for the country. Richard Rubin reports.

Plus: A bill requiring hedge funds to disclose their holdings more frequently was introduced in Congress, a move that if signed into law would represent a seismic change for the hedge-fund industry.

GETTY IMAGES

PACIFIC TRADE AGREEMENT HERALDS PUBLIC BATTLE: The text of the sweeping Pacific trade agreement that the U.S. concluded with Japan and 10 other countries around the Pacific was released on Thursday, setting off a public battle over the merits of the deal and whether it should be ratified. William Mauldin reports.

SUPREME COURT UPDATE: Maryland Republicans seeking to reinstate a challenge to the state’s 2011 congressional map made headway early in Wednesday’s Supreme Court arguments. But concern from some justices over a possible flood of political gerrymandering litigation later raised doubts whether they would prevail.

ALSO IN THE NEWS

The Federal Reserve may raise short-term interest rates in mid-December so long as the U.S. economy remains on track, Chairwoman Janet Yellen said.

U.S. Defense Secretary Ash Carter sent a blunt message to China on Thursday by joining the American aircraft carrier USS Theodore Roosevelt on patrol in the sensitive South China Sea: that the U.S. won’t accept Chinese domination of the contested region.

A federal formula to spread out risk among insurers resulted in many co-ops paying steep fees. At the same time, lawmakers eager to chip away at the Affordable Care Act put restrictions on a federal government program to cover insurance company shortfalls.

Federal financial regulators have generally done more to hire minority workers and promote women than the companies they oversee, but most of the agencies haven’t yet fully implemented requirements to increase racial and gender diversity included in the 2010 Dodd-Frank law, according to a new report.

The U.S. State Department denied TransCanada’s request to suspend its permit application for the Keystone XL pipeline, putting the project on a likely path to rejection and punctuating years of miscalculation by the company.

U.K. authorities said they fear that a bomb could have brought down the Russian jetliner that crashed in Egypt Saturday, becoming the first government to publicly raise the specter of terrorism.

Poorer nations’ demand that wealthier countries help bankroll their transition to cleaner energy has emerged as the biggest obstacle for world leaders seeking to reach an agreement on emissions at a summit that begins this month.

The wealthy Chinese women who come to America to have their babies spend thousands of dollars in hospitals, malls and luxury apartment complexes, making “anchor babies” a lucrative business.

A day after voters in Houston soundly defeated a measure that would have extended antidiscrimination protections to gay and transgender people, business and civic leaders voiced concern about a potential economic backlash.

Volkswagen AG reversed course in a fresh dispute with U.S. regulators, halting sales of thousands of additional diesel vehicles amid claims they may contain illegal software that can cheat on emissions tests.

Mexico, a country racked by drug-related violence, took a major step toward fully legalizing marijuana on Wednesday, in the latest challenge to the U.S.-backed war on drugs in Latin America.

The Swedish government will formally seek assistance from fellow European Union members to relocate some of the thousands of migrants entering the Nordic nation, reversing an open-door policy that has made it a magnet for asylum seekers. Plus, Greek authorities sent a group of 30 asylum seekers to Luxembourg under a European Union relocation scheme aimed at easing the deepening migration crisis in the wider region.

TODAY’S VIDEO

SEIB VIDEO: AFFORDABLE CARE ACT STILL HAUNTS ELECTIONS

WSJ’s Jerry Seib explains how the Affordable Care act continues to reverberate in U.S. politics, after GOP candidate Matt Bevin scored an upset in the Kentucky governor’s race.

HERE’S A LOOK AT THE DAY AHEAD

OBAMA ADMINISTRATION: President Barack Obama is interviewed by local radio hosts participating in “Live from the White House” at 2:10 p.m. EDT. He hosts a conference of leaders of American Indian tribes at 4:15 p.m. Vice President Joe Biden delivers remarks in Nashville at 2 p.m. at the National League of Cities 2015 Congress of Cities and Exposition. Defense Secretary Ash Carter is on foreign travel to the Asia-Pacific region. Attorney General Loretta Lynch delivers closing remarks at the Ministerial on International Cooperation Part II in Morocco.

CONGRESS: Senate: The Senate resumes consideration of the motion to proceed to H.R.2685, the “Department of Defense Appropriations Act,” and proceeds to a roll-call vote on the motion at 11 a.m. House: The House is expected to pass its highway bill, with an amendment authorizing Ex-Im Bank and an offset that involves slashing the dividend the Federal Reserve pays to member banks. House Speaker Paul Ryan holds his first Capitol press briefing as speaker at 11:30 a.m.

ECONOMIC INDICATORS: The Labor Department releases third-quarter productivity data and weekly jobless claims at 8:30 a.m.

Other: NASA announces new findings on “the fate of Mars’ atmosphere” at 2 p.m.

WHAT WE’RE READING AROUND THE WEB

Unlike British Prime Minister David Cameron, who focused almost entirely on trade and economics on a recent visit by Chinese President Xi Jinping, the leaders of France and Germany are taking a broader approach, say Philippe Le Corre and May-Britt U. Stumbaum of Brookings: “French and German leaders view these trade and economic partnerships as engines to work on other issues, particularly political and diplomatic ones.”

Think an outsider couldn’t win the presidency next year? Tea-party favorite Matt Bevin’s win in the Kentucky race for governor after he trailed in the polls “is merely the latest warn­ing shot fired at the polit­ic­al status quo,” writes National Journal’s Ron Fournier. “The un­fathom­able seems im­possible un­til it’s not.”

HuffingtonPost’s Paul Blumenthal writes that voters’ support in Seattle and Maine of ballot initiatives to reform campaign-finance laws signals a new front in the effort to reform and democratize campaign finance. “The effort to take the reform agenda to the states — and directly to the people — is succeeding.”

BloombergView’s Al Hunt’s solution for GOP presidential candidates who don’t care for debate moderators: Let them challenge each other. “There couldn’t be allegations of liberal bias. It would be fair to everyone.”

In the WSJ’s Think Tank, Matthew J. Dowd provides five points on the state of the presidential primary races. Among them: Jeb Bush has no real way to grow support.

TWEET OF THE DAY

@heidiscruz: It’s official! @tedcruz is on the ballot in Alabama. #cruztovictory pic.twitter.com/5YNGFmafbX

@SpeakerRyan: If Congress secured the border & strengthened enforcement, that would show Americans that the federal government is more trustworthy.

FEEDBACK: The Capital Journal Daybreak newsletter is The Wall Street Journal’s morning rundown of the biggest news stories and exclusive features from Washington on politics, policy, financial regulation, defense and more. Send your tips, feedback and suggestions for recommended reading to editor Kate Milani at kate.milani@wsj.com.

SIGN UP: Capital Journal Daybreak, straight to your inbox http://on.wsj.com/CapitalJournalSignup