The Washington Post via Getty Images

Rightwing columnist Ann Coulter continued vilifying immigrants as criminals Wednesday in a column poking fun at people with “comically foreign” names.

The column attacks the Obama administration for allowing the federal government to hire health care “navigators” without requiring them to pass a criminal background check. The navigators are charged with taking down applicants’ personal information when they apply for health care through the exchanges established by the Affordable Care Act.

Riffing on the theme of health care and criminality, Coulter presents a list culled from Justice Department press releases of people recently convicted of health care fraud.

Do you notice anything that stands out about the list of convicts? Would any of their names have sounded strange to Ben Franklin? Of 22 people convicted of defrauding American taxpayers by fraudulently billing Medicare or Medicaid, at least 17 have almost comically foreign names.

It is generally not clear from the list of names or the Justice Department press releases whether the people are foreign or American. Spanish surnames have existed in what is today the United States for nearly a century longer than English ones.

Nevertheless, Coulter points the finger at U.S. immigration policies.

None of the scammers should be foreigners! We can’t do anything about our native-born crooks, but why are we importing them? Enormous, unwieldy corrupt government programs run by arrogant bureaucrats would be bad enough in 1950. But after decades of our Third World-only immigration policies, one can't help noticing that Medicare and Medicaid are beckoning Disneylands for foreign-born thieves. The problem isn't their complexion, it's their culture. In America, we think only dumb people become criminals. That's not true in the Third World!

Crime rates are lower among immigrants than the native born, according to a study cited by Pew last month. Crime rates rise among second-generation immigrants to levels comparable to the native born, the study says.

Coulter has continually raised alarms about the possibility of reform including a pathway to citizenship, saying it would create a primarily Latino underclass of welfare recipients that deplete government resources.

In fact, Latinos use less than their fair share of government benefits. A study released last year by the Center on Budget and Policy Priorities noted that non-Hispanic whites accounted for 64 percent of the population in 2010 and received 69 percent of entitlement benefits. Latinos, on the other hand, made up 16 percent of the population but received 12 percent of the benefits.

Check out more wrong things Ann Coulter says below.