Paul Antonson / The Wall Street Journal

The Academy Award nominations for 2014 will be announced Thursday, and it’s certain fans will end up feeling that some movies were snubbed. It’s a familiar feeling for people who follow the Oscars, especially those who have lists of favorite films that have been left out of the Academy’s best picture nominations over the years.

Whether you think “Close Encounters of the Third Kind” was the big science-fiction movie that should have been nominated in 1977 instead of “Star Wars,” or you think “Almost Famous” was an instant classic that would endure longer than its 2000 rivals such as “Chocolat,” you might be tired of arguing about their snubs by now. Or maybe you’re one of those film fanatics who believe the Academy has snubbed popular blockbusters such as “Terminator 2: Judgment Day” or comedies like “The Birdcage” out of snobbery.

In that case, and in the spirit of inclusiveness, we have figured out which movies since 1968 should have been nominated for best picture in an expanded field — and we have put it all together in an interactive graphic you can find here.

Starting in 2009, the Academy expanded its best picture category from five nominees to as many as 10. So what would the Oscars look like if they always allowed 10 nominees? To determine this, The Wall Street Journal’s data team investigated correlations and developed a scoring system that gives weight to other award nominations, industry guild honors and Oscar nominations in other categories. It factors in the relative importance of a movie’s other Oscar nominations, along with other variables such as industry guild honors and Golden Globe recognition.

For instance, a nomination for best film editing has a stronger correlation to best picture nominations than a supporting actor nod does. Another example: A film nominated for best dramatic movie at the Golden Globes is more likely to end up nominated at the Oscars than a movie that’s up for the Golden Globes’ award for best picture, musical or comedy.

Here’s an example of how our system works. We pit “The Reader,” which was one of the best picture nominees for 2008, against “The Dark Knight.”

Kate Winslet in ‘The Reader.’ Weinstein Company/Everett

“The Reader” (Nominated, 18 total points)

Director — 3 points

Actress — 3 points

Adapted Screenplay — 3 points

Cinematography — 3 points

Golden Globe best picture (drama) — 3 points

BAFTA best film — 3 points

Christian Bale in ‘The Dark Knight.’ Warner Bros./Everett Collection

“The Dark Knight” (Not nominated, 21 total points)

Cinematography — 3 points

Editing — 3 points

Directors Guild — 3 points

Producers Guild — 3 points

Supporting Actor — 2 points

Sound Mixing — 2 points

Art Direction — 2 points

Sound Editing — 1 point

Makeup — 1 point

Visual Effects — 1 point

“The Reader” sounds like the usual kind of Oscar bait. It’s a prestigious literary adaptation about Nazis and the post-World War II world, headlined by a director (Stephen Daldry, “The Hours”) and star (Kate Winslet) with Oscar pedigrees. “The Dark Knight,” by contrast, is just a comic-book movie, albeit a comic-book movie that received much better reviews than “The Reader.” Our system doesn’t take reviews or critical consensus into consideration, though, and “The Reader” is certainly richer with “prestige” nominations. However, “The Dark Knight” boasts nominations from the Producers Guild of America and the Directors Guild of America, two honors that usually correlate to a best picture nomination at the Oscars. In terms of sheer volume, “The Dark Knight” had eight Oscar nominations while “The Reader” had five.

Some of our other findings will shock you, some will make you chuckle, some will leave you scratching your head — but many may just vindicate your passionate opinions about the grievous exclusions of past years.

We figured 1968 would be a good year to start since a newer, more modern age was beginning in Hollywood, and it featured what are considered two of the biggest snubs ever: “2001: A Space Odyssey” and “Rosemary’s Baby,” both left out of the five best picture nominees. Would a bigger field of nominations have changed things? We’ll never know, but it’s fun to think about what might have been.

Follow @Michael_Calia and @thegeoff2000 on Twitter.