Berthoud resident Danny Pond looks on as his corgi, Boomer, takes his second attempt during the Splash Dog competition Sunday at The Ranch during the Larimer County Fair. ( Luke Whittaker / Loveland Reporter-Herald )

Trigger scampers to the end of the dock and screeches to a halt, staring anxiously at the scary blue water and a tennis ball bobbing away.

Indiana waits for her owner to reach the end of the dock and then makes a mad dash and enormous splash for the toy that is thrown high into the air over the pool.

Trigger lets out a few sharp barks and paces on the dock, watching the ball bounce and bob.

Boomer quivers with excitement as her owner tosses a toy and yells, "Go get it, go get it." Then the corgi gallops towards the end of the dock and leaps into the water.

Trigger scoots on his belly, his legs hanging over the lip of the dock, then backs away, then comes back. At last, because that ball is just within reach, he slides into the water, to cheers from the audience.

Windsor resident Kirsten Bayne looks on as her golden retriever, Indiana, leaps into the pool during the Splash Dog competition Sunday at The Ranch during the Larimer County Fair. (Luke Whittaker / Loveland Reporter-Herald)

Splash Dogs, an event where dogs compete for the longest jump in a swimming pool, started Friday and is running through Tuesday at the Larimer County Fair.

Dogs are grouped into divisions by jump length and some will be invited to the final competition on Tuesday.

Dogs have to perform 20-foot-and-over jumps to be competitive in the upper divisions, according to Jeff Vanatta, operations manager for Splash Dogs.

"We have some Jack Russells that jump 18 feet. And we have a 6-pound yorkie that jumps 4 or 5 feet," Vanatta said.

Lap dogs 16 inches or shorter are in their own division, and there is a kids division for children ages 6-15 and their dogs.

Advertisement

There are rules to this playful time of jumping for toys. Owners can't throw or push their dogs in the water. A camera records each jump and measures the length of the jump by where the tail entered the water.

"This is just having fun with your dogs," Vanatta said, adding that the event isn't too competitive.

"We have some dogs stop and slide and will jump one foot or something. A jump's a jump. People just crack up."

New dogs are introduced to the exit ramp, according to volunteer Nikki Wegner, by tossing a toy back and forth and allowing the dog to jump into the water from the exit and climb back out. Once he's familiar with the ramp, his owner takes him up to the dock.

"Some will do it (jump), some won't," Wegner said. "We had some unhappy parents this morning whose dogs are great at fetching, leaping, but won't get in the water, and some dogs are just naturals at it."

A Labrador retriever named Trigger, for example, refused to get in the water during practice but finally plopped in during his competition run. While his owner splashed the water to entice him, and a volunteer bounced his tennis ball into the air with a net, Trigger barked and paced and sniffed and shivered.

Meanwhile, Kirsten Bayne's golden retriever Indiana is a five-year veteran of the dock jump.

"His longest jump is 20 feet 5 inches," said Bayne, who is from Windsor.

During the 1 p.m. competition Sunday, his two jumps were each 20 feet 3 inches.

"I just love having fun with my dogs," Bayne said. "This is his most favorite thing and he has such a good time at it."

Many of the owners train their dogs by playing fetch or bringing them into a river or lake near home.

"You need a dog that likes to swim and will chase a toy," Bayne said. "Over time we've worked on running faster down the dock and better catching."

She said a lot has to do with how you throw; too high and the dog won't see it, too angled and the dog will leap that way, cutting short his length.

Amanda and Danny Pond of Berthoud brought Boomer, a corgi, and Bella, a border collie/corgi mix.

"We're just trying to have fun," Danny Pond said. "We're not getting serious with it."

Boomer scored lengths of 12 feet and 13 feet. Bella did better than that with 14 feet and 12 feet during her runs.

Contact Reporter-Herald Staff Writer Jessica Benes at 970-669-5050 ext. 530 or jbenes@reporter-herald.com. Follow her on Twitter at twitter.com/jessicabenes.