Democratic presidential candidate Hillary Clinton gives an economic speech at New York University on July 24. Spencer Platt/Getty Images

In a speech Friday calling for an end to “quarterly capitalism,” Democratic presidential candidate Hillary Clinton proposed replacing today’s maximum tax on capital gains with a sliding scale of taxation based on how long the investment is held. The levels would begin at 39.6% for those investments held for less than two years and decline to 32% if held for three to four years. The current maximum, 20%, would be reached only after six years.

Lawmakers have long grappled with how to tax capital gains: Past approaches include treating it as ordinary income, imposing a maximum tax, allowing a partial exclusion, and applying a sliding scale (Mrs. Clinton’s proposal is not the first; a sliding scale was in place under President Franklin Roosevelt).

The tax on capital gains was the same as that on wages, or “ordinary income,” for only two periods: from 1913 to 1921 and under the Tax Reform Act of 1986. The rest of the time there has always been a significant differential in the maximum tax on capital gains and that on ordinary income. In 1932 and 1933, the highest tax on capital gains was 12.5%, vs. 63% on ordinary income; from 1951 to 1964, there was a 25% maximum tax on capital gains vs. 91% on wages; and today 23.8% (this includes the 3.8% tax on net investment income under the Affordable Care Act) vs. 44.6% on wages.

The argument for a differential tax on capital gains is that it encourages entrepreneurial activity and economic growth. As this will no doubt remain in the tax code, the key questions are: How big will the tax differential be and how will it be calculated?

Mrs. Clinton’s sliding scale encourages long-term investment but locks investors into an arbitrary timetable, one oblivious to markets and real-time indicators of the best uses of capital. Decades ago, the different tax treatments might have discouraged those eyeing motor cars from investing in a new invention. These days, why should the government encourage investors to stick with BlackBerry when, say, Apple or Android could more efficiently utilize their capital? There are similar pros and cons to the other capital gains tax regimes the U.S. has tried.

The mainstream Democratic position boils down to: I can go along with special tax treatment of capital gains but only if it rewards investment, not speculation. A more populist Democrat may quip: The capital gains tax is a huge windfall for millionaires and two bits for the average American. Republicans say almost universally: To help foster entrepreneurship and economic growth, there should be no tax on capital gains. The takeaway from all this? Mrs. Clinton’s sliding-scale proposal would unite the growth and populist wings of the Democratic Party. How to tax capital gains will be part of the economic debate among 2016 candidates. But to succeed at changing the tax code’s treatment of capital gains, or more fundamental tax reform–which looks unlikely in the near term–will require bipartisan buy-in.

Interestingly, a suggestion that would be a more fundamental change to the tax code recently received bipartisan backing. Under a consumption tax—whose pro-growth effects were cited this month by a bipartisan Senate Finance Committee working group on tax reform–all return of capitals, including capital gains, would not be taxed. On the one hand, that’s wishful thinking. But it could be a palatable solution for Mrs. Clinton and her Republican competitors in the never-ending efforts to “fix” the capital gains tax.

Mark Bloomfield is president and CEO of the American Council for Capital Formation and co-authored “The Consumption Tax: A Better Alternative?” He is on Twitter: @MrCapitalGains.

ALSO IN THINK TANK:

Who Would Have Guessed? Bipartisanship on Tax Reform.

Graduates of Many Training Programs Find That the Wage Picture Isn’t Pretty

Overhaul the Tax System Like It’s 1913

Enough Common Ground for Corporate Tax Reform in 2015