I’ve always thought of Highland as Denver’s Brooklyn, an older part of town, across the river, that wasn’t so interesting, then was, then became so interesting I couldn’t afford to live there.

Like Brooklyn, it was a borough, but not the borough, and one of the things that kept it at a distance was Union Station, a nine-square-block barricade that separated the northwestern part of the city from downtown, which, of course is Denver’s Manhattan. The South Platte River was part of the great divide, and Interstate 25, too, but they were bridgeable in a way Union Station wasn’t.

As the Highland neighborhood — upper, then lower, then outer — rose over the past decade with the arrival of young families, new restaurants and sleek architecture, it felt only more isolated because of Union Station, an anachronism from another century, fronting row upon row of train tracks. Sure, you could get around it, with the bridges on 15th and 20th streets, but that was it, and the drive was always a depressing reminder of a golden age gone.

Of all the good things possible from the nearly completed renovation of the Union Station site (the official opening is now July 26), none hold more promise than the prospect that it will unite the two most exciting parts of Denver: downtown and Highland. That it will invite passage and make the journey from here to there, from the urban hardscape to the hip strips — more interesting.

One can reasonably dream of even more, that the station will fulfill the promise of its developers to become a psychic center of the city, where everyone is welcome to sit side-by-side in the Great Hall atrium, shop for flowers or gifts, eat gourmet meals or ice cream, frolic in the fountain with 300 water jets, get a little drunk at the elegant balcony bar. Oh, yes, they could board a train or bus there, too.

The neoclassic station itself, built mostly in the 1910s after a fire destroyed the original structure, has been gently saved, with the nostalgic “Travel by Train” sign included. Tracks have been moved and buildings are going up in the rear and on the sides. People will live and work there.

A scenic urban stroll

It will be possible to walk from the front of the station on Wynkoop Street, through its grand interior, out its rear door and right across its backyard to the edge of the Central Platte Valley. You can traverse the back by walking underground through the new bus station, a light-filled beauty designed by Chicago-based Skidmore, Owings & Merrill, one of the country’s all-time great architecture firms.

These connections are key because now you can experience a scenic urban stroll all the way from the Capitol to any part of downtown, then cut through the historic station (remember, there will be a nice bar in there), then cross a series of bridges that span rail, water and highway, then pass through the Central Platte Valley and sail right into Highland. You have to zig and zag a little, but, ultimately, it makes Denver one of the most interesting cities for pedestrians in the U.S.

This didn’t occur overnight, and most of the pieces of this puzzle are already well in place. The efforts to unite downtown and neighborhoods to the north go back 25 years to the administration of then-mayor Federico Peña and involve both public and private efforts. Many things happened to turn this trek pleasant, but a few were key: The restoration of the South Platte River and the development of Confluence Park, Commons Park, City of Cuernavaca Park and the Platte River Trail; the construction of the Millennium Bridge and the Riverfront Park neighborhood and the whole Highland Bridge system; the revitalization of businesses on Platte Street, and, continuing up the north side, the development of new design-first residential buildings in Highland that have set a standard for architecture in Denver.

The final piece is Union Station, and its owner, RTD, has made a wise choice in keeping the building true to its original purpose. It remains a transit center, a place where the commuter buses and trains — and in 2016, the new light rail to DIA — will pass through, and that guarantees that tens of thousands of people will touch station grounds most days.

That’s not true of all the Union Stations across the country that became dinosaurs as rail travel subsided in the auto age. St. Louis converted its station into a hotel and shopping mall. It looks nice, but it’s a dead zone in the city with not enough reason to go there. Kansas City made a science museum its station’s core — swell if you’re 10 years old.

By contrast, Washington, D.C., kept its station a transit hub, and it’s a lifeline for the region. Bustling, connected and important.

Balancing act

Denver’s Union Station has even more potential, if it’s managed right. It has a better location between all those happening neighborhoods, and comes online just as the region’s economy is improving and Denver’s hotel and restaurant scene is finding its own personality.

There will be concerts and events, and outdoor seating, and a fine hotel and farm-to-table eateries to lure people who have no intention of transiting anywhere. Instead of being a barricade, Union Station could be a star, emanating its energy out toward the ballpark and museums and bike trails, toward the skyscrapers and up through the residential swaths.

Challenges remain, and they’re formidable. To succeed, this public building, rebranded as a place for the people, will have to serve all the people, races, ages and classes. It can’t be an enclave for the affluent, like a lot of downtown and its surrounding areas. The music at the concerts will have to be pop, classical, hip-hop and sometimes sung in Spanish. The food will have to appeal to everyone, and everyone should be able to afford a quality dinner there.

If all of Denver is welcome, then that includes wealthy people and the homeless, tourists with suitcases and teens who don’t necessarily pull their pants all the way up when they get dressed. It will be tempting to sterilize the place, to keep it — and some frankness is required here — some white, upper-middle class idea of respectable rather than letting it be a shared zone of urban authenticity. Already, the hotel, charging $279 many nights, threatens to close people out.

How can the station operators balance the equation? Across the grounds, the restaurateurs, innkeepers, shop owners and landlords will make their bundles, as will the developers who invested. But in return, they will have to serve us all if our shared dream for the project is to come true.

Union Station will be judged by how completely it unifies us all. The rail lines that unite the region, the grounds and walkways that unite neighborhoods, the multipurpose mall that unites engaged citizens of all stripes and types on a Saturday night. It would be a plus, if it wipes Brooklyn off the Colorado map.

Ray Mark Rinaldi: 303-954-1540, rrinaldi@denverpost.com or twitter.com/rayrinaldi