Although one window is covered, the Flowers store shows that few changes have been made to the structure over the years. (Sonje Jessen/For the Reporter-Herald)

Bellvue has changed little over the years. It is located at the intersection of the road to Horsetooth Reservoir and the Rist Canyon Road (County Road 52E).

At the corner sits the old historic Flowers store, constructed in 1883 by Jacob Flowers.

The following year, a post office was added. It may have been built as a result of demand for a place to purchase groceries by the quarry workers in the valley now occupied by Horsetooth Reservoir.

In 1948, it was purchased by the Cache la Poudre Grange 456, and today, serves as a senior and event center.

Civil War veteran Jacob Flowers was born in Pennsylvania and at one time lived along the Mississippi River where he owned several steamboats. Flowers arrived in Colorado in 1872 from Kansas searching for a place for a colony.

Built in 1883, the Jacob Flowers store in Bellvue was the first mercantile business in Pleasant Valley. Demand by nearby quarry workers may have been the impetus for construction of the store. (Kenneth Jessen Collection)

After traveling around the state, he picked Pleasant Valley as having the best potential for his project.

Flowers returned to Kansas with flattering reports about Pleasant Valley. As a result, 25 families decided to head west, and some settled in Greeley (known as Union Colony at the time) while others traveled to Fort Collins. The idea for a colony apparently never materialized.

Flowers purchased the Joseph Mason farm and laid out the town of Bellvue. He constructed a fine home made of locally quarried stone as well as the store — both are standing today. As the town's only merchant, he was affectionately known as "Uncle Jake."

Flowers is noted for the construction of the Flowers Road above the Cache la Poudre River in 1879.

Advertisement

Larimer County contracted him to construct a road between Buckhorn Creek, over Cameron Pass and down Michigan Creek on the west side of the Continental Divide. The idea was to serve the new mining industry in North Park.

A stipulation in the contract was to build a road feasible by hauling a load of oats using a two-wheel cart. Flowers met the terms of the contract, but only by using a considerable amount of manpower. The road did not prove practical due to the rough terrain.

Portions of Flower's pioneer road can be driven today, and the upper portion is a hiking trail.

One of Flowers' sons, Ben, took over operation of the store and became the first postmaster of Bellvue. The Flowers family also operated a nearby sawmill.

In recent years, money was raised to restore the old store by those that are named as part of the original grange or their descendants. The original floor was shored up, the bathroom made handicap accessible and the exterior mortar re-pointed.

In order to apply for designation on the National Register of Historic Places, the windows have to be replaced with ones similar to the originals. One of the two front windows now meets this criterion, and money is being raised for the other window.

Volunteers and money could be used to finish the work on this old store. Call Judy Jackson at 970-482-5091.

The Flowers Store is located on the southwest corner of County Road 23 and County Road 52E (Rist Canyon Road).

Not to be overlooked, on the north side of County Road 52E is the Flowers home, also built of stone. Built in 1880, it too is on the National Register of Historic Places.

Kenneth Jessen has been a Loveland resident since 1965. He is an author of 20 books and more than 1,600 articles. He served on several Loveland boards and was an engineer for Hewlett-Packard for 33 years.