Mention the term Catholic Charities to someone and it conjures up services like homeless shelters, adoptions, programs for the elderly and all types of counselling, among others. And all of these are provided on a local level usually through a diocese or a geographical region.

When all of these agencies, though, are joined together throughout the world, they can have a mighty impact on a major crisis like the typhoon in the Philippines or the floods in Haiti. And that is the work of Caritas Internationalis, the Vatican's charity arm.

Coadjutor Archbishop Bernard Hebda is the only prelate from the U.S. to serve on their executive board and he just returned from an eight day fact-finding trip to Jordan in the Middle East.

He said there are an estimated two million refugees from Syria, Iraq and even Palestine living in camps among a regular population of seven million in Jordan. "It was a great opportunity to show support for them," said Hebda, both a canon (or church) and civil lawyer, who first became involved with Caritas through his 13 years working for the Vatican.

While he did not personally go to a refugee camp, some 350 refugees were transported to a center where all the Caritas board members and staff could speak with them and hear their concerns. For example, some of them have been there for three years and see no hope of ever returning to Syria, he said. "There is a difficulty of waiting and not being of use," said Hebda about the doctors and lawyers and other professional people in the camps. Some volunteer in the camps, "but they have no control over their future."

Hebda praised the Jordanian King and his family for their generosity, but there has to be a way to allow some refugees to get to other countries and begin their lives over. And this is where the international quality of Caritas can help.

Caritas has more than 160 members in seven regions: Africa, Asia, Europe, Latin America and the Caribbean, the Middle East and North Africa (MONA), North America, and Oceania. The President is Cardinal Oscar Rodríguez Maradiaga from Honduras, who also serves as head of the Cardinals' Council advising Pope Francis.

Caritas offices in the Vatican coordinate the emergency response to major disasters; there are also delegations at the U.N. in Manhattan and Geneva. In the five year period 2008-2012, the amount of emergency aid channeled through Caritas was more than $316 million in large part because of the great response to the crisis in Haiti.

In North America, Catholic Relief Services (CRS), Catholic Charities from all the individual archdioceses and dioceses and Caritas Canada are the three member groups.

Pope Benedict XVI reorganized Caritas and appointed three prelates to the Executive Board from where he said are "remote dioceses." And I guess you can't get more remote than Gaylord, Michigan, where Hebda was serving as their bishop at the time before he came to Newark last year. Hebda believes that his canon law work revising the statutes of Caritas caught the eye of Benedict.

He has been serving for two years and so far the meetings have been short ones four times a year with one conducted over Skype. The Jordan trip was the longest and the first where Hebda saw things close up.

He was also in Jordan a few days before Pope Francis landed there in his first trip to the Holy Land. Hebda said there was no connection between their meeting and the Pope's trip, but the notoriety of Francis gave them high visibility and lots of media attention on the plight of the refugees, which can also help them propose solutions and raise needed funds.

And this where the Vatican connection is crucial he said. Pope Benedict XVI praised Caritas during his pontificate, saying it "has rightly earned the esteem and trust of the faithful and of many other people around the world for its generous and consistent witness of faith and its concrete ability to respond to the needs of the poor." Pope Francis said that Caritas is "an essential part of the Church" and that it "institutionalizes love in the Church." He said, "Caritas is the caress of the Church to its people, the caress of the Mother Church to her children, her tenderness and closeness."

Returning home, Hebda reminisced that the trip put flesh on the legal documents he worked on years before. "It made me very excited about the work of Caritas."

Santora is the pastor of The Church of Our Lady of Grace & St. Joseph, 400 Willow Ave., Hoboken, 07030, fax (201) 659-5833, e-mail:padrealex@yahoo.com.