A single-payer health care system that eliminates "monopoly profits" for pharmaceutical companies and reduces "administrative bloat" would boost the economy, lead to job creation and make Americans healthier.

That's the summary of an analysis by University of Massachusetts economics Professor Gerald Friedman, who said the Affordable Care Act is simply one step in the direction of a single-payer system.

You must login to view the full content on this page. Screen Name or Email Password Forgot? Remember me on this computer Login Screen Name or Email Now I remember! Or, use your facebook account: facebook Need an account? Create one now.

Friedman, a consultant to the Missouri chapter of Physicians for a National Health Program, spoke last night to a group of physicians, students and others at the University of Missouri School of Medicine.

"The Affordable Care Act does a lot of good things," Friedman said. "But because the ACA does not effectively control cost, it's not sustainable. The solution is single-payer."

Friedman suggests an 8 percent payroll tax and an 8 percent tax on dividends to finance a single-payer system in Missouri. He compared that method with a general example of current health insurance costs. A family that has around $44,000 in annual income might pay $11,000 for health care — premiums of $9,000 and a $2,000 deductible. A single-payer system with an 8 percent payroll tax would save that family roughly $7,500 each year.

"That money goes back into the economy," Friedman said.

Applying that model on a national scale would reduce health care costs by $592 billion in 2015, he said.

"This is the single best economic policy we could adopt," Friedman said.

Conservatives have long opposed a single-payer system in the United States, citing the strain it could place on already stretched federal and state budgets and warning it could lead to a lack of individual control over health care choices and rationing of treatment.

Friedman presented myriad examples of how costs would come down if "administrative bloat" is eliminated. He noted that Massachusetts General Hospital has more employees in its billing department than the number of beds in the hospital.

"Get the profit out of health care," he said. "Everybody wins."

Friedman also presented figures comparing the cost of U.S. health care with the costs from other countries. Health care in Austria and the Netherlands, for instance, costs half what it does in the United States, yet life expectancy there is longer. He said the life expectancy in Italy, which spends one-third the amount the United States puts into health care, also is higher.

He cited a Health Affairs study from November that found that a quarter of Americans did not get a prescription filled in 2010 because of the cost.

"This is making us sicker. It's causing us to miss days of work," Friedman said. "It's making us miss years of life."

Ed Weisbart, chairman of the Missouri chapter for Physicians for a National Health Program, is a family physician in St. Louis. He said he has experienced patients "choosing between their blood pressure medication and eviction."

Weisbart said the Missouri chapter is "sort of laser-focused on fixing Medicare," with the hope that an improved Medicare program with lower deductibles and also provides dental and vision plans would be provided for everyone in the country.

Friedman conceded that the quest for a single-payer system won't be an easy fight, considering the lucrative salaries paid to pharmaceutical and insurance company executives.

"It will take a national mass movement," he said, comparing such a movement to the abolitionists who took on slavery more than 160 years ago.

"A small band of people transformed the country," he said.