The management company for Forest Park Medical Center in Dallas, which closed suddenly Friday because of lending complications, is looking for ways to resolve the problem but isn’t exactly sure when it will reopen.

Todd Furniss, chairman of the management company for the Forest Park chain of luxury hospitals, said the “pause” in Dallas operations is temporary. When asked how long the hospital might be closed, he said: “I’m uncertain, but I hope not very long. I hope it will be a matter of days.”

Management is focused on two things, Furniss said: the introduction of capital into the business and preserving the hospital’s license.

On Friday, the hospital transferred about 20 patients to other facilities and furloughed about 150 employees, he said. It did not pay all of those employees, he said.

Forest Park reflects a growing trend of high-end, for-profit, doctor-owned hospitals. It has five facilities across Texas, and at least two others are troubled. The Dallas hospital, which opened in 2009, specializes in bariatric, orthopedic and certain pediatric surgeries.

Forest Park’s San Antonio hospital closed Oct. 15 and has not reopened. In September, its Frisco hospital filed for bankruptcy reorganization to restructure more than $12 million in debt, but it’s still open.

“The hospital has been under distress for several months and has been actively seeking additional capital to allow continued operations,” FPMC Services, the Dallas-based operator of Forest Park, said in an Oct. 15 letter to state officials. “It has become apparent that the hospital will not be able to secure the additional capital.”

Last week in Dallas, the hospital’s lender did not fund a drawdown on its revolving line of credit for just over $1 million, Furniss said. He declined to name the lender but said the $10 million-plus credit line had “plenty” of borrowing capacity.

“It’s fair to say we’re disappointed,” Furniss said. “And we’re trying to do everything we can to solve the problem right now and not do things counterproductive to that.”

Financing is just one of the issues facing for-profit, physician-owned hospitals under the new health care model.

“What you’re looking at is a symptom and not the underlying disease or problem,” Furniss said. “This all is arising out of the perhaps unintended consequences of the Affordable Care Act.”

The health care law bars physician-owned hospitals from expanding, and those that do can’t receive Medicare/Medicaid reimbursements. Forest Park doctors must split their time at different facilities to handle such cases, creating “downward pressure on revenue,” he said.

Consolidation in health care is another complication for smaller hospital systems like Forest Park, Furniss said. For example, UT Southwestern Medical Center last month announced a collaboration with Texas Health Resources, and Baylor Health Care System merged with Scott & White Healthcare in 2013.

“The ACA as well as the way the market is moving toward value-based care puts increasing pressure on providers to understand health risk and cost-of-care delivery in a new way,” said Mark Chronister, head of health and benefits practice at Mercer in Dallas. “The challenge is access to the data necessary to manage their practice under the new reimbursement models. One of the advantages of consolidation is the critical mass necessary to fund access to that data.”

In addition to Dallas, Frisco and San Antonio, Forest Park operates hospitals in Fort Worth and Southlake. One in Austin is under construction.

Could the Fort Worth and Southlake hospitals also shut down? “I have no reason to believe that will occur,” because their financing position is much different, Furniss said.

Twitter: @SJeanDallas