The Department of Health and Human Services on Friday gave a green light to an aggressive new ObamaCare exchange pricing strategy that relies on huge silver-plan deductibles and results in smaller government subsidies.

This is likely good news for Centene (CNC), which could see big enrollment gains in 2016 because its Ambetter affiliate managed to significantly underprice competitors in a number of major markets by attaching deductibles as high as $6,500 to silver plans. But it’s bad news for modest- to moderate-income customers buying coverage in some Ambetter markets like Miami, Atlanta and Jackson, Miss., which will face the highest after-subsidy premiums in the country in 2016.

Many Bronze Premiums Spike

The cheapest bronze plan available in 2016 in those three cities will cost about $2,220, or $185 a month, for 27-year-olds earning about $30,000, just over 250% of the poverty level. That’s 21% more than the average $152-per-month cost of the cheapest bronze plan found by IBD in a review of the largest market in each of the 37 states using HealthCare.gov.

Paying the individual mandate penalty of $695 — less than one-third of the cost of the cheapest, $6,800-deductible bronze plan in those Centene-Ambetter markets — may look like the best option.

Although ObamaCare is already struggling to attract relatively young and healthy customers, and Centene’s pricing strategy will make it even harder to do so, HHS said it has no plans to add new restrictions to the type of policies an insurer can offer.

While the Obama administration plans to create a standard silver plan that will have a $3,500 deductible, and it will aim to highlight that option for customers, that won’t do anything to address the real threat: smaller subsidies.

Silver Deductibles Deduct From Subsidies

That’s because the size of exchange subsidies depends on the price of the second-cheapest silver plan in each market. Largely because two Ambetter plans are priced so low in its markets — with a $6,500 deductible for the cheapest silver plan and a $5,500 deductible for the second-lowest-cost plan — the subsidy available to 27-year-olds earning about $30,000 in Jackson will fall from $757 in 2015 to $439 in 2016.

The pricing shift in Jackson has been especially dramatic. In 2015, the second-lowest-cost silver plan cost 35% more than the cheapest bronze, but the gap has narrowed to just 13% in 2016.

One key reason is that Ambetter’s cheapest silver plans cover only about 68% of eligible expenses of the insured group, not too far above the typical 60% covered by bronze plans. The standardized silver-plan option HHS envisions would cover 71% of group costs.

Centene also may be pricing in somewhat smaller bills among customers attracted by its lower-premium, high-deductible plans. Customers who choose Ambetter’s $6,500 deductible plan in Indianapolis will get limited benefits before the deductible is met, such as primary-care visits at a cost of $30, specialist visits for $60 and generic drugs for $15, along with free preventative care such as vaccines. But big-ticket items like diagnostic testing, MRIs, specialty drugs, emergency-room visits and surgical procedures aren’t covered until after a patient racks up $6,500 in in-network bills.

Silver plans are the most common exchange selection because customers with incomes up to 250% of the poverty level are eligible for extra subsidies that lower out-of-pocket costs.

Even with these extra cost-sharing subsidies, people earning from 201% to 250% of the poverty level would face a $4,500 deductible under the cheapest Ambetter silver plan.

After its $6.8 billion merger with HealthNet (HNT), Centene will have about 500,000 individual market customers in 14 markets.

Medicaid Insurers Expand In Exchanges

Along with Centene, Molina HealthCare (MOH), CareSource and other Medicaid managed care specialists have been among the most aggressive exchange competitors in terms of pricing. This group — not the start-up ObamaCare co-ops that are dropping like flies — looks likes the real threat to a profitable ObamaCare exchange presence for the biggest insurers, including UnitedHealth (UNH), Aetna (AET) and Anthem (ANTM).

Last week, UnitedHealth shook up the entire sector with its warning that it may abandon the exchanges in 2017 if it keeps bleeding red ink in the coming year.

If it wanted to, the Obama administration could modify regulations to require silver plans to cover at least 70% of group costs, though it may be leery of taking steps that will lead to bigger premium hikes (before subsidies) in 2017, particularly since those will become evident by the time voters go to the polls in 2016.

HHS also detailed key ObamaCare parameters for 2017 on Friday, including a maximum $7,150 bronze-plan deductible.

Follow Jed Graham on Twitter @IBD_JGraham.