Topics: Donald Trump, Editor's Picks, Elections 2016, South Carolina, The Art of the Deal, Business News, News, Politics News

The Salesman is on his way to Florence, South Carolina. Crowds drape the perimeter of the civic center, huddling together to stay warm while they wait. Shards of glass sparkle in the parking lot, and participants beam as they talk about what their candidate will do for America. A man calls out, “Bomb the shit out of ISIS!” The crowd, thickening by the minute, whoops in apparent agreement.

In many ways, the rally takes place before the Salesman even arrives. Enterprising eventgoers set up shop outside the civic center, offering their homemade wares to the highest bidder. One man displays his for-sale underwear, which read “Make America Great Again” on the rear. He says not to forget to check out his tie-dye shirts, and adds that he made all of these himself, that “Trump doesn’t get a penny of his profits,” and that’s “exactly the way [he likes] it.” Elsewhere, Hillary Clinton makes an appearance — usually in button form — wearing an orange pantsuit, her face partially obscured by prison cell bars.

A female vendor, who said she traveled to Florence from Sarasota, Florida, and is selling baseball caps that feature “The Donald” hair, tells me that she is voting for the Salesman because he is the one politician to say that if he makes a mistake, he will pay for it. She adds that this isn’t her first rally for the candidate, either. “We follow him everywhere,” she says, gesturing to her partner.

A man in a sombrero briefly steps out of line, addressing everyone and no one in particular when he says that the country is $40 trillion in debt — but it might be closer to $100 trillion, actually — and that his candidate is the only person who can help dig the country out of it. When asked why he’s sporting a sombrero, he says that approximately 40 percent of the Salesman’s voters are Mexicans, who are legal in this country, and so he doesn’t have a problem with them. He clutches his candidate’s doll — still in the box — and laughs when he presses a button and the figurine says “You’re fired” in the colicky brusqueness that so many of the candidate’s fans have come to love.

At 5 p.m. sharp, the civic center opens its doors to the public, and the crowd quickly files in, excited to see their star. “It’s like going to the movies,” one attendee says.

After a prayer, two songs, and words from Lt. Gov. Henry McMaster, the Salesman appears — and to the tune of The Beatles’ “Revolution.” He holds up his thumbs — the bread and wine of this holy communion — and commands to his crowd of thousands, “We are going to make America great again.” The Salesman then proceeds to praise himself for being the first to bemoan the menace of The Illegals, and thus “making something happen.” The audience does not respond. He then — and repeatedly — congratulates himself for being the only self-funded politician in the year’s presidential race. The people applaud.

The Salesman continues to riff on this theme in pursuit of more praise, and then ventures into the topic of Medicare drug price negotiation. He receives no applause, and so the Salesman begins to talk about churches, and how “Christianity is under siege.” He has received his desired reaction: A plaintive chorus of “Boo’s” reverberates throughout the auditorium. The Salesman, recognizing a winner when he sees it, proceeds to embed this into his pitch, using it to sculpt and sell his stances on immigration and ISIS to his believers, who at this point are increasingly responsive to his words. Politics, it would seem, is very similar to his business.

In the 1987 book “The Art of the Deal,” the Salesman writes that in order to seal a transaction, he engages in what he calls “truthful hyperbole,” which he describes as an “innocent form of exaggeration.” Essentially, the Salesman says, “I play to people’s fantasies…. People want to believe that something is the biggest and the greatest and the most spectacular.” He adds that he does this for one reason: effective promotion.