MARPLE >> Town Talk Newspapers and the Delco News Network host a Super Flea Market at Delaware County Community College, Route 252 and Media Line Road, 8 a.m.-3 p.m. Sunday.

Dozens of vendors exhibit and sell their wares, including household items, crafts, antiques, collectibles, toys, books and more. All items are available at bargain prices. The site offers plenty of free parking.

The Rose Tree Media Optimist Club has a food booth for the event. Everyone is welcome, but no pets are allowed. Rain date is Sunday, May 22. For information, email towntalkevents@yahoo.com or call 610-915-2253.

Widow/widower support group meets Thursday

Advertisement

SPRINGFIELD >> To Live Again, Widow and Widower Support Group, meets at 7:30 p.m. Thursday at the Church of the Redeemer, West Springfield and Hillcrest roads. The De La Salle String Band provides entertainment after the meeting.

For information, the newly bereaved may call Marie Stewart at 610-789-8741.

Arts education lecture on Wednesday

NETHER PROVIDENCE >> The Chester Historical Preservation Committee presents a free lecture, “Art Integrated Interest Driven Education,” by Carlos Alejandro at 7:30 p.m. Wednesday at Helen Kate Furness Free Library. 100 N. Providence Road, Wallingford. Mr. Alejandro is a professional photographer and the founder of the Cab Calloway Summer School of the Arts. His works have appeared in numerous shows. His commercial work has had such clients as Longwood Gardens, University of Delaware, the University of Pennsylvania and numerous others. His editorial works have been published in many national publications. For information, call 610-872-4497.

Breakfast benefits Chester Senior Center

ASTON >> Senior Community Services holds an Applebee’s Flapjack Fundraiser to benefit its Chester Senior Center at the Aston Township location, 4301 Pennel Road, from 8-10 a.m. Saturday, June 11.

Cost is $10 for adults, $5 for children 12 and under. Tickets are available at Chester Senior Center, 721 Hayes St. “Enjoy a short stack for a tall cause.” For information, contact Vicky Homes or Jamee Nowell Smith at 610-497-3550.

Parish fair at St. Joe’s Collingdale

COLLINGDALE >> St. Joseph’s Parish, 500 Woodlawn Ave., holds a parish carnival Wednesday, June 1-Saturday, June 4 with food, rides, games, and chances on a beer wall and flat screen TV. Family Night is Thursday — ride all rides for one price. The Greater Overbrook String Band performs Friday, and Saturday there is DJ entertainment. Hours are 6-10 p.m. Wednesday and Thursday; 5-10 p.m. Friday and Saturday. For information, call 610-583-4530.

County fire ladies’ aux. meets Monday

UPPER PROVIDENCE >> The Rose Tree Fire Co. Ladies’ Auxiliary hosts the Delaware County Ladies’ Aux. at 7:30 p.m. Monday at the firehouse, 1275 N. Providence Road, Media.

Davidson sponsors health fair

YEADON >> State Rep. Margo Davidson (D-Delaware) sponsors a community health fair 3-5 p.m. Thursday at Yeadon Presbyterian Church, 541 Holly Road, for residents of the 164th Legislative District.

Medicare and the Affordable Care Act experts are on hand to answer questions about the federal health care programs.

The fair includes free health screenings; information on health wellness from providers, state and county agencies, and nonprofits; door prizes and giveaways.

For information, contact Maureen McGrory at 610-259-7016 or mmcgrory@pahouse.net

Bonner-Prendie alumni Mass May 21

UPPER DARBY >> Monsignor Bonner and Archbishop Prendergast Catholic High School Advancement Office and Prendie Traditions present the fifth annual Spring Alumnae Mass at 11 a.m. Saturday, May 21 at the Saint Katherine Drexel Chapel in the Brendie building. 2016 Archbishop Prendergast High School for Girls Hall of Fame nominees are the special guests. Light refreshments and social follow the Mass. All are welcome. For information, contact Patti Mellon Germanovich, ‘75, at 610-368-6372 or pattig@kdi-inc.com

Lyme support group meets in Brookhaven

BROOKHAVEN >> PALRN (PA Lyme Resource Network) Delco Region holds a Lyme support group meeting at 7 p.m. every third Thursday of the month at Brookhaven Community Center, 2 Cambridge Road. For informaiton, email delcolyme@palyme.org, visit www.palyme.org or search for the Delco chapter on Facebook, username “PALRN, Delco Region.”