Josh Hawley visits with Stone County Republican Central Committee Chairman Tom Martin and his son, Ryan Martin, of Lampe, during a town-hall meeting held Thursday at Danna’s BBQ & Burger Shop in Branson West. Hawley is a campaigning for Attorney General.

Tristan Bruner, 16, is all smiles as he and his dad, Conor Bruner, of Branson West, visit with Josh Hawley, Republican candidate for attorney general after Hawley held a town hall meeting at Branson West Thursday.

Posted: Friday, April 8, 2016 9:00 pm

When Josh Hawley decided to become the first one of his family to practice law, not everyone was impressed.

His late grandfather asked, “Can’t you find an honest profession?”

But Hawley was convinced and hasn’t wavered since reading a book by the late Supreme Court Justice Anton Scalia.

Speaking Thursday at Danna’s BBQ & Burger Shop in Branson West during a town hall meeting, Hawley said he learned about how the principles established by the founding fathers in the United States Constitution made all the difference in the country.

“We don’t have any lawyers in our family,” Hawley said.

Yet, he said he sensed this was his calling.

“I thought that’s what I want to do with my life,” Hawley said.

He bills his campaign for attorney general of the state of Missouri with an emphasis on protecting and fighting for religious liberty.

Hawley said with the current situation in the U.S. Supreme Court, electing an Attorney General who will stand up for the rights of Missourians and fight federal overreach is important.

“With Justice Scalia gone, (we’re) sitting at 4-4. We’re not in a good position. As conservatives, we’re in a very dangerous position,” Hawley said.

In evaluating candidates to replace Scalia, Hawley would pose a basic litmus test, “Are you committed to enforcing the Constitution as it’s written, not as you think it should be?”

He said Missourians should ask the same of their next attorney general.

In 2014, the Supreme Court ruled in favor of Hawley’s client, Hobby Lobby, which challenged the Affordable Care Act’s contraceptive mandate.

According to Hawley, the Supreme Court has heard three cases challenging provisions of Obamacare. He said he is honored to have served as co-counsel on the only one that was victorious.

“We won the Hobby-Lobby case, 5-4; and Justice Scalia was vote five,” Hawley said.

One question posed during Thursday’s town hall meeting at Branson West was how difficult attorney general is if a Democrat is elected as governor.

Hawley responded by saying, “Of course, we want a Republican governor, but the governor has almost no power over the Department of Justice. The attorney general does not take direction from the governor. The governor does not tell the attorney general what to do.”

Hawley said this differs from the federal government where the U.S. attorney general is appointed by, and serves under, the president.

On a state level, Hawley describes the attorney general as an (elected) independent executive, an office that does not fall under the authority of the legislative branch.

“Some of these other states that have a liberal governor, the attorney generals are going in and making a difference,” Hawley said.

That is his intention in running for attorney general as a first-time candidate who has never previously held office.

“When it comes to fighting the federal government, who can fight the left’s agenda? The attorney general is the person who can do that,” Hawley said.

Hawley is a native of Lexington, in rural Lafayette County. He graduated from Rockhurst High School in Kansas City, graduating with honors from Stanford before attending Yale Law School. Hawley earned clerkships at the U.S. Court of Appeals, 10th Circuit and the U. S. Supreme Court.

Differentiating himself from his opponent, state Sen. Kurt Schaefer, of Columbia, in the August Republican Primary, Hawley likened Schaefer to a professional politician.

Hawley said his candidacy offers a contrast as someone who has never ran for office, nor held office.

“The last 24 years we’ve had all these professional politicians in Jefferson City that all they think about is how can we get elected next time,” Hawley said.

Hawley said Schaefer has been endorsed by the AFL-CIO. The labor union did endorse the state senator in his re-election bid in 2012.

“He’s a moderate Republican from Boone County. We just disagree on the issues,” Hawley said.

Hawley said Missouri ranks 48th of 50 states in job growth and is 49th in economic development.

“Labor unions have far too much influence in our state,” Hawley said. “In all the most important cases over the last seven years, our attorney general has been on the side of Obama.”

Hawley also said he is 100 percent pro-life and has been so his whole life.

Hawley said if elected attorney general he will work to maintain the integrity of elections.

“Elections are a sacred thing because that’s how we govern ourselves,” Hawley said.

“The Obama and the left’s agenda is to turn our government away from being a government by the people for the people and turn it into a government by expert bureaucrats,” Hawley said.

As for the 2015 Supreme Court ruling legalizing same-sex marriage, Hawley said the big issue of the day is religious liberty.

“In the wake of what the Supreme Court has done, we’ve got to make sure our religious liberties are protected,” Hawley said. “That’s got to be a priority for the next attorney general.”