Governor Pat McCrory has declared November 29 through December 5 as Winter Weather Preparedness Week and is urging North Carolinians to update their emergency supplies kits and review emergency plans.

“During the past two years we’ve seen several statewide winter storms with significant snow and ice accumulations,” said Governor McCrory. “This winter the National Weather Service is predicting above-normal amounts of precipitation. Regardless if that comes as rain, ice or snow, it is important to prepare now for winter weather. Weather conditions can change rapidly, so planning ahead can help your family stay safe this winter.”

North Carolina Emergency Management officials urges people to:

Keep alternative heating sources prepared. If you have a fireplace, store a good supply of dry, seasoned wood. Keep fire extinguishers on hand, and make sure your family knows how to use them.

Properly vent kerosene heaters and keep any electric generators OUTSIDE and away from any open windows or doors to prevent carbon monoxide poisoning. Also, do not burn charcoal indoors. Carbon monoxide poisoning can result from charcoal fumes indoors.

Keep fresh batteries on hand to use with flashlights and weather radios.

1. Always keep at least a three-day supply of non-perishable food in your home.

2. Wear multiple layers of thin clothing instead of a single layer of thick clothing to stay warm. You will be warmer and, as the temperature changes, you can easily remove layers to remain comfortable.

3. Store an emergency kit in your vehicle. Include blankets, a battery-powered radio with extra batteries, a first aid kit, a flashlight with extra batteries, battery booster cables and flares, a tire repair kit and pump, a road map, a sack of cat litter (for tire traction), a tow rope, bottled water and non-perishable high-energy foods such as granola bars, extra clothing to keep dry, and a windshield scraper and brush.

State Emergency Management Director Mike Sprayberry warned that most deaths attributed to winter storms result from indirect dangers such as traffic accidents, falling trees, downed power lines, house fires and carbon monoxide poisoning resulting from improper use of space heaters, grills and stoves.

More information can be found here:Link