U.S. Army Corporal Steven R. Koch died in Afghanistan in 2008

The No. 10 NASCAR Sprint Cup Series car, driven by Danica Patrick, will honor fallen U.S. Army Cpl. Steven R. Koch of East Brunswick at the NASCAR Sprint Cup Series Coca-Cola 600 at Charlotte Motor Speedway on Sunday. (Photo: Courtesy of Getty Images for NASCAR) Story Highlights Fallen U.S. Army Cpl. Steven R. Koch of East Brunswick will be among those honored.

His name will be displayed on the windshield of the No. 10 NASCAR Sprint Cup Series car.

The car is driven by Danica Patrick.

Koch died in Afghanistan in 2008.

NASCAR will pay tribute to 43 fallen service members, including an East Brunswick soldier, at the Coca-Cola 600 on Sunday. Each service member's name will be proudly displayed on a windshield of a car.

U.S. Army Cpl. Steven R. Koch, 23, of East Brunswick, who died on March 3, 2008, of wounds suffered from an improvised explosive device during combat operations in the Sabari district of Afghanistan, will be honored by the No. 10 NASCAR Sprint Cup Series car driven by Danica Patrick.

"I feel like the NASCAR industry as a whole is incredibly patriotic and does a lot throughout the year to support members of the military," Patrick, driver of the No. 10 GoDaddy Chevrolet SS, said in a statement. "I'm proud to have U.S. Army Cpl. Koch's name on my GoDaddy Chevy this weekend for the Coca-Cola 600. He made the ultimate sacrifice for our country and I'm glad we're able to honor him in this way."

U.S. Army Cpl. Steven R. Koch of East Brunswick, who was killed in Afghanistan in 2008, will be honored at the NASCAR Sprint Cup Series Coca-Cola 600 at Charlotte Motor Speedway on Sunday by the No. 10 NASCAR Sprint Cup Series car driven by Danica Patrick, . (Photo: Courtesy of Bill Koch Jr.)

The "600 Miles of Remembrance" is a special tribute to commemorate Memorial Day weekend and celebrate the launch of NASCAR: An American Salute, a seven-week, industrywide salute to active military and veterans, the statement said.

Although NASCAR has a long history of honoring the military, this is the first year NASCAR is holding the "600 miles of Remembrance" event.

During the race, "stickers," which usually are reserved for the drivers' names only, a practice that was started about two years ago, will be used to honor those who've bravely served in the U.S. Armed Forces.

The race will be at Charlotte Motor Speedway in Concord, North Carolina.

The No. 10 NASCAR Sprint Cup Series car, driven by Danica Patrick, will honor fallen U.S. Army Cpl. Steven R. Koch of East Brunswick at the NASCAR Sprint Cup Series Coca-Cola 600 at Charlotte Motor Speedway on Sunday. (Photo: Courtesy of Getty Images for NASCAR)

Born in New Brunswick, Koch, lived in North Brunswick before moving to East Brunswick. He attended Our Lady of Lourdes School in Milltown and East Brunswick High School. Koch enlisted in the U.S. Army in March 2006 and was a paratrooper in the 82nd Airborne Division. He is the recipient of the Bronze Star, Purple Heart and the Meritorious Service Medal. He died about one month before he was due to come home.

Koch Lane in the township was dedicated in his honor last year.

"For us, it's a great tribute for Steven — a very humble, young man that really put a lot of dedication and courage into what he was trying to do," said Koch's father, Bill Koch Jr. "Seeing his name on a race car, he probably would have laughed. It's a very nice gesture. It's bittersweet all the way around, but it's a nice tribute for those that were killed in action and their families."

Unfortunately, Koch said, he and his wife are unable to attend because of prior commitments concerning Memorial Day services in the area.

"I'm hopeful that people remember and think about these guys that sacrificed to protect freedom and the nation and protect people that can't protect themselves," he said. "That's a big thing I write about that Steve talked about."

U.S. Army Cpl. Steven R. Koch of East Brunswick, who was killed in Afghanistan in 2008, will be honored at the NASCAR Sprint Cup Series Coca-Cola 600 at Charlotte Motor Speedway on Sunday by the No. 10 NASCAR Sprint Cup Series car driven by Danica Patrick. (Photo: Courtesy of Bill Koch Jr.)

Daniel Knost, crew chief of the No. 10 GoDaddy Chevrolet SS, said he is honored to be participating in the program.

"It's just a real honor to be able to represent and celebrate the life of someone who's gone out and made the ultimate sacrifice for this nation and for their family," Knost said in a statement. "We're very blessed to do something that many would do for free, and you don't get that opportunity without having people like Cpl. Koch that will go out and defend our borders. We really appreciate all that the members of our Armed Forces do and we're proud to have him on the car this weekend."

Another New Jersey native, Navy SEAL David M. Tapper of Atco, who died in 2003 while serving in Afghanistan, will be honored by No. 41, Kurt Busch.

The race can be viewed at 6 p.m. ET on Fox.

Read or Share this story: http://mycj.co/1SpAlft