MIAMI, Sept. 11, 2014 /PRNewswire/ -- HolaDoctor.com, the leading health website in the Hispanic digital market, launched a new Interactive Health Insurance Center which aims to inform and educate Hispanics on how to apply for and acquire health coverage in 2015.

According to the Affordable Care Act, which came into effect in March 2010, all citizens and legal residents of the United States must be covered by health insurance or they may have to pay a fee and assume all their health care costs.

The health insurance marketplace is in its second year of operation, but according to data from the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, 30 to 40% of Hispanics who are eligible to purchase coverage have not yet done so.

Open enrollment in the health insurance marketplace will run from November 15th, 2014 through February 15th, 2015. During this period, Hispanics who do not have health insurance will be able to enroll themselves and their family members in their state's marketplace, apply to receive government aid, and purchase a coverage plan that fits their needs.

"Our market studies show that the Hispanic community needs significant assistance in the process of applying for subsidized health insurance and learning to take full advantage of their health coverage. This need led us to create the Interactive Health Insurance Center in 2013 and make modifications and improvements based on our experience with the first enrollment period of the health insurance marketplace," said Roberto Estrada, CEO of HolaDoctor.

The Interactive Health Insurance Center is easy to use. It provides access to the health insurance marketplace by state, as well as assistance tools such as a subsidy calculator, a glossary of key terms, a directory of community health centers and clinics in states like California, Florida, New York, Georgia, and Colorado, and a section answering the questions most commonly asked by Hispanics with regards to health insurance and the Affordable Care Act.

The Center is also equipped with a team of health insurance experts who are ready to offer advising services in Spanish. These services can be requested by filling out a form available on the website: http://holadoctor.com/es/centro-de-seguros-de-salud.

About HolaDoctor

HolaDoctor® is a leading Hispanic health company. Founded in 1999, HolaDoctor manages the largest online community of Hispanics interested in health and wellness and is the exclusive partner of Univision Interactive Media for health content. HolaDoctor also provides strategic marketing, communications, and consulting services to healthcare companies seeking to expand their business with Hispanic consumers in the United States and internationally. The company has broad experience in the health care law (Affordable Care Act) [http://holadoctor.com/es/seguros-de-salud, health insurance, obesity and diabetes, among other key areas, to increase access to health care and reduce disparities among Hispanics. Headquartered in Atlanta, Georgia, with offices in South Florida and Latin America, HolaDoctor serves a growing customer base throughout the Western Hemisphere. For more information, visit http://www.holadoctor.net

Contact: Catalina Rodriguez

crodriguez@holadoctor.net

Phone number: 678-242-6779

SOURCE HolaDoctor