It was a quick start to 2015.

“I have no more campaigns to run, I know because I won them all.”

It was a year of memorable moments, like marking the 50th anniversary of the marches from Selma to Montgomery in one iconic photograph and welcoming a pontiff to the United States.

"You remind us that the Lord’s most powerful message is mercy,” Obama said to Pope Francis.

It was a big year for Mrs. Obama. The first Lady making moves on her childhood obesity initiative.

“For some of you cooking is a way to bond with your family,” Michelle Obama said.

It was a year of change. With police relations front and center, Obama focused on their courage and sacrifice at 34th Annual National Peace Officers Memorial Day.

Historic agreements, like the Iran deal and affordable care act, even the White House changed, colors that is, when the supreme court declared same sex marriage legal in all 50 states.

"When all Americans are treated as equal, we are all more free,” Obama said.

And another kind of change, climate change. The President took a trip to Alaska to draw attention to the fight against global warming, ahead of the world conference in Paris where they made a historic climate agreement.

"I believe in the words of Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. as there is such a thing as being too late and when it comes to climate change that hour is almost upon us,” he added.

The shooting in Charleston struck a nerve with the President. Later, after another deadly shooting in Oregon, the President would deliver a speech he says he has given to many times before.

"The reporting is routine, my response here at this podium ends up being routine,” he said.

Before the year was out, chaos. With the attacks in Paris and San Bernardino came a new threat to national security.

“The threat from terrorism is real but we will overcome it,” Obama said.

It marked a renewed effort to fight Isis at home and abroad, likely to linger into 2016.

It’s been a busy year for the President and it looks it will only get busier, as he prepares to enter the final year in office. First up on his plate? Gun control. The President is expected to issue an executive order on new gun control measures early in the New Year.