Firefighters exit the Bob L. Burger Recreation center after a reported chemical spill in the center's pool area on Saturday. ( Paul Aiken / For The Camera )

The fitness areas at Lafayette's Bob L. Burger Recreation Center will reopen Monday, but the pool will remain closed for more tests after a suspected chemical leak sent 22 people to the hospital on Saturday.

Air monitoring tests conducted immediately after reports of patrons coughing and experiencing nausea in the pool area late Saturday afternoon revealed no abnormal gas or chemical levels, according to city officials.

A second round of tests by the Lafayette Fire Department on Sunday also found normal air quality throughout the pool, fitness and public areas of the rec center, according to Lafayette spokeswoman Debbie Wilmot.

She said Boulder County Public Health will test the pool water on Monday, and the pool will remain closed until the results are analyzed.

On Monday, all recreation programs will run as scheduled, with the exception of aquatic classes and open swim, she said.

Lafayette officials said it's not known what triggered the reported illnesses.

Recreation center visitors were evacuated to the adjacent Pioneer Elementary School on Saturday after the afternoon incident. Patients were then taken to local hospitals for symptoms that included coughing, nausea and vomiting.

Lafayette officials on Sunday said they didn't know how the 22 evacuees were doing, but Lafayette Fire Chief Dave Friedel reported Saturday that all were conscious and alert.

Advertisement

Friedel said emergency responders came from as far away as Thornton, as well as nearby Louisville and Boulder, to handle the situation. The Boulder County Hazardous Materials Team also was on the scene to aid in investigating the cause of the incident.

The recreation center, located at 111 W. Baseline Road, was closed to the public as the leak was investigated, and North Public Road approaching the facility was shut down to accommodate first responders.

Amy Bounds: 303-473-1341, boundsa@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/boundsa