You’re now able to grab more than just popcorn, candy or a soda at Movies 14 in Mishawaka. The theater recently finished renovating part of its lobby, adding a bar and cafe.

The cafe serves hot items — chicken strips, fries, pizza and pretzel bites — a limited Starbucks menu and hand-dipped ice cream. You can also get milkshakes, which the theater says have been the most popular addition.

On the bar side, there’s already a selection of beer and wine; some frozen and mixed wine-based drinks are coming. Although it is called a bar, it’s not the long row of bar stools you might be thinking of.

The bar is just a separate register with a divider offsetting it from the cafe side. The renovation did add table and booth seating, though, which the theater officials say people have been taking advantage of.

Of course just like the popcorn, anything you buy from the cafe and bar can also be brought into the movie. And when you combine the food and drink additions with the upgraded seating that was also installed, you’re in for a great movie experience.

The theater at 910 W. Edison Road started the lobby renovation in January, right after it finished replacing all of its traditional seating with luxury recliners. There’s no over hyping these seats; they are fantastic. There’s no better way to watch a movie than in a comfy seat with lots of room and your feet propped up.

The armrest between some seats can even be pulled up if you want to cuddle with your date. For the sake of the rest of us, though, please keep that to a minimum.

Although Movies 14 is the first in the area to upgrade to luxury seating, it’s not the first to expand its food and drink offerings. Wonderland Cinema in Niles started serving beer and wine last summer, and it added food items like sandwiches, hot dogs and mozzarella sticks well before that.

Improved seating and concession selections have been expanding nationally in recent years. Of the just under 6,000 movie theaters in the country, an estimated 600 sell alcohol, with many more planning it for the future, according to the National Association of Theater Owners.

There are also theaters taking amenities to the extreme, offering luxury seating with waiters bringing full menus of food and drinks right to your seat.

Without a doubt these changes are being made to improve the customer’s experience and keep people coming in the door.

“Our feeling has always been to give customers as many options as possible,” says Frank Gonzalez, a spokesman for Cinemark Theaters, the Plano, Texas-based owner of Movies 14.

Cinemark is the third largest movie theater owner in the U.S.

Improvements and renovations are always part of the life cycle of theaters, Gonzalez says, but now the company is thinking beyond aesthetic changes and looking at how the customer experience can be improved.

For example, with the addition of the luxury recliners at Movies 14, you now buy a ticket for a specific seat. It’s especially nice for the highly anticipated movies. You can buy your ticket and reserve your seat days in advance if you want. No more showing up an hour before the movie to get a good seat.

Even though theater officials say the theater lost more than half of its total number of seats with the upgrade, ticket prices didn’t increase.

Theaters across the country have been making these improvements to get people back in the seats. Following the hard hit that ticket sales took in 2014, something needed to be done.

Ticket sales that year were the lowest since 1995, with box office sales dropping 5.2 percent to $10.3 billion. While movie offerings play a large part in attendance as well, creating a better experience goes a long way.

Whatever the industry did, it worked. The box office saw a more than 7 percent increase in 2015, ending at $11.1 billion.

And if the reaction from Market Basket readers on social media is any indication, the upgrades should be a big draw.

“It’s really nice and genuinely makes me want to go to the movies more often,” Kat Brown wrote on Facebook.

Smart Streets celebration

The city of South Bend and downtown businesses will celebrate the launch of the Smart Streets conversion Monday, offering a range of specials. The Smart Streets project will be turning downtown’s one-way roads into two ways.

Business specials:

Cafe Navarre: 10 percent off all food, all day

Chicory Cafe: 10 percent off all food, all day

Fab Forty Maternity: 10 percent off all retail purchases

Fiddler’s Hearth: 10 percent off all food, all day

Hair Crafters: Free paraffin bath on hands with any paid service from Tuesday through April 9.

Memorial HealthWorks! Kids’ Museum: $1 off general admission

Idle Hours Bookshop: 10 percent off all city planning books

Inspire Me: 10 percent off all purchases

LaSalle Grill: 10 percent off all food, all day

Laura Johnson Skin Care and Massage: 10 percent off all products and 15 percent off all appointments booked on Monday (either in person or online). Appointments must be scheduled to take place within next three weeks and can be scheduled online from ljskincareandmassage.com.

Le Peep: 10 percent off all food, all day

Michiana Brewer’s Supply: 12 percent off entire store

South Bend Brew Werks: 10 percent off food bill for anyone who comes in and writes down on a note card why they think Smart Streets is going to be awesome.

South Bend Woodworks: 20 percent off any product. Use coupon code Mikes2016. southbendwoodworks.com

Therapeutic Indulgence: 10 percent off Monday’s yoga classes and 10 percent off retail products all day (Mention Smart Streets when you come in to get your discount)

Woochi Japanese Fusion & Bar: 10 percent off all food, all day

Lincoln Wright’s column runs on Wednesdays and Sundays. Contact him at LWright@sbtinfo.com or 574-235-6324. You can also talk retail at Facebook.com/thebasket and at Twitter.com/marketbasket.