Associated Press

John Malone‘s adding to his European empire. This morning the media mogul’s Liberty Global international cable holding company agreed to buy Dutch cable company Ziggo for €6.9 billion ($9.44 billion).

Here’s how that changes the lineup for Liberty Global in Europe:

Mr. Malone has made no secret of his thirst to grow via consolidation of cable assets. “The name of the game in the cable business is scale,” he said at Liberty Global’s annual meeting in June last year. And Europe, beset by a fragmented telecom industry, weak economies and fast-moving regulation, is a good place for him to do business.

Liberty Global has spent $38.7 billion on 16 telecom deals in the last two years, representing 6% of the global telecom market’s value by merger and acquisition activity totaling $635.3 billion, according to data provider Dealogic. The purchase of the remainder of Ziggo was Liberty Global’s third-largest acquisition ever, after Virgin Media in February last year and Cable & Wireless Communications 15 years ago, via its subsidiary NTL.

Liberty Global was a particularly active deal maker in 2013.

At the start of the year, it acquired U.K. cable-television and Internet provider Virgin Media for $16 billion. It also raised its stake in Telenet Group Holding of Belgium, which it tried to acquire fully.

In June, Liberty moved to acquire Germany’s biggest cable operator, Kabel Deutschland Holding, but was outbid by Vodafone in a roughly $10.6 billion deal. Liberty already was a major operator in Germany, having bought Germany’s No. 2 cable company, UnityMedia, in 2009, and Kabel Baden-Wuerttenberg, in 2011.

The Ziggo deal is unlikely to be the endpoint for Mr. Malone’s European adventure, as U.S. telecom providers circle Europe for deals.

“U..S operators have been looking at Europe. Europe is a mature market, but an important market,” said Mike van Dulken, analyst at Accendo Markets.

Liberty Global declined to comment on its acquisition strategy or potential targets.