Inconsistent information about who exactly is at risk for contracting or spreading Ebola is contributing to panic about the deadly virus being tracked in the U.S. for the first time.

The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention has tried to assure the public there is nothing to fear. But people who may have legitimate concerns about whether they were exposed say they can’t get information that calms their worries.

A Florida lawyer who Tuesday flew on the Frontier Airlines plane that a day earlier carried Ebola patient Amber Joy Vinson said he later placed precautionary calls to his doctor and to the Ohio health department after he realized he was seated close to where Vinson had been seated. He was referred to the CDC.

“I wanted someone to answer if there was any risk and if I should self-quarantine for 21 days and what to tell my employer,” said the lawyer, who provided copies of his flight vouchers to The Denver Post but asked that his name not be used

.

He says a CDC employee told him, “I don’t have an answer for you.”

“I said I was surprised, because (she’s) going to get a call from about 500 people on these other flights,” he said. “I know I have much more chance of getting influenza, but it would be nice to have some communication.”

At 8:30 p.m. Wednesday, he was told that someone would be in touch. On Friday, he was still waiting.

None of this is helping to assuage public fear.

“This is one of the saddest examples of bad communications I’ve seen in 25 years of public relations,” said Wendy Aiello of Aiello Public Relations in Denver. “On a scale of ‘Fantastic’ to ‘I can’t believe this is happening,’ this all weighs heavily to the side of ‘What in God’s name is going on?”

As happens with other major national health crises — such as the SARS outbreak in 2003 — the CDC activates a joint information center that controls communications, public affairs director Barbara Reynolds said.

Part of the mission is to move questions from the public through a triage system that helps to sort out people with legitimate concerns about exposure from those who have general questions.

“It’s like disease detective work,” Reynolds said. “Our job is to make sure that we can contain any spread of Ebola or disease.”

The CDC, she said, has been focused on finding people who were passengers on the two flights that actually carried Vinson. But the system has been overwhelmed.

“It does take more time because you’re building up through a triage that can’t handle it all,” she said. “But the CDC is responsible for answering the questions that come to the CDC.”

On Thursday,

Frontier Airlines president Barry Biffle said he was still waiting for answers to crucial questions, including how best to dispose of material removed from the plane during a precautionary decontamination process.

Reynolds said a CDC liaison has been in constant contact with the airline. But since the agency did not recommend Frontier rip out seats and carpeting, it is not offering guidance on how to dispose of them.

“This is a really frustrating situation,” she said. “It probably seems like we’re not helping them, but we’re giving answers based on our recommendations. We didn’t believe the plane needed to be out of service.”

This approach may be a good idea from the perspective of conserving resources, Aiello said. However, crisis communications involves delivering a consistent message and answering questions immediately.

“There is not a leadership voice,” she said. “The fact that it’s the CDC, which deals with fear and trauma and confusion, and that it appears there is not an integrated communications plan in place is troubling. And if there’s one in place, it’s not being implemented in an effective manner.”

Reynolds said the CDC is trying. On Thursday, the agency fielded 155 questions in one hour via Twitter chat.

Still, she admits there is room to improve.

“I want this to go better, and I want people to get the information they need when they need it,” she said.

The CDC opened a 24-hour help line Friday.

Also, Reynolds said she will propose an online Ebola FAQ page to the joint information center.