Lawmakers questioned provider organizations on how they are preparing their members to implement the changes included in the Medicare Access and CHIP Reauthorization Act of 2015, which became law just over a year ago.

MACRA, signed into law roughly a year ago, changed how physicians are paid under Medicare, after years of physicians pressuring Washington to end the sustainable growth rate formula, which cut Medicare payments of services. At the subcommittee’s second hearing overseeing the implementation of the law, officials form physicians groups said they were talking with colleagues and members about the best ways to implement the law.

The Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services has started the rule making process regarding the law, which will further determine how doctors implement the reform.

Subcommittee Chairman Rep. Joseph Pitts (R-Pa.) said that until then, physicians should be preparing for the process, as they know it is coming.

“Rather than wait until CMS issues a proposed rule on how they plan to implement these incentives and program changes, there are steps every practitioner can be taking right now

Physicians should be thinking about ways they can modernize their practices and participate in current programs to act as a springboard for their preparation for MACRA.

Rep. Michael Burgess (R-Texas), a doctor, said Congress has a priority to ensure the law is implemented properly so that doctors aren’t faced with another policy that is unliked and difficult to repeal.

“Societies have some obligation to prepare doctors for implementation of this,” Burgess said.

Barbara McAneny, a board member of the American Medical Association, said the group had learned many physicians were unaware of the details of the law and how it would affect them, according to prepared remarks.

The group recommended that CMS consolidate performance reporting for providers, broaden APMs and improve its methods for measurement.

Robert McLean, from the American College of Physicians, said in his prepared remarks that many of his colleagues are surprised to learn that the law will make it easier for them to practice.

“I truly believe that if MACRA can get rolled out with its best intentions implemented well, it is a remarkable ‘shot in the arm’ Congress can give to physicians and the rest of the clinician community to combat burnout, and thereby enable our system to realistically strive for the Quadruple Aim,” he said.

The group recommended that CMS create a learning health system, ensure patient centeredness and make reporting less burdensome.

Robert Wergin, the board chair of the American Academy of Family Physicians, said in his remarks that the group has launched a multi-year education and communication initiative for its members to inform the about MACRA.

Additionally, Jeffrey Bailet, president of the Aurora Health Care Medical Group and chairman-elect of the American Medical Group Association, a trade association group representing medical groups and health systems, testified on how the Wisconsin hospital he leads has shifted to a value-based payment system through some initiatives.

“Medicare largely has been based on fee-for service payments since its inception and many physicians are in various stages of readiness for a value-based payment system,” he said. “While systems such as Aurora and our physicians have early experience with value-based payment structures, there is and will continue to be a significant learning curve as providers begin to take on financial risk.”