In the last decade, the Times-Union editorial board can’t recall as many close calls in making endorsements.

The board examines bios, questionnaires and material submitted by the candidates. We usually interview the candidates together to allow for better comparisons.

We are not looking for agreement down the line. We are more impressed by an open mind, evidence of a strong work ethic, curiosity about issues and the willingness to work well with colleagues.

Our choices are in bold.

YES ON LIBRARY STRAW VOTE

Perhaps the most important reason to vote will have no immediate impact. It is a straw vote in Duval County in which voters will be asked if they would like to have a binding referendum on an independent library district.

This is not anti-consolidation. In fact, independent authorities are a key part of the consolidated government because they need strong management and certain separation from politics.

But such a district would be significantly different than independent authorities. Key funding decisions would be made by a board of elected officials. And any revenue would be carved out of the current city revenue.

Actually, the revenue issues are less important than the ability to have predictable funding and better planning. Other Florida counties like Alachua and Orange have independent library boards.

The current system is simply not working for those who use it. If you care about a healthy library system, vote yes on the straw ballot.

CONGRESS: GOP PRIMARIES

In District 4, Rep. Ander Crenshaw has built strong influence in the military and port sectors, both crucial to the Jacksonville economy.

He is a reliable conservative, consistently opposing the Affordable Care Act and supporting the FairTax. However, he is open-minded enough to work across the aisle when it is called for.

In District 3, Rep. Ted Yoho surprised the political world two years ago when he knocked off a longtime incumbent. The large animal veterinarian retains his conservative principles; he has a mind of his own, but he also is willing to work with Democrats on broad-based issues.

In District 5, two impressive Republican candidates are seeking to challenge incumbent Democratic Rep. Corrine Brown. Glo Smith gets our nod because she hails from this area and brings a wealth of experience about the key issues facing her constituents. Thuy Lowe from the Orlando area has a fascinating life story as an immigrant from Vietnam.

FLORIDA HOUSE: GOP PRIMARIES

In District 16, Rep. Charles McBurney has been one of the most effective and productive members of Northeast Florida’s legislative delegation. He has been instrumental in requiring civics education in the public schools and has been an effective advocate for smart justice reforms. He also showed a familiarity with serious issues involving mental illness.

In District 15, it has been disappointing to see how nasty this campaign has become. Perhaps it is due to both Republicans agreeing on most major issues. Paul Renner and Jay Fant are both strong candidates. While we don’t agree with Renner on every issue, he seemed to have wide interests and a sophisticated mindset.

FLORIDA SENATE: GOP PRIMARY

In District 6, Sen. John Thrasher benefits his constituents with a long history of public service. From Clay County School Board member to speaker of the Florida House to his current role as a key leader in the Florida Senate, Thrasher has fulfilled local expectations.

Combined with his political acumen, Thrasher has the ability to get things done for the people of Northeast Florida.

DUVAL SCHOOL BOARD

In District 4, the editorial board had a tough call in deciding between incumbent Paula Wright and newcomer Darryl Willie. It is “old school” vs. “new school.”

Willie is a Teach for America veteran and administrator. Wright is a strong advocate for her constituents.

At the end of the day, however, Willie seems to be more open-minded about making changes in a district that’s dealing with a surge of families pulling children out of its schools.

In District 2, the board had a similarly tough choice between two newcomers, Scott Shine and Sam Hall. Both have strong resumes of civic service. Either would do a fine job. In the final analysis, Hall’s approach — pragmatic and open minded — was the deciding factor.

CIRCUIT COURT

Mike Sharrit is the clear choice in the only race involving the local judiciary.

Endorsing in a judicial race is difficult because candidatets are forbidden by judicial ethics from commenting on issues that might come before them.

So we must assess temperament, background, leadership experiences and the willingness to work hard and grow on the job.

Sharrit’s legal credentials are impeccable. His list of endorsements is phenomenal. He would make an excellent addition to the local bench.