The Supreme Court building is reflected in an anti-abortion protester's sunglasses as he prays during the third and final day of legal arguments over the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act at the Supreme Court in Washington, in this March 28, 2012 file photo. REUTERS/Jonathan Ernst/Files

4710592

Office Depot is standing by its refusal to print 500 anti-Planned Parenthood flyers, because the flyer is “graphic” and “hate material” that persecutes those who support abortion rights, according to a company explanation obtained The Daily Caller News Foundation.

Maria Goldstein, 42, of Illinois requested the flyers Aug. 20, but an employee refused, citing corporate policy. Goldstein said she is being discriminated against because of her religious beliefs, and obtained legal counsel.

In a letter written by attorney Robert A. Amicone, Office Depot said the refusal had nothing to do with the woman’s religious beliefs, but she disagrees.

“When I tell people they’re shocked because this is America,” Goldstein told TheDCNF Thursday. “Office Depot is trying to silence my freedom of speech and my freedom of religion.”

Goldstein planned to hand them out at her church. The flyers list facts from Planned Parenthood’s annual report and quotes a prayer calling for an end to Planned Parenthood.

The prayer is where Office Depot has a problem.

The letter obtained by TheDCNF says that certain language, such as “the killing of children in the womb” and “the grisly trade of body parts” as well as referencing the “death camps in our midst” is graphic hate speech by Office Depot’s standards.

Office Depot policy “prohibits the copying of ‘graphic material,’ which can include descriptions of dead or dismembered bodies,” Amicone wrote. Company policy also “prohibits the copying of “hate material” that advocates for the persecution of groups of people, regardless of the reason.”

“To be clear, Office Depot’s position is that the above-quoted language falls within the definition of ‘graphic material’ and/or ‘hate material,’ making the refusal to print the flyer appropriate,” the attorney wrote.

Goldstein has teamed up with the religious liberty group the Thomas More Society. They told TheDCNF they will likely file a legal complaint if Office Depot does not comply.

Read the full letter here:

Office Depot Response

Read the flyer here:

Planned Parenthood Fact Sheet and Prayer by Daily Caller News Foundation

Follow Casey on Twitter and like him on Facebook

Content created by The Daily Caller News Foundation is available without charge to any eligible news publisher that can provide a large audience. For licensing opportunities of our original content, please contact [email protected].