Fungal disease spread by tiny beetles affects black walnut trees

Exit holes produced by walnut twig beetles and shallow tunnels exposed under the bark are shown. (Morgan County CSU Extension / Courtesy photo)

The presence of both thousand cankers disease and the walnut twig beetle have been confirmed in a walnut tree in Fort Morgan.

Thousand cankers disease is a fungal disease in black walnut (Juglans nigra) that is spread by the minute walnut twig beetle (Pityophthorus juglandis).

Initial symptoms include yellowing of the upper crown, which progresses to include death of larger branches. During advanced stages, foliage appears to wilt.

Mortality in trees is a result of tunneling by the walnut twig beetle and subsequent cankers, which develop around beetle galleries caused by the fungus Geosmithia morbida and Fusarium solani that is carried externally on the beetle.

In black walnut, dark brown to black cankers develop around each beetle gallery. These cankers are initially small, but expand rapidly.

Eventually, all of the inner bark is killed, and the branch dies.

The cankers are formed each time a beetle exits and reenters the branch. Thus, the number of cankers that are formed on the branches and the trunk are large, hence the name "thousand cankers."

Detection of TCD is very difficult in early stages of the disease. At present, detection is generally possible only if external symptoms are present, which only occur after the tree is infested.

Symptoms often appear as yellow flagging of smaller branches. The crowns often show a general thinning, and limbs with symptoms of flagging later die.

Advertisement

As trees usually die within two-to-three years after infestation, it can be assumed that TCD and the associated walnut twig beetle have been in Fort Morgan for some time now.

Confirmation of the disease requires examination of symptomatic limbs for the presence of either walnut twig beetle activity (tunneling, live insects or exit holes) or Geosmithia morbida, which must be confirmed through the Plant Diagnostics Clinic at Colorado State University.

Walnut twig beetles are minute, about the size of the text on a penny, making detection difficult. (Morgan County CSU Extension / Courtesy photo)

Efforts to control TCD have not yet been identified.

To help manage TCD, a good idea is to identify where black walnuts may be on your property, and if they are showing early signs of TCD, have them removed to prevent the spread of the walnut twig beetle.

Instruments used in pruning of black walnut must be sanitized to prevent the spread of the associated fungus.

Wood infested with walnut twig beetle should be burned or buried, not chipped, as this beetle can survive chipping.

To prevent the spread of walnut twig beetle, walnut wood must not be transported outside the infested county.

It is highly encouraged that local municipalities develop contingency plans to deal with the disposal of walnut wood and to prevent the spread of walnut twig beetle and thousand cankers disease in their respective jurisdictions.

Management limitations make it extremely critical that the walnut twig beetle not be allowed to spread beyond infested areas. The most likely means of long-distance spread is through human movement of salvaged TCD infected logs, mulch or firewood that contains walnut twig beetles.

Since 2010, several states have established quarantines that prevent movement of certain walnut products. It is likely more will follow. These all regulate raw walnut wood material.

For more information on walnut twig beetle, or thousand cankers disease, contact Rich Guggenheim at the Fort Morgan CSU Extension Office, 970-542-3540.