HOUSTON , Aug. 25, 2014 /PRNewswire/ -- Brident Dental & Orthodontics - announced the opening of its newest office in Houston , located at 13327 Tomball Parkway , providing a full-range of dental and orthodontic services. The opening marks the first expansion of Brident outside of its Dallas , Fort Worth , Austin and San Antonio locations.

"We are pleased to expand our services to the residents of Northwest Houston ," said Dr. Edward Kim , Managing Doctor for Brident Dental Houston. "Whether for emergency care, specialized pediatric services or routine preventive care, patients can visit our office and be assured that quality and convenience will always be our highest priority."

For patients without dental insurance, Brident is offering a New Patient Special for $39 , which includes a dental exam, x-rays and enrollment in a discounted cost plan for complete dental services. All of Brident Dental's services are backed by a unique Quality Assurance Management System (QAMS), which electronically monitors all patient visits, treatments, dental staff and clinical performance to enable high-quality care.

Brident Dental accepts most private insurance plans and Medicaid , and offers no-interest payment plans. In addition, offices have same-day appointments and bilingual staff. The Smiling Woods location is open Monday through Friday from 9 a.m. to 7 p.m. and Saturday from 8 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. To learn more or to schedule an appointment, visit www.brident.com or call 1.888.871.8476.

About Brident Dental

Brident Dental & Orthodontics is an experienced dental service organization, which provides comprehensive business support services to affiliated dental offices owned by licensed dentists, with convenient locations throughout Texas. In addition, we are affiliated with a dental and oral health maintenance organization that provides dental services in over 180 office locations with over 4,000 team members. Being affiliated with this network of dental offices allows us to benefit from such affiliate's long standing emphasis on high standards of quality of care, first class training, and professional development. The Brident Dental offices are led by Dr. Soumava Sen, who brings over 20 years of experience in practicing dentistry, managing dental offices, and leading dental professionals in delivering great quality dental care. For more information, visit www.brident.com.

Logo - http://photos.prnewswire.com/prnh/20140818/137079

SOURCE Brident Dental & Orthodontics