From Baton Rouge to Washington, the verdict among political observers is that Sen. Mary Landrieu's 2009 vote for the Affordable Care Act (ACA) doomed her re-election. Perhaps they're right. But let's imagine Landrieu had opposed and, therefore, killed the bill.

Had she stopped Obamacare, would Republicans be holding parades in her honor? Would the Democratic Party's base, including black leaders, now celebrate her decision to abandon them on this monumental vote?

Of course not. Landrieu is not in trouble only because she supported Obamacare. If she had opposed the ACA, Republicans would still attack her with gusto, as would some leading Democrats. Politically, at least, she had no attractive alternative.

It's not even clear that Obamacare will decide this race. In a special election last Tuesday for a vacant Florida congressional seat, Democrat Alex Sink lost narrowly to her Republican opponent. But a survey by Sink's pollster suggests her opposition to repealing Obamacare actually helped her with independents who don't want the law repealed. While an obsession with Obamacare motivates conservative voters, it appears Sink was primarily done in by low Democratic turnout.

Perhaps one lesson for Landrieu and other Democrats is that they must effectively and aggressively champion the health care law to the party's base, not just meekly defend it.

The very the idea that Obamacare is broadly unpopular is wrong. While a recent CNN poll found that 57 percent of Americans oppose the law, a closer look reveals that 12 percent said they oppose Obamacare because the law "isn't liberal enough." Fifty-one percent like the law or want it strengthened. Another recent bipartisan national poll found that 54 percent of respondents want the law improved, not repealed, while 17 percent want to keep it as is.

Public opinion aside, it's also becoming clear that Landrieu's vote for Obamacare was a smart policy decision.

Despite its disastrous rollout last year, the ACA is working. Its success may not be apparent soon enough to help Landrieu, but the law is working better than many critics expected.

Last week, a new Gallup-Healthways Well-Being Index survey found that the percentage of America's uninsured is "on track to be the lowest quarterly level ... measured since 2008."

Earlier this month, the U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA) reported a $19.2 billion increase in personal income in January for those working poor who are now receiving Medicaid health coverage under the health care law. In other words, Medicaid expansion in 26 states is stimulating the economies of those states, precisely what proponents predicted.

Speaking of Medicaid expansion, the ACA has enrolled more than 4.3 million working poor. Another 4.2 million individuals have purchased health insurance on state marketplace exchanges. In addition, an estimated 3.1 million young people remain on their parents' health insurance policies under the ACA's provisions. In all, more than 11 million individuals have new or better health insurance.

But what about the millions whose individual health insurance policies were canceled because of Obamacare? Isn't that where Landrieu is most vulnerable? Didn't she and Obama say, "If you like your health care plan, you can keep your health care plan"?

The idea that millions are losing their individual health care policies because of Obamacare is misguided. The controversial cancellation provision has been delayed for two years. It's also worth noting that the two-year turnover rate in the individual health care market has long been about 17 percent. That's roughly the same percentage who would have seen their substandard insurance policies canceled - and most of those individuals will find better insurance at lower cost under Obamacare's provisions.

Of course, Republicans want to repeal the law, but failing that - and they've tried more than 40 times - they're offering a pitiful alternative. For example, the nonpartisan Congressional Budget Office concluded their efforts to delay implementation of Obamacare would actually increase health insurance costs "by 10 percent to 20 percent" by 2018 and would knock 13 million people off their insurance policies.

Based on current polls, Landrieu may well lose this election. If she does, Obamacare might play a small role, although even Gov. Bobby Jindal suggests that Republicans can't capture the Senate on that issue alone. I suspect, however, if she loses it will be because she's running as a Democrat in a conservative state when Obama and congressional incumbents are at the depths of their unpopularity. Of course, she might also lose if she fails to tout the health care bill's benefits to her Democratic base.

I won't bet my house on a Landrieu victory. If she loses, however, it won't be because of a "bad" vote on Obamacare. On policy and politics, that was the best vote she could cast.

Robert Mann, an author and former U.S. Senate and gubernatorial staffer, holds the Manship Chair in Journalism at the Manship School of Mass Communication at Louisiana State University. Read more from him at his blog, Something Like the Truth. Follow him on Twitter @RTMannJr or email him at bob.mann@outlook.com.