The tea party has, to date, been a uniquely Republican movement, with would-be progressive analogs fizzling and fading. “Occupy Wall Street” seemed more interested in drum circles than political engagement. And do you remember the Coffee Party? I didn’t think so.

The lack of a tea party left is in part because having the White House helps paper over a lot of intraparty divisions. And it’s also in part a function of the parties’ differing structures, with the GOP’s recent purity pushes abetted by a media-entertainment complex that incentivizes ideological fidelity over electability as well as the conservative movement’s historical certitude that it is both embattled and about to be betrayed by its allies, even when it has been ascendant.

But this month's Democratic Party split over the spending bill that will keep most of the government open through September (the exception being the Department of Homeland Security which is funded for merely a couple of months so the GOP can use it to fight President Barack Obama’s immigration policy) raised once again the unhappy possibility of a progressive tea party, with Massachusetts Democratic Sen. Elizabeth Warren cast in the role of a mirror image of Texas senatorial trouble-maker Ted Cruz. That’s a bit too facile. Sure they’ve each defied their party’s leadership in base-rousing ways and they’re both being talked up as a dragon-slayer presidential candidates against the expected bids of retread establishment figures (she against former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton, he against former Florida Gov. Jeb Bush who recently donned his pith helmet and started exploring the land of presidential politics). But despite the similarities, don’t buy the idea that they’re diametrically opposed peas in a pod – or that Democrats should desire them to be.

First off, there are a couple of key differences between the two freshmen lawmakers, including the scope of their aims and how far they have been willing to push for them. First, aims: Ted Cruz was fighting over repealing the entirety of the Affordable Care Act, while Elizabeth Warren’s rebellion against the White House in 2014 had to do with preserving a portion of the Dodd-Frank law that put banks under stricter regulatory control (never mind that, as Vox’s Matthew Yglesias has pointed out, in both cases the GOP was using the question of whether to keep the government open as a lever with which to win policy concessions). As Bloomberg’s Jonathan Bernstein suggested, “demanding a repeal of Obamacare ... despite a solid Democratic majority in the Senate and a Democrat in the White House is of a different order than a fight about a relatively small provision of Dodd-Frank.”

[SEE: Editorial Cartoons on the Tea Party]

Then there’s the issue of how far they were willing to push for their aims. As The Washington Post’s Sean Sullivan observed, as the spending bill wended its way through the process, “a key distinction emerge[d]: Cruz was willing to hold up the process to make his point. Warren was not.” Warren fought the bill, but did not filibuster or ultimately hold it up. On the other hand Cruz, by demanding a point-of-order vote on whether the bill was constitutional (because it funds what he views as the president’s unconstitutional immigration policy), put his GOP colleagues in the position of either shutting down the government or ratifying the immigration policy. Cruz scored points with the base – leading the futile charge against Obama’s immigration policy – at the expense of his colleagues, and not for the first time either: Last February, he forced a procedural vote on raising the debt ceiling that obliged several of his Republican colleagues to cast responsible, if politically unpopular, votes rather than let Democrats do all the dirty work.

This is, by the way, a reflection of the Cruz and Warren trajectories – his plans to exit the Senate for the White House make posturing for the base more important than building the kind of relations on the Hill that are needed to actually accomplish something; her repeated statements about not running for president seem genuine for the converse reason – she’s not burning bridges, presumably because she actually wants to get something done.

[SEE: Political Cartoons on Democrats]

The episode prompted some on the left to yearn once more for a tea party all its own. “Think of it: The Tea Party gang gets to intimidate party leaders, threaten legislation, block nominees, shut down the government and default on the debt if they don’t get their way. They cause major trouble,” Bill Scher of the Campaign for America’s Future wrote in Politico Magazine. “Boy, does that sound good.” And David Atkins wrote in Washington Monthly: “The problem with the hyperconservative tea party wing of the Republican Party isn’t its tactics, but rather its policies.” But that’s wrong on a couple of levels. One problem with the tea party is undoubtedly its nutty policies, but its tactics – political extortion through things like shutdowns and debt defaults – are no less an issue. On a very basic level one wouldn’t think that progressives, who by definition favor affirmative government, would need to be told why shutting that government down isn’t a good idea. This is like when I was a child and threatened to break my own toys if I didn’t get my way.