Topics: Blogs, Books, Childhood, Disney Princess, Gender, Marriage, Parenting, Writers and Writing, Life News

While we tried to set boundaries, C.J.’s love of all things pink, purple, sparkly, glittery, and frilly knew no bounds. I realized the gravity of our plight when not only could C.J. name each Disney Princess and her movie of origin, but when his third birthday finally rolled around, he wanted a Disney Princess– themed party.

Where we live, in conservative and competitive Orange County, California, third birthdays are when things start to get out of control. It happens right around the time there are preschool classmates and parents to impress. In Orange County— especially the southernmost portion, where we live, where you can run into a Real Housewife in the grocery store or at the gym— people are constantly trying to one-up and outdo one another. Kids’ birthday parties are a big deal here. There are mobile salons that cater to tweens and mobile video- game trucks that bring every gaming system and every video game to your driveway so that the pint- sized party peeps can get their game on in an air- conditioned fifth wheel. We’ve been to kids’ parties that were fully catered and have left with goody bags that cost more than the gift we brought.

C.J. had been to enough of these over- the- top parties to know that he wanted one for himself, with as many people in attendance as possible and with the house and his cake decked out with Disney Princesses. There was no room for negotiation.

It was the first but definitely not the last time I thought, Great, my son is going to be the punch line of some gay joke. I worried that some partygoer would take a photo of the birthday boy blowing out pink glitter candles atop a Disney Princess– themed cake and post that photo on Facebook with some slightly homophobic, sassy caption and that that person’s Facebook friends would try to outwit one another with LGBTQ- unfriendly, snarky comments.

Finally, the big day came, and it was almost time to sing “Happy Birthday.” Friends and family were gathered around the table outside by the pool. So were the preschool classmates and their parents, all strangers to us. [My mother] Nana Grab Bags exited the kitchen and approached the crowd first. She proudly carried a tray of homemade genderneutral- yellow cupcakes that had been rainbow- sprinkled to perfection. In her blue maxidress she moved like Cinderella’s godmother.

I was right behind her carrying C.J.’s oversized cupcake adorned with Ariel, Belle, Aurora, Cinderella, Snow White, even Jasmine.

Nana Grab Bags set the cupcakes in the center of the table. All eyes were on us.

I set the jumbo pink princess cupcake with pastel sprinkles in front of C.J. as everyone watched. C.J. was clapping his hands out of excitement and in approval of his cake. His smile was wide and his dimples were deep. It was the cake of his dreams.

The group turned into a mixture of skeptical looks, baffled expressions, and smirky smiles. No one said a word to us. People were using their smartphones to capture the moment. More so than usual— or at least that’s how it felt. It seemed like every partygoer wanted a shot of the birthday boy with his princess cake. I held my head up high and carried on, as if this were perfectly normal, because, increasingly, for us, it was.

It felt like a coming- out party for our family, like we were saying to everyone in attendance, This is our son, he is three, and he likes girl stuff. If you don’t like it, you can take your goody bag and go. It was nerve- racking for us, but we tried to remember that the day was about C.J., not us or anybody else. When it was over, we breathed a sigh of relief, wondered if there would be any fallout, and dreaded seeing the other parents at school on Monday.