Juana Rivera (L) speaks with Fabrizzio Russi, an agent from Sunshine Life and Health Advisors, as they discuss plans available from the Affordable Care Act at a store setup in the Mall of the Americas last year in Miami, Florida. JOE RAEDLE/GETTY IMAGES

DAVID BLUMENTHAL: A little-known provision of the Affordable Care Act (ACA) could significantly affect how the law is implemented in the future.

Starting in 2017, Section 1332 of the ACA allows the federal government to give states waivers granting them considerable flexibility to modify how coverage is provided to uninsured populations. Depending on how the provision is implemented, these authorities could give both conservatives and liberals the opportunity to realize their varied visions of the law’s future.

Among the changes to the law that states could conceivably pursue are the following:

Doing away with a state’s health-insurance marketplace, the mechanism through which the law makes subsidized private insurance available to eligible consumers.

Repealing the individual and employer mandates, widely opposed by conservatives, which now require individuals and employers to purchase insurance or face economic penalties;

Establishing a single-payer health system, like the recently failed Vermont initiative.

Importantly, the Section 1332 waivers do not allow states simply to repeal the ACA. They are limited by legislative “guardrails” to make sure states cannot undermine the fundamental goals of the law. Any proposed changes must insure at least as many people with coverage that is at least as comprehensive and affordable as under the ACA. And they must do this without increasing the federal deficit. States also can’t touch some rules like those that prevent insurers from charging higher premiums to people with pre-existing conditions.

It’s still unclear just how much flexibility these guardrails allow. The Obama administration has not released regulations governing the implementation of the waivers, and as a result, many states that might be interested have hung back, waiting to see if their ideas will fit regulatory requirements. The 2016 elections introduce further uncertainties. Even if Secretary of Health and Human Services Sylvia Burwell released the waiver regulations tomorrow, the next president could instruct his or her HHS secretary to rewrite them, or could even push for legislative changes that expand the waivers’ scope. Since 1332 enjoys bipartisan support in Congress, such expansions are not out of the question.

Despite these question marks, the waivers offer tantalizing prospects for would-be ACA reformers across the political spectrum. There are many tweaks that could make the law less complex and fix some obvious problems, such as the so-called family glitch, which prevents some low- and middle-income families from receiving insurance subsidies. If the states are the laboratories of democracy, as Justice Louis Brandeis once declared, then Section 1332 of the ACA could open the doors to robust state-driven experimentation with this landmark health care law.

Dr. David Blumenthal (@DavidBlumenthal) is the president of the Commonwealth Fund, a national health-care philanthropy based in New York.

Read the latest Health Report.