Getty Images

Is tackling sensitive political and social issues good for business?

Starbucks is making itself arguably the biggest test case in corporate America for that question. While many companies avoid taking positions on such matters, the coffee giant has repeatedly thrust itself and its employees into them, most recently with its new “Race Together” campaign. The effort involves holding discussion forums across the country about racial tensions in the U.S., encouraging employees to write #RaceTogether on customers’ drinks and co-publishing a “special conversation guide” in USA Today newspapers.

Chairman and Chief Executive Howard Schultz tied the effort to recent racially charged events in Ferguson, Mo., and elsewhere in the country, saying in a statement that “we at Starbucks should be willing to talk about these issues in America…Not to point fingers or to place blame, and not because we have answers, but because staying silent is not who we are.”

Indeed, Mr. Schultz has given Starbucks a prominent voice on many of the hot-button issues of our time. He vociferously criticized the scarcity of affordable healthcare for millions of Americans before the Affordable Care Act was proposed. In September 2013, he told U.S. customers that Starbucks no longer welcomed firearms in its stores—upsetting some gun-rights advocates. Last June, amid mounting national concern about student debt, Starbucks offered its baristas tuition rebates to help pay for online degrees.

Mr. Schultz co-wrote a book on veterans with long-time Washington Post journalist Rajiv Chandrasekaran, who recently announced he was leaving the newspaper to produce documentaries on socially sensitive subjects for a Starbucks-backed venture.

Beyond Mr. Schultz’s higher goals, the campaigns may yield some commercial upside. Race Together, for example, helps set Starbucks apart from rivals, and could bolster its sheen as a brand that cares about making the world better, not just making profits—a potential benefit in particular among much-coveted younger consumers.

But the effort also could fall flat. Some customers who turn to Starbucks for a quick, quality cup of joe could be put off by prodding from Starbucks to discuss delicate subjects such as racial and class divisions that, on their face, have little to do with coffee. Already, many people have voiced frustration about the Starbucks push through social media—though others, like Jamilah Lemieux, a senior editor at Ebony magazine, also supported the effort through her confirmed Twitter account.

Early Tuesday, Starbucks’s top spokesman, Corey duBrowa, deleted his Twitter account in response to repeated personal attacks related to the Race Together initiative, a company spokeswoman said. She added he will rejoin the social media service soon.

So far, though, Starbucks’s voluble corporate conscience hasn’t appeared to hurt sales. Starbucks’s America’s region revenue in the year to Sept. 28, 2014, which started just after Mr. Schultz issued his 2013 gun missive, grew 8.9% to $11.98 billion while operating income climbed 18% to $2.81 billion.