President Obama's disapproval rating rises among California voters

By Special Report Intern/ Gabriella Morrongiello

President Barack Obama has seen a significant decline in support since the botched rollout of his legacy healthcare legislation and voters in one of the country's bluest states have proved no exception.

According to a new Field Poll, 43 percent of California voters now disapprove of the President's performance-- an 8 percent increase since July. Furthermore, just one-third of poll participants believe the country is headed in the right direction.

The poll's director, Mark DiCamillo, believes the poll is a "much more deflating reflection of how people view the leadership of Obama."

"At the beginning of the year, after his re-election, they felt great. They are not feeling that way anymore. They think the country is moving in the wrong direction even with their Democrat in the White House," DiCamillo told The Sacramento Bee.

The California Field Poll reflects growing trends in the President's disapproval rating throughout the country.

Harvard's Institute of Politics released a recent poll revealing the President's approval rating at just 41 percent among young Americans ages 18 - 29-- the lowest level reported since the beginning of his presidency. Of that same age group, 47 percent would vote to recall President Obama today if it were possible.

California's own state exchange, Covered California, has operated relatively smoothly in comparison to the national Health Insurance Marketplace, however the messy Obamacare rollout - defined by widespread policy cancellations and an unpredictable website - has influenced the opinions of California voters nonetheless. Half of California voters now disapprove of President Obama's handling of healthcare, according to the Field Poll.

Moreover, the poll reveals a shocking increase in disapproval ratings among some of President Obama's largest and most loyal supporters: 16 percent among Latinos, 18 percent in union households and 13 percent among women in California, the poll showed.

During a recent interview with Barbara Walters, President Obama commented on his approval numbers saying, "The good thing about when you're down is that usually, you've got nowhere to go but up."

The Field Poll surveyed 766 registered voters in California from Nov. 14 to Dec. 1 with a margin of error plus or minus 3.5 percentage points.