Christine Jones (center) speaks to Kayla Kolar (left) and Marty Tomljenovic (right) at a meet-and-greet event on Friday, April 29, 2016, in Gilbert. Jones has decided to run for Congress in the East Valley. (Photo: Courtney Pedroza/The Republic)

A confusingly worded email from a junior political consultant caused a minor brouhaha on social media last week after it generated suggestions that a potential congressional candidate was offering to pay people to show up to an event.

Lilia Dashevsky, an associate at Mesa-based Criterion Public Affairs and a well-known young Republican activist, sent the email Thursday afternoon. In it, she said she was looking for people who wanted to earn $12 an hour "just for attending and mingling" a Friday evening meet-and-greet in Gilbert for Republican Christine Jones, who is exploring a bid to replace retiring U.S. Rep. Matt Salmon, R-Ariz., in the East Valley's 5th Congressional District.

"It's really that easy!" she wrote. "If you don't have a car and need transportation, give me a call and we'll figure it out."

Dashevsky's email quickly spread to supporters of potential Jones rivals in the 5th District, which includes Gilbert and parts of Mesa and Chandler, and then to news media covering the race. The allegation of paying for an audience resonated partly because a similar charge was leveled last year against Republican presidential front-runner Donald Trump, who was accused of hiring actors to attend his campaign kickoff.

Jones, a former GoDaddy executive vice president who is independently wealthy, is expected to self-fund a congressional campaign if she runs.

NEW: @JonesForGov paying for people to show up to her campaign event? pic.twitter.com/Y5Fj5grgoI — Dennis Welch (@dennis_welch) April 29, 2016

After Dashevsky's email started picking up buzz on Twitter, her firm quickly denied offering money to show up to the event. They said the offer was for paid petition circulators needed for the event and released a partial clarification email that they said went out later Thursday once the problem was discovered.

Thomas Grier, a partner at Criterion, told The Arizona Republic on Friday that the original email was written by "a young kid" and that Jones had nothing to do with it.

"We are paying for paid circulators, not only for Jones but for other candidates," Grier said. "We have an event, but it's not even a campaign kickoff, it's a meet-and-greet."

Criterion senior members said they instructed Dashevsky to solicit the help, but acknowledged they did not pre-approve a draft of her email, which they say only went out to about 15 or 18 young Republican activists whom the firm has hired for petition-circulation work in the past.

"That (offering to pay people just to show up and mingle) just didn't happen, whether people believe it or not," Grier said.

Jones sought the 2014 Republican gubernatorial nomination, finishing third in a six-way primary.

In other developments:

• Incumbent U.S. Sen. John McCain, R-Ariz., is getting some help from a group of five freshman U.S. senators in his tough re-election race.

Republican Sens. Tom Cotton of Arkansas, Joni Ernst of Iowa, Cory Gardner of Colorado, David Perdue of Georgia and Dan Sullivan of Alaska are coming to Arizona on Friday for a morning campaign rally at McCain's central Phoenix campaign headquarters and a fundraiser.

McCain is being challenged from the right by several candidates in Arizona's Aug. 30 Republican primary and, if he wins his party's nomination, is all but certain to face U.S. Rep. Ann Kirkpatrick, D-Ariz., in the Nov. 8 general election.

• McCain's campaign also is launching a radio ad attacking Kirkpatrick over her support of President Barack Obama's signature health-care-reform law, the Affordable Care Act.

The commercial, which features McCain calling on voters to hold Obama and national Democrats accountable for the "failed health-care law," on Monday will start running three times a day on four radio stations serving Kirkpatrick's rural congressional district.

A narrator hits Kirkpatrick for expressing pride in her 2010 vote for the legislation.

D.B. Mitchell, a Kirkpatrick campaign spokesman, said the radio ad is a sign that McCain's camp has anxiety about the state of the race.

"John McCain launching misleading attack ads more than six months before Election Day shows just how worried he is about running against Ann Kirkpatrick," Mitchell said. "With public polling showing this race in a dead heat, it's clear the people of Arizona are ready for a new voice after 33 years of McCain."

• U.S. Sen. Jeff Flake, R-Ariz., praised the Senate's confirmation Thursday of Roberta Jacobson as the new U.S. ambassador to Mexico.

Flake, who sits on the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, has been critical of fellow Republican efforts to stall her nomination, which Obama sent to the Senate on June 2.

“On issues ranging from trade to migration to security and the border, the interests of the United States are served and Arizona benefits when our nation is well-represented in Mexico," Flake said in a written statement. "Though long overdue, I’m pleased that the Senate has confirmed an individual as qualified and capable as Roberta Jacobson to serve as U.S. ambassador to Mexico."

U.S. Secretary of State John Kerry also heaped compliments on Jacobson, who has been assistant Secretary of State for Western Hemisphere Affairs.

"I have long relied on Roberta’s wise counsel and good cheer, and I am confident that as Ambassador, she will bring her extensive experience and judgment to this critical post," Kerry said in a written statement. "No one is more qualified than Roberta to represent the United States in Mexico. I will continue to count on her leadership and sound advice to advance our economic and political relationship with our partner and friend."

Nowicki is The Republic's national political reporter. Follow him on Twitter at @dannowicki and on his official Facebook page.

Read or Share this story: http://azc.cc/1TDD8RY