Buy Photo Indianapolis' east side is marked by many crumbling homes and poor infrastructure. Above is the expansive vacant former RCA building at North LaSalle and East Michigan streets. (Photo: Charlie Nye/IndyStar 2015 file photo)Buy Photo

In just a year, the federal "Promise Zone" on Indianapolis' east side has helped secure $9.6 million in grant commitments and 110 jobs.

Imagine, Mayor Joe Hogsett said Thursday morning, what could happen in the next decade.

At Ash and Elm Cider Co., a cider production and tasting room opening soon on East Washington Street, White House officials and local leaders marked the one-year anniversary of the Promise Zone designation, a status that gives high-poverty areas a leg up in the competitive world of federal grant dollars, boosting urban revitalization and anti-poverty efforts.

Officials joked about "drinking the near-east-side Kool-Aid" — decades of planning and redevelopment efforts have made the area one of the city's most promising up-and-coming urban areas. But the backdrop of the news conference — East Washington Street, a once-vibrant retail corridor now marked by vacant buildings, fast-food restaurants and used car lots — served as a sober reminder of how far the area has to go.

The area remains impoverished and plagued by crime. The typical household makes just $22,000 a year. And as many as 40 percent of those older than 25 never finished high school.

When the designation was announced in 2015, community leaders said it could prime the pump for grant funding on a number of fronts, such as cleaning up polluted industrial sites, giving businesses incentives to locate in low-income areas and helping ex-felons re-enter society.

The results in year one of the 10-year initiative: 14 grants totaling $9.6 million, 110 full-time jobs and more than 200 temporary positions for disadvantaged teens and ex-offenders trying to transition to the workforce. One grant will fund an Environmental Protection Agency brownfield assessment of the Massachusetts Avenue/Brookside Industrial Corridor, a two-mile stretch that was once home to a number of industrial sites. The Promise Zone designation also was credited with a $2 million youth jobs grant announced earlier this week.

Hogsett called the initiative "a big deal" — "politely paraphrasing," he said, Vice President Joe Biden, who famously dropped an F-bomb with that phrase when the Affordable Care Act was signed.

"A year later, we stand in what was then an abandoned storefront on the east side," Hogsett said. "... Today, a year later, look at what has already been accomplished."

The IndyEast Promise Zone is bounded on the west by I-65, on the east by Sherman Drive, on the north by 22nd Street and on the south by the railroad tracks just south of Washington Street. The lines were gerrymandered a bit to include another low-income area, Martindale-Brightwood, and a former Citizens Gas coke plant.

IndyEast is one of 13 Promise Zones nationwide to date. Seven others are planned. So why Indianapolis, out of dozens of large cities? Why this community out of countless impoverished areas across the country?

Luke Tate, the White House official who oversees the program, said it was because of the work that community groups and residents have been doing for years.

Groups such as the John Boner Neighborhood Centers, a community group that served more than 13,000 low-income residents last year with a broad array of programming. Groups such as the Englewood Community Development Corp. and Near East Area Renewal, which have rebuilt more than 100 homes for mixed-income ownership over the past decade. And the neighbors who in 2007 helped put together the area's quality-of-life plan, a planning document that laid the groundwork for millions in public and private investment over the following years.

"Here in IndyEast, you've proven that you have the dedication," Tate said. "We've seen that since 2004."

Add it all up — a community that's invested in itself, the preferential treatment from the feds and the area's recent inclusion in the city's Great Places 2020 urban redevelopment initiative — and signs increasingly point to a bright future.

"Remember what the near-east side looks like today," Hogsett said. "And then let us commit returning to this very place four years from today and see what it looks like then."

Call IndyStar reporter Brian Eason at (317) 444-6129. Follow him on Twitter: @brianeason.

Read or Share this story: http://indy.st/1TpEP5T