Topics: 2016 Elections, African Americans, Ben Carson, Donald Trump, Editor's Picks, Hispanics, Marco Rubio, Race, Racism, Republican Party, Elections News, Media News, News, Politics News

Ever since his presidential campaign began in earnest, predicting the end of this whole Donald Trump… thing — phenomenon, bubble, disaster; take your pick — has been a mug’s game. At this point, in fact, the best way to know Trump’s next move may be to find out whatever it is most pundits are expecting; because the complete opposite will probably happen instead.

So I’m not going to join the New Republic’s Jeet Heer in prophesying doom for Trump 2016, not just yet. But I think he’s right to wonder if Trump hasn’t crossed a Rubicon of sorts with his recent attack on Dr. Ben Carson, the retired neurosurgeon and peerless grifter who may snatch the Iowa caucuses from Trump’s hands — and who Trump likened to a “child molester” on Thursday.

“Donald Trump has made a huge mistake,” Heer writes. Not because comparing an opponent to a child molester is beyond the pale — which it obviously is, even for Trump — but because Carson, Heer says, “is far and away the most personally popular candidate in the GOP race.” (That’s true, by the by; a recent poll showed that 71 percent of Republicans view Carson favorably, with only 18 percent seeing him in a negative light.)

Even if they don’t think he should be the next president, in other words, Republicans love them some Ben Carson. And while that isn’t necessarily reason enough for Trump to go easy on the good doctor, the difference between Carson and other recipients of Trump’s bile, Heer writes, is that Republicans want to like Carson — they almost need to like him, in fact. Why? For reasons of both ideology and electoral politics. Heer continues:

[Carson’s] inspiring life story speaks to large constituencies in the party, ranging from evangelical Christians who love tales of redemption, to economic conservatives who treasure Horatio Alger narratives of the poor pulling themselves up by their bootstraps. As a successful black man who supports hard-line conservative policies, he’s a cherished piece of evidence that the GOP is as it claims to be: a party for all races.

As a general description of how Trump is misreading his audience, I think Heer is on the money. (And if you doubt that Republicans care about being perceived as bigoted, just check out how popular the “All the Democratic candidates are white!” talking point is among the #tcot crowd.) But there’s a reason why I’m not quite willing to co-sign his view that the attack on Carson could be Trump’s downfall.

He’s got the basic dynamic right. The problem is, he’s looking at the wrong candidate. Because if anything Trump said on Thursday undoes him, it won’t be his broadside against Carson. It’ll be his equally transgressive attack on Marco Rubio, the Florida senator and pseudo-frontrunner who seems to be the only GOPer who understands how to deal with Trump on his own terms. Rubio “wants amnesty,” Trump said. And he wants it because he’s Hispanic.