For one, brief shining moment — that is to say, last week — there was a liberal Roberts court.

It shimmered in the afterglow of rulings on same-sex marriage, health care, housing discrimination and nonpartisan redistricting. Conservatives cried betrayal. Chief Justice John G. Roberts Jr. “is now dead to conservatives,” declared Curt Levey, president of the right-wing Committee for Justice.

Progressives, for their part, were able to breathe again, even as they struggled to reconcile this term with the past decade of conservative activism. What had saved the day? Was it the sheer power and persuasiveness of liberal arguments? A collapse on the court’s right flank? The impressive unity displayed by the four liberal justices, who deferred when necessary to Justice Anthony M. Kennedy? Whatever the explanation, there was the data, after all, with 56 percent of the term’s decisions coding “liberal.” Results speak louder than explanations, right?

As a mirage in the morning light, the “liberal Roberts court” narrative is now fading. Chief Justice Roberts is clearly no traitor; he was, in fact, in dissent in three of the four most important liberal victories, the exception being his majority opinion in King v. Burwell that saved the Affordable Care Act. And the liberal justices were unable at the end of the term to dissuade their colleagues from dragging the court back into the morass of affirmative action; the new term will revisit a now laughably moot challenge to the University of Texas admissions plan. The chance that the court’s liberals will be able to deflect a crushing defeat for public employee unions, in another case to be heard in the new term, appears vanishingly small.

It’s fading, but not fast enough. The “liberal Roberts court” theme retains its grip, and I worry that it may become the received wisdom about the 2014-15 term as public attention moves on from the Supreme Court. On the eve of the presidential primaries, it’s important that progressives not be lulled by a few welcome decisions into thinking that the court is in safe hands. The court that gutted the Voting Rights Act and hijacked the First Amendment as a deregulatory tool (remember Citizens United?) is, to paraphrase Donald Rumsfeld, the court we have. It’s not the court we might wish we had.

Explanations do in fact matter. So how to explain the seeming liberal drift? Two weeks ago, an Upshot column provided a link to one of the more illuminating academic political science articles I have read recently. The article, by Kevin T. McGuire, Georg Vanberg, Charles E. Smith Jr. and Gregory A. Caldeira, isn’t new; it was written in 2007 and published in The Journal of Politics in 2009. It doesn’t deal with the Roberts court, and its title, “Measuring Policy Content on the U.S. Supreme Court,” is not particularly inviting. It nonetheless offers an “aha!” insight worth keeping in mind as the next — and, most likely, more typical — Supreme Court term takes shape.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

The authors argue that the common practice of toting up the numbers of conservative and liberal outcomes in order to assess the direction of the court has the capacity to mislead by introducing what they call systemic bias. They go beyond a more common critique of the numbers game, which is that numbers alone don’t take account of the fact that a conservative court shifts the doctrinal baseline ever rightward; a decision that codes as liberal against that baseline may objectively not be liberal at all.

Rather, the authors distinguish between Supreme Court rulings that affirm and those that overturn a lower court decision. They argue that on a conservative court, affirmances tend to be liberal and so should be discarded from a statistical snapshot of a given term’s ideology.