"Health care is a big part of this job. That's the reason why they get away paying such low wages to the workers."

ATLANTIC CITY — The lettering from the façade of the shuttered Trump Plaza is mostly gone, with a red "UMP" looming over the boardwalk. Revel still gleams like it always did, but it's lost another suitor. Showboat and the Atlantic Club sit idle, and it isn’t over yet.

With a spate of casino shutdowns in the city this year, the emotions, and the stakes, are high in light of the potential closing of Trump Taj Mahal.

Casino workers protested the impending closing of the Taj Wednesday night, holding signs likening billionaire Carl Icahn, who is considering reopening the facility, to a vampire and the "Grinch Who Stole Christmas."

In a letter to employees this week, the Taj's CEO compared the union president to Soviet dictator Joseph Stalin.

The parties are wrestling over the union’s contract, which was voided by a bankruptcy judge last month, as Icahn looks to turn debt he is owed into ownership of the facility. Icahn, who owns the Tropicana Casino and Resort, has said he can’t reopen the Taj unless the union drops an appeal of the contract dismissal and state and local officials green light millions of dollars in tax breaks.

"One overriding fact is perfectly clear: The Taj is quickly running out of money and will almost certainly close," Icahn told the Associated Press in October. "Reprehensibly, the union, instead of working with, and trying to help, the company to keep the Taj alive, is instead doing everything to destroy the possibility of saving the jobs of over 3,000 employees."

But the union says its workers make less than $12.50 an hour on average, and have foregone raises over the last decade to maintain their health benefits.

Cocktail waitress Valerie McMorris started working at the Taj Mahal when it opened in 1990, and said she has spent the intervening 24 years working in “two-inch heels.”

She said her husband was laid off from his job at Revel, and now he and their 15-year-old son are on her health plan. She makes $9 an hour, plus tips, she said.

“Health care is a big part of this job,” she said Wednesday, standing on the boardwalk before the protest. “That’s the reason why they get away paying such low wages to the workers.”

Hundreds of workers from the local Unite-HERE union and from neighboring states flooded the cold and nearly-empty boardwalk Wednesday night, marching from the Taj to Icahn’s Tropicana to decry the closing. Chants of “no health care, no peace” shifted to “shame on you!” as they passed the vacant Trump Plaza.

The Taj will meet a similar fate just two weeks before Christmas, on Dec. 12, and won’t reopen unless the parties can find common ground.

In a two-page open letter posted on their website last week, Trump Entertainment Resorts CEO Robert F. Griffin lambasted union leaders for appealing the contract dismissal and elected officials for shooting down the tax incentives.

“The city and the state seem more interested in protecting the union than in saving 3,000 jobs, as we would in our plan,” Griffin wrote. Low-paid casino workers would not be without health insurance if the facility stayed open and the benefits from the union’s contract were thrown out, Griffin said, “because Obamacare and Medicaid will subsidize them.”

Griffin wrote in another letter to employees on Wednesday that the union was spreading “false propaganda” and “hollow rhetoric” and said the health plan was a money maker for the union rather than a resource for its workers.

“The choice is really simple,” he wrote. “On the one hand, if the Union drops the appeal, Mr. Icahn will invest and we can save your jobs. On the other hand, if the Union continues to fight, whether they win or lose the appeal, the Taj will stay closed and thousands of jobs will be lost.”

Union head Robert McDevitt said losing the health benefits would set a bad precedent for casino workers elsewhere in the city, and would further burden members of the city’s shrinking casino workforce.

“They have to understand that we’re not going to give up our health benefits and do these jobs for $12 an hour,” McDevitt told NJ Advance Media on Wednesday. “The rest of the city has health benefits. We want at the Taj Mahal what everyone else has. We can make sacrifices together that move the city forward, but taking away people’s health care is not the answer.”

As the workers marched, news broke that the fate of the Revel Casino Hotel, which closed on Sept. 2. but was bought at bankruptcy auction, was again in limbo. Toronto-based Brookfield US Holdings, LLC walked away from the $110 million purchase after a disagreement over debt related to Revel's power plant.

All this comes as an advisory commission formed by Gov. Chris Christie is recommending the state install an emergency manager to help fix the city's troubled finances.

The Associated Press contributed to this report.

S.P. Sullivan may be reached at ssullivan@njadvancemedia.com. Follow him on Twitter. Find NJ.com on Facebook.