Topics: Constitutional reform, Debt ceiling, Failed state, Government shutdown, Inaction, The Globalist, us, US Constitution, Business News, News, Politics News

This article originally appeared on The Globalist

If anything, the chronic re-occurrence of the U.S. government’s failure to approve a budget as well as the repetitive quarrel over raising the country’s debt ceiling demonstrate one thing clearly: Constitutional reform is the priority in the United States. Without it, the U.S. will indeed become a failed state.

Such reform should not be difficult. At the U.S. state level there have been 230 constitutional conventions since the founding of the country, according to Sanford Levinson, a law professor at the University of Texas and author of Our Undemocratic Constitution. The State of New York is currently on its fifth constitution. If the 50 states can do it, why not the nation as a whole?

Other countries, too, have a record of frequently changing or adopting new versions of their constitutions. In contrast, the constitution of the United States of 1787 seems to enjoy a sacredness only matched by some religious books.

The last change to the U.S. Constitution, the 27th Amendment, was approved in 1992. Hard though it may be to believe, it dealt with the oh-so critical issue of increases in salary for members of the U.S. Congress not taking effect until the term following the increase.

How much more myopic can one get? Maybe the country should have saved its action-oriented powder for something more earthshaking.

The Constitution: dead or alive?

Nobody seems to remember that the U.S. Constitution was a highly controversial document as it was being drafted. The so-called Federalist Papers are living proof. And that was at a time when there were only 13 states in the union.

The fact that the U.S. Constitution has only been changed 27 times since 1787, which was almost 100 years before Thomas Edison turned on the lights, shows how stale and out-of-date a reference point it has become.

In other words, the rest of the living world has changed significantly. But, as Supreme Court Justice Antonin Scalia has been quoted as saying approvingly, the U.S. Constitution is “not a living document. It’s dead, dead, dead.”

Of course, Justice Scalia is not suggesting that the meaning of the Constitution is dead, but that it should be interpreted exactly as written by the Founding Fathers. He views them as omniscient, even though they had not seen a light bulb, a car, a plane, a space ship, a computer, a 3D printer or a female Supreme Court Justice, for that matter.

Scalia’s view of the Constitution, also dubbed strict constructionism suits his political purposes as a paleo-conservative. Consequently, he has no qualms with expanding the “right to bear arms” to semi-automatic weapons rather than limiting it to muskets existing at the times of the Founding Fathers.

And, naturally, Justice Scalia had no patience to read the entire Second Amendment which states: “A well regulated militia being necessary to the security of a free state, the right of the people to keep and bear arms shall not be infringed.” Well, guess what? Just like we have don’t have slavery anymore, we also don’t have state militias.

Urgent need for constitutional reform

All this goes to say is: The United States urgently needs constitutional reform. What key changes would need to be made?

Starting with Scalia and his colleagues, the terms of justices to the Supreme Court should be limited to one term of about 10 years, enough to establish a record, without allowing individuals to create a “legacy” all the way to the graveyard. Of course, the nine Justices’ terms would be staggered so that no President would appoint more than two.

All elections in the country would be publicly funded to make sure the country is a true democracy and not a place where the legislative body is described as “the best Congress money can buy.” Thus, all direct or indirect campaign contributions would be explicitly prohibited.

Money, after all, is not free speech. It’s creating an acidic stench over the entire American body politic.

The non-democratic Electoral College would be eliminated, since it can lead – and has led – to the election of four Presidents without support from the majority of the American people (the last one, President George W. Bush in his first term).