Editor's note: Chris Mandel, senior vice president, strategic solutions with Sedgwick, and David Smith, divisional vice president of risk management with Family Dollar.

Imagine having two claims adjusters handling every workers’ compensation claim -- one managing the medical component, the other handling the indemnity -- sitting in different rooms and rarely discussing the claim. Complete your profile to continue reading and get FREE access to PropertyCasualty360.com, part of your ALM digital membership. Benefits:

Your access to unlimited PropertyCasualty360.com content isn’t changing. Once you are an ALM digital member, you’ll receive: Critical PropertyCasualty360.com information including educational webcasts and videos, resources from industry leaders, and informative eNewsletters.

Exclusive discounts on ALM, National Underwriter, Claims, and PropertyCasualty360.com events.

Access to other award-winning ALM publications including BenefitsPro.com, LifeHealthPro.com, ThinkAdvisor.com and Law.com. Register Now Already have an account? Sign In X Sign in with your ALM Account Remember Me Or... Sign In With LinkedIn

Risk management programs are no longer simply a matter of risk transfer, i.e. purchasing insurance to cover and pay losses. Effective risk management requires an integrated and collaborative approach, combining the skills of claims management, risk analytics and loss avoidance expertise to optimize the spectrum of activity from preventative through claim closure. Insurance coverage or risk transfer to insurers serves as the safety net subject to large retentions or deductibles, which ideally represent our appetite for risk taking. On the benefits and health insurance side, the management process is heavily weighted to transference of risk through insurance, with staff dedicated to customer service and benefits enrollment, while devoting limited resources to strategic health claims management and wellness. Often these strategies do not account for the potential synergies that exist within risk management functions and the typically separate strategies they pursue.

Corporate risk management and health benefits management historically have remained independent and isolated organizational business practices. Program integration provides opportunities for employers to deliver efficient, effective occupational and non-occupational health and wellness programs no matter the source of the problem. If our collective interests as functional leaders include the maximum health, welfare and productivity of the entire workforce, then it seems logical that leaders of these two key functions should build their collaborative relationship toward common enterprise-wide goals like these. Goals of an integrated program approach