Colorado Academy’s seniors came prepared to play.

Forwards Henley Hall and Julia Murphy combined for two goals and an assist to lead the top-seeded Mustangs to a 2-0 win over No. 3 Palmer Ridge Saturday at All-City Stadium for their third consecutive state field hockey title.

“Our seniors have been the top leaders you can ask for the whole season,” Colorado Academy coach Veronica Scott said. “And absolutely they stepped on that field knowing … that you have to go out, you have to play hard, you have to get those goals.”

Murphy scored in the 11th minute of the first half on a tip off a corner pass from junior defender Emma Richards to give the Mustangs (17-0-0) a 1-0 lead.

“I was thinking earlier, ‘It’d be great to score off a tip,’ and then it happened,” Murphy said. “And I thought it was like the best moment of my entire life.”

With 7:40 to go in the half, Murphy sent a pass down the middle of the field to Hall for Academy’s second score.

Palmer Ridge (12-4-2) entered the second with heavy offensive pressure, holding possession for most of the half, but weren’t able to capitalize against the Mustangs’ stifling defense.

“We checked them out, they don’t have too many weaknesses, but we tried to take advantage of the ones we find,” Palmer Ridge coach Paul Lewis said. “We had them there for a roll at the end. We were putting the pressures, but we weren’t getting the goals.”

With the win, Colorado Academy extends its unbeaten streak to 52 games, including 41 straight wins, a record of 50-0-2 that started at the beginning of the 2012 season.

“It means a lot,” Murphy said about ending her preps career with another title. “I’ve been on this team since my freshman year and it’s been great as a senior to finish it for the team.”

Joe Nguyen: jnguyen@denverpost.com or twitter.com/joenguyen

MVP

Colorado Academy forward Julia Murphy capped off her high school career by scoring the game-winning goal and assisting on another for the Mustangs.

Colorado Academy 2, Palmer Ridge 0

Goals — CA: Hall, Murphy; PR: None; Assists— CA: Murphy, Richards.