Topics: Alabama, bryan stevenson, Civil War, Confederacy, Editor's Picks, equal justice initiative, Jamelle Bouie, Jim Crow, Jr., KKK, Ku Klux Klan, Martin Luther King, Race, Racism, Robert E. Lee, Ta-Nehisi Coates, Terror, Terrorism, White Supremacy, Media News, News, Politics News

Earlier this month, President Obama made a remark about U.S. history that sent many members of the American far-right into a paroxysm of rage. Speaking at the annual National Prayer Breakfast, Obama said that it would be wrong to blame all Muslims or Islam itself for the cruelty and evil of ISIS, because every ideology and every religion includes people who are willing to distort their creed in order to justify oppression and brutality. “[L]est we get on our high horse and think this is unique to some other place,” Obama said of ISIS, “remember that during the Crusades and the Inquisition, people committed terrible deeds in the name of Christ. In our home country, slavery and Jim Crow all too often was justified in the name of Christ.”

Conservatives were outraged that the president had the audacity to compare Americans — American Christians, at that! — to the murderous zealots that comprise the paramilitary terrorist group. Ta-Nehisi Coates, Jamelle Bouie and others rightly noted that Obama wasn’t merely telling the truth but was actually soft-pedaling the historical record. The truth is, Americans not only have a long history of supporting white supremacy with pseudo-Christian arguments; they also have a history of enacting violence on the bodies of their fellow citizens that was every bit as heinous as what ISIS has done to people throughout Syria and Iraq. And essentially for the same purposes, too.

That history is available to any American willing to go and find it. But a new report from the Equal Justice Initiative (EJI) shows that the American past is even bloodier than we thought. According to “Lynching in America: Confronting the Legacy of Racial Terror,” between the years 1877 and 1950, nearly 4,000 African-Americans were lynched by Southern whites. In fact, during the years spent researching for the report, EJI claims to have found at least 700 more examples of racial terrorism than previously known. And as EJI founder and leader Bryan Stevenson recently told the New York Times, these barbaric acts of violence had a symbolic, political purpose, just like ISIS’s most-publicized crimes.

Recently, Salon spoke over the phone with Stevenson to discuss the report, the importance of recognizing these lynchings as a form of terrorism and how the age of racial terror still influences the United States today. Our conversation is below and has been edited for clarity and length.

The use of the word “terror” to describe these crimes, was that done consciously? If so, why do you think it’s important for us to use that word and see these acts of violence through that lens?

I heard from older people of color in the South over the last 10 years who have complained to me that they get angry and upset when they hear TV commentators and news analysts talking about how, after the 9/11 attacks, America is dealing with terrorism for the first time in the its history. What these older people of color will say is, Mr. Stevenson, we grew up with terrorism. We were menaced and threatened and lynched and traumatized every day of our lives. And it is injurious to us to not have that recognized by these casual comments. So our use of the word “terror” was definitely intentional.

There is a narrative about America’s racial history that we have not acknowledged, that we have not confronted. We have been burdened by continuing problems with race relations and racial equality because we have not understood the narratives in the way that I think we should. It actually begins with slavery; I think even the way we talk about slavery has been superficial. I don’t think the evil of slavery was involuntary servitude. To me the great evil of slavery was this narrative of racial difference, this ideology of white supremacy, that black people weren’t fully human, that they had deficits and deficiencies that meant that it was okay, that it was moral and just, to enslave them.

That narrative that was the true evil of slavery wasn’t addressed by the Thirteenth Amendment; it wasn’t addressed by the Emancipation Proclamation. As a result, slavery didn’t end at the end of the Civil War; it just evolved. It set up an era where white people in the South felt that they had to enforce racial hierarchy in all things. So the lynchings of African-Americans during this period of time were not just simple punishments for individuals accused of crimes. It was a statement to the entire African-American community that they must remain compliant to Jim Crow segregation; no voting rights, economic exploitation and racial hierarchy.

That’s what terrorism is about. It’s about effectuating social, political and economic conditions through menace, through violence, through terror. And that’s what we saw in the Deep South during this era of lynching.

What kind of non-criminal transgressions would lead to racial terrorism?

About 25 percent of the lynchings that we documented were for violations of the social order.

An African-American man was lynched in Blakley, Georgia, returning from World War I, because he refused to take off his U.S. military uniform. There was a man in Mississippi who was running for a train and he bumped into a white woman and he was lynched for that indiscretion. Jesse Thornton in Luverne, Alabama, in 1940 was lynched because he approached a police officer to ask for assistance and he didn’t say “mister” before he evoked the officer’s name, and that made him vulnerable to an accusation of being above himself — “uppity.”

These kinds of lynchings took place all the time. In the 1920s, when black sharecroppers felt they were being exploited by white landowners who were not paying them what they had promised, if they complained about that, if they organized and formed a union, they were oftentimes lynched. The great Elaine massacre that took place in Elaine, Arkansas, which resulted in dozens of people being killed, was inspired by black farmworkers trying to organize for better treatment and economic conditions. So lynching was very much a tool designed to sustain the economic, social and political order of the day, which very much had people of color in a subordinate position.

It was also something that could be celebrated and tolerated, even in the face of very grotesque barbarity, because African-American people still weren’t seen as fully human and entitled to justice. What’s interesting is a lot of people, when they hear about lynching, they’re really thinking about frontier justice, where somebody gets hanged from a tree. And there were parts of this country were you did see people being executed in a crude form, because there was no functioning criminal justice system. That’s not true of the racial-terror lynchings; almost all of these lynchings took place in spaces where there was a functioning criminal justice system, but there was perception that African-Americans weren’t good enough to be afforded the dignity and respect of a trial, of a pronouncement of a sentence before they were executed.