DARMSTADT, Germany--German pharmaceuticals group Merck KGaA on Tuesday reported a rise in underlying fourth-quarter profit, driven by growth in its life sciences business.

The company's closely watched earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization before one-time items rose 6.3% to EUR933 million ($1.03 billion), beating analysts' expectations of EUR917 million.

Revenue climbed 16% to EUR3.5 billion, boosted by new sales from its recent $17 billion acquisition of U.S.-based l aboratory-equipment maker Sigma-Aldrich.

However, costs related to the Sigma-Aldrich deal--a central part of its strategy to grow sales and profitability by diversifying beyond its drug business--led Merck to post a 55% drop in net profit to EUR125 million, compared with EUR280 million for the same period last year.

For the current year, Merck said it expects "slight" organic sales growth and forecast Ebitda before one-time items to rise by a low double-digit percentage, compared with EUR3.6 billion in 2015, boosted by the integration of Sigma-Aldrich.

The deal, first announced in September 2014, is the latest step by outgoing Chief Executive Karl-Ludwig Kley to move the company away from its traditional pharmaceuticals business by investing more heavily in the life sciences and specialty chemicals divisions.

Merck in 2014 paid EUR1.9 billion to buy U.K.-based AZ Electronic Materials, a producer of high-purity specialty chemicals for the electronics market. The company's specialty chemicals business, known as Performance Materials, has been driven by its expertise in liquid-crystal technology, used in display screens for televisions, smartphones and tablets.

Ebitda before one-time items at Performance Materials jumped 26.5% to EUR1.1 billion in 2015, boosted by positive currency effects and the integration of AZ.

Mr. Kley's shift in strategy was largely prompted by the company's struggle to bring successful and lucrative new drugs to market in recent years. Moreover, Merck's best-selling drug, multiple sclerosis treatment Rebif, continues to face stiff competition from cheaper generic versions.

Sales of Rebif declined 10.7% in 2015, while Ebitda before one time items at the Healthcare division remained flat year-over-year at EUR2 billion.

However, Ebitda before one-time items at the Life Sciences division climbed 30% last year to EUR856 million, helped by the acquisition of Sigma-Aldrich.

Write to Christopher Alessi at christopher.alessi@wsj.com

More from MarketWatch