WASHINGTON -- New Republican Rep. Vance McAllister of Louisiana said he figures he got off to a good start with his new House colleagues by keeping his remarks short Thursday after being sworn in to office by House Speaker John Boehner.

As he explained it, his parents didn't "bring up a fool," and he knew the members were anxious to head back home for the start of the Thanksgiving recess. His message to his colleagues: He owes everything to his family, who were on hand to watch him take the oath, and that all members of Congress should work together to help the American people.



McAllister, 39, a businessman who has operated oil pipeline businesses, and more recently Subway and Fox Pizza franchises, won the runoff on Saturday to replace former Rep. Rodney Alexander, R-Quitman. He lives in Swartz, a small town near Monroe, with his wife and five children.

The size of his victory -- 20 percentage points -- was a surprise because his opponent, state Sen. Neil Riser, R-Columbia, had raised more money and had the backing of the GOP establishment, including all Republican members of the Louisiana congressional delegation, save for Sen. David Vitter and Rep. Bill Cassidy, who remained neutral.

McAllister said he told House Republican Whip Kevin McCarthy, R-Calif., on Thursday that his "landslide" win should send a message to his new congressional colleagues: "Every incumbent ought to be a little nervous."

McAllister said the 5th District voters showed they want candidates "who will move forward and not just stand there and do what they did -- shut down the government for no results."

McAllister said he's a conservative who will probably vote conservative most of the time. But he said his district has a lot of poor people who need resources, and there will be times he'll vote differently from his GOP colleagues.

"People will ask why are you doing what you're doing," McAllister told reporters Thursday. "It will always be because I thought it was the right thing."

McAllister, who largely financed his own campaign, ran as a Washington outsider -- and he met the definition more than most who use the slogan. Until he traveled to Washington on Wednesday to begin his congressional job, he had never set foot in the city.

"It's pretty big," deadpanned McAllister, who planned to escort his wife, children and other family members on hand for his swearing-in on a quick tour of Washington, including the Lincoln Memorial and the White House.

His new Louisiana colleagues, including Rep. Charles Boustany, R-Lafayette, the new dean of the Louisiana House delegation with Alexander's departure, warmly greeted McAllister.

Was it awkward, given that most of them had backed his opponent with both endorsements and money? "No hard feelings," McAllister said. But he said that when they get together after the Thanksgiving break "behind closed doors, they will get my opinion and they can give their opinions."

Of course, he might point out that the last-minute advertisement for his candidacy by Willie Robertson, a star of the TV reality show Duck Dynasty, was perhaps more valuable than endorsements from Louisiana House Republicans.

McAllister said he considers his GOP opponent, Riser, a "good guy," but that those who ran his campaign were guilty of running ads with "half-truths and outright lies." One flier, containing a picture of him and President Barack Obama was sent to only certain "demographic areas of the large district, and had darkened his face. He said the flier played to racial divisions and had no place in America.

"I think they should be run out of politics. I think they should never be allowed to practice politics in Louisiana again because they don't represent our values," McAllister said of the political consultants behind his opponent's campaign.

"I wish Congressman McAllister the very best," said Timmy Teepell, the Republican consultant and former chief of staff to Gov. Bobby Jindal who ran Riser's campaign. "We do not run ads that are not true. Nonetheless, he won and is to be congratulated."

A lot of the Riser attacks involved McAllister's view that Louisiana should accept the Medicaid expansion under the Affordable Care Act. Jindal has continuously rejected the expansion, calling it too expensive, though it would be funded 100 percent by the federal government for the first three years and no less than 90 percent after that.

Riser also vowed to try and repeal the Affordable Care Act, while McAllister said the more practical and constructive move would be to modify it to make it work better for the residents of the 5th District, many of whom don't have health insurance.

In Washington, McAllister was assigned the same office as his predecessor, Alexander, who left Sept. 26 to take a job as veterans' secretary for Jindal. McAllister has kept on 10 of Alexander's staffers, including his chief of staff, Adam Terry.

Former Republican Rep. Gerald Ford, who went on to become vice president, then president after Richard Nixon's resignation, once used the office. McAllister showed visitors a picture of Ford that was left behind in the office.

His first vote? A "yes" on a bill to speed up the approval process for oil and gas pipelines. "I'm a guy who made his money in the oil and gas industry and this is the first vote. It doesn't get any better than that, does it? A sign from above," McAllister said.