Buy Photo Pensacola Mayor Ashton Hayward (Photo: PNJ archive)Buy Photo

On Tuesday we asked Pensacola Mayor Ashton Hayward these questions related to the shakeup at city hall. Here are his answers:

1. Former COO Tamara Fountain was obviously a prominent part of your administration, although, not largely familiar to many city residents. Can you please explain how you were first introduced to Fountain before bringing her on at the city?

Most City residents are not largely familiar with any City officials outside of their elected officials. They expect and trust their elected officials to protect their interests, which is something I have done since my first day in office. I first met Mrs. Fountain in 2012 when I was introduced to her by a member of the judiciary.

2. At the time that you first contracted with Fountain, how were you made aware of her education and work history?

I misspoke when I said Mrs. Fountain had a master’s degree. She distinguished herself at the University of West Florida where she majored in Management and received a Bachelor’s degree in Business Administration from their excellent College of Business.

3. Can you explain what experience specifically qualified her to be the city’s chief operations officer?

I originally hired Mrs. Fountain as our Communications Administrator. Over time, she proved herself to be an incredibly capable project manager, and I gradually asked her to take on more and more responsibilities. When the previous City Administrator resigned in August 2014, I asked Mrs. Fountain to take on additional duties, including oversight of human resources, technology resources, City Council relations, constituent services, and intergovernmental affairs. Earlier this year, I asked her to take on oversight responsibility for our City’s three enterprises. Mrs. Fountain’s degree, experience, and performance met all of the qualifications for both of the positions she held while with the city. She consistently met every challenge I assigned her.

4. Through public records requests, reporters learned there was no work history or resume for former COO Fountain on file at the city of Pensacola. Is there a standard requirement of such documentation for all hires at city hall? Furthermore, is there a standard method of verification of such information as presented by all new hires?

Our Human Resources Office works diligently to ensure that the staff hired by the City meet the requirements of the job. In December 2014, the City implemented a new online application system which has greatly improved the consistency and efficiency of our hiring process. We should have ensured that Mrs. Fountain’s resume and transcript were placed in her personnel file and I will make sure this happens without exception going forward.

5. Some taxpayers have been taken aback by documents from former COO Fountain’s personnel file that revealed a 35 percent pay raise in less than two years at the city. Do you stand by that pay increase as an appropriate use of taxpayer dollars?

My staff and I make every effort to ensure that every penny of public funds is spent wisely and that employee compensation is benchmarked to comparable positions both within our organization and at other agencies. Mrs. Fountain’s compensation increased commensurate with her responsibilities and was consistent with or less than what similar City management officials were paid in the past.

6. Do you stand by former COO Fountain’s assertions that reporting by the Pensacola News Journal and other media outlets are bullying and personal attacks?

I think that we often put too much focus on personalities and short-term controversies at the expense of the bigger picture. I’d much rather focus on growing Pensacola and attracting new jobs, talent, and investment. We have made tremendous progress over the past five years and every possible indicator tells us that Pensacola is on the right track. I hope that we, as a community, can rally around this incredible momentum and work together to continue moving our city upward.

7. An online poll conducted by the PNJ in conjunction with the reports on former COO Fountain said that nearly 75 percent of respondents are not happy with “how city hall is run.” That flies in the face of a comment from City Administrator Eric Olson, who estimated a majority are happy. How do you account for the dissatisfaction and Olson’s perception of citizens?

The PNJ’s poll wasn’t a scientific survey, wasn’t limited to City residents, and people were able to vote more than once by using different devices. Numerous statistically-valid surveys, including the PYP Quality of Life survey as well as the Pensacola Community Survey, which the UWF Haas Center conducted on behalf of the City last year, have demonstrated that a majority of City residents are satisfied with the services the City is delivering and feel the City is on the right track. Do we have room for improvement? Of course we do, and that’s something my employees and I are focused on every day.

8. Clearly Fountain’s departure affects your recently announced restructuring of city government. Do you still believe the restructuring is the appropriate template for the the city going forward?

My goal is to reduce the size and cost of government, and I’m very proud of the restructuring that we have done at City Hall since I took office. These changes have made our city government leaner, more efficient, and more responsive to citizens. We continually evaluate the way our city government does business, and I welcome any suggestions that will allow us to better serve our citizens.

Read or Share this story: http://on.pnj.com/1Nx4buh