Supreme Court Chief Justice John Roberts, clearly a conservative on the high court, came under fire from GOP presidential candidates during a debate Wednesday for not being conservative enough. (Photo: 2014 photo by Elise Amendola/Associated Press)

The Supreme Court hasn’t gotten a lot of play in the 2016 presidential contest yet, but count on it becoming more of an issue as the election draws nearer.

Whoever the next president is, he or she could have a rare opportunity to recast the court’s politics for a long time with multiple key appointments in a first term.

On the conservative side of the court, Justices Anthony Kennedy and Antonin Scalia will be 80 next year; on the liberal side Justice Ruth Bader Ginsberg is 82 and Stephen Breyer is 77.

It’s hard to imagine that none of their seats will become available by 2020.

At Wednesday night’s Republican debate, the court came up in a narrow sense, as several candidates trashed Chief Justice John Roberts (a nominee of George W. Bush and an undeniable conservative on the court) and even went so far as to say his appointment was a “mistake.” Texas Sen. Ted Cruz, who, like Roberts, was a clerk for former ultraconservative Chief Justice William Rehnquist, said Roberts should have been passed over for a more conservative nominee. Even Jeb Bush questioned his brother’s pick, saying — ridiculously — that Roberts, who’d served in the Reagan White House and in the Solicitor General’s Office for George H. W. Bush in addition to clerking for Rehnquist, didn’t have enough of a record to establish his conservative bona fides.

The source of ire last week was a pair of Roberts opinions, both having to do with health care reform. Roberts twice saved Obamacare from congressional challenge — first in the ruling that deemed the health insurance mandate a constitutionally acceptable tax, and the second preserving the federal subsidies for state-run health insurance exchanges.

Two opinions. Culled from nearly a decade on the court.

And let's be clear: The Roberts opinions that aren’t in lockstep with conservative political values are very few and far-between.

He’s just as well known for helping decimate affirmative action or any other government-sponsored attempt to achieve racial equality, writing once that race-conscious efforts to fight inequality were as much a part of the problem as outright discrimination.

And he blew a hole though the government’s ability to ensure black voting rights, saying several Southern states with pernicious histories of terrible discrimination shouldn’t be singled out by the Voting Rights Act for simple federal review of proposed voting or ballot-related changes.

And then there are the stats: Roberts votes most frequently with Scalia and then with Samuel Alito, inarguably solid conservative members. (SCOTUSblog.com is a great resource for numbers about the high court.)

So why the kvetching?

Well, conservatives have a long history of eating their own when it comes to court appointments. Earl Warren was vilified as a traitor for his embrace of school desegregation and other decisions through the 1950s and 1960s.

Justices John Paul Stevens and David Souter faced similar ridicule and political bile.

And Anthony Kennedy, nominated to the court by Ronald Reagan, is a darling punching bag of the right, principally for his profound evolution on the question of gay rights.

What always amuses me is how the so-called conservative court traitors tend to embody the core beliefs of conservatism.

Take Kennedy, for instance. His protection of gay rights is rooted in a belief that the constitution constrains government from singling out classes of Americans for differential treatment. (It absolutely does, in the 14th Amendment.)

And in fact, the same impulses that have driven his contempt for discrimination against gays shape his opposition to race-conscious policies like affirmative action. Kennedy doesn’t care whether the government is treating people different in the name of expanding their liberty or confining it; his point is that the government ought not be in the business of treating people differently.

Roberts, too, is a conservative rock, even when he’s voting in favor of preserving the Affordable Care Act. In both rulings, he was exercising deference to Congress’ lawmaking abilities, and the court’s responsibility to carve wide berth — and avoid nitpicking defeatism — in interpreting what the popularly elected branches want or intend to do.

Sounds pretty conservative to me. I doubt Roberts, or Kennedy for that matter, is rushing off to join even the most conservative wings of the Democratic party.

I know the Republican candidates were poking at Roberts only by way of jabbing at Obama; this is primary season, and they know there are votes to be mined in the opposition to just about anything the current president has done.

And I know that, in office, the brash calculations of a debate-stage performance almost always give way to more considered, thoughtful decision-making. Especially when it comes to the high court.

But before we all vote next year, it might be good if we had a more honest discussion about what this court looks like, how its members fit with our various views of the constitution, and what we might want in what could be a really different cast of characters by the next election.

The sound-byting and posturing doesn’t quite cut it.



Stephen Henderson is editorial page editor for the Detroit Free Press. Contact him: shenderson600@freepress.com.

Read or Share this story: http://on.freep.com/1F5rrR1