iNVEZZ.com Sunday, February 16: The US healthcare sector, especially the biotechnology sector, delivered an impressive performance last year with the S&P Biotechnology Select Industry Index (INDEXSP:SPSIBI) surging more than 50 percent. The rally has continued this year as well, with the index gaining nearly 20 percent. While some investors see a bubble forming in the sector, there are plenty who believe there’s a lot of upside left for biotech stocks.

David Miller, portfolio manager for hedge fund Alpine BioVentures, recently said in an interview that while there were some biotech stocks with fundamentals out of sync with their market capitalisations, there wasn’t a bubble in the entire industry. He recommends investing in biotech stocks to those investors who are looking for companies with large pricing power, sizeable gross margins and improving returns on R&D. However, Miller cautions that only one out of 10 companies that go public is going to succeed.

There are a few drivers behind the rally in healthcare stocks. One of these drivers is the Affordable Care Act, often known as ‘Obamacare’. The act is meant to increase the number of insured Americans, which will inevitably increase the demand for the Medicare and Pharma industries. Although Obamacare was plagued by political as well as technological issues, some consumers have started buying new insurance plans or have signed up for the Medicare programme.

The biotech industry has also benefitted from a heightened mergers and acquisitions activity. Since 2009, the sector has seen at least 400 M&A deals per year. According to analysts, large cash reserves and still-modest R&D are prompting companies to embark on takeovers or join hands.

Finally, the healthcare sector and the biotech industry stand to benefit from the aging global population, which boosts the demand for biotechnology. Companies are constantly working hard to come up with medicinal solutions to critical diseases.

If you want to invest in the biotech industry you can do so through an exchange-traded fund (ETF). One such fund is the iShares Nasdaq Biotechnology ETF (NASDAQ:IBB), which tracks the Nasdaq Biotechnology Index. The fund has about$5.5 billion (₤3.28 billion) of assets under management and an expense ratio of 0.48 percent. It provides exposure to 123 companies and is one of the largest and most popular ETFs in the biotech sector. The top 10 holdings account for about 56.50 percent of the fund and include Biogen Idec (7.75 percent), Gilead Sciences (7.57 percent) and Amgen (7.47 percent). IBB last year delivered a total return of 65.47 percent.

As of Friday, 14 February buy iShares Nasdaq Biotechnology ETF at $257.52.

As of Friday, 14 February sell iShares Nasdaq Biotechnology ETF at $257.50.

Trade stocks with Hargreaves Lansdown from £5.95 per deal.

Prices can go up and down meaning you can get back less than you invest. This is not advice. Dealing services provided by Hargreaves Lansdown.