By Joe Bilello - Fox News

A recent WaPo/ABC poll found that 36 percent of Democrats find Hillary Clinton untrustworthy - a staggeringly low number but still 36 points higher than it should be.

In general, politicians are not viewed as the most trustworthy of professionals. But why does Hillary Clinton's untrustworthiness stand out in a crowd of the most un-trusted members of our society? Why is Hillary Clinton seemingly incapable of telling the truth?

One characteristic of a pathological liar is that they can convince themselves that they are actually telling the truth. When asked by CBS’s Scott Pelley if she has ever lied to the American people, Hillary responded, “I don’t think I ever have."

Maybe that was the only time she actually told the truth. But this is not the case with Hillary Clinton. She is fully aware of the truth. Another characteristic of pathological liars is that even though they are aware of their own lies, they believe they are telling them for the greater good. It’s a variation of tactics straight from the Alinsky playbook - the ends justify the means. And in Hillary's mind, the greater good is her own power.

The word "lie" is thrown around so casually in politics today that it has almost lost all meaning. Accusations of lying have become so prevalent that they are often disregarded as political attacks. So lies - real lies - go unaccounted for because we have conceded to the fact that that's just what politicians do, they lie.

Politicians think they must pretend to know at least something about everything. Admitting ignorance causes great fear of political suicide. But the fear is not necessarily warranted. Anyone who pretends to know everything must be lying at some point. Is pretending to have all the answers better than simply admitting ignorance? Donald Trump is often criticized for his perceived lack of knowledge on the issues. Rather than pretend to have the answer, Mr. Trump often says things like "I'll get some really smart people to figure that out." While mocked by political insiders for comments like that, Mr. Trump’s honesty in regard to his lack of knowledge on some issues has resonated with many voters.

It is important to make the distinction between political "lies" and outright, inexcusable, boldface lies. It is also important to make the distinction between lies, ignorance, broken promises, incorrect intelligence and legitimate change of heart.

"Saddam Hussein has weapons of mass destruction" - if you believe something to be true based on the intelligence provided and it turns out to not be true, that is not a lie.

"Read my lips, no new taxes" - a broken promise is not necessarily a lie.

"If you like your doctor, you can keep your doctor" - perhaps a lie but perhaps not. President Obama did not read 20,000-plus pages of ObamaCare. No one read ObamaCare and no one understands it. Maybe his advisers told him that folks who like their doctors could keep their doctors.

Contrast those untruths with blatant, outright lies.

"I remember landing under sniper fire. There was supposed to be some kind of a greeting ceremony at the airport, but instead we just ran with our heads down to get into the vehicles to get to our base." - Most of us have never been shot at. Arriving in a foreign country under a hail of gunfire would seem to be a life-changing experience. One that would not be easily "misremembered."

“The Benghazi attacks were the result of a YouTube video” – Everyone knew that the attacks were premeditated and not related in any way to a spontaneous reaction to a video.

"I did not have sexual relations with that woman" - Even the most promiscuous individuals would remember whether or not they had oral sex performed on them in the Oval Office of the White House.

So, why is Hillary's inability to tell the truth a potentially good thing?

As unsettling a proposition as it may be, we must acknowledge the fact that Hillary Clinton could be the next President of the United States. We must also acknowledge that a Hillary presidency would be far better than the alternative on the Democrat side.

The relative success of Bernie Sanders and Hillary's attempt to keep pace with the socialist Senators’ far-left ideals are proof of just how radical the Democratic party has become. Barring an indictment, Hillary will be the nominee with relative ease but it hasn't been as easy as it should've been. Hillary should have been able to come right out from the beginning and say, "Seriously people, seriously? Bernie Sanders? I am a committed progressive Democrat but this guy is completely out of his mind."

Instead, Hillary has chosen to attempt to out-Bernie-Sanders Bernie Sanders with far-left lunacy. But while Bernie actually believes the insane notions in his mind, Hillary Clinton only craves power. Hillary is a progressive Democrat. But a completely delusional, radical left-wing ideologue? Perhaps not.

Like her husband, Hillary Clinton is a relative pragmatist. She is well aware that the Democrats’ campaign rhetoric and absurd promises would lead to economic disaster and social chaos. She will not go after the wealthy with the zeal she is pretending to have at the moment. She doesn’t even know anyone who isn’t a millionaire or billionaire. She will not break up the banks. She will not come down hard on Wall Street executives who have helped fund her political career. She will not take on the pharmaceutical industry. She will not guarantee equal pay for equal work because she knows that we already have those laws on the books and pay inequity is based on the market not sex discrimination.

She will use standard class, gender and racial rhetoric without actually doing anything to address her party’s grievances because she knows deep down that the grievances are bogus. She has no interest in a “political revolution” like her Democratic counterpart.

Politics as usual has been very good to the Clintons. Hillary Clinton has no intention of following through on many of the promises she is currently making. And that's a good thing.