In July, Oregon Rep. Kurt Schrader was one of just 14 Democrats to vote for a bill that would weaken the Endangered Species Act.

In September, he was one of only 35 Democrats to vote for a measure aimed at ditching water regulations that angered farmers.

It's a typical pattern for Schrader. He may stick with Democrats on a lot of the big votes – Obamacare and the $787 billion stimulus bill, for example – but he's carved out a distinctive record that's helped him survive in Oregon's most politically divided congressional district.

It's left his Republican opponent, Clackamas County Commissioner Tootie Smith, fuming that Schrader is always keeping his eye on election-year politics. Meanwhile, she hopes there's enough anti-incumbent anger to drive voters to her low-budget campaign

The 5th Congressional District was created just 34 years ago and sometimes feels cobbled together from disparate parts.

It includes a sliver of Southeast Portland, most of the population of Clackamas County and a big swath of the Willamette Valley before extending to the coast.

The district has a Democratic registration edge of just 2 percentage points. Republicans nationally invested heavily in the district trying to unseat Schrader in 2010 but fell 10 points short. Since then, it's been hard for GOP candidates to raise money against Schrader.

The candidates, Oregon's 5th Congressional District Incumbent: Democrat Kurt Schrader Background: Elected to Congress in 2008; Oregon Senate, 2003-09; Oregon House, 1997-03. Veterinarian from Canby. Website: kurtschrader.com Challenger: Republican Tootie Smith Background: Clackamas County commissioner since election in 2012; Oregon House, 2001-05; state director of Oregon Lands Coalition in mid-1990s. Farmer and former newspaper editor and reporter and technical writer. Website: tootiesmith.com Other candidates:

rbaldwinelection2012.

wix.com/

raymond-baldwin Raymond Baldwin, Constitution Party Marvin Sannes, Independent Party, marvinsannes.com Daniel K. Souza, Libertarian, no website

"I'm probably one of the most bipartisan and moderate Democrats in the House and that's what my folks in the 5th want," said Schrader, 62, a veterinarian who honed his political skills in the state Legislature.

He got a break shortly after he took office in 2009 when the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration moved it Pacific research fleet from Seattle into Schrader's district in Newport – giving him bragging points for helping create jobs as well as a string of spending projects he can work on for the new NOAA facility.

From his perch on the House Agriculture Committee, Schrader also helped shape the latest Farm Bill, which includes increases in funding and marketing help for specialty crops, the mainstay of the Willamette Valley.

Schrader has also done whatever he can to highlight his bipartisanship, joining such groups as No Labels, which wants to get lawmakers of both parties to work together on a congressional agenda. He's among a small minority of lawmakers who voted for the Simpson-Bowles budget plan that conservatives upbraided for its proposed tax increases and liberals despised for its proposed reductions to Social Security and Medicare.

Nobody has ever accused Tootie Smith of running to the political center. She had a staunchly conservative voting record in two terms of the Legislature and focused heavily on legislation aimed at making it easier for rural residents to develop their land. In 2012, Smith was part of the new conservative majority that took control of the Clackamas County Board of Commissioners after a heated election. She won national publicity by raffling off a 9 mm Glock pistol to raise campaign funds.

Smith, 57, grew up on a farm and continues to live on one in rural Clackamas County. Her husband had just started a logging business when federal logging restrictions were enacted after the 1990 listing of the northern spotted owl as a threatened species. That led her into political activism as the director of a statewide grass-roots group fighting to overturn the restrictions.

From this experience, Smith says, "I see what the federal government is doing to our state and I don't like it very much...I grew up in an Oregon where you could get a high school education and get a family-wage job, and now not even the college graduates can make it."

Smith supports repealing Obamacare and says that the key to resolving the immigration issue is tougher border controls and enforcement. She says Schrader may talk a good game of bipartisanship but notes that the National Journal found that he votes with the Democrats 84 percent of the time.

In conversation, Smith keeps returning to the forestry issues that got her into politics in the first place. She says she wants to turn over federal forests to state and local governments and allow them to be logged more extensively.

"These are our forestlands," she says, arguing that the federal government has failed to properly manage the public lands.

Schrader has a quick comeback, noting that he worked with Republican Rep. Greg Walden and Democratic Rep. Peter DeFazio on a bill that would put about 1.6 million acres of federal lands in Western Oregon into a state trust focused on timber production.

Smith's talk about a massive turnover of federal lands to the states "is just not going to happen," Schrader says. "Ours is a much more thoughtful response."

The Schrader-Walden-DeFazio bill is now languishing in the Senate, which Smith is quick to point out. However, that shows how unlikely it would be for the Senate, let alone the Obama administration, to accept a more radical approach.

In any case, Schrader has reaped political benefits from the timber bill. He's gained wood-products industry support, just as his vote for the bill to curb Environmental Protection Agency regulations further endeared him to the agricultural community.

The Oregon Farm Bureau backed the district's Republican candidate in 2010 but has now endorsed Schrader for the second election in a row.

-- Jeff Mapes