While Californians may grumble about high health care premiums, consumers pay less through the Affordable Care Act in the Golden State compared with half the nation, according to a national analysis.

Even so, slight variations exist in Los Angeles County, where some pay more than others for the same insurance plan.

Data studied by Digital First Media show that the benchmark health plan for a 50-year-old Sacramento woman who makes $40,215 annually and who chooses a low-cost silver-level health plan through Covered California will spend $3,619 on health insurance, the highest statewide.

But if that same woman lived in Inyo County, she would spend $2,412 annually, according to the analysis.

The Digital First Media analysis modeled the impact of tax credits on premiums for individual policies bought on government-run insurance marketplaces, which are an option for people who don’t get coverage from their employer. Using that data, an average health premium in California ranks as eighth-highest in the nation, but then drops to the middle of the pack after federal tax credits are applied.

California’s premiums are also lower in some regions of the state compared with others because there’s more competition among insurance companies. When Covered California first launched, there were a dozen health insurers that listed their plans on the open market, allowing consumers to shop around. Eight of those insurers — including three of the largest — listed plans in Los Angeles County, while seven were available in San Bernardino County.

“Geography makes a big difference,” said professor Shana Alex Lavarreda, director of Health Insurance Studies and research scientist at the UCLA Center for Health Policy Research.

“California has the highest managed care penetration across the country, which has prompted competition,” she added.

Lavarreda said health insurance companies price their premiums based on providers and how many enrollees they expect to have, among other factors.

But a small variation can be seen within Los Angeles County. Covered California, the state’s health plan exchange, divided Los Angeles into two areas, Region 15 and 16 because of its size.

A 50-year-old whose income level is $40,215 and who chooses a low-cost silver plan with Health Net, for example, pays $294 a month if she lives in Region 16, which includes Pacoima, Encino, Torrance or Toluca Lake.

Advertisement

Those who live in Region 15, including Altadena, Pasadena and Long Beach, pay $276 for the same Health Net plan, or $18 less.

“The amount of premium someone pays for health insurance is directly related to how much their medical care costs in their local community,” said Charles Bacchi, executive vice president for the California Association of Health Plans. “Regions with higher medical costs have higher premiums, and regions with lower medical costs have lower premiums.”

In another analysis, a 50-year-old who earns the same $40,215 a year and who lives anywhere in San Bernardino County would pay more for the same silver plan than in Los Angeles County.

That means residents of the cities of San Bernardino, Chino, Rancho Cucamonga or Fontana all pay $300 a month.

“Even though the areas are compact and the regions are next to each other, there are variations in provider costs and hospital costs, and there are population differences, too, in an individual’s health status and their health care consumption patterns,” said Brad Kieffer, a spokesman for Health Net. “All these factors lead to different premiums between those three different regions.”

The latest enrollment figures show that 728,410 Californians enrolled in a health insurance plan from Oct. 1 through January. Of those, 86 percent were eligible for tax credits, according to Covered California.

A majority of those who enrolled chose the silver plans. And the top health plans were those offered by Anthem Blue Cross of California, Blue Shield of California, Kaiser Permanente and Health Net.

Premiums can change, of course, Lavarreda said. And many are watching to see not if, but by how much, premiums will rise next year. One change in California could have some effect on California’s health care landscape, Lavarreda said.

“I think next year, we may see some smaller plans drop out,” she said.