Topics: Angelina Jolie, Film, Scarlett Johansson, Entertainment News

Angelina Jolie’s “Maleficent” is by no means a superhero, but the deliciously villainous character possesses enough powers to displace an entire squad of mutants from the top spot at the box office. Though “X-Men: Days of Future Past” was already in its second week of release, the feat is still quite remarkable because of the many identifiable faces, from Hugh Jackman to Ian McKellen to Jennifer Lawrence — and their corresponding quadrants — to which the X-sequel appealed. In contrast, check the promotional material for “Maleficent” and you will see only one prominent visage. Taking it further, I challenge anyone who has not already seen the film to name two other actors featured. Angelina Jolie is one of the very few Hollywood leading ladies who has the sheer recognizability and widespread appeal to singlehandedly open a motion picture up to the chance of blockbuster success. She literally has face value. Studios are willing to bank on it, and if you want proof, recall the poster for “Salt.”

So, what does this mean for the handful of other women who breathe the same rarefied air as Jolie? It’s too soon to tell, but not for long. I haven’t seen “Maleficent” yet myself, but I’m betting that all weekend long, while the Disney adventure was raking in its $70 million, it was preceded in each multiplex by a preview for Scarlett Johansson’s upcoming sci-fi action vehicle “Lucy.” Without even a franchise or a fairy tale to build from, the potential success of “Lucy” hinges entirely on whether audiences around the world want to see a psychically enhanced Johansson — and Johansson alone — kick butt in the near future. Though Scar-Jo may appeal to a slightly younger demographic than Jolie, the folks behind “Lucy” can’t help but feel bolstered by the fact that, this weekend, more than just teenage girls paid good money to see a beautiful, badass heroine manifesting unimaginable, superhuman powers. “Lucy,” itself, will also function as a test for Johansson’s next high-profile action project, a feature film vehicle for Marvel’s Black Widow. That catsuited character made a splash alongside the Avengers, but solo is another story.