TALLAHASSEE — Gov. Rick Scott and lawmakers for both parties are touting cable and phone tax cuts signed into law last month, but many Floridians will likely see those savings eaten up by higher costs for a variety of everyday expenses next year.

It will cost slightly more to drive Florida's Turnpike. The state's top insurance companies are seeking rate hikes for health and property coverage. State regulators recently allowed Florida Power & Light to pass on to consumers the cost of gas drilling known as fracking. Higher contributions to education funding required by the state will put pressure on county governments' finances.

Most Democrats voted for the tax cuts. But they also continue to criticize Scott and the GOP for taking credit for them while allowing jumps in rates for other expenses.

"The Republican leadership and the governor are basically selling tea-party snake oil. They have been disingenuous to the people of Florida," said House Democratic Leader Mark Pafford of West Palm Beach, the only House Democrat to vote against the tax-cut bill. "The hypocrisy is outlandish, but it's normal for these folks who are out of touch."

Scott pushed for a $673 million tax cut this year, but lawmakers passed $400 million in cuts, mostly through a slight reduction in cable, satellite-TV and phone service taxes. A consumer spending about $100 per month will save about $21 during a year. Scott's original proposal would have saved the same consumer $43 during the same period.

During the legislative session, he set up a "tax-cut calculator" booth to show how much Floridians would save under his proposal and went on a whirlwind tour of the state the day before he signed the budget last month to highlight the cuts.

When asked about higher tolls, insurance and utility rates, Scott again touted his tax-cutting efforts and his ability to hold college tuition level for the second straight year. He blamed the federal health-care law for higher health-insurance rates.

"Obamacare is a disaster. It's one of the reasons why health-insurance premiums are going up," Scott told reporters last week.

In filing requests for double-digit rate increases for Obamacare plans, Florida's largest health insurers did cite higher projected medical costs due in part to greater use of medical services as more people become insured.

Aetna is seeking a 21 percent hike and UnitedHealthcare of Florida an 18 percent jump for rates taking effect next year.

"Medical costs go up mainly for two reasons — providers raise their prices and members get more medical care," Aetna's filing states.

Florida health-insurance regulators will review and possibly adjust the rate requests later this year.

Although most large private-property insurers haven't filed rate requests for 2016 yet, Citizens Property Insurance Corp., the state-backed insurer that covers the most properties in Florida, is asking for a 3.2 percent statewide rate increase for 2016. Citizens' proposal, though, includes rate decreases for inland areas, with higher hikes for coastal areas and South Florida. State regulators will review and decide on the request later this year.

Scott and the Cabinet also voted in April to allow Citizens, in its best financial shape in years with a $7.6 billion surplus, to purchase $2.2 billion in additional reinsurance, a move projected to boost premiums by $13.75 during 12 months.

State utility regulators voted last month to allow Florida Power & Light to pass on $500 million per year in expenses for drilling for natural gas via fracking in Oklahoma. The Public Service Commission unanimously approved the measure, making FPL the first utility in the country to receive guaranteed money from consumers for fracking expenses.

FPL stated in a filing that cost recovery for fracking would "provide a physical hedge" against volatile natural-gas prices, and end up saving consumers money. But the approval came against the recommendation of PSC staffers, who stated it would set a bad precedent.

Lawmakers relied on an increase of $600 million in local property-tax revenues to help boost money for K-12 schools. The statewide mandated average millage rate of about $5.18 per $1,000 of taxable value is unchanged from last year, but local governments will be hoping for surges in property values to generate the extra revenue.

In a further squeeze of the wallet, tolls on Florida's Turnpike and other roads such as the BeachLine Expressway (State Road 528) rose 1.6 percent last month. A drive the length of the turnpike now costs $20.41, or 34 cents more than last year, for E-Pass and SunPass users. Lawmakers in 2007 tied toll rates to inflation.

grohrer@orlandosentinel.com or 850-222-5564