Giuliani steps up lobbying for Lynch His support offers cover for wavering Republicans as nomination remains in limbo

Former New York City Mayor Rudy Giuliani is stepping up his lobbying for Loretta Lynch’s confirmation as attorney general, a move that could give political cover to fence-sitting Republicans who are weighing whether to block the nominee.

In a letter to Sen. Lindsey Graham (R-S.C.), Giuliani praised Lynch’s record as a U.S. attorney for the Eastern District of New York and says the president deserves to have his pick of nominees, even if he disagrees with some of her views. And he urged Graham, who plans to vote for Lynch’s confirmation, to circulate the letter to fellow senators.

Story Continued Below

“How we treat nominees like Ms. Lynch has important constitutional implications,” Giuliani says in the Monday letter, which was provided to POLITICO. “The scope and the breadth of the advice and consent function of the U.S. Senate has been much debated. My interpretation has always been that a president should be given the deference to choose his Cabinet unless the nominee is unqualified to do the job, has a history of unethical behavior or is so ideologically rigid as to be incapable of making rational choices in the public interest.”

“None of these disqualifiers apply here,” Giuliani concluded.

Giuliani has expressed support for Lynch in the past, but his renewed effort comes at a critical juncture. The Obama administration is running into roadblocks trying to get Lynch confirmed. Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell has called on Democrats to let an unrelated anti-human trafficking bill pass before he’ll put her up to a vote.

Moreover, most senators in the 54-member Senate GOP Conference are prepared to block her, largely over her support of Obama’s use of executive power to defer deportations and provide work permits for several million undocumented immigrants. That means Democrats will need at least four GOP senators to cross the aisle and back her nomination to replace Eric Holder as the top official at the Justice Department.

In addition to Graham, Democrats seem to have enough support — but barely. Other GOP backers include Sens. Orrin Hatch of Utah, Jeff Flake of Arizona and Susan Collins of Maine.

Giuliani’s backing could be helpful for Graham in particular. The South Carolina Republican, who is actively considering a run for the GOP presidential nomination next year, could use the letter to push back against any anger over his support of Lynch.

Giuliani, the tough-talking, post-9/11 mayor, recently made headlines for questioning whether Obama loves the United States. Graham and Giuliani discussed Lynch in a private phone call Sunday.

“Like you, I have some ideological differences with her, and if there was a Republican president, we would be supporting someone closer to our shared political viewpoint,” Giuliani said. “However under the present circumstances, I would vote to confirm her if I were a member of the Senate regardless of my political affiliation.”