Among the city workers who are currently threatening to strike amid contract negotiations that have stalled over pay and other issues, many collect salaries higher than those who do similar jobs in both the public and private sectors, a Los Angeles Times analysis has found.

The greed of government worker unions seems to know no boundaries. Even the left-leaning Los Angeles Times notices that unionized workers for the City of the Angels are already heavily overpaid compared to their counterparts in not just the private sector but other municipalities, yet are now threatening to go on strike for even higher wages.

The analysis, which compared 2014 city and federal wage data, shows that three of the five largest job categories represented by Service Employees International Union Local 721 — the biggest and most prominent of the unions now in contract talks with the city — pay more than double the median salary of similar full-time, private-sector jobs in Los Angeles County.

More than double! SEIU is one of the most left wing unions out there, but when it comes to extorting taxpayers, they are all about greed. Even compared to employees of other cities, the LA workers are making out like bandits:

The pay disparity can also be seen — albeit to a lesser extent — in comparisons with other government agencies, the data show. The median wage for each L.A. city job class is 18% to 42% higher than that paid public employees doing similar jobs elsewhere in the county, according to the Times' analysis. L.A. traffic officers, who are primarily responsible for enforcing parking regulations, made a median salary of $63,626 last year. Median annual pay for parking-enforcement officers at other government agencies was $45,110. (In each job category, half of workers' salaries are below the median and half above it.)

The LAT provides a helpful graphic, based on SEIU workers:

My sense is that there is a big constituency for reining in the government worker unions. The Left is adept at practicing class warfare, but there is plenty of warfare to be made in the governing class. Scott Walker succeeded in Wisconsin, home of the progressive movement, by taking on the state workers’ unions.

People who work hard and ay taxes are sick and tired of government employees getting rich, or at least better off for the same jobs they do. And needless to say, although there are certainly exceptions, as a group, government workers have shorter hours, work less, and are not subject to the sort of discipline that functions in the private sector.