WILLIAMSBURG, Va., Oct. 16, 2013 /PRNewswire/ -- An innovative online approach by ThyroScore.org using crowdfunding takes over where Obamacare stumbles in preventive services for pregnant women. Obamacare specifically provides for testing for gestational diabetes – a pregnancy-related disease – yet completely ignores the great need for Thyroid Stimulating Hormone (TSH) testing for pregnant women or for those that plan to become pregnant. ThyroScore corrects this congressional oversight by providing low-cost TSH testing to moms-to-be without their ever having to leave home.

(Logo: http://photos.prnewswire.com/prnh/20131016/PH98291LOGO-a )

(Photo: http://photos.prnewswire.com/prnh/20131016/PH98291-b )

Pregnancy and the Thyroid

According to the Guidelines of the American Thyroid Association on Thyroid Disease and Pregnancy, many pregnant women suffer from thyroid disorders which can have a profound effect on the health of their unborn baby. Postpartum problems with the thyroid can continue for mother and child as well. Using a newly developed ThyroScore Health Kit available via the crowdfunding site indiegogo.com, mothers-to-be can self-administer a simple and fast blood test at home, the first step in diagnosing and resolving thyroid disorders. Tests are sent to a licensed laboratory for analysis. Results are available online and can be shared with her doctor for further diagnosis and treatment if needed.

30 Million Americans have thyroid disorders. 15 Million don't know it.

Regardless of whether Obamacare is repealed, altered, or stays, thyroid screening is an absolute necessity for pregnant women. And it should be part of annual well-care exams for all Americans. According to the experts at the American Association of Clinical Endocrinologists, 50% of the estimated 30 million Americans suffering from thyroid dysfunction remain undiagnosed due to lack of TSH testing. Chronic symptoms include fatigue, weight change, depression, memory loss, difficulty concentrating, dry skin and nails, hair loss, sensitivity to cold and many more. ThyroScore TSH testing is available to everyone.

ThyroMetrix, Inc., parent company of ThyroScore, was formed in 2006 to bring to the market products that can accurately and conveniently measure thyroid health. ThyroMetrix is committed to providing the medical community with easy and profitable on-site rapid TSH testing with the interfacing of the Holomic Rapid Diagnostic Reader and the rapid immunoassay ThyroTest. For full details, visit ThyroScore.org.

Contact information:

Sharon Cunningham, President

THYROMETRIX, INC.

Phone: (506) 485-0889

Email

Website: www.thyroscore.org

Facebook: www.facebook.com/thyroscore

Twitter: https://twitter.com/Thyroscore

Read more news from ThyroMetrix, Inc.

SOURCE ThyroMetrix, Inc.

Related Links

http://www.thyrometrix.com