GUELPH – It wasn't pretty, but Canadian champion Paul Rasmussen of Guelph managed to get free enough for a unanimous victory Saturday night at his home TNT Boxing and Fitness Academy.

"That was an ugly fight," Rasmussen said after he landed the majority of the punches thrown in his bout against Aaron Huggins of Toronto's Atlas Club. "There was a lot of holding going on. He didn't really come out to fight. He didn't throw that many punches, it was more kind of run or clench which made it look like a pretty ugly fight, more a wrestling match than a boxing match."

At 5-foot-10, Rasmussen is one of the shorter fighters in the men's 91-kilogram class. He has little choice but to work inside as usually his opponents have a height and reach advantage. Huggins, at 6-foot-4, is one of the taller in the class and has few options other than to try to smother the smaller fighter up when he gets inside. The result can look like a bit of a hugfest.

"It's tough because you don't want to expend too much energy trying to get out of the hold, but you also need to throw punches at the same time," Rasmussen said. "It's difficult and he's a difficult guy to fight."

Rasmussen and Huggins have met before and the previous fights have been the same. Rasmussen defeated Huggins for last year's provincial title.

"It's always push forward and get inside," Rasmussen said. "He had a really big reach to get by and I guess what he was doing was that every time I did get by his reach, he'd grab me. He was trying to take that away from me, me getting inside on him."

The fight was Rasmussen's first since he won the national championship at Regina in October and his first in Guelph in three years.

"I try to get a fight every month, if I can," he said. "I'm still staying busy with sparring and training, but that's not the same thing. Fighting in front of people is a completely different thing. The more you do it, the easier it gets."

Rasmussen won't have long to wait for his next bout. He's scheduled to fight Dawson Gibson of the Atlas club at the Atlas club Friday.

"That's who I originally wanted for my fight here," Rasmussen said. "He's a little closer to my height, but 20 to 30 pounds heavier. He like to fight, he likes to throw so it'll be a good fight."

After that fight, Rasmussen will prepare for his first action as a member of the Canadian national team.

"I'm heading to Serbia April 24th for the 52nd Belgrade International Tournament," he said. "That'll be my first tournament away and then there's a few training camps come May and possibly a few tournaments in Wales and other parts of Europe in July and August."

The Rasmussen-Huggins bout Saturday was the first of two co-main events on the TNT club's Dynamite Fights 14 card, possibly the best card the club has ever hosted.

The other co-main event featured female fighters Chantel Hartmann of TNT and Natasha Szlapetis of Mississauga CAOS. There was no hugging in this fight as they went toe-to-toe for most of their fight that Szlapetis won by unanimous decision. It was a rematch of a Dynamite Fights 13 bout that Hartmann had won by split decision a month ago.

Fabricio Portillo of TNT won his fight with Marco Capobianco of Kombat Arts by split decision.

Khol Adams of Mississauga's Dewith Boxing Studio won a split decision over Filip Ulanek of TNT.

Jessica Burgess of ONTC Top Glove Boxing Academy of Sudbury defeated Carly Burt of TNT by split decision.

Brock Stumpf of TNT opened the 10-bout card with a split-decision win over Kevin Daisley of Dewith.

Sara Haghighat-Joo of Coquitlam, B.C., who has been training at the TNT club the last couple of weeks, lost a split decision to Erica Adjei of Ottawa's Beaver Boxing Club.

Nicky Ward of Niagara Falls won a unanimous decision over Jim McCumber of Ring London.

Emily Wilkinson of Dewith won a split decision over Benay Kway Elijah-Camelo of Ring London.

Kaitlyn Clark of Ottawa Beaver won a unanimous decision over Jessica Camara of CJ Boxing 92 of Mississauga.