Assemblywoman Lucy Flores of Las Vegas,, the state Democratic Party’s candidate for lieutenant governor, was the featured speaker at the Cesar Chavez Dinner Monday night at the Circus-Circus. Many people wore “I Love Lucy” stickers. I don’t know if it is an official campaign slogan, but it sounds snappy.

Of course, “I Love Lucy” was giant TV comedy from the 1950s that can be seen on Netflix. The slogan is reminiscent of an historic campaign slogan from the 1950s – I Like Ike – which helped former Gen. Dwight Eisenhower win the presidency in 1952.

The “I Love Lucy” slogan was suggested by Reno labor activist Andy Barbano. He thinks it would make a great bumper sticker. Of course, there may be some trust or trademark on the slogan that would make Flores' offical use of "I Love Lucy" either illegal or expensive.

“They are saying they love Lucy,” Barbano said. “It’s a great campaign gimmick. It’s a much better slogan to have on bumper stickers, rather than something like, ‘I’m voting for Lucy.’ It creates buzz and gets people talking about the candidate.”

IT’S NO SECRET Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid, D-Nev., is involved in a feud with the conservative, fabulously wealthy billionaire Koch brothers, Charles and David.

Now, Nevada’s junior senator – Republican Dean Heller – is a target of a conservative seniors group with ties to the Koch Bros.

The 60 Plus Association is urging Heller and other bipartisan members of the Senate Banking Committee not to “bring Obamacare to the mortgage industry.” The 60 Plus Association is concerned changes to the Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac in the Crapo-Johnson bill could hurt seniors whose investments include bonds sold through these mortgage giants.

The group is running TV ads in Nevada, saying that “Dean Heller is teaming up with Barack Obama to take over the mortgage industry.”

That’s a stretch for Nevadans – Heller and Obama “teaming up.” Other members of the Banking Committee are getting similar pressure in their home states.

The 60 Plus Association hopes their pressure on the senators will impact the upcoming markup of the bill in the Senate, according to reports.

“With this proposal, Senator Heller is simply eliminating too-big-to-fail Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, to the dislike of some on Wall Street, in order to protect Nevada taxpayers and prevent yet another bailout in the future,” said spokeswoman Chandler Smith.

U.S. REP. MARK AMODEI has had some issues with his recent detached retina surgery. Yet it appears the worst is behind him, said spokesman Brian Baluta.

Mark was cleared by his doctor to fly to D.C., which he did on (a recent) Sunday,” Baluta said. “His eye is still healing, but he has been able to participate in a full slate of meetings, hearings and votes this week.”