Bloomberg Michael J. Fox, actor and Parkinson’s activist, speaks to Anne Wojcicki, chief executive officer of 23andMe Inc.

The U.S. Food and Drug Administration has ordered 23andMe Inc., a DNA-analysis company backed by Google Inc., to “immediately discontinue” marketing its over-the-counter genetic-testing kits or face penalties.

In an unusually stern letter to the Silicon Valley company’s founder, Anne Wojcicki, dated Friday, the FDA warns her to halt sales of the test because the risk of false positives “could lead a patient to undergo prophylactic surgery, chemoprevention, intensive screening, or other morbidity-inducing actions,” it says, “while a false negative could result in a failure to recognize an actual risk that may exist.”

The FDA expresses frustration with the company, charging, “months after you submitted your 510(k)s and more than five years after you began marketing, you still had not completed some of the studies and had not even started other studies necessary to support a marketing submission for the PGS. It is now nine months later, and you have yet to provide FDA with any new information about these tests.”

Google /quotes/zigman/93888/delayed /quotes/nls/goog GOOG and Johnson & Johnson Inc. /quotes/zigman/230812/delayed /quotes/nls/jnj JNJ are among 23andMe’s investors. Customers can order a DNA test online for $99, send the company saliva samples, and then receive information about health and ancestry.

23andMe acknowledged the letter in a statement to the press: “Our relationship with the FDA is extremely important to us and we are committed to fully engaging with them to address their concerns.”

In 2010, the FDA reached out to five companies, 23andMe Inc., deCODE Genetics, Illumina, Navigenics and Knome Inc., warning that the agency requires more regulatory approval before genetic tests can be sold to consumers. 23andMe is the only one being ordered to stop selling its test.

Anne Wojcicki is married to Sergey Brin, co-founder of Google. AllThingsD reported in August that couple are not living together.

—Follow Michelle on Twitter: @m_cof