Hundreds came to hear Carly Fiorina speak at the Wicwas Lake Grange in Meredith Thursday night.

Click to watch News 9's coverage

“Citizens, it is time to take our future back. It is time to take our politics back, government back. Citizens, it is time to take our country back,” said Fiorina.

Carly Fiorina tackled issues from ISIS to the Affordable Care Act, including one of her favorite political topics, Hillary Clinton.

“So the way to beat Hillary Clinton is to point out that she doesn't have a track record of accomplishment, that she's been wrong on every foreign policy challenge, that she lied to the American people,” said Fiorina. “Not just about emails and servers, but about the terrorist attack in Benghazi. And she lied over and over again.”

Fiorina not only questioned Hillary Clinton’s credibility, but even weighed in on her husband, saying any former president is fair game.

She spoke about what she would have done if she were in Hillary Clinton’s shoes when former President Bill Clinton admitted to having sexual relations with Monica Lewinsky.

“If my husband were doing those things, I would leave him. And yes, I think there is a lot of evidence that Bill Clinton behaved in a predatory manner in some cases,” said Fiorina.

The former CEO of Hewlett-Packard also criticized Republicans.

“Donald Trump is having a bromance with (Russian President) Vladimir Putin,” said Firoina.

Fiorina outlined her "blueprint" to the more the 250 people at the town hall meeting.

The GOP hopeful said she wants to cut jobs at the IRS, repeal and replace Obamacare and defund Planned Parenthood.

Fiorina says she opposes abortion because of her husband.

“I learned from his mother that she had been told to abort him. She chose not to. She was a woman of courage and faith. She spent a year in the hospital after his birth. He became the joy of her life, and has been the rock of mine for over 30 years,” said Fiorina.

Fiorina also said she wants to create a new app that will allow people to weigh in on public policy.