Dr. Ron Paulus (Photo: John Fletcher, Jfletcher@citizen-times.com)

After two years of weighing benefits versus costs of new breast cancer screening technology, Mission Health has decided to buy a tomosynthesis, or 3-D mammography, machine for the Asheville community.

The machine could be in use this year, Dr. Ron Paulus, Mission Health president and CEO, said Thursday.

“This is worth trying to increase the local choices available,” Paulus said. “Whether we’ll have one machine or 11 will be decided in years to come.”

The technology won U.S. Food and Drug Administration approval three years ago, in part as a way of easing concerns that traditional mammography can create patient anxiety with false positives and lead to unnecessary biopsies.

Traditional mammography also is more likely to miss cancers harder to detect in women with dense breast tissue.

Mission Health System uses nine digital mammography machines, also known as 2-D imaging, at 11 sites across Western North Carolina. Those machines take more than 40,000 mammograms a year.

The 3-D machine takes 2-D and 3-D images. It will most likely be placed at Hope Women’s Cancer Center in South Asheville, which is owned by Mission and exclusively serves women with cancer.

Paulus said a team of oncologists, radiologists, hospital administration and other experts has been evaluating the tomosynthesis technology for the past couple of years and decided last week to approve its purchase.

Dr. Blair Harkness, an oncologist with Hope Cancer Center, who has been leading the 3-D mammogram committee, said he expects a contract to be signed within a month for the machine, which costs $500,000- $600,000 and is made by Hologic.

“All the studies have shown tomosynthesis has better cancer diagnosis and fewer false positives — fewer women are called back for questionable findings,” Harkness said. “The biggest question when that happens is ‘do I have cancer?’ If we can reduce the number of women called back for false alarms and find more cancer earlier, the better.”

A study published in June in the Journal of the American Medical Association looked at more than 450,000 2-D and 3-D mammograms involving 139 doctors and 13 academic and nonacademic sites around the country. It showed 3-D mammography found many more invasive cancers than traditional mammograms and decreased the recall rate for false positives.

“I’m hoping within three months we’d have it here. There are logistical issues — we have to get approval from the state for getting equipment changed out, and we’ll need to get the technicians and the radiologists trained on the new equipment,” Harkness said.

“I think it’s a good thing for the community, and we’re happy to have that available to women soon.”

For the Asheville area, Blue Ridge Radiology in Hickory is the closest North Carolina location offering 3-D mammography.

Had the new technology been available earlier, she could have been spared a biopsy, said Carolyn Williams, of Asheville, who has been getting mammograms for the past 26 years.

While those have always been normal, Williams said there were some with suspicious findings, forcing her to get a biopsy three years ago.

“Happily, it wasn’t anything, but that biopsy is no walk in the park,” said Williams, who works on the board of the Preservation Society of Asheville and Buncombe County.

“I feel like this 3-D mammography will be a huge step in battling this complex issue of breast cancer diagnosis,” she said.

Women in the United States have a 12 percent lifetime risk of being diagnosed with breast cancer. There were about 232,000 cases of breast cancer diagnosed last year, and 64,600 cases of breast cancer in situ, a noninvasive form. Nearly 40,000 people died from the disease.

Since there is no form of prevention or cure, the best chance for survival is early detection.

A North Carolina law that went into effect Jan. 1 requires mammogram facilities to let patients know by letter if they have dense breast tissue.

Harkness said the 3-D technology is better at detecting cancer in women with dense tissue, which can often mask cancer cells, but it “shows improved diagnosis regardless of density — whether a woman has dense tissue or normal density, there is better diagnosis and fewer call-backs with tomosynthesis.”

Medicare has yet to set rates for 3-D mammography, so some insurance companies are not paying for it, he said.

Carolinas HealthCare in Charlotte, which offers 3-D mammography at three sites, charges patients an extra $50 for 3-D mammograms. Blue Ridge Radiology in Hickory does not charge patients anything above the digital mammography cost.

Health insurance is required by the Affordable Care Act to cover a yearly screening mammogram for women 40 and older.

Paulus said the cost was a real issue when considering the purchase and whether to pass the cost on to the patients.

“Medicare doesn’t pay for technology, and it costs a lot more than a traditional machine — about double,” Paulus said.

“It probably takes the radiologist twice the amount of time to read the film. Essentially, it induces a significant cost onto the health system that nobody compensates us for. We are facing half a billion dollars of payment cuts over the next 10 years. How do you buy things that are understandably needed?”

He said the hospital will evaluate the benefits of the 3-D machine and then decide if it would benefit the community to add more machines.

“I can see a day when we have nothing but 3-D units. But we might learn maybe it’s not the best technology,” Paulus said. “I’m very hopeful and excited about what we’ll learn.”

Julie Young, a two-year breast cancer survivor who lives in Arden, said she is anxious to see the 3-D machine in Asheville. Her dense breast tissue masked the cancer for more than 20 years of traditional mammograms. She was diagnosed only after feeling a lump herself.

“I’m cautiously optimistic,” she said. “But I’m awaiting delivery of the machine to celebrate and to cancel my travel plans to Hickory (for a mammogram).”

Read or Share this story: http://avlne.ws/1mTciXB