Democratic nominees Hilary Clinton and Bernie Sanders are tied in the race for the Democratic Party’s Presidential nomination, an NBC News/Marist poll found. Clinton and Sanders have been exchanging shots at one another for weeks on end, with Bernie calling out Hillary’s sources for her campaign funding and Clinton attacking Sanders’ track record in politics. Among those likely to vote Democrat, former Secretary of State Hilary Clinton has a 45-48 percent lead over Senator Bernie Sanders in Iowa, with Bernie Sanders taking the lead in New Hampshire by 46-50 percent, the Wall Street Journal discovered.

Thus far, Clinton has been the main target of attacks from across the aisle, and she has dealt some shade herself. Several weeks ago, Clinton called Republican Presidential candidate Donald Trump “ISIS’ biggest recruiter,” referring to Trump’s proposed policy of banning all Syrian immigrants to the U.S. Meanwhile, Clinton and Sanders have been fighting among themselves.

New NBC/WSJ/Marist poll shows the Democratic race tightening in Iowa with likely caucusgoers: Clinton 48, Sanders 45, O’Malley 5. #CNNSotu — State of the Union (@CNNSotu) January 10, 2016

Sanders and Clinton have also been duking it out over the issues, including their proposed economic policies. Both Sanders and Clinton view Wall Street as the main source of the financial crisis that has plagued the country, but Sanders alleges that Clinton has been a friend to big bankers and corporate interests. Sanders and Hilary also have differing views on how to deal with the “plague” they consider Wall Street to be. Sanders claims his campaign money is raised from the public, thus pushing special interest groups out of the Bernie Sanders campaign.

Differences aside, one thing is clear: both Sanders and Clinton are anti-Trump. As Inquisitr previously reported, Bernie has vowed to “destroy” Trump. Clinton has attacked Trump for making speeches she feels are misogynistic in nature. Trump’s wife, Melania, has been there to defend Trump against Sanders and Clinton’s attacks, and says he’d make a “great” president.

“I want to build on and make improvements in the Affordable Care Act, and I will stand against any Republican effort to repeal… because you know what the alternative is? We’ll go back to the insurance companies making all the decisions. If you’ve got a preexisting condition, you’ll be lucky if you can afford health insurance. If you’re a woman, you’re going to pay more, because that’s what used to happen before we had the Affordable Care Act. If you’re a young person up to the age of 26, you’re out of luck; you can’t be on your parents’ plan anymore.” —Hillary in South Carolina A photo posted by Hillary Clinton (@hillaryclinton) on Nov 23, 2015 at 12:43pm PST

Hillary has also supported President Obama on major issues such as gun control and healthcare reform. Sanders hasn’t taken many official positions on divisive issues, but did promise that he would “reinstate Glass-Steagall,” a 1930s banking act that outlawed banks from making investments. Sanders was silent on healthcare and abstained from a vote during which certain portions of the Affordable Care Act were up for possible repealing. Bernie has consistently voted for new gun control laws, however, including an act that would restrict terrorists’ access to dangerous explosives and firearms.

As ABC News discovered, former Maryland Governor Martin O’Malley (Clinton and Sanders’ competition in the Democratic Caucus) received just 1 percent of the vote amongst likely Democratic voters compared to Clinton and Sanders’ much higher numbers (48 percent going to Clinton and 45 percent to Sanders).

With Sanders and Hilary Clinton controlling a combined 93 percent of the vote, it’s likely Martin O’Malley will be squeezed out without being given a chance to get a Democratic Presidential nod. There is still almost a year left until the Presidential election; Clinton and Sanders’ numbers could change over time.

It’s clear that both Hillary and Sanders are focused on protecting the younger generation of 20-somethings who feel let down by issues like student loans and a still-recouping economy with poor job prospects. Sanders’ plan to alleviate this generation’s pain is to make college tuition free to all students, while Clinton is proposing reforms of the Affordable Care Act that could extend the age children can remain on their parents’ healthcare plans.

Let us know your predictions for the 2016 Presidential nominations. Do you think Sanders, Clinton, or O’Malley will get the Democratic Presidential nomination?

[Image via Ida Mae Astute, ABC News/Flickr/CC BY-ND 2.0]