Steve Leigh vows to improve based on faculty feedback

Steve Leigh (Courtesy photo)

Some arts and sciences professors at the University of Colorado aren't thrilled with the performance of Steve Leigh, the dean of CU's largest college.

Faculty members this spring got a chance to rate and provide feedback for Leigh, who is in his third year leading the College of Arts and Sciences on the Boulder campus.

Although they ultimately decided that Leigh is meeting expectations, arts and sciences professors complained about Leigh's communication style, leadership and his handling of several high-profile controversies in recent years.

"The comments indicate that a sizable number of faculty is unhappy, and it is telling that both sets of raters agree that the dean's constituents lack trust in him," according to a report summarizing the results of the faculty survey.

Leigh was rated by the general arts and sciences faculty population, and by a select group of people who work more closely with him. Those who know him generally rated him higher than the faculty at large, according to the report.

One common theme identified in survey results was Leigh's poor handling of the situation involving sociology professor Patti Adler, who said she was questioned for a lecture on prostitution, and his treatment of the philosophy department, which was perceived to have a climate unfriendly to women.

Advertisement

Another was his leadership style, which some faculty members described as untrustworthy, autocratic and confrontational. Others described a lack of transparency in his decisions.

"There is little or no innovation yet from this dean," one reviewer wrote. "He seems to not listen very well and takes a very long time to make decisions. However he does respond respectfully. Further, it appears that he is more concerned with balancing budgets than promoting good ideas."

Another faculty member wrote that Leigh's communication skills could use work.

"He comes to faculty meetings and after talking at us, does not answer specific questions, dodges hard questions and then leaves quickly," the faculty member wrote. "It sends a very negative message, and the overall feeling is that he is not listening, and does not really want to talk to us, but simply at us."

Though the report included the content of some comments from faculty members, their names were not included. That level of anonymity is meant to ensure genuine feedback from the faculty members about their boss, said Greg Carey, a psychology professor who oversees the administrator appraisal process.

Some respondents praised Leigh for his work to improve student retention, his willingness to listen to differing viewpoints and his ability to make decisions in a timely manner. Many faculty members felt Leigh acts with integrity.

Provost Russ Moore, who oversees CU's deans, said he stands behind Leigh and has appreciated his leadership. Moore said he feels Leigh has an "incredibly tough job."

"He's made tough decisions, and change is tough to do in the academy, especially when things have been humming along and seem to be just fine for a long time," Moore said. "Change is difficult in any setting, and the academy is no exception. I think he's done a wonderful job."

For his part, Leigh said he plans to set goals for himself based on the faculty's feedback. Leigh will be up for another faculty evaluation in his fifth year.

He said he loves his position and feels CU is an "incredibly exciting place to work."

"One takes lessons from negative comments and really tries to understand the underlying issues," he said. "The report is quite valuable to me. It's very helpful to get that feedback. One issue along the lines of making sure that I communicate a little bit more effectively, maybe a lot more effectively, is going to be important."

Sarah Kuta: 303-473-1106, kutas@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/sarahkuta