St. Peter's University Hospital of New Brunswick argued that it will suffer irreparable harm if Horizon's OMNIA plan takes effect in the new year and it is not included in the preferred hospital tier.

Mary K. Caffrey

There was no Christmas Eve miracle for a hospital that hoped to join the preferred tier in New Jersey’s largest health insurer network before coverage begins this weekend.But today’s preliminary hearing revealed more details about how Horizon Blue Cross Blue Shield built its controversial OMNIA network. Apparently being the only preferred hospital in a market was important.Judge Frank Ciuffani denied St. Peter University Hospital’s request to be placed in Horizon’s preferred tier, because it would be “extraordinary” to take this step without a full hearing. St. Peter’s, located in New Brunswick, argued that it will suffer irreparable harm, including lost revenue and damaged relationships with patients, once the OMNIA plan takes effect.The judge told both sides to return January 4, 2016, to schedule depositions and a full hearing, Ciuffani told the parties he wants the matter resolved quickly.Benefits under OMNIA start Saturday for some public employees covered by the plan, and on January 1, 2016 for everyone else. Horizon attorney Michael Kassak said today OMNIA will cover 3% of the market.“Horizon is pleased that the court has refused this effort by St. Peter’s to change the implementation of Horizon’s OMNIA health plans. This is good news for the thousands of individuals who have purchased OMNIA health plans to date,” said Horizon spokesman Thomas Vincz.Since it was unveiled September 10, 2015, Horizon’s OMNIA plan has drawn fire from mayors, legislators, and hospitals that were not included in the preferred network, known as Tier 1. OMNIA is both a tiered network, which was approved by state regulators, and a population health alliance, which is designed to move away from traditional fee-for-service healthcare delivery as called for under the Affordable Care Act.Around the country, population health contracts are becoming more common in managed care, as providers work with patients to stay on their medication, get health screenings, and take other steps to avoid major health crises that result in multi-day hospital stays. Providers then share in the savings that result from such activity.In the case of OMNIA, these agreements came with another element: those in the preferred network would also charge lower rates in exchange for having more patients routed their way. St. Peter’s attorney Jeffrey Greenbaum argued that depositions revealed that giving Tier 1 exclusivity to St. Peter’s competitor in New Brunswick, Robert Wood Johnson, was key to getting the RWJ agreement. Like most of the other OMNIA partners, RWJ is a large, multi-hospital system, while St. Peter’s is a standalone hospital.