WLFI File Photo

LAFAYETTE, Ind. (WLFI) — Indiana hospitals counting on extra Medicaid dollars from Obamacare have been watching hospitals in other states welcome new patients by the thousands and grow their profits by the millions. Gov. Mike Pence’s decision to refuse Medicaid expansion has hurt hospital bottom lines across the state.

When St. Elizabeth Central hospital closed its emergency room Sept. 3, it led News 18 to ask if that was a move primarily designed to save money. CEO Terry Wilson said “that’s not accurate,” adding that most emergency visits to Central “really amounts to urgent care.”

Wilson isn’t sure how much St. Elizabeth may have lost out on because of the state decision, but pointed to several programs he said the hospital could have introduced or expanded into the community. According to the Obama administration, 216,000 Indiana residents lost the chance for coverage when the governor refused to expand Medicaid.

“Everybody in this community who pays for healthcare — private citizens, businesses, insurance companies, governmental agencies — wants us to be more efficient, more productive,” said Wilson.

Wilson also said the emergency room was closed because it wasn’t seeing as many patients as it had in recent years. Records filed with the Indiana Department of Health show the emergency room saw 25,031 patients in 2013, compared to 29,706 in 2010, when St. Elizabeth East opened.

Despite the decline, IU Health Arnett and St. Elizabeth East emergency rooms have been forced to deal with the demand in the month since the closure. Central’s emergency room became an urgent care center Sept. 29.

It’s hard to quantify exactly how much money Indiana hospitals have potentially lost, but a recent analysis by Pricewaterhouse Coopers shows how much other hospitals have gained from being in states that accepted Medicaid expansion.

“One thing is clear,” the study said. “Newly released earnings and patient volume data reveal a distinct financial split between healthcare providers in states that have expanded Medicaid programs and those that have not.”

For example, the study points to Community Health Systems, which operates in 29 states including 12 that expanded Medicaid. Company executives credit Medicaid expansion for adding potentially $80 million to their balance sheets by the end of 2014.

“I think about it as lost opportunity,” Wilson said about St. Elizabeth. “What could we do with those things? Which programs could we have expanded?”

The PwC study also notes a sharp drop in uncompensated care in states that expanded Medicaid. Uncompensated care is the services hospitals provide to people who can’t pay for them. Factoring in Medicaid shortfalls already cutting into hospital profits, uncompensated care totals $124,813,137 at St. Elizabeth Central and East since 2010, according to Hospital Fiscal Reports filed with the Indiana Department of Health.

“I do think [refusing Medicaid expansion] is not just unfair but really just unwise,” said Brian Tabor, vice president of government relations for the Indiana Hospital Association. “In some states you have hospitals that are seeing their payments reduced but they’re not seeing their expanded coverage they expected.”

The IHA is putting its faith in the governor’s expanded Medicaid program, called HIP 2.0. In the plan, Medicaid dollars that could have come to Indiana beginning last year will account for most of its funding, which would be used to insure 350,000 Hoosiers.

The U.S. Department of Health and Human Services currently has it under review, but has not revealed when it will make a determination. Both Wilson and Tabor are optimistic that it will solve some of the problems refusing traditional Medicaid expansion has caused.

“Whether it’s called HIP 2.0 or modified Medicaid expansion, I don’t know,” said Wilson. “I look at that as a spectrum of options and we’re going to end up somewhere in the middle I think.”

Share this: Email

Print

Twitter

Facebook

Google

More

Pinterest

Like this: Like Loading...