Florence Chamber of Commerce hosts 102nd annual banquet Saturday

Chamber members Larry and Beryl Baker, from left, accept the Outstanding Citizen of the Year award on behalf of Lynn Lemmon-Oliver from Fran Black on Saturday during the annual banquet in the Florence Elks Lodge No. 611. ( Charlotte Burrous / Daily Record )

During the Florence Chamber of Commerce annual banquet Saturday, Florence-Penrose School District Superintendent Rhonda Vendetti presents the Outstanding School Employee of the Year to Steve Wolfe, who has been with the school district for almost 30 years. (Charlotte Burrous / Daily Record)

Florence — During its 102nd annual banquet and meeting, the Florence Chamber of Commerce selected Lynn Lemmon-Oliver as the Outstanding Citizen of the Year for her work on the Bell Tower Cultural Center.

"It's a pleasure to present the Outstanding Citizen for 2014," said Fran Black. "I know you know 'it takes a village to raise a child,' but it has taken a lot of community volunteers to raise and achieve this project I'm going to talk about."

After receiving the gift of the 117-year-old former Baptist Church building, the Florence Arts Council was delighted when they were chosen to receive this gift, Black said. However, it takes a good leader to achieve the amount of work that it needed.

"The Florence Arts Council is very proud to have four excellent leaders," she said. "Our greatest leader is Lynn Lemmon-Oliver."

Because Lemmon-Oliver was unable to attend the meeting Saturday night, Beryl and Larry Baker accepted the award on her behalf.

"There are so many people who have volunteered on this project," Larry said.

In September or October, the council was looking for a place to display the art and to have the auction for Paint the Town. After visiting the former Baptist Church and several other buildings, Lemmon-Oliver surprised them with the announcement that the church at 201 E. Second St.had been offered to the arts council.

Advertisement

"We were floored," Beryl said. "We didn't know what to think. It was just so exciting. We accepted it."

During the banquet, Steve Wolfe was named Outstanding School Employee of the Year, Big D's Superfoods as Outstanding Business of the Year and Gary McWilliams received the Linda Smith Public Service Award.

Wolfe began his career with Florence-Penrose School District in 1985.

"Steve Wolfe is one of the finest, most dedicated employees that RE-2 School District has ever known," said Superintendent Rhonda Vendetti. "We're going to really miss him."

Florence Chamber of Commerce Vice President Cecil Slattery, left, presents the Linda Smith Public Servant award to Florence Fire Chief Gary McWilliams for his work in the community. (Charlotte Burrous / Daily Record)

Over his career, he has served in various capacities, from teaching science at the high school level to being the principal twice to his current position as executive director of instructional services.

Wolfe said he was surprised.

"I appreciate this recognition, but also it's been my privilege to serve the school district the past 30 years, especially for the kids and teachers."

During the introduction of the Linda Smith Award, Board Vice President Cecil Slattery reminisced about Smith, who served in various positions with the chamber before she died several years ago.

"We're here to talk about the public servant today in his 27 years of service to the citizens of eastern Fremont County," Slattery said.

McWilliams became a firefighter for Rockvale Dec. 1, 1986, then joined the Florence Volunteer Fire Department and has been a member ever since. He also worked as a firefighter in Black Hawk for several years before moving back to Florence. In the past 10 years, McWilliams has taken leadership role, first as an assistant fire chief and currently as the fire chief.

"Gary epitomizes what a dedicated volunteer is," Slattery said. "He models his expectations by example."

For instance, it was his idea to organize the Fire and Ice fundraiser to collect toys to distribute to children in the Florence area at Christmas.

The recognition was a surprise to McWilliams.

Florence Chamber of Commerce Secretary Mitze Heard presents the Outstanding Business of the Year to Rod Davidson, of Big D's Superfoods on Saturday during the annual banquet in the Florence Elks Lodge No. 611. (Charlotte Burrous / Daily Record)

"I had no idea that this was what I was here for," he said. "The chamber just said 'we have something for the fire department. Can you come?'"

Board Secretary Mitzi Heard presented the Outstanding Business of the Year" award to Rod Davidson, of Big D's Superfoods.

"This business has been recognized for its consistency and customer service, and its commitment to fulfill expectations of customers, employees, family and our community," she said. "We applaud them for their never-ending involvement and fulfillment of our town's needs."

Davidson said he was pleased.

"I know there are a lot of businesses out there that are just as deserving," he said. "I appreciate this. I have a good crew down at the store who will appreciate this as well."