Thom Tillis at Duke on Friday. (WNCN)

DURHAM, N.C. (WNCN) – Republican Sen. Thom Tillis was back in North Carolina Friday, and WNCN was with him for a tour of Duke Children’s Hospital.

He met patients and heard from doctors about the care they provide – and what it takes to treat children.

He had met a doctor during an event in D.C. and promised to come tour.

“There’s no replacement for going out and seeing how investments and research, investments in cures and treatments are actually impacting peoples’ lives,” Tillis said. “It makes me a better Congressman, somebody that can go up there and advocate for increased NIH funding, the kinds of things we need to do to accelerate the pace of finding cures and treatments for children and adults.”

Friday’s visit was Tillis’ second to Duke. He’s also visited UNC.

He says the partnerships the two universities have in research help their chances for getting federal funding.

Tillis said he has not spoken with Republican candidate Donald Trump.

He said he was with other candidates – senators Marco Rubio, Lindsey Graham, Ted Cruz and Rand Paul – Thursday night during a budget vote and was struck by how well they get along.

Here is Tillis on other topics:

On Republican candidate Donald Trump:

“I think we’ve got a good slate of candidates. I for one think that any of them are a better alternative to Secretary [Hillary] Clinton and we’re in the primary phase where I tell everybody out there, ‘Put on the jersey of your favorite player, get through the primary and then put on the jersey of the nominee,’ because I actually think it’s really important that we turn the nation in a different direction and I don’t see Hillary Clinton doing that.”

On possible executive action by President Barack Obama on gun control:

“I would say to the president that what we need to do is to come up with thoughtful, not reactionary, policies and to my way of thinking, executive action he would take would probably be as questionable constitutionally as some of the other action he’s taken. We’ve got to work and collaborate and come to a good solution, not an over-reaction or something that seems to take advantage of a political mood.”

He said there needs to more of a focus on mental illness.

“I think that we need to be sure to look at some of the root causes of the more notable events that people react to and the root cause of many of these things is mental illness,” Tillis said. “… I don’t know if you can anticipate something that happened like in Paris and San Bernardino, absent intelligence information, but I think if we spend more time, if you take a look at many of the other ones that weren’t necessarily terrorist inspired, workplace violence inspired, and even those tend to have a root back less into the gun control issue and more into the mental health issue, which is an issue in North Carolina and across the country.”

On wanting to repeal Obamacare:

“We need to solve the problem that existed with healthcare,” Tillis said. “What the Affordable Care Act has done is create a new set of problems. I mean, we have increased healthcare costs. We’ve had 147 percent increases in premiums over time here. We’ve seen job losses. We’re going to see more because a lot of people don’t realize that the Affordable Care Act’s not completely implemented.

“When the other taxes and mandates go into place, I think fewer people – more people may have healthcare and that they have a policy – many of them won’t be able to use it because they simply can’t afford the co-pays and the out of pocket expenses. So, we need to get to a point to where we get back to solving the problem for the people who had legitimate issues – preexisting conditions, the children on their parent’s policies until the age of 26, transportability policies. Those things can be accomplished without the Affordable Care Act. Once you do that – let’s go and find out who else needs help.”

On Gov. Pat McCrory’s re-election bid and the questions about his admnistration’s prison contracts with a Charlotte company:

“I think Gov. McCrory’s done a great job and I think what we need to do is remind people of the mess that we found the state in in 2011 and it’s quite a bit different today in terms of our economic competitiveness in the Southeast.

“He’s done a number of good things. I think this is the time of year where people try to shift a disproportionate amount of focus on things that on the whole pale in comparison to all the good that’s done, whether there’s a legitimate argument or not. But, this is the political season and people are going to take political shots.

“I’m going to do everything I can to get my friend, the governor, re-elected.”