The Mustang school district is spread across Oklahoma, Canadian and Cleveland Counties.

It's back to school for students across the metro. Many of those schools are seeing an increase in students. One local school district is seeing record growth this year.

School starts in one week in Mustang. And while the total growth won't be figured for a few months, this new elementary is just one of the many new buildings that might be needed for a rapid surge in students.

"I only paid them for five hours, so I’m doing the rest myself,” said a new Mustang resident.

It's moving day for the Fortin Family. With the exception of one kindergartner, the Fortins are getting everything inside their brand new home, one of many new homes sprouting across the district.

The family is coming from Midwest City. After factoring in proximity to work and the school system, the Fortins were sold.

"I've been told it's one of the best school districts in the area or around Oklahoma," said Serge.

That word appears to be spreading faster than expected.

"It kind of gives you butterflies. We're okay, we're not panicked. We have a master plan that we're tweaking right now to make sure we make good decisions for our kids and our community," said Mustang Schools Superintendent Dr. Sean McDaniel.

It is a master plan that McDaniel and the district will use to accommodate student growth in the next 7-10 years. Right now, the focus is on the school's new record 707 new students already enrolled for this year.

Compared to other metro districts' new student enrollment; Yukon has seen 350, Moore 790, and Norman around 500 last year. But as far as predicted total growth, McDaniel thinks his school could be the highest.

"It's really a great blend of small town. I know my neighbors, contemporary school district and a city with a vision," said McDaniel.

The Fortins agree with McDaniel's evaluation.

"This many people moving here, they got to be good schools. That’s what I think," said Serge.

This is the 7th elementary for Mustang Schools. The district predicts another in the next 2-3 years, with the possibility of another middle and intermediate school.

The Mustang school district is spread across Oklahoma, Canadian and Cleveland Counties.