As world leaders gather for G20, president is personally more popular than his policies.

President Obama and German Chancellor Angela Merkel in June in Berlin. (Photo: Michael Sohn, AP) Story Highlights U.S. president remains the most popular world leader.

But over the course of the past five years he has certainly lost some of his luster.

His legacy will depend on how he handles China as well as regional conflicts in Egypt and Syria.

As President Obama heads to the G20 summit in St. Petersburg this week he remains the most popular world leader. Ordinary citizens in most countries, with some notable exceptions, say they have confidence in him to do the right thing in world affairs and many generally approve of his policies.

COLUMN: Obama's inept foreign policy

But over the course of the past five years he has certainly lost some of his luster -- which is to be expected from a president who won a Nobel Peace Prize just nine months after taking office. Expectations were very high. And, as it turns out, so far he has not achieved what he promised. The world public has noticed.

Nonetheless, Obama remains personally popular and has consistently received much higher confidence ratings over the course of his presidency than his predecessor George W. Bush. And he is better regarded than other current world leaders. Only Angela Merkel comes close to the breadth of Obama's popularity. But even in Europe, a Pew Research poll last year found the American president getting higher ratings than the German chancellor in seven out of eight major European nations. In other parts of the world, more citizens expressed confidence in Obama than Merkel for the most part.

Our polling over the years has found no contest as to who's more popular, Barack Obama or his G20 host, Vladimir Putin. In 2012, Obama's median average confidence rating was 42% compared to 19% for Putin in 21 countries where the image of both leaders was tested. Notably, in China, Putin evoked more confidence than Obama. We can only speculate that in a new international poll the confidence gap would remain substantial in the president's favor, despite the dispute between the two leaders surrounding Putin's giving shelter to Edward Snowden, leaker of information about America's much criticized NSA digital surveillance program.

Clearly, President Obama's strong suit is not perceptions of his record but his powerful personal image. While international publics disapprove of many of his policies, large percentages continue to say they have personal confidence in him. A global median of 54% across the 39 countries surveyed by Pew Research in 2013 express confidence in Obama to do the right thing in world affairs, while just 47% approve of his international policies. The gap between people's trust in the American president and their support for his policies is particularly large in Canada (+16 percentage points) and some Western European nations, such as Britain (+11).

In almost all regards, Obama has failed to meet the initial high expectations that people around the world had for him. In 2009 Pew Research surveys found many believing the new American president would act multilaterally, would seek international approval before using military force, would take a fair approach to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, and would make progress on climate change. Few now believe he has actually accomplished these things.

Historically, the greatest concern of people around the world about President George W. Bush was that the U.S. acted unilaterally and did not consider the interests of other countries, especially in matters of war and peace. Broad global opposition to drone strikes has tarred Obama with that brush as well. In 2013, half or more in 31 of 39 countries disapprove of U.S. drone attacks against extremist groups. But the gap between perceptions of Bush and Obama is yawning, failed expectations notwithstanding.

What is remarkable is that the president remains so well regarded given what he promised, but not delivered, and what he has done that is not well liked. Looking ahead, how Obama will be seen at the end of his presidency may well hinge on how he is judged on handling the U.S.'s new challenges: growing Chinese power, and hard to solve regional conflicts, such as in Egypt and Syria, that do not rise to the level of direct threats to the U.S. national interest.

In the end, the right policies ultimately will determine his level of success, but the high levels of public trust and confidence will play an important role in facilitating understanding and acceptance of what Obama will try to do in response to these challenges over the next three years. We may well see a test of that theory in public reaction if or when the U.S. responds militarily to the Syrian sarin attacks.

Andrew Kohut is the founding director and former president of the Pew Research Center. He served as president of the Gallup Organization from 1979 to 1989.

In addition to its own editorials, USA TODAY publishes diverse opinions

from outside writers, including our Board of Contributors.

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1dB0FAm