497 Flares Filament.io 497 Flares ×

Ed. Note: Check the date on the post…



This morning on FOX News, Governor Rick Perry announced his intention to enroll in Medicaid once his term as governor ends. Citing recent financial difficulties, Perry sees Medicaid as his best option once he no longer has a salary, savings or health care.

“If I become President I think I'll be okay financially,” Perry said. “But if that doesn't work out, I don't really have a back-up plan. And to be honest I've been mowing through my governor's salary and my savings at a pretty fast clip – I mean, my new glasses weren't cheap.”

Perry has identified Medicaid as the best and often the only health care option for low-income Texans, and plans to be a low-income Texan himself soon. In addition, Perry has had numerous issues with his back and expects his medical bills to be out of control once he no longer has government health insurance.

Find out how Ted Cruz feels about the announcement below the jump.The announcement has come as a surprise to many, since Perry has long fought against a Medicaid expansion in Texas. Under the Affordable Care Act, Texas could have received $9 billion in federal funds to insure over 1 million low-income people. But Perry repeatedly rejected this option, despite Texas having the highest uninsured rate in the country.

“Sure, I fought against a Medicaid expansion as governor,” Perry said. “But that was when I thought I would never need it. Now that I'm going to be low-income myself and have actually seen what health insurance costs, I kind of get it.”

However, when asked if he would reconsider expanding Medicaid before his term ends, Perry replied, “Absolutely not. Obamacare is the worst.”

When asked to comment, Senator Ted Cruz was very supportive. “Generally I believe that anyone who enrolls in Medicaid is just mooching off the system and needs to get a real job,” he said. “But Rick Perry has obviously worked really hard all his life, so it's okay for him.”



This is an April Fools' Day post. Unfortunately, it is not true. But imagine if it were!