Topics: Colton Burpo, Editor's Picks, Fox News, Greg Kinnear, Heaven Is for Real, Movies, Sarah Palin, Sean Hannity, Todd Burpo, Life News, Entertainment News, News

The religious and their cynical Hollywood panderers have offended reason and outraged aesthetics by generating a treacly tale of celestial sojourning so transparently trumped-up that only a fool could fail to see through it. Yet, in so doing, they have exposed the acute faith-derangement syndrome (FDS) afflicting large swaths of the American public and thus, potentially, cleared the way for sanity-inducing treatment.

This week’s essay concerns one Colton Burpo — no, I’m not making up this burbling eructation of a name — and his father Todd and the immensely remunerative product of their collaboration, “Heaven Is for Real: A Little Boy’s Astounding Story of His Trip to Heaven and Back.” Based on alleged happenings in 2003, the book hit the stands only in 2010. Todd Burpo, originally (and not incidentally) a cash-strapped Nebraskan preacher, relied on Lynn Vincent (who helped Sarah Palin write “Going Rogue: An American Life”) as co-author to tell the story of Babe Burpo’s putative excursion to paradise and back, and his supernal jaunt’s effect on his family and community.

Todd Burpo’s choice of co-author hints at the credibility we should grant him. Not surprisingly, however, the book the two came up with became a New York Times nonfiction bestseller that sold more than ten million copies. Sony Pictures took note and cashed in, casting Academy-Award nominee Greg Kinnear (“Little Miss Sunshine” and “As Good As It Gets”) as Burpo Senior, and stage actress Kelly Reilly as his wife Sonja, with Colton played by the cherubic (no exaggeration) Connor Corum. The outcome: a shameful waste of celluloid no one involved with should be allowed to live down, but that earned in excess of a hundred million dollars — almost ten times the production budget. If nonbelievers ever needed proof that divine justice is a cruel myth, “Heaven Is for Real” is it.

I’ll concern myself herein with the movie, which the Burpos helped promote and say is accurate. Though they inhabit a near-palatial home, not much is going well financially with the Burpos in the quintessentially All-American small town idyll of Imperial. (Hollywood skimped on idylls and actually shot in Canada.) In fact, they are nearing destitution. Todd’s job as pastor of the Crossroads Wesleyan Church is just not cutting it. He’s a randy pastor, we see, indulged in hinted-at S&M tendencies by his All-American wife (who happens really to be British). His sermons, however, are of the insipid sort, not spiced up with any of the vicious nonsense bespattering the Bible. (A rationalist viewer wonders why anyone would attend this entirely run-of-the-mill mortal’s homilies at all.) Except for bizarre tarantula-petting sessions, life unwinds in Imperial much as a non-red-stater might expect, with barbeques and softball matches and, of course, lots of neighborly bonhomie, which helps Todd Burpo endure a splintered shinbone, kidney stones and (again, not incidentally) mounting money problems.

Then tragedy strikes. Little Colton begins vomiting and develops a 104-degree fever. Symptoms persist for four full days before the Burpos think to take the delirious lad to the hospital. There they learn his appendix has burst. Orderlies rush him to the operating room. As the surgeons are removing scraps of the exploded organ (a remnant, incidentally, of our Darwinian evolution from herbivores to omnivores), the anesthetized Colton undergoes what appears to be a rather typical out-of-body experience, or so we are at first led to believe.

Colton later provides “evidence” of it; he recounts seeing himself from above, watching his mother in the waiting room organize a communal pray-in to help him recover (a big mistake, research shows), and spying on his father as he rages in the chapel at the imaginary tyrant worshipped by devotees of his chosen Abrahamic cult. Nota Bene: at no time do attending physicians or the Burpos themselves contend that Colton died and was revived. Essentially, the boy does nothing more than talk about what he dreamed while drugged up.

That should have been the end of this story of parental neglect, faith-delusion, bad budgeting and kidney stones. All the more so since none of what Colton dreamed sounded extraordinary; it could have all derived from memories of his daily life, with a pastor father who prayed and a mother who might well have, within his earshot, organized pray-ins. But then, one stormy night, after the Burpos’ discuss money woes, which are so bad mom exclaims “I’m going to have to get a job!” (perish the thought!), Colton says he ranged far and wide while he was out cold, consorting with Jesus and journeying to heaven on Christ’s horse. As the film progresses, it turns out he also encountered a miscarried sister he allegedly never heard of and met Todd’s deceased father. (In another venue, Colton even claims to have conversed with the Almighty Himself, but more on that below.)

Except for Christ’s ungulate, everything Colton describes he could have seen earlier on Hallmark cards or in a picture Bible for kiddies, or learned about from his parents. This includes the stock-image Jesus, of course, who, in his telling, is white, light-eyed and English-speaking. Not a shred of evidence shows Jesus even existed, but if he had, he would have likely sported a duskier Mediterranean complexion, curlier and darker hair, and spoken not Midwestern American English, but Aramaic and some Hebrew.

Herewith begins the film’s internal inconsistency, nay, incomprehensibility. Colton’s regurgitation of all this pop-Christian rubbish astounds and even disturbs Todd so much that he seeks succor from a psychologist. (Of course, he rejects her rational explanations). Todd then complains to his banker (we are never allowed to forget he’s broke) that “We ask these kids to believe this stuff” — about heaven and God — “and I don’t even know if I believe it myself . . . the Bible tells us to believe as children. What my child’s tellin’ me could get me laughed out of this town.” Later, in church, still discombobulated, he voices his doubts to his incredulous “flock;” one of them, disturbed by all this ungainly talk of Colton’s purported visit with the Godhead, bleats, “Good lord, what’s happened to our preacher?”