U.S. Supreme Court reviews issues surrounding False Claims Act

Q: The False Claims Act (FCA) imposes civil and potentially criminal liability on anyone who knowingly submits a false or fraudulent health care claim for payment to the federal government. What are the issues the Supreme Court is reviewing?

A: Common examples of FCA violations include a health care provider that submits a claim to Medicare for services not provided or a government contractor that presents a claim for payment despite failing to perform the requirements of the contract. Some federal circuit courts of appeal have held that the act of submitting a claim constitutes “implied certification” that the claim for payment complies with all material requirements of statutes and regulations that are preconditions to payment. Under this doctrine, noncompliance with these conditions makes the claim “false” and the party liable for violating the FCA. The Implied Certification Doctrine isn't recognized in all circuits, however, and even in the circuits that do apply the doctrine, courts are split as to whether the applicable statute must expressly state that its requirements are a “material precondition to payment.” The U.S. Supreme Court has agreed to address this lack of consistency in the lower courts, answering two questions: whether the “implied certification” theory is viable; and, if so, whether an express statement designating the statute as a “material condition of payment” is required.

Q: How have the lower courts ruled?

A: The courts are split on the issue of whether the theory of implied certification is viable. The majority of courts have allowed plaintiffs to proceed on this theory. The Seventh Circuit, however, found it would be unreasonable to require compliance with “the thousands of pages of federal statutes and regulations” as conditions of payment for purposes of FCA liability. The circuits are split on the second issue as well, with the majority of circuits finding that, in order to impose liability for noncompliance with a condition of payment, the applicable statute or regulation must expressly state the provider must comply in order to be paid. Other circuits, however, have found that preconditions of payment need not be expressly designated in the statute as such, finding that narrowing the application of the implied certification theory would “foreclose FCA liability in situations that Congress intended to fall within the Act's scope.”

Q: What are the potential implications?

A: The court's decision will provide much-needed clarity regarding what constitutes a “false” claim. If the court strikes down the Implied Certification Doctrine, the scope of FCA liability will be narrowed significantly, subjecting a company to liability for failing to comply with an underlying legal requirement only where it affirmatively certifies that it has done so. However, if the court upholds the theory, companies will continue to be exposed to liability — including treble damages — for failing to comply with all applicable statutory, regulatory and contractual requirements, regardless of affirmative certification. Moreover, if the court finds the statute isn't required to expressly identify it is a precondition of payment, companies will be left with a great deal of exposure, as well as uncertainty as to which statutes, if violated, would support a false claim suit. Oral arguments are expected to be heard in March or April.

PAULA BURKES, BUSINESS WRITER