Bob Chilmonik and Frant Moretz (Photo: Courtesy of the candidates)

Background and perspective might be more of a dividing line between the two Republican candidates to represent eastern and northern Buncombe County in the state House than differences on specific issues.

Robert "Bob" Chilmonik, 62, had a corporate career and served on a county school board in Florida for eight years before moving to Black Mountain in December 2013. He is now a teacher at Asheville High School.

He emphasizes his support for tax cuts, transparency in government and public education, saying the state needs to increase what it spends on schools.

Fairview resident Frank Moretz, 66, is a retired anesthesiologist who has been in Buncombe County for 35 years and is a co-owner of Highland Brewing Co.

Moretz said he would bring a needed doctor's perspective to the General Assembly and would push measures to lower health care costs.

They are competing for the chance to run against incumbent Rep. John Ager, a Fairview Democrat who won his first term in a close vote in 2014. The district, fairly balanced between Democratic and Republican voters, runs in an arc that includes Fairview, Riceville, Black Mountain, Barnardsville, Weaverville, Alexander and parts of Leicester, Woodfin, Swannanoa and East Asheville.

Chilmonik wants the state to continue cutting the income tax to the point where it doesn't exist at all, shifting the cost of running government to the sales tax, although he says the sales tax should exempt basics like food and medicine. That, he said, would make the state more attractive to companies considering new locations.

Local school boards should be making decisions on issues like whether to permit more charter schools, he said: "The only time the state should involve itself in any local community (school issue) is if there's fraud, mismanagement."

School funding needs to be increased to bring the state up to the national average and teachers should be paid using a merit system that takes the performance of their entire school into account, he said.

A computer system North Carolina schools use is unwieldy and spending on education administration should be redirected to the classroom, he said.

He said the state should do more to use the Internet to provide services and to allow citizens to learn more about government spending. He said he favors background checks for gun buyers but the state should do away with the requirement that county sheriffs approve permits to buy pistols.

State House District 115 takes in eastern and northern Buncombe County. (Photo: N.C. General Assembly)

Moretz said when he announced his candidacy that he could have registered as a Democrat as easily as a Republican and, this week, that he takes a practical approach to problems.

"There's only one physician in the legislature right now. ... They're not making bad decisions, they're just not informed decisions," Moretz said.

He said it bothers him that North Carolina taxpayers are "already paying" for expanding Medicaid as part of the Affordable Care Act yet "we're not getting the benefit."

But he said Medicaid is "horribly flawed (with) a lot of abuse and fraud and inefficiencies" and now is not the time for the state to accept federal funds to cover more people.

The ACA, he said, is "not sustainable" and the state should press on with its own efforts to fix problems in Medicaid before considering an expansion.

He said he is a product of public schools and is a strong supporter of them.

Education " gave me great opportunities," he said. "Educated people tend to become job producers and increase the economy." Moretz last year pledged to give $1 million to the Asheville campus of UNC Medical School and two other UNC-Chapel Hill institutions when he dies.

Chilmonik said he supports the General Assembly's 2013 decision to give control of the Asheville water system to the Metropolitan Sewerage District but can live with whatever comes out of a legal battle over the law.

"Once the courts have spoken, that's it. ... You don't need unnecessary turmoil," he said.

Moretz said the city should have done a better job of running the system but he has mixed feelings about the legislature's move. He said it is too soon to say what should happen next because the city's lawsuit is now before the state Supreme Court.

"Let's see what the court says," he said.

Candidates were respectful in their comments about each other, but they said there are differences.

Chilmonik said he "would be more on the fiscal conservative side" than Moretz.

Moretz, a native of Hickory, said Chilmonik's relatively recent move to the area is a drawback and, "I am not a politician. I am just a pragmatist."

Read or Share this story: http://avlne.ws/1p8djyX