Topics: AlterNet, College, GOP, Higher education, Universities, Elections News, Business News, Life News, Politics News

This article originally appeared on AlterNet

As colleges across the country gear up for another academic year, it is not unusual for faculty and parents to hear the classic complaints about lazy, entitled, needy college students. There are the inevitable “it’s on the syllabus” memes alongside the snarky #firstdayofclasses tweets. These little barbs seem innocuous. They are just jokes after all, right? But as we have recently seen with Donald Trump’s rude comments to Megyn Kelly, these “jokes” matter. It’s always a bad move to mock students, especially if it’s your career to teach them. But this year jokes aren’t just a bad idea; they’re adding fuel to a fire.

As nutty as the current slate of GOP nominees may seem, it would be a mistake to ignore the very real threat of their higher education policy. Across the board, in a variety of ways, the GOP lineup is on the hunt for higher education as we know it. While we might all agree that reform is due, make no mistake that the GOP platform is out to destroy our colleges and universities and take down the students they serve in the process. Let’s look at the three main models.

Profit U: The Trump Model

Under Trump, higher education would no longer even remotely resemble a common good for the public; it would simply be a profit-driven model. Of course, many faculty and administrators are already stuck in the business of generating revenue as public funding for higher education has declined. The Trump model goes a step further, as evidenced by his already existing for-profit venture.

It won’t come as a surprise to learn that Trump’s megalomania led to the founding of Trump University in 2005. The for-profit education company was meant to teach students to be like The Donald. The Washington Post reports that he had to change the name in 2010 when the New York Board of Education accused him of “misleading the public by running an unauthorized school.” After that, the lawsuits and complaints kept filing in. In 2013, New York Attorney Eric Schneiderman announced he was suing Trump for fraud:

“More than 5,000 people across the country who paid Donald Trump $40 million to teach them his hard sell tactics got a hard lesson in bait-and-switch…Mr. Trump used his celebrity status and personally appeared in commercials making false promises to convince people to spend tens of thousands of dollars they couldn’t afford for lessons they never got.”

As Mother Jones points out in its coverage of the complaints over Trump U, the instructors didn’t know the material, Trump was a no-show and the curriculum was a joke. But more importantly, it rigged its course ratings, misled students into thinking they were getting real degrees and told students to lie to credit card companies to increase their spending limits so they could get further into debt. Students left Trump U with no knowledge and more debt than they could handle.

The Trump model is all about making more money at the student’s expense.

Privilege U: The Bush Model

While Jeb Bush may seem like the least loony of the lineup, his higher education policy may be one of the most insidious. Even though he likes to tout that while governor of Florida he made it easier for first-time students to attend college, the facts suggest otherwise. As reported in the Atlantic, in 1999 he was the first governor in the nation’s history to end the use of race and ethnicity in admissions decisions at public universities. From 2000-’13, black enrollment in colleges in the state fell by almost 11 percent while enrollment nationally rose by over 3 percent. Black student enrollment dropped at the state’s flagship schools, declining by more than 50 percent at the University of Florida.

While Bush was gutting an admissions model that took diversity into account, he was opening the doors to top students. His “One Florida” plan ensured that the top 20 percent of high school graduates would be admitted to institutions of higher learning. This left the elite public schools for the elite and ensured that a segment of the population would have less access to the economic benefits of higher education at a top-ranked school.

Bush’s meritocracy also extends to the issue of student debt. According to him, the only reason student debt is a problem is because students don’t work hard enough: They take too long to graduate and they follow a “French work week.” Clearly he is unaware of the fact that many millennial students often are working while in school. The average student works over 20 hours a week. CBS reported in 2013 that, “71 percent of the nation’s 19.7 million college undergraduates were working in 2011. Of that number, one in five undergrads were working at least 35 hours a week year-round.”