Max Hosmer portrays Don Ramiro and Taylor Raven is Angelina in the Eklund Opera Program's production of "La Cenerentola." ( Glenn Asakawa / University of Colorado )

Related Stories Vocal acrobatics enliven CU's 'La Cenerentola'

If you go What: The University of Colorado Eklund Opera Program presents Rossini's "La Cenerentola." When: 7:30 p.m. Friday, Oct. 23 and Saturday, Oct. 24; 2 p.m. Oct. 25 Where: Macky Auditorium, 285 University Ave., University of Colorado campus, Boulder TIckets: $10-$45 Info: 303-492-8008 or cupresents.org

It's obviously "Cinderella," but generations accustomed to the Disney movie; Stephen Sondheim's Tony Award-winning take, "Into the Woods," or even the versions by Charles Perrault and the Brothers Grimm might do a bit of a double take when presented with Gioachino Rossini's 1817 opera "La Cenerentola."

Probably the composer's most second-most popular stage work (after "The Barber of Seville"), "La Cenerentola" has become known as a vehicle for a star mezzo-soprano with an agile voice. The title role became a signature for the great Cecilia Bartoli.

According to music director Nicholas Carthy, the University of Colorado's Eklund Opera Program has "three astounding coloratura mezzos" this year. This surely factored into the decision to open the 2015-16 season with Rossini's fairy-tale opera.

But as presented, the story is not exactly a fairy tale. Cinderella is abused by her stepsisters and finds her prince, but no magic is involved. The fairy godmother (or the spirit in the tree) is replaced by a philosopher, Alidoro, who notes the problems of society. The glass slipper is replaced by a bracelet. Cinderella meets the prince long before the ball (although his identity is disguised), and she largely triumphs through her own strength of personality.

The ending is nicer than the fairy-tale versions, emphasizing forgiveness and reconciliation, the type of resolution operatic audiences expected for non-tragic works.

Indeed, the opera's subtitle is "Goodness Triumphant."

Another significant change is that the wicked stepmother is replaced by a stepfather, comically named Don Magnifico.

The production opens Friday night at Macky Auditorium on the CU campus, with repeat performances Saturday night and a Sunday matinee Oct. 25. CU typically double casts its opera productions, with the same group performing Friday and Sunday. But with the three mezzo-sopranos, Carthy decided, in this case, to triple-cast that role.

"They are all just so good," Carthy said, "that they all deserve that chance." The other roles are doubled as usual.

Carthy said that, surprisingly, this is his first time conducting a Rossini opera, either at CU or elsewhere. "Cenerentola" was most recently produced at the university in 1998, long before Carthy's arrival. In 2012, an early one-act work was led by a visiting conductor from Italy.

"I suppose I sort of disdained it and specialized in different repertoire," Carthy said. "I've seen a lot of Rossini performances that were really terrible and a rare, few fantastic ones. There seemed to be a large gap, with no middle."

Part of that, he said, was the orchestra's lack of engagement. Rossini belonged to the so-called "Bel Canto" school, which focused on showcasing the beauty and athleticism of the voice.

"I think that the orchestra may not always feel an equal partnership with the singers," Carthy said. "But I've actually discovered that he gives the instruments exciting stuff to play, and I have to emphasize that."

Rossini's overtures, popular in the concert hall, show his gifts in the area of orchestration.

As for the vocal parts, Carthy noted that Rossini wrote the parts for specific singers.

"Different singers would often change some notes or alter cadenzas to fit their own strengths. Several arias have different versions," Carthy said. "That makes Bel Canto style a wonderful teaching tool for student singers, not just in a vocal or technical sense but in encouraging them to be freer with the music than they would in opera from other styles."

Strict adherence to the score is never as vital for Rossini as for some other composers.

"Some of our singers started out reluctant to add variations and decorations," Carthy said, "but they have learned that it is perfectly OK, and it's been one of our most fantastically educative experiences. I'm happy with what we've done, and the singers are in extremely fine form."

CU Opera program director Leigh Holman has passed the reins of the stage direction to guest director Bill Fabris, who is based in New York.

Fabris was suggested by tenor Matthew Chellis, who joined the CU voice faculty last year.

"Matt and I worked together for many years," Fabris said.

"I've worked in a lot of universities, and that's one of the reasons he suggested me. He knew I could work well with young artists. ... "

Chellis "was raving about the singers" to Fabris and, indeed, the guest director was instantly impressed with the singers at the first rehearsal.

"They really nailed it,' Fabris said. "The coloratura was all there, and they all have a great technique for the lightness of voice required for this repertoire."

Chellis himself is a guest performer. He will take the role of the prince, named Ramiro, in Saturday's cast. Another guest is Egyptian bass Ashraf Sewailam, a graduate of the CU program. Both Chellis and Sewailam are doubled by younger student singers.

Sewailam has gone on to an international career, and he will be singing in Opera Colorado's "Aida" in November. Because he was in the area for those rehearsals, Sewailam agreed to take the role of Alidoro on Friday and Sunday.

"It's one of his signature roles," Carthy said.

As for the Eklund Opera's production of "La Cenerentola," all involved have high hopes.

"I really like 'Cenerentola,' even more than 'Barber,' " Fabris said.

Added Carthy: "It is a magical evening of opera."