1. And New!

Robbie Lawler is the new UFC welterweight champion, picking up a split decision win over Johny Hendricks in the main event of UFC 181 to claim the title.

As much as everyone is aware of the Cinderella story it has been since he’s returned to the Octagon, some people don’t truly appreciate the scope of Lawler’s comeback. This is a guy who stopped sparring for six years, looked completely disinterested in the sport at times during his Strikeforce tenure and was beaten rather handily by guys like Renato “Babalu” Sobral, Tim Kennedy and Lorenz Larkin. Now he’s the best welterweight in the world.

Make no mistake about it – Lawler’s resurgence is real. He been a beast since moving to American Top Team and returning to the 170-pound ranks and seeing him fulfill his destiny more than a decade after his first UFC run came to an end truly is the stuff Hollywood movies are made of.

2. Not Sure How 49-46 Lawler Happened

MMA scoring/judging has been an issue for a long, long time, but it reared its ugly head again in the main event, as Lawler picked up an inexplicable 49-46 score from judge Glenn Trowbridge. As he saw it, Hendricks won only the middle stanza of the five-round affair.

Watching the bout back not once, not twice, but thrice, 49-46 Lawler doesn’t make sense. You could make an easier case for 49-46 Hendricks than you can 49-46 Lawler unless we throw out all the precedent that has been set in the history of scoring fights. Sadly, that seems to happen far too often.

This is a subject that can’t be covered in the restricted confines of this column (not properly, at least), so expect a larger discussion soon. What has to be said, however, is that there needs to be some serious reforms and adjustments made in MMA scoring to get everyone on the same page – or as close to being on the same page as possible – because going to the scorecards really is becoming a crap shoot and that should not be the case.

3. Rory MacDonald Might Have to Wait

As much as the UFC “promised” Canadian welterweight standout Rory MacDonald that he would face the winner of Saturday’s main event, he might have to wait out a third bout between Hendricks and Lawler or fight once more to keep his place in line.

With each man having won a close, hard-fought battle, putting together a trilogy fight makes a lot of sense, and that’s coming from the guy who dislikes when the UFC rushes rematches to the Octagon. This is different though.

These two have now gone 10 rounds in the Octagon and you could easily argue that they’ve split those frames down the middle. At the absolute most, one man has a 6-4 advantage and given how tight these two bouts have been, running it back for a third time to put a cap on things now might be the right call.

That sucks for MacDonald, but with a championship rematch scheduled and this very outcome easily predicted, “guaranteeing” him the title shot after his win over Tarec Saffiedine in October seemed hasty to begin with.

4. “Showtime” Retains

Gilbert Melendez was fighting the perfect fight against Anthony Pettis – pressing forward, clinching, forcing the lightweight champ to be defensive. When they disengaged, “El Nino” was landing winging shots, dealing with Pettis’ returning fire without flinching.

But then 90 seconds into the second round, Pettis connected with a stiff right hand that staggered Melendez and when the former Strikeforce champion opted to try for a takedown, “Showtime” connected his hands on a deep guillotine choke, rolled through it into mount and forced Melendez to tap. Just like that, the UFC lightweight champion had retained his title and made a statement in one fell swoop.

Pettis is the ultimate opportunist, capable of exploiting any and ever opening that is presented to him. Sometimes, he makes his own chances appear, pressing the action and forcing the opposition to make mistakes. Other times, like Saturday night, he simply takes what he’s given and still finds a way to secure the finish.

That kind of talent – and it is, indeed, a talent – isn’t something you can teach. Pettis’ tremendous natural abilities and keen Fight IQ make him stand out amongst the pack and helped him secure his first title defence on Saturday. Now the question is whether or not more will follow?

5. Clearly Defined Heavyweight Tiers

Cain Velasquez stands alone atop the division. For the present time, new interim champ Fabricio Werdum has a tier to himself as well, though Junior dos Santos or Stipe Miocic could join him with a win next weekend. Travis Browne isn’t far off from that level either.

Brendan Schaub isn’t going to be joining that class any time soon, as Browne dispatched of him in relatively quick and easy fashion Saturday night, shrugging off every takedown attempt “Big Brown” offered before clipping him with a right uppercut and finishing him with unanswered strikes from back mount.

The middle fight in the UFC 181 fight card illustrated the clear striation that exists in the heavyweight ranks. Browne, though not quite a championship-level talent, is definitely a notch or two above Schaub, who well ahead of the middle-to-lower tier talents that fill out the ranks. We see this kind of delineation in every division, but it really stands out in the heavyweight division, where the ranks are shallow and the options are limited.

Browne looked very good against Schaub, but he’s looked very good in these spots before. The key for the massive Hawaiian is to maintain that kind of success when he takes his next step up the ladder and stands in the Octagon with another fighter in the upper echelon of the heavyweight division.

6. Todd Duffee: Still a Prospect to Watch

All it took was 33 seconds. Well, technically, it took 707 days and 33 seconds, but Saturday night at UFC 181, Todd Duffee reminded everyone that he is still very much a prospect worth watching in the UFC heavyweight division.

After nearly two years away from action due his struggles with Parsonage-Turner Syndrome, Duffee stepped back into the Octagon against Anthony Hamilton and promptly laid out the Team Jackson-Winkeljohn fighter with a right hand to the temple. Quick, pinpoint and powerful, that one shot is all it took to finish the contest and cement the once-hyped physical specimen as a fighter to keep tabs on in 2015.

Given the dearth of fresh blood in the division and the decline shown by several of the established names in the weight class, Duffee has the potential to rise up the ranks rather quickly, provided he remains healthy and able to compete.

7. TUF Winner Tony Ferguson Keeps Rolling

Beware UFC lightweights, “El Cucuy” is coming for you!

After missing 17 months following his loss to Michael Johnson, Ferguson has returned to rattle off four consecutive victories, adding another win to his run of success Saturday night in Las Vegas by submitting Abel Trujillo in the second round. It was his third finish in those four fights and another showcase of the well-rounded skill set he brings to the cage.

Trujillo landed with some power in the first and looked to have Ferguson in danger, but the 30-year-old California native steadied himself and went on the offensive to close out the frame as his opponent began to tire. That pattern continued in the second, as Ferguson dragged Trujillo to the canvas rather easily, softened him up with ground and pound and eventually locked up a rear naked choke.

Rangy with solid wrestling and underrated grappling, Ferguson is now on the cusp of being a contender in the loaded lightweight division. At the very least, he should find himself facing a Top 15 talent when he looks for his fifth straight win once 2015 commences.

8. One Night, Two Bulldog Chokes

There might not have been two bulldog choke finishes in the UFC over the last 10 years. Niklas Backstrom had one earlier this year fighting in Germany, and the only other one I can recall is Carlos Newton using it to win the welterweight title against Pat Miletich way back at UFC 31.

Saturday night, both Urijah Faber and Raquel Pennington used a version of the choke to pick up victories at UFC 181, Faber against Francisco Rivera and Pennington against late replacement Ashlee Evans-Smith. Faber’s finish came following an inadvertent eye poke, while Pennington’s put Evans-Smith to sleep as the horn sounded to signal the end of the first round.

While not a hold that has been frequently seen in the Octagon, it’s one that could become more prevalent going forward as the opportunity to cinch up the choke presents itself fairly often. Fighters have learned not to leave their necks out when shooting in for takedowns, but they don’t often worry about it when the opposition is working to take their back from either side.

Don’t be surprised if you see a few more of these types of finishes in the future.

9. CM Punk, UFC Fighter

Following Tony Ferguson’s win over Abel Trujillo, the pay-per-view broadcast shifted to a stand-up cageside interview between Joe Rogan and former WWE champion CM Punk, where it was announced that “The Straight Edge Superstar” had signed a contract with the UFC.

From an attraction standpoint, bringing in a major name in professional wrestling like Punk will bring tons of new eyeballs to the UFC. Maybe not as many as when Brock Lesnar transitioned from the squared circle to the Octagon, but a solid number, for sure.

From a “fighters with UFC contracts” standpoint, it’s hard to understand how 36-year-old Phil Brooks, former professional wrestler with zero fights to his credit and limited training, is on the roster, but unbeaten welterweight and former NCAA and Olympic wrestler Ben Askren is not.

These are the signings that are hard to take for purists and anyone that wants to see the sport recognized as more than just a spectacle or carnival act. Yes, Punk has profile and will bring more dollars to the table than any other first-time fighter in UFC history, but he has zero professional combat sports experience. A fighter with that kind of resume and advanced age would normally debut in a Fight Pass prelim, but Punk will be a main card fixture from Jump Street and that’s hard rationalize.

10. Instant Punk Effect

The impact of Punk’s arrival is already being felt. Coming off an event with two championship fights, both of which stood out in their own ways, and three more finishes on the main card, the biggest story coming out of UFC 181 is the arrival of “The Second City Saint.”

The UFC is happy because its dominating the headlines (and Google searches and Twitter) conversations today, but the focus should be on the fighters that turned in strong performances Saturday night in Las Vegas, not the former professional wrestler who has yet to set foot in the Octagon.

FoxSports.com, the online arm of the UFC’s broadcast partners, FOX Sports, has a story suggesting that former Mighty Morphin Power Ranger Jason David Frank wants to fight Punk in his UFC debut. Frank is 41-years-old, went 3-0 as an amateur and picked up a 46-second submission win in his lone pro bout four years ago.

I don’t know whether or not that specific fight will happen, but the fact that a former Power Ranger facing a former professional wrestler inside the UFC cage in 2015 is even being discussed as a real thing while proven, talented professional fighters can’t get a sniff of coverage is a complicated reality to wrap your head around.