LIKE THE PT ON FACEBOOK, SIGN UP FOR THE NEWSLETTER Like Long Beach news? Like us on Facebook! Get local news delivered to your email by signing up for our newsletter. Check the box for news and breaking news alerts.

DOWNEY >> Rancho Los Amigos National Rehabilitation Center is undergoing a massive $418 million renovation and expansion that includes a 12,000-square-foot wellness and aquatics center offering physical therapy tailored specifically for patients coping with disabilities, such as spinal cord injuries and strokes.

“This facility will be a dream come true for patients and clinicians,” said Lilli Thompson, rehabilitation division chief and physical therapy department director at Rancho Los Amigos. “This center is the next step for patients after intense medical care. This facility will be the equivalent of going to a community gym.”

People with disabilities can live full, rich and active lives, but they have to include activities that promote not only physical health but also physical health with psychological and social health, like yoga and Pilates classes. Unfortunately, people with disabilities have limited access to those activities because facilities don’t accommodate their needs, Thompson said.

“But the equipment in our wellness center will be accessible to people in wheelchairs, and our classes will be taught at a level to accommodate patients,” she said.

The wellness and aquatics center is scheduled to open August 2016, and Rancho Los Amigos’ entire 42-acre renovation will be completed by 2020.

The hospital will remain open and fully functional during the five-year construction project.

When completed, the wellness center will include a therapy swimming pool with underwater treadmill, weight-lifting room, dance studio, cardio and yoga rooms. The wellness center also will feature a peer-mentoring program that will encourage patients to stay active, Thompson said.

Many of these patients are at higher risk for diabetes, bone density loss, depression and cardiovascular disease because they have limited mobility, she said.

“We want to create a support system where people feel comfortable and confident to work out,” Thompson said. “If patients see other people with disabilities working hard and helping themselves, it motivates them to do it.

“We want them to make it a part of their daily routine, which will help them live a healthier life,” she said.

Rancho Los Amigos is the only Los Angeles County Health Services Department hospital providing specialized care for people with disabilities, including spinal cord and brain injuries, strokes, neurological disorders and physical and developmental disorders.

Advertisement

The construction and renovation project will increase patient accessibility to the hospital’s outpatient and inpatient services, which are each spread among three buildings. When construction is completed, the each of the services will be housed in just one building, said Jorge Orozco, Rancho Los Amigos’ chief executive officer.

The extra, vacant buildings then will be demolished, he said.

“This is long overdue,” Orozco said.

The historic Harriman Building will be refurbished.

“This is a new mission,” said Dr. Mindy Aisen, Rancho Los Amigos chief medical officer. “The mission from the federal government and part of the Affordable Care Act is to take care of patients in a coordinated fashion, integrated primary care.

“Having doctors’ offices closer to each other is much more effective. Physicians and therapists can collaborate more easily,” Aisen said. “This will be the patient’s medical home, one place for all things health-related.”

For more information about the construction project, call the Rancho Los Amigos hotline, which is available in English and Spanish, at 562-219-4771.

Contact Phillip Zonkel at 562-714-2098.