Topics: american museum of natural history, Children's television, Climate Change, Documentaries, Environmentalism, HBO, Video, Sustainability News, Entertainment News

How do you talk to kids about the wide-ranging, complex and sometimes frightening environmental issues that define our times?

“Saving My Tomorrow,” a new HBO series, takes on the challenge, and what it’s arrived at is basically the same approach we use for adults: a combination of science, stories and calls to action, supplemented by musical performances (Willie Nelson, Karen O and Pete Seeger, among others), and celebrity appearances (Neil deGrasse Tyson, Tina Fey and Alan Cumming are some of the big names).

What makes it particularly easy, director Amy Schatz told Salon, is that kids are already thinking about the big problems — climate change, extinction, deforestation — a lot; maybe even more than we’d want them to at such a young age. Then again, it’s encouraging to see how ready they seem to take on the challenges passed on by older generations. What emerged from interviews about kids’ varied concerns, Shatz said, was one consistent message: “The adults clearly aren’t doing enough to stop this,” as one child puts it, “so we have to take it into our own hands.”

The two-part special premieres Dec. 15 at 7 pm ET. Check out the trailer below; a conversation with Schatz follows.

This interview has been lightly edited for length and clarity.

I was hoping that first you could tell me a little bit about how this project came about.

For many years I’ve been working with Sheila Nevins at HBO on family specials that explore complex issues. Our children’s shows have featured kids speaking from the heart about some of life’s big questions: kids thinking out loud about subjects like poetry, dreams, God, the meaning of life. The environment seemed so deeply relevant today, and we wanted to explore it with kids: What do they know, what do they wonder about, what concerns do they have?



After thinking about this subject, we realized that there would be no better partner for this endeavor than the American Museum of Natural History, that concerns itself with the natural world — its past and its future. We’re so lucky to have access to them and their scientists and their incredible collections.

I’m interested in how you approached tailoring a climate change message to kids. What are some of the issues that come up when you’re thinking about how to present the issue to that audience?

Well, I have to say that my role in this … you know, I’m a filmmaker, but I’m also a messenger for what the kids tell me. And my approach is always to start with the kids, and to listen to them, and to see what they know and what it is they want to tell me. Where I began was, I sent a call out to kids around the world to send me video messages, to hear what was on their minds not only necessarily about climate change, specifically, but about the environment. I asked what they loved about the nature around them and their tips for taking care of the earth.



And what came back was maybe 2,000 videos from kids from around the world — from Bali, India, Canada, Australia, London and across the U.S. — with what kids were thinking about. For me, rather than have my own script that I’m following, I take their lead. And one of the things that emerged in listening to all these video messages was that it was an amazing collection of voices, but there was an overwhelmingly uniform message, which is that we are the kids, we’re going to take care of this planet, we care about the species on Earth and we need to do what we can to protect it before it’s too late. They were concerned about pollution, they were concerned about littering, they were concerned about burning fossil fuels, they were concerned about climate change. They knew a lot about the issues in their own backyard; not only about polar bears but some of the things that hit closer to home.

Were you surprised by the range of issues that came up? Some of the things the documentary covers, like oil trains, you might not expect to be on children’s minds.

I learned a lot from them about these issues. I actually didn’t know a lot about some of the things that they brought to my attention.

I was surprised at the scary content that these kids knew about. My feeling about childhood is that it should be a worry-free period, and my concern was that I didn’t want to introduce stress into kids’ lives. I guess for me, when I saw the amount of information that the kids had, and the concerns that they had, which were really for the survival not only for certain species of fish or the whales, but they were concerned about their children; several of the kids talked about the future generations. So they weren’t only thinking about themselves — which, when you think about children you think that they’re very rooted in the moment of their lives, but they were actually thinking ahead to what their future role would be. And I found that very heartbreaking, that they were worried about what the environment would look like for their children and their grandchildren and their great-grandchildren.