James Teague, left, is in a critical condition in a Dunedin hospital after falling from a balcony. Photo: Supplied

Rugby union fanatic James Teague was supposed to be sitting in the stands watching his beloved Waratahs take on the Brumbies on Saturday night.

Instead, the 19-year-old from Sydney's eastern suburbs was clinging to life in a New Zealand hospital after plunging six metres from a luxury apartment balcony while on a ski trip to Queenstown.

The Waratahs made a pre-match tribute to Mr Teague on Saturday night as the Eastern Suburbs Colts player spent a third day in a critical condition in Dunedin Hospital's intensive care unit.

James Teague, right, and his cousin. Photo: Supplied

Police said Mr Teague, from Paddington, had been drinking with four friends at the Glebe Apartments in Queenstown and tried to climb from a second-floor balcony to the rooftop just before 3am on Thursday.

Advertisement

He fell at least six metres to a car park below and suffered a major head injury, police said.

Mr Teague's father, well-known eastern suburbs "society psychiatrist" Robert Hampshire, and his mother remained by his bedside.

Battle: James Teague (centre) is fighting for his life. Photo: Supplied

Friends launched a social media campaign using the hashtag #clapforjames, asking the Waratahs to pay tribute with a minute of applause before kick-off at Allianz Stadium. A Waratahs spokeswoman said the club had been in touch with the family, who were grateful for the pre-game tribute to their son.

"A big Tahs fan, 19-year-old James Teague had been looking forward to being here tonight," the announcement said. "Tragically he was involved in an accident earlier this week and is now in a critical condition in hospital. Our thoughts are with the Teague family. We wish James all the very, very best for a full and speedy recovery."

Best friend Gabby Richmond posted online that Mr Teague was "the sunshine in all of our lives".

James Teague. Photo: Supplied

"You brightened every person's day who you met," she said. "I will love you for the rest of my life . . . know how many lives you changed just by being you."

Another friend Matt Buxton posted that Mr Teague was a "rugby tragic and a great mate to many".

He attended the Scots College in Bellevue Hill and was studying at the University of Sydney. The group of five friends had been in New Zealand for at least a week, enjoying skiing and skydiving in Queenstown.

Glebe Apartments manager Anne Henley said a growing number of Australians were injuring themselves after drinking excessively.

‘‘Perhaps it is something the council needs to address in Queenstown,’’ she said. ‘‘Just the numbers of people coming to Queenstown, naturally [these kinds of incidents] are going to increase.’’

In 2008, a local electrician fell to his death at the Glebe after gaining access to the courtyard and climbing to the roof. In 2003, a construction worker suffered serious injuries after he slipped from the third floor of the Glebe when it was being built.

Ms Henley insisted the Glebe was safe. ‘‘It is a safe property,’’ she said.