Alabama health insurance rate hikes will be given extra scrutiny by the federal government this year, but questions remain about the effectiveness and transparency of the government's "rate review."

Alabama is one of five states in which the federal government took over the review process after deeming the state's system ineffective.

It's safe to say premiums will vary across the nation's 501 rating areas and many experts project higher premiums, although maybe not to the extreme.

"The next big brouhaha for the Affordable Care Act will be how much premiums go up in the non-group insurance market," said Kaiser Family Foundation CEO Drew Altman recently in the Washington Post.

But "people getting premium subsidies in exchanges will largely be shielded from premium increases," said Larry Levitt, Kaiser Family Foundation's senior vice president in a series of Tweets on the subject. "The government bears the risk."

Of course that's not necessarily a good thing, either, Altman points out.

"When premiums rise sharply the government and taxpayers pay more for people's tax credits," he said. "That's the big reason rising premiums in the marketplaces are a problem."

What's going on in Alabama?

Of the some 100,000 people enrolling under the Affordable Care Act exchanges in Alabama, 85 percent are receiving a subsidy, which mirrors the national percentage.

The process of determining 2015 rates is well under way across the country and new rates are already starting to be disclosed elsewhere.

Virginia said health insurance hikes in 2015 will range from 3.3 percent to 14.7 percent, the Wall Street Journal reported.

Blue Cross and Blue Shield of Alabama, the state's predominant health insurer, is required to file its new rates on June 27 with the Alabama Department of Insurance, according to BCBS spokeswoman Koko Mackin.

And because the state is one of five states deemed to have an ineffective rate review, Alabama insurers also must file by that date with the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.

HHS will be doing Alabama's "rate review," which is a tool that has been effective in some states in reducing premiums and bringing more scrutiny to the insurance companies' pricing rationale.

The upshot in Alabama is that the federal government can review the rates and deem any given rate that has been hiked more than 10 percent and doesn't meet certain criteria as "unreasonable" -- but that's about it.

"For states that do not meet federal standards for rate review, CMS (Centers for Medicare &Medicaid Services) reviews all rate increase filings for compliance with federal rating requirements and reviews filings of 10 percent or greater for unreasonableness," an HHS official said on condition of not being identified. "If we determine a rate increase is unreasonable, we require the plan to provide a justification for the increase."

Ultimately, the feds cannot make the insurance companies change rates; that power lies only in state hands. There is one stick though. Ultimately, the Affordable Care, requires insurers that fail to spend at least 80 percent of premiums on health care to refund the difference to consumers.

Alabama joins Missouri, Oklahoma, Texas and Wyoming among states whose rate review is overseen by the feds.

When and what will consumers see?

So when and how will Alabamians know when what their 2015 rates will be?

Mackin said "any adjustments will be communicated via written communication to our members."

BCBS of Alabama sent out 87,000 letters in the fall of 2013 for 2014 rates -- the majority, she has said, were notifications of premium increases.

Meanwhile the federal government is working on ways to provide more information about rates and rate hikes to the public, according to the HHS official.

New regulations going into effect this year will give CMS, which is an agency of HHS, the authority to collect information on all rate filings, not just those of 10 percent or more.

But what will the public see?

The dissemination of information to the public is still a work in progress.

HHS said they are currently examining the insurance-provided information to see what might be able to be disclosed and what might be proprietary.

"This new information is currently working its way through the FOIA (Freedom of Information Act) process to determine whether certain parts of the filings are exempt from public disclosure.

"We are currently working through this process in order to provide the public more information as soon as possible."

Stay tuned, the official said.