Morty’s attachment to the MG could be seen in an interior devoid of noticeable wear, even though it had never been restored. The wooden dashboard — whose contours recalled a handlebar mustache — still looked polished. The seatbelts, installed many years ago, were aftermarket accessories.

The gauges and controls looked straight out of the 1930s, because essentially, they were. A successor to the MG TC that had endeared itself to American G.I.’s after World War II, the TD, introduced in 1949, was designed specifically for America’s burgeoning sports-car market.

Although its body design still followed the style of MG’s prewar T-series models, the TD was given an upgraded chassis, including an independent front suspension to improve the ride quality and rack-and-pinion steering for more confident cornering. Most important for the United States was the TD’s left-hand drive, which the TC did not offer.

“It’s very easy to drive,” Randy said, explaining that the MG’s steering, clutch, and gearshift operated with a lightness that, to him, feel like the controls of modern cars.

The ride seemed compliant and taut, even over railroad crossings. Radial tires on the original vented steel wheels were a big help in that regard, Randy suggested.

“It holds the road surprisingly well,” he continued. “I tried the original-type tires, but the ride and handling were terrible.”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Randy dispelled one myth about old British sports cars, describing the MG’s convertible top as easy to use, and side curtains with plastic windows can be installed for a bit of weather protection when needed. But there’s no heater.

“In winter, you wear a blanket on your lap,” Randy said. Some engine heat seeps into the cabin, helping to warm legs, but on a cool day multiple layers are a wise choice.

Returning to Duke Farms, Morty joined his nephew for coffee in the park’s cafe, each man carrying items for an impromptu show-and-tell at one of the tables.

“Morty, you go first,” Randy said.

From a worn Pan Am flight bag that he was using as a satchel, Morty pulled the car’s original workshop manual. Randy looked on fondly as his uncle then sorted through photos, cards and other papers in an overstuffed wallet. In the memorabilia Morty retrieved were laminated pictures of the MG with his favorite passenger, a street mutt that wandered into his electrical supply business in the Bronx in 1988.

“That’s Lucky Dog,” Morty said. “When I would open up the warehouse in the morning, this stray dog would run from across the street to stare at me. He was in rough shape. One day my wife drove out to see. She opened her car door, and the dog jumped in.”

Telling the story of his adopted dog, who died about 10 years ago, Morty began to choke back his words.

“He loved to ride in the MG,” Morty said.

Randy paused to give his uncle a moment and then took his turn.

“I’ve got something for you,” he said, handing his uncle a package to unwrap. Inside was a framed glass mosaic of the MG — with Lucky Dog in the driver’s seat.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

“It’s by your daughter,” Randy said, explaining that he had commissioned Lauren Mehrberg, an artist in Massachusetts, to create the mosaic. Morty marveled at the detail, especially the grille and hood louvers, and of course his beloved pet. The car, though not especially valuable, holds the status of a family heirloom.

“The MG was in his will for me, but he didn’t want me to wait to enjoy it,” Randy said, and then asked Morty to recount the story of how he got the car.

“When I got out of the Army, I bought a ’57 MGA,” Morty began, referring to the sleek successor of the T-series cars. “That was my first car, but I sold it. I wasn’t really looking for another sports car, but I saw an ad for the TD for $650.”

The seller was an auto shop teacher at a high school in the Bronx. The car, which Morty said was in very good condition, already had its distinctive, though nonoriginal, black-and-gold paint scheme.

“For a long time, it was my only car,” Morty said. “I used it to go on sales calls.”

He commuted from Manhasset to the Bronx and would park the car inside his warehouse. Later, he bought an apartment in Manhattan, where he parked the car on the street.

“There was a lot of car vandalism in the city, but I never had a problem,” he said.

Morty drove the MG in all seasons but avoided long trips, which he said could be tiring. To improve traction when it snowed, he secured two 50-pound sand bags on the luggage rack behind the gas tank. The MG does not have a trunk.

“I always took care of it,” he said. “The odometer shows 48,000 miles, but it’s probably 68,000.”

Morty had the MG repainted once, keeping the black and gold design. Randy had it painted again when the car became his.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

“I thought about painting it red,” Randy said. “It turns out that was the original color. I decided to keep the black and gold — to keep it authentic to Morty.”

Morty said he never considered replacing the MG with a more modern sports car. He still has the apartment in Manhattan, where he keeps and drives a 1967 Citroën 2CV, a minuscule 2-cylinder French economy car known as the Deux Chevaux.

“I’m not a big spender, but when I see something interesting, with character that I really like, I get it,” he said.

Thirteen years ago, Morty bought a 1993 Land Rover Defender 110, one of 500 the company imported that year. He recently gave that British-built 4-wheel-drive S.U.V. to a friend’s daughter when she graduated from the United States Merchant Marine Academy.

Soon, the MG will be moving west. Randy, who spent five years in charge of building large-scale solar electricity installations in several states for a New Jersey-based renewable energy company, recently started a new position as general counsel for Vail Resorts in Colorado. Appropriately, Randy drives a Tesla Model S, and his wife, Michele, has a Lexus hybrid. Their son Sam, 21, doesn’t gravitate toward the MG because it lacks modern technology, preferring his parents’ cars.

“Eric, my 12-year old, really likes the MG,” Randy said. “He enjoys when I drive him to his baseball and soccer games in it. I think it’s partly because of the attention from the other kids.”

Randy’s daughter, Dillon, 25, also has a soft spot for the MG. As Morty picked up the mosaic to admire it again, Randy described a drawing Dillon had done of the car with the family’s Portuguese water dog, Odie, sitting inside.

“Morty,” Randy said, “in her drawing, Odie looks like Lucky Dog.”