Jimmy Dimora sets the type of precedent prosecutors love. Ed FitzGerald finishes a week juggling politics and governing. Today's Ohio Politics Roundup heads into the weekend with a detour in Detroit and updates on mayoral races in Youngstown and Cincinnati.

A judge on Thursday sentenced Kwame Kilpatrick, the disgraced ex-mayor of Detroit, to 28 years in prison for taking bribes, steering contracts and other corrupt acts.

What, you ask, is the connection to Ohio politics?

Jimmy Dimora, the disgraced ex-commissioner and Democratic Party boss in Cuyahoga County, served as the benchmark for prosecutors in seeking the hefty punishment.

"The closest analogue is Jimmy Dimora, who received a 28-year sentence for corruption as a Cuyahoga County commissioner," prosecutors wrote in an Oct. 3 sentencing memo. "Dimora, like Kilpatrick, was convicted of a racketeering conspiracy and had a guideline range of life imprisonment. But Dimora received only $451,000 from his crimes, far below the $840,000 in corrupt personal benefits that Kilpatrick pocketed here."

The memo, which requested at least 28 years for Kilpatrick, continued: "Dimora also shared power in Cuyahoga County with two other commissioners; as mayor of Detroit, Kilpatrick's power was almost unchecked – his corruption seeping from the apex of the executive branch into all levels of city government. And unlike Dimora, Kilpatrick's past criminal conduct includes such things as perjury, assault, probation violations, and committing these federal offenses while under the supervision of other courts."

U.S. District Judge Nancy Edmunds went with exactly 28 years. "That way of business is over," said the judge, as reported by Tresa Baldas and Jim Schaefer of the Detroit Free Press. With good behavior, Kilpatrick, 43, can be out of prison in 23 years.

Prisoner Dimora returned to Cuyahoga County in August, reportedly for questioning in a case tied to the county corruption probe. Dimora remains in County Jail, county spokesman John O'Brien confirmed Friday to the Northeast Ohio Media Group.



Ed FitzGerald on the trail, Ed FitzGerald on the home front

This week provided a valuable glimpse into how Cuyahoga County Executive Ed FitzGerald – the man elected to clean up Dimora's mess – is balancing running the county with running for governor. Here's a look back at the Democrat's moves.

On Monday, FitzGerald lobbied the County Council for his college savings program and for his proposal to extend the county's hotel tax to free rooms offered by casino operators. Both initiatives, incidentally, became campaign fodder for Republicans.

On Tuesday, FitzGerald remained in official mode. Kind of. He called a news conference to speak out against the federal government shutdown and its effects on Northeast Ohio. But as our Andrew J. Tobias reported, it was the second time in less than a week that FitzGerald had banged the shutdown drum. In campaign mode, the hopeful and his Democratic allies have been pressuring Gov. John Kasich to intervene.

Tuesday brought other official business. FitzGerald helped cut the ribbon at the Global Center for Health Innovation, the county endeavor formerly known as Medical Mart.

FitzGerald was in full campaign mode Wednesday, when he welcomed Maryland Gov. Martin O'Malley to Cleveland for a public event and private fundraiser. O'Malley helped FitzGerald bookend his shutdown strategy by recalling Kasich's time in Congress.

On Thursday, FitzGerald took his campaign to Columbus, where he continued his assault against Kasich's budget, particularly changes to a property-tax break for senior citizens. Joe Vardon of the Columbus Dispatch reports that FitzGerald spoke at the same senior center that Kasich did last month. Of course, their messages were quite different.

As we head into the weekend, FitzGerald is back in county executive mode. The Plain Dealer's Michelle Jarboe McFee reports that he will announce Hilton as the operator of the county's new convention center hotel in a news conference Friday morning.

Get your cleveland.com voter guide (with a side of Naymik)

The cleveland.com voter guide for this fall's local elections is posted, and Northeast Ohio Media Group columnist Mark Naymik explains why you should read it carefully:

Mayors and council members who have become fixtures will argue that long tenures are signs of well-run communities. Don't be fooled. It's a sign that voters are not paying attention. History shows us that there is always room for improvement.

Cutting through the politics of Obamacare

Recent hospital cuts at the Cleveland Clinic and elsewhere have fueled a simplified debate: That President Barack Obama's Affordable Care Act is to blame. Stephen Koff, The Plain Dealer's bureau chief in Washington, has a thorough look at all the variables, and for anyone who cares about this issue and wants to learn more, it is a must-read.

A few final Friday reads

Ohio Senate Republicans have unveiled their proposal to reform Medicaid. But as Jim Provance of the Toledo Blade reports, the plan looks nothing like Kasich's favored Medicaid expansion. Within the piece is more speculation about a Kasich end-run.

Reporters in Youngstown have requested text-messages that might shed light on sexual harassment allegations against mayoral candidate DeMaine Kitchen. But the Youngstown Vindicator's David Skolnick reports that city officials claim they don't have the messages. And Kitchen says his city cellphone has been lost or stolen.

John Cranley, a Democrat running for mayor in Cincinnati, nearly got an endorsement he didn't want, reports Jane Prendergast of the Cincinnati Enquirer. COAST, a conservative anti-tax group inadvertently tweeted a message of support for Cranley.