Well-known conservative blogger Jim Hoft at Gateway Pundit suffered terrifying health issues roughly three months ago.

“I became very sick with what I thought was a cold,” he wrote in a candid post earlier this week. “After a few days I lost vision in my left eye and I checked into the hospital. I soon found out that what I thought was a summer cold was actually Strep bacteria poisoning my blood stream. The bacteria blinded my left eye, ate a hole through my heart, caused five strokes on both sides of my brain and forced the removal of my prosthetic left knee.”

Hoft appeared on the Glenn Beck Program Friday with guest host Dana Loesch, explaining how he has now become one of the millions (so far) to lose their health insurance in the aftermath of the Affordable Care Act.

“I get this notification that I’m going to lose my insurance,” he said. “This insurance that I bought, that I purchased, and I was paying a good premium, (and) covered most everything.”

Hoft, who is still in a wheelchair, said he has a number of “major surgeries” in the near future and was “very pleased” with his insurance of choice.

“So to get this news on top of my recovery, on top of trying to make a living, has been obviously a very difficult thing to take on at this time,” he said, the emotion clear in his voice.

Hoft has written about Health and Human Services Secretary Kathleen Sebelius’ assertion that people who have lost their insurance are “thrilled” with the options they have available to them, and on Friday he repeated his message that she can “go to hell” because that is “absolutely not true.”

“I don’t have the options I had,” Hoft told Loesch. “I pray to God that I get the same doctors, who saved my life three months ago. I pray that I’ll be able to see them.”

Thankfully, Hoft said, there are already “laws on the books” ensuring that someone in his condition doesn’t “get kicked off” their health insurance mid-treatment, but his health complications are not short-term.

“It’s just, again, something I really didn’t want to suffer through at this time,” he said.

Gateway Pundit’s Jim Hoft added that the Affordable Care Act was “based on lies,” and said he is one of the millions of Americans who is asking, “why is our government doing this to us?”

Hoft has scheduled a “wheel-in rally” outside Missouri Senator Claire McCaskill’s (D) St. Louis office on Saturday from 11:00 p.m. to 12:00 p.m. in an effort to find out.

He stresses that while the focus of the Affordable Care Act’s implementation has been the failed website, the website is not the issue — it is the law itself.

“I can’t believe that so many people still today are just taking this and sitting at home,” he concluded, saying he hopes a few people join him on Saturday.

Your browser does not support iframes.

The full episode of The Glenn Beck Program, along with many other live streaming shows and thousands of hours of on-demand content, is available on just about any digital device. Get it all with a FREE TRIAL.

–

Other Must-Read Stories: