By ABBY GOODNOUGH, The New York Times

Dr. Sven Jonsson, a primary care physician in Taylorsville, Ky., is seeing a steady tide of new patients under President Barack Obama's health care law, the Affordable Care Act.

So far, it is working out for him. His employer, a big hospital system, provides expensive equipment, takes care of bureaucratic chores and has buffered him from the turmoil of his rapidly changing business.

"This is just a much saner place for me right now," said Jonsson, 52, who left private practice to work for the system, Baptist Health, in 2012. "I'm probably going to live another five years."

About 25 miles away in the more affluent suburb of Crestwood, Dr. Tracy Ragland, 46, an independent primary care physician, is more anxious about the future of her small practice. The law is bringing new regulations and payment rates that she says squeeze self-employed doctors. She cherishes the autonomy of private practice and speaks darkly of the rush of independent physicians into hospital networks, which she sees as growing monopolies.

"The possibility of not being able to survive in a private practice, especially primary care, is very real," she said.

Jonsson and Ragland represent two poles of that primary care system, doctors whose success depends on their front-line work. Both live and work on the outskirts of Louisville, with the patience required of family practitioners who spend long days troubleshooting routine problems like back pain and acid reflux. But the similarities in their practices end there.

About 265,000 residents of Kentucky have signed up for insurance through the Affordable Care Act, and most have been found eligible for Medicaid, which the state expanded under the law. Primary care offices are supposed to be their point of entry into the health care system, providing the preventive care and upkeep that is crucial to improving the nation's health.

SAFETY IN NUMBERS

As an independent physician, Ragland must carefully devise strategies to keep her three-person practice afloat amid rising overhead, flat or dropping reimbursement rates, and new rules, many of them related to the health care law.

She said that she embraced the goal of extending health coverage to far more Americans, but that Medicaid paid too poorly for her to treat any of the new enrollees. And while she is accepting some of the private plans sold through Kentucky's new online insurance exchange, she has rejected others — again, because she considers the payment too low.

Only about 40 percent of family doctors and pediatricians remain independent, according to the American Medical Association — and many, including Ragland, feel that harsh economic winds that were already pushing against them have been accelerated by the Affordable Care Act.

"We're in an unknown time," she said.

Jonsson is less mired in the daily worries of running a medical business. His hospital system, with far more bargaining power than a private practice, negotiates with insurers on his behalf, pays his overhead and malpractice insurance, and handles much of the ever expanding paperwork. It provides him with an X-ray machine and a costly system for keeping digital patient records, a move encouraged by the new law. He has been able to take his first long vacations in years, including a recent month in his native South Africa.

"It's that stability factor," Jonsson said. "People know they can get a certain amount of salary, and the hospital's not going anywhere, you know?"

Since the passage of the act in 2010, hospital systems have been acquiring physician practices to shore up their market positions and form networks to take advantage of incentives under the new law. Baptist enlisted about a dozen of its primary care providers in the Louisville region to take on new Medicaid patients, officials there said, both to get more paying customers in the door and, as a nonprofit system with a stated charitable mission, to help more of Kentucky's poor get medical care under the law.

"We all have to sort of dig in and work hard and see what happens," Jonsson said.

THE LUXURY OF TIME

Ragland is both a general internist and a pediatrician, treating infants to patients in their 90s. Her office is on a winding road lined with horse pastures and upscale subdivisions, with a big sun-splashed waiting room and a Pilates studio next door. She grew up on a farm and does not bother wearing a white coat.

One Monday this month, she saw 15 patients at an unhurried pace, partly because she had some no-shows because of bitterly cold weather.

There was Marcia Robinson, 54, diagnosed with shingles in December and seeking follow-up care before a Caribbean vacation; Dylan Waddle, 10, who had a bad cough; and Margaret Smith, 77, who was dealing with a painful wisdom tooth.

"She's very attentive," Smith, a retired piano teacher, said of Ragland. "She doesn't just cut you off." Ragland has seen a handful of newly insured patients since Jan. 1, but most of her adult patients have insurance through their jobs or Medicare.

Some have switched to the new private exchange plans that her office takes — all except those offered by Humana, a large insurer based in Louisville, which she said would have reimbursed 20 percent less than what her office gets for Humana plans outside the exchange. Still, she does not hesitate to recommend the exchange to her patients if she thinks it could help them.

Halfway through her day, Ragland walked into an exam room and found Aline Burgin, 61, waiting for her.

"I haven't seen you in a while!" she said, noting that Burgin's last visit was two years earlier. Burgin, who works the overnight shift at a nursing home, said she had temporarily dropped her employer-sponsored insurance because it was too expensive.

"It's $170 out of my paycheck every two weeks," she said.

"Did you go to the exchange to see if you could qualify for some help?" Ragland asked.

Burgin agreed to take the phone number for Kynect, the state exchange. Then she lingered in the exam room, telling Ragland about her sister's recent death from emphysema and the guilt she felt about not being with her that day. Ragland listened for nearly 10 minutes, nodding her head and saying, "Mm-hmm." By the time they were finished, 30 minutes had passed — 10 minutes longer than the usual appointment time. It is that kind of flexibility that Ragland said she treasured about private practice.

"Some patients need five minutes; some patients need all kinds of time and follow-up," she said. "I never want to be in a situation where my employer tells me I need to be more productive or I'm going to have a severe cut in my pay."

The next morning, Ragland and her partners had their monthly meeting with a private consultant they hired recently to take over their billing and help them maximize reimbursements. They talked about their effort to recruit a fourth partner, which has stalled partly because so many young doctors now prefer to work for hospitals. And they examined spreadsheets showing their productivity over the previous month, including how many patients each doctor had seen and how much they had billed for each visit. Productivity was down because of harsh weather.

"I want to rent a truck and pick up patients and say, 'Go to the doctor!'" said the consultant, January Taylor-Mills.

A FULL WAITING ROOM

In his Baptist Medical Associates office across from a drab shopping center in Taylorsville, Jonsson chugged through 30 patient visits one Wednesday in January. He hustled between exam rooms carrying a laptop equipped with voice recognition software, provided by Baptist, that allows him to dictate notes into patients' digital records.

"There's no question I have more time," he said, comparing his life now to when he owned a private practice. But, he added, "I work hard when I'm here."

For now, hospitals generally provide doctors like him with a baseline salary and potential bonuses tied to productivity — a system likely to change as the Affordable Care Act calls for basing payment on results instead of volume.

Jonsson, a competitive kayaker who advocates a plant-based diet to anyone who will listen, quickly dispensed with a back pain case and a follow-up visit for chest pain that seemed to be acid reflux. There were also patients with leg cramps, obsessive compulsive disorder, pneumonia and rheumatoid arthritis, most of whom had followed Jonsson when he went to work for Baptist — or as Steven Pippin, the chest pain patient, put it, "when Obamacare came along."

Jonsson owned his practice in Louisville for a decade — and did not accept Medicaid, for the same reasons that Ragland generally does not — but sold it in 2010, months after the Affordable Care Act passed. He did so, he said, expressly out of concern that the law and related requirements were about to ratchet up the pressures and expense of private practice. In particular, he dreaded having to buy and learn how to use an electronic records system, not only because such systems are expensive but because doctors' productivity slows down while they are learning the computerized systems, threatening tight margins.

"I'm not sure how I could have done it," Jonsson said.

When he is done seeing patients, he tends to the grapevines he recently planted on his property with plans to make wine.

"I don't have to go look at anything related to the finances of the office," he said. "I can actually go dig a hole on my farm."

He had never been able to take more than a week off in private practice, he said — "if you did, you really didn't earn anything that month because it all went to overhead" — and Baptist's willingness to let him do so was another source of new happiness. The typical fears about hospital employment — pressure to refer only to other Baptist doctors, for example, or to bring in as much revenue as possible — have not burdened him, he said, at least not yet.

"I don't know where I'll be in 10 years," he said, acknowledging that the uncertainty pervading his profession may lead him down yet another path.

"Hopefully I'll be here; and hopefully I'll be happy, right?"