Buy Photo Protesters gather outside Sen. Lamar Alexander’s office last month to urge raising the minimum wage. Alexander supported raising the wage in 2007, but now opposes it. (Photo: George Walker IV / THE TENNESSEAN)Buy Photo

I commend Gov. Bill Haslam for recently acknowledging that "income inequality" is a problem. Boy, is it.

In three decades, America's richest 1 percent saw their household incomes almost quadruple. The poorest working Americans saw a percentage increase of 16 percent, only a percentage increase of one-seventeenth as much as the rich.

In 1965, CEOs made 20 times more than the average worker. Today, CEOs make nearly 300 times the pay of the average worker. The rising tide that once lifted all boats now lifts only yachts.

If the 1968 minimum wage of $1.60 an hour were merely adjusted for inflation, today it would be $10.74.

From 1968 to 2012, worker productivity rose 124 percent. If pay had kept pace with productivity, today the minimum wage would be $22.

Almost 50 studies have been published that found that when the minimum wage goes up, poverty goes down. Raising the minimum wage to $10.10 per hour would give minimum wage workers an additional $5,700 per year, lifting nearly 6 million Americans out of poverty.

Tennessee leads the nation in the share of workers earning minimum wage, nearly twice the national average. And almost half of the states have a higher minimum wage than ours.

This year, Tennessee Democratic legislators proposed raising the minimum wage a dollar to $8.25 an hour. But tea party Republicans quickly killed the bill — even though Republican legislators have enjoyed not one but two pay hikes since the minimum wage was last raised.

Tea party Republicans argue that increasing the minimum wage will force businesses to fire workers. In fact, 60 percent of the states that raised the minimum wage during periods of high unemployment saw higher-than-average job growth, not lower.

Many businesses support a higher minimum wage, including Costco, McDonald's, Subway, Panera Bread, The Gap and Stride Rite

Tea party Republicans argue that raising the minimum wage would hurt our economic recovery, but most economists believe the opposite. Raising the minimum wage would stimulate our economy and give consumer spending an immediate boost. Higher wages would give low-income workers the ability to purchase goods like food and cars that jump-start the economy. An increase in the minimum wage from $7.25 to $10.10 would grow the U.S. economy by $22 billion and net 85,000 new jobs.

Raising the minimum wage would not increase costs significantly for consumers. Research shows that food price increases following an increase in the minimum wage will lead to no more than an extra dime a day for American households, while delivering $35 billion in additional income to almost 30 million workers.

Furthermore, because the minimum wage is so low, we taxpayers fund a larger government safety net of food stamp programs, Medicaid, the Earned Income Tax Credit and housing assistance. Raising the minimum wage would generate more taxes from workers, save the rest of us tax dollars and reduce the deficit.

In 2007, when Republican President Bush advocated increasing the minimum wage from $5.15 to $7.25, 39 current House Republicans and 24 current Senate Republicans voted to do so, including our own Sens. Bob Corker and Lamar Alexander.

Yet, this year when a Democratic president argued for raising the minimum wage, Republicans voted against it. Sen. Alexander now even says he doesn't believe in the minimum wage and would abolish it.

If Gov. Haslam is truly concerned about income inequality, and I believe he is, he should help solve the problem by raising the minimum wage.

Roy Herron is chairman and Garrett Jennings and Hannah Oakley are interns at the Tennessee Democratic Party.

Read or Share this story: http://www.tennessean.com/story/opinion/2014/06/28/raise-minimum-wage-fight-income-inequality/11447603/