TORONTO (AP) - The Blue Jays lost another close game and watched two players leave with injuries Tuesday night.

Second baseman Devon Travis left with a sore shoulder and slugger Jose Bautista hobbled off with cramps in his right hamstring as Toronto lost 3-2 to the Philadelphia Phillies.

Travis, who hit a leadoff homer in the first, missed 36 games this season with a shoulder injury sustained when he was hit by a bad-hop grounder in an April 30 game at Cleveland.

“Obviously, it’s pretty frustrating,” Travis said. “I’ll do all that I can to play through this one.”

Bautista was replaced after grounding out in the eighth because of cramps in his right hamstring. Bautista said he didn’t consider the problem to be serious.

“If I would’ve run it out I probably would’ve strained it,” Bautista said. “I think I did the right thing.”

After Bautista’s departure, Toronto had to use catcher Russell Martin at second base in the ninth.

All-Star shortstop Troy Tulowitzki, acquired by Toronto from Colorado, was not active and is expected to make his Blue Jays debut on Wednesday.

Toronto is 10-22 in one-run games.

The Phillies won their first game after trading All-Star closer Jonathan Papelbon to Washington and got their ninth victory in 10 games since the All-Star break.

Morgan stopped a four-start winless streak and Cody Asche drove in two runs for the Phillies, who had lost their previous eight games against Toronto.

The Blue Jays came in batting .290 against left-handers but couldn’t get the job done against Morgan.

“He shut us down us as well as any lefty has all year,” manager John Gibbons said.

Morgan (2-2) allowed two runs and five hits in six innings to win for the first time since his major league debut, June 21 against St. Louis.

“He pitched very well,” interim manager Pete Mackanin said.

Making his fourth start for Toronto, left-hander Felix Doubront (1-1) allowed three runs and six hits in four-plus innings. Doubront has not won in his past three outings.

“He lost the zone and started scattering,” Gibbons said.

Philadelphia took the lead with a three-run fifth. Ryan Howard led off with an infield single that bounced off his leg. Gibbons asked for a review but was denied.

“I figured one of the umpires must have saw that,” Gibbons said. “Thought it was pretty obvious.”

Darin Ruf, Asche and Andres Blanco followed with consecutive doubles.

Martin doubled off the glove of center fielder Ben Revere to begin the fourth, but Morgan responded by setting down the next nine batters.

NUMBERS GAME

Blue Jays third base coach Luis Rivera changed his jersey number from 2 to 4 so that Tulowitzki could wear his preferred number. Tulowitzki was assigned the locker that once belonged to Reyes.

HOMER HAPPY

Toronto has gone deep in 10 straight games, matching their longest streak of the season. They also did it from May 21 to May 31.

SOLID DEBUT FOR HAWKINS

Veteran RHP LaTroy Hawkins, acquired from Colorado along with Tulowitzki, made his debut with a perfect, eight-pitch sixth.

TRAINER’S ROOM

Phillies: Phillies LHP Cole Hamels is being pushed back one day and is not scheduled to start for again until after Friday’s trade deadline has passed. Hamels threw a season-high 129 pitches in Sunday’s no-hitter over the Cubs at Wrigley Field. He is 6-7 with a 3.64 ERA in 20 starts.

Blue Jays: Travis left after two innings with a sore left shoulder. Travis missed 36 games earlier this season because of a shoulder injury, suffered when he was hit by a bad hop grounder in an April 30 game at Cleveland.

UP NEXT

Phillies: RHP Jerome Williams (3-7, 6.28 ERA) pitched six innings against the Chicago Cubs on July 24, his first start after missing more than a month with a strained left hamstring. He’s 2-0 in four career appearances against Toronto.

Blue Jays: RHP R.A. Dickey (4-10, 4.53 ERA) pitched 8 1-3 innings to beat Oakland on July 23, snapping a five-start winless streak. Dickey has allowed three earned runs or fewer in nine of his past 10 outings.