Matt Carlino goes over the back of Villanova's Ryan Arcidiacono at the Wells Fargo Center. Credit: Getty Images

By of the

Newark, N.J. — Marquette senior guard Matt Carlino will miss Saturday's game against Seton Hall due to a concussion he suffered on Wednesday night against Villanova.

Carlino fell on his head during the second half of Wednesday's 70-52 loss, but after a few moments on the ground was able to run off the court under his own power.

He was evaluated by athletic trainer Brandon Yoder and team doctor Darin Maccoux immediately after the fall and went through a concussion check upon returning to the bench. He was also evaluated multiple other times during the game. Concussion symptoms were not present in any of those evaluations and he was allowed to return to the court after missing about five minutes of play.

"It was a very scary fall," head coach Steve Wojciechowski said after Wednesday's game. "All indications right now are that he's good — as good as you can be when you have a fall like he had."

It wasn't until Carlino was reexamined after the game that he was diagnosed with a concussion. Shortly after the game, Carlino twice said that he was fine in talking with the Journal Sentinel.

"After our game in Philadelphia we had him checked out," Wojciechowski said after Saturday's game. "With concussions it's hard to tell. There's a protocol that you have to go through, so it's kind of been day-to-day, but yesterday we pretty much came to the realization that he wasn't going to play."

The 6-foot-2 graduate transfer from BYU is officially considered to be day-to-day. Entering Saturday, he was the team's leading scorer at 14.5 points per game and led the Big East with 60 made three-pointers this season.

Carlino was at the Prudential Center, but was not on the bench during the game. Instead, he watched from the locker room. That was the suggestion from Marquette's medical professionals since it is much quieter in the locker room than on the sidelines.

"I'm not a doctor, but I was told that that's the best thing to do," Wojciechowski said of keeping Carlino in the locker room. "I'm a basketball coach. I just listen to the experts."