WASHINGTON — Michelle Nunn, the Democratic Senate candidate, stated her case cogently last week in Columbus, Ga.: If elected, she vowed to “change Washington in a collaborative way.”

Her Republican opponent, David Perdue, a businessman, is also running as a “change” candidate, but he’s skipping the collaborative stuff. He says he will go to Washington to attack President Obama and the Senate leader, Harry Reid, Democrat of Nevada.

How this argument plays out matters. An upset by Ms. Nunn in Georgia, which has been solidly Republican for more than a decade, was long considered just a bonus possibility for her party. Now Democrats hold six or seven vulnerable Senate seats in the Nov. 4 elections, and a loss of six would cost them the majority. They need to win in a couple of Republican-held states. Georgia, where Senator Saxby Chambliss is retiring, is one of the two best options for a Democratic victory.

Democrats hoped to run against one of Georgia’s House incumbents. Instead, they face a political newcomer, a corporate executive and cousin of a former governor of Georgia, Sonny Perdue.

This race is surprisingly close because of the state’s changing demographics. As recently as 2004, whites, who vote overwhelmingly Republican, accounted for 71 percent of the electorate. In 2012, they made up a little more than 61 percent. The black vote, almost all Democratic, grew to 30 percent from less than 25 percent, and the small Hispanic vote is increasing. The Atlas Project, a Democratic organization that studies voting patterns, projects that this trend will continue.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Democrats say they’re competitive in Georgia this year because of two candidates with impressive political pedigrees. Ms. Nunn is the daughter of a much-admired former senator, Sam Nunn. The Democratic nominee for governor is Jason Carter, grandson of former President Jimmy Carter.

This year “is a gift,” said Stacey Abrams, the Democratic leader in the Georgia House of Representatives, who spearheaded the registration of 120,000 new voters and will lead the turnout drive. “The demographics are not yet sufficient,” she said, “but we have two strong candidates with strong names.”

The math is simple. Ms. Nunn needs close to 30 percent of the white vote — Mr. Obama got about 23 percent in Georgia in 2012 — and needs black voters to turn out in numbers such that they account for nearly 30 percent of the vote, or slightly less than in the 2012 presidential election. Mr. Perdue needs to get 75 percent of the white vote this year to at least match the share of the electorate that whites represented two years ago, when they counted for slightly over 61 percent.

He’s running against Washington, the president and the immigration overhaul bill, which he calls amnesty. He also wants to repeal the Affordable Care Act.

Ms. Nunn has a tougher tightrope to walk: She needs to appeal to the base by embracing pay equity for women, a higher minimum wage, immigration overhaul, and mend, not end, the Affordable Care Act. Simultaneously, she has taken as a model her father’s record as a fiscal moderate and national-security realist, promising to “reach across the aisle” to seek bipartisan accords.

She has impressive business supporters, like Mitesh Shah, the chief executive of a private equity real estate firm. A lifelong Republican, Mr. Shah says he is bothered by his party’s rightward drift on social issues such as immigration.

“I may not always agree with her, but I think Michelle is different and can make a difference in Washington,” Mr. Shah said.

Mr. Perdue has run as a job creator. On Friday, however, a nine-year-old deposition came to light in which he readily acknowledged that as a chief executive he had outsourced jobs.

Polls show a tight race, which includes a libertarian candidate expected to get 3 percent to 4 percent of the vote. If no candidate gets 50 percent of the vote, Georgia law requires a runoff on Jan. 6.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Both camps agree that would be a nightmare, especially if control of the Senate is at stake. Experts predict that $100 million in campaign funds would pour into Georgia during the two-month runoff.