Voters in the 18th Congressional District will have a choice at the ballot box this November after all.

This month, longtime Eureka College history professor Junius Rodriguez was slated by Democratic Party leaders to challenge U.S. Rep. Darin LaHood, R-Peoria, who won a special election last fall.

The name is likely familiar to Democrats in the know. Rodriguez previously expressed interest in a bid for the seat in 2008 when U.S. Rep. Ray LaHood retired. That shot went to Colleen Callahan. Rodriguez mulled another shot last year after U.S. Rep. Aaron Schock resigned, but former student Adam Lopez was running in the primary, and he didn’t want to run against someone he’d taught.

Rodriguez casts himself a centrist Democrat, wanting to challenge the notion that the 18th is a “solid red district,” but rather one that is “much more purple than it claims to be.” He says he’s also concerned at the notion that voters would look at someone who has held the seat for less than a term as one who has the powers of incumbency, arguing that LaHood still needs to prove himself to the citizenry given the low turnout in last September’s special election.

In a year where political outsiders are admired, Rodriguez says he brings the best of both worlds, having dealt in compromise during his career while building working relationships, but at the same time teaching on matters including foreign policy and getting familiar with public service agencies.

“What I’m asking people to do is to look at the totality of my life, the totality of my experience, what I bring to the table,” he said during a wide-ranging phone interview. “I also believe in the final analysis that if we have debates ... I can debate issues of policy.”

And our lengthy discussion suggested Rodriguez has some policy proposals that would generate discussion, including on working to improve the job-creation element of the Affordable Care Act. He’d like to see more work at the community college level — even utilizing community facilities like libraries in small towns — to train folks for work in the electronic health record field.

His focus isn’t just on the Peoria area either. Rodriguez told us he’d like to work on partnerships with districts across the Mississippi River from the edge of the 18th in Quincy, working to expand Interstate 72 as an alternative east-west route for travel and shipping — improving business opportunities in communities along that corridor.

That’s part of a trend, his desire to be “thinking ahead to what’s going to be in our interest five, 10, 30 years down the line” rather than focusing on policies that only have appeal in the context of the next election.

The 18th has had a tendency toward sleepy races and lopsided victory margins. History suggests that margin will still be there when Nov. 9 dawns, but that doesn’t mean that it shouldn’t still be an active campaign of ideas, policies and views. Voters deserve that.

Even more money

There was a great deal of hullabaloo — some of it caused by this column — about the proposed pay for elected, countywide officials in Peoria County. The concern was that in tight financial times for governments and taxpayers alike, giving raises that would bring those folks into six-figure salary territory sent a bad signal to taxpayers.

Ultimately board members opted for a compromise, giving no raise to the base salary of $94,210 for the county auditor, circuit clerk and coroner, but giving them an additional $1,200 “service payment” in each year. That way their base rate won’t grow.

Turns out, though, those salaries only account for pay from the county. Because we’re all state of Illinois taxpayers, we end up paying them again in a way that pushes their annual salary above $100,000.

Each of those officials also receives a stipend from the state of Illinois for their job — part of a series of expenses that added up to more than $3 million to elected, countywide officials during the last fiscal year, according to data we requested from the state comptroller’s office.

Efforts by some legislators to eliminate those stipends have gone nowhere.

For most, the state stipend adds an additional $6,500 per year for the county clerk, circuit clerk, treasurer, auditor, recorder of deeds, coroner and sheriff. (Treasurers and sheriffs received extra in the last fiscal year — a total of $10,429 — because of an additional line item labeled “stipend liability.”)

Even in these lean times of the 2016 budget year — you may have heard about the lack of a state budget going on a year — some of the officials are still getting their stipends because of court orders. A search of the comptroller’s website shows payments to county auditors, sheriffs and coroners. However, clerks, circuit clerks, treasurers and recorders of deeds are still left out in the cold.

Hopefully those high five-figure county salaries are enough for them to make ends meet.

At least it’s economical

Peoria School District 150 is trying to encourage the community to buy in on its rebranding as “Peoria Public Schools.” But in addition to being asked to buy in, taxpayers in the district might be wondering just how much that buy in will cost. Such changes rarely come cheaply — we’d suspect those who work at, say, Caterpillar Inc., OSF Saint Francis Medical Center, either of the UnityPoint Health facilities in town, or Bradley University have wondered at that expense from their own experience. Doubtless those tied to smaller employers in the area have likewise been curious about the cost.

It seems that the cost taxpayers will have to bear in this new effort is actually minuscule — on the order of $115. No extra zeros are missing from that figure.

You see, the district’s logo and other brand markers have used “Peoria Public Schools” since 2008. So all letterhead, presentations and signage use that terminology, district spokesman Chris Coplan tells us. Buses are the exception. They still say “Peoria Public School District 150,” which the district is looking to change via the in-house transportation department to the new name.

The only external expense, Coplan says, is to buy a new Web domain at www.peoriapublicschools.org under a five-year purchase costing that $115. That’ll become the primary Web address, though the old psd150.org site will still work. District officials will still use psd150.org Web addresses.

Chris Kaergard (C.K.) covers politics and Peoria County government for the Journal Star. He can be reached at 686-3255 or ckaergard@pjstar.com. Follow him on Twitter @ChrisKaergard. Nick Vlahos (N.V.) is on extended leave from the paper. He can be reached at nvlahos64@comcast.net. Follow him on Twitter @VlahosNick.