Critical Action Needed for Critical Access Hospitals

Nearly 700 rural hospitals are at risk of closure, research shows. They provide care access to about 11.7 million people, employ 100,000 healthcare workers, and account for $277 billion in economic activity.

You've probably read the alarming report from iVantage Analytics showing that 673 rural hospitals—one out of three—are under financial duress, and that 210 are at high risk of closing.

The methodology iVantage used to make this dire prediction looked at about 70 metrics such as market position, balance sheet, costs, charges, and outcomes from the more than 66 rural hospitals that have closed since 2010 and applied those same metrics to rural hospitals that remain operational.

Alan Morgan, CEO

"Statistically, they correlated. As we looked at those 70 indicators, we found 210 hospitals that were highly correlated with hospitals that had closed and another 453 that were strongly correlated with the hospitals that had closed," says Michael Topchik, senior vice president at Portland, ME-based iVantage.

Alan Morgan, CEO of the National Rural Health Association, which partnered in the iVantage study, says the findings are troubling, but not surprising to anyone paying attention.

"If it was one single issue then, from a policy perspective, it would be easy to show why they are closing, so you need to do this. But there are multiple factors," Morgan says. "Number one is sequestration and a series of congressionally mandated Medicare cuts that have happened over the past few years, and the reductions in the payments included in the Affordable Care Act."

"It is also tough about talking about the Affordable Care Act and its impact on rural hospitals," he says. "You have the cuts to disproportionate share payments, which are supposed to be offset by Medicaid expansion. That hasn't happened. In addition, the health exchanges were supposed to help with the numbers of people presenting at rural hospitals with insurance. People have been using the exchanges, but they haven't been signing up in rural areas at the same levels as they have in urban areas. So multiple factors within the Affordable Care Act are just not playing out in a positive manner for rural hospitals."

High Stakes

Let's review what's at stake here. According to iVantage, these 673 rural hospitals that are at risk of closure provide care access to about 11.7 million people, many of whom are older, sicker, and poorer than people living in urban America. As we know, rural hospitals are often among the largest employers in the communities they serve.

iVantage says if these 673 hospitals closed it would mean the loss of nearly 100,000 healthcare jobs, another 137,000 ancillary jobs in the communities they serve, and $277 billion in lost economic activity for these regions over the next decade.

The status quo is unsustainable, which means that every stakeholder needs to act, including elected officials and policy makers at all levels of government. This isn't simply about throwing more money at the issue. When so many rural hospitals are threatened, it means we must evaluate the way care is delivered in rural America, and what role hospitals should play in that care delivery.