My fellow Chicagoans: We owe Donald TRUMP a great debt of gratitude.

Hey, now: Put down those torches and pitchforks and bear with me.

The story of TRUMP Tower has deeper foundations than the recent outrage of the sign Mr. TRUMP has installed. While the process of getting the building's design approved was fraught (remember Mayor Richard M. Daley insisting that TRUMP's architects add a spire?), once the TRUMP Tower was up, Chicagoans liked it. It respected its neighbors and connected organically to the river, a great addition to the skyline between Willis (Sears) Tower and the John Hancock Center.

Mr. TRUMP had done the seemingly impossible: He got Chicagoans to embrace something built by a Republican reality TV star from New York. A feat comparable to making tea partiers sign up for Obamacare, or birthers accept Barack Obama's Hawaiian birth certificate.

As Nelson Algren wrote in a different context, in Chicago we say of both bad poets and good safe-blowers: If the man can get away with it, you've got to give him credit.

So now Mr. TRUMP's done us the very real favor of trashing his inadvertent masterpiece. In an amen chorus ably led by Blair Kamin at the Chicago Tribune, everyone hates this sign. The complaints run from the purely aesthetic (it's ugly!) to dubious claims about regional values (modest Midwestern Chicago versus egotistical East Coast New York).

But the aldermen OK'd it, it's legal, so ain't nothin' gonna be done. We're stuck with this eyesore.

Which is good.

REALITY CHECK

Because Chicagoans need to have our illusions disabused exactly the way Mr. TRUMP mangled his own building's stellar design.

TRUMP exposes the fault lines in Chicago's self-regard. We like to think that we are a city connected to its history and its architecture. Maybe in some parallel-Earth Chicago, but here we routinely demolish historic buildings (Prentice Women's Hospital) and allow swathes of mediocre new buildings to blight whole neighborhoods (River North), with the occasional utter abomination thrown in (New Soldier Field).

TRUMP will be a permanent thorn in our collective civic paw.

On every Chicago Architecture Foundation River Tour, on every northbound el making the turn at Lake and Wabash, and on every Wacker Drive stroll when a prideful local shows out-of-town visitors around, TRUMP will remind us of the reality of Chicago.

Like it or not, we will be reminded that paeans to our architectural legacy are often platitudinous hot air, pure puffery.

Money and insiders rule this town, and the rest of us have to look at and live with the results. TRUMP — the man and the sign — makes that fact perfectly clear.

So thank you again, Donald TRUMP. Chicago owes you one.

Bill SAVAGE is distinguished senior lecturer in English at Northwestern University.

Related:

• Looks like the Trump sign will be a love-hate thing. Mostly hate.

• Defending The Donald: Why I'm with Trump on his towering sign