GLEN ROSE — Some say you can’t beat a team three times in one season.

Some say it’s even harder to do so when that team isn’t someone you play in district every year.

Despite not seeing Lewisville Hebron since the early part of the season, the Amarillo High Lady Sandies proved why they are ranked the No. 1 team in Class 6A with a 25-22, 28-26, 13-25, 25-18 win over Lewisville Hebron in the Region I-6A finals Saturday to advance to the state championship tournament for the second consecutive season.

“The game today was intense and Hebron came out with vengeance, but we pushed and fought back hard,” Amarillo High senior Cambree Villarreal said. “We won the first two sets, which were tight, then the third we got too comfortable and Hebron took the third set. The fourth set started off close but we pulled away at the end to get the victory and now we are state-bound. We are excited and ready to compete at state.”

Amarillo High coach Jan Barker said it was a tough match to advance to state for the 13th time in 28 years.

“For the first two sets we started strong but got behind and had to make a comeback against a strong team,” Barker said. “They showed a lot of fight. Then after losing pretty badly in the third game, the girls kicked it in and never looked back. It was then that we had an 8-1 run and were able to finish it off. Making it to state with these girls is so exciting. They have so much fight in them, and the returnees were so focused on making it back again after winning it last year.”

Senior middle blocker Zoe Hardin, who was MVP in last season’s state tournament game, said Lewisville Hebron was a difficult oppenent to face for a third time.

“Hebron was the toughest team we’ve come up against all season,” Hardin said. “It’s hard to beat a team three times. We had to fight harder than ever and come together as a team and play one point at a time. It was such a fun game and we cannot wait to continue the hard work at the state tournament.”

Senior libero Samantha Nolan said Lewisville Hebron had the goal of avenging the two losses earlier in the season.

“They were out to get us and fought hard,” Nolan said. “Every time they pushed, we pushed back even harder. The winning team will always be the one who finishes.”

Sophomore outside hitter Emerson Solano said Amarillo High was able to win because of a drive to succeed.

“I’ve never been a part of a team that fought so hard and wanted it so bad,” Nolan said. “We all had a next point mentality and with that we took it all the way.”

Amarillo High def. Lewisville Hebron 25-22, 258-26, 13-25, 25-18

Amarillo High—Kills: Cambree Villarreal 15, Emerson Solano 11. Blocks: Zoe Hardin 7, Villarreal 5. Digs: Emerson Solano 20, Abby Warner 14, Samantha Nolan 14. Assists: Jordan Pennington 28, Abby Warner 18. Aces: Solano 3.

Record: Amarillo High 42-6.