President Barack Obama traveled to La Crosse, Wis., on Thursday. Republican Gov. Scott Walker, a possible 2016 presidential candidate, greeted him at the airport. (Photo: Carolyn Kaster / AP)

Earlier this week, President Barack Obama descended the steps of Air Force One to shake the hand of a Republican governor.

The well-known Republican governor is a national leader in the party and a likely contender for the presidency himself, and yet he took the time to speak with the president on the tarmac.

No, it wasn't Tennessee Gov. Bill Haslam. It was Scott Walker, the Republican governor of Wisconsin and one of the front-runners for the GOP presidential nomination in 2016.

There's a school of thought that a Republican appearing with Obama, in any capacity, can hurt that Republican politically. But Walker, facing likely future attacks from all political sides as he competes with at least a baker's dozen of GOP presidential hopefuls, still met the president on his trip to La Cross, Wis., on Thursday.

As The New York Times noted, Walker didn't accompany the president to his speech and he wrote an opinion piece in which he argued Wisconsin's economy has "improved in spite of — not because of — the president's big-government policies."

But when the leader of the free world came to his state, Walker deemed it necessary to shake the man's hand.

For the third time in as many presidential visits to Nashville, Haslam didn't meet the president. Logistically, the governor's staff said Haslam couldn't fit the president into his schedule Wednesday when Obama visited Nashville.

"Meetings," Haslam spokesman David Smith said, when asked what Haslam was doing that tied him up.

Smith didn't elaborate in response to several requests asking for more information about the nature of the meetings.

Politically, there seems to be a simple reason why Haslam didn't meet Obama this trip: Insure Tennessee.

Obama came to Tennessee to discuss the Affordable Care Act and the future of health care in the United States, including Medicaid expansion. Opponents of the governor's controversial health care program, which relies on funding made available through "Obamacare," repeatedly entwined Insure Tennessee with a president and federal health care law that are unpopular in Tennessee.

That linkage of Haslam's plan and Obama, however tangential in reality, probably played at least some role politically in the proposal dying twice in separate legislative committees earlier this year.

With calls to revive the plan, chiefly from Democrats and some of the hundreds of thousands of Tennesseans who probably would benefit from the plan, Haslam may have figured he couldn't risk another photo opportunity with the president, said longtime adviser Tom Ingram.

"I don't know why Governor Haslam made the decision he made. But when I saw that the president was coming to Tennessee, my first thought was this does not help pass Insure Tennessee in this legislature," Ingram said Thursday afternoon.

"His decision may have had something to do with that because passing Insure Tennessee at some point is very important for this state."

Yes, Tennessee and Wisconsin politics are different. Walker and Haslam have their own reasons for meeting or not meeting with the president.

President Barack Obama traveled to La Crosse, Wis., on Thursday. Republican Gov. Scott Walker, a possible 2016 presidential candidate, greeted him at the airport. (Photo: Carolyn Kaster / AP)

But there was no indication lawmakers were changing their minds on Insure Tennessee before Obama announced his visit. Even after the latest Supreme Court ruling on the Affordable Care Act, a decision Insure Tennessee opponents pointed to as a reason to wait on approving the plan, Haslam told reporters he wasn't sure how the ruling changed the debate at the statehouse.

And it's not like Haslam has never appeared with the president. The pair took the same stage earlier this year in Knoxville to discuss Tennessee Promise, Haslam's education plan Obama is using as the basis for a proposed federal program.

Clearly, Haslam could have caught flak from some in the GOP for meeting with the president. But so could Walker, who decided a handshake wouldn't be damaging enough to any state or national plans.

Haslam meeting the president probably doesn't help Insure Tennessee. But at the end of the day, if a handshake with the president could sink the plan, it's another indication of just how uphill the battle will be for the governor and supporters to persuade GOP lawmakers in the state General Assembly to change their minds.

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/1IALVAL