If Sen. David Vitter runs for governor in Louisiana, he can expect strong support from conservatives as well as a rehashing of his 2007 connection to a Washington, D.C., escort service.

Sen. David Vitter, R-La. (Photo: Patrick Semansky, AP) Story Highlights Vitter enjoys solid support among Louisiana conservatives

2007 escort-service scandal would almost certainly resurface

Expert: Vitter not interested in becoming popular in Senate

WASHINGTON — Republican Sen. David Vitter will almost certainly run for governor of Louisiana next year, according to political experts who say the decision would make him "far and away" the strongest candidate in the race.

The experts noted that Vitter has steadily laid the groundwork for a bid.

"We've known for two years he's running,'' said Jennifer Duffy, a senior editor at the nonpartisan Cook Political Report, which tracks governors' races. "He's also staking his claim to first place in line.''

Vitter, who survived a scandal linked to a Washington escort service and easily won his 2010 re-election bid, plans to announce this month whether he will run to replace GOP Gov. Bobby Jindal, whose term expires in 2016.

STORY: Super PACs gear up for individual Senate battles

Bernie Pinsonat, a Louisiana pollster and political consultant, said Vitter has solid support among conservatives in Louisiana and is "far and away, right now, the strongest candidate, period, in his corner of the world."

Pinsonat said a recent poll he conducted showed Vitter with an 80% favorability rating among Republican men and women voters.

Louisiana Democrats already are preparing for a Vitter run. Last month, the Louisiana Democratic Party launched a website to highlight Vitter's record and show "why he's not a good choice for the people of Louisiana,'' said Kirstin Alvanitakis, a party spokeswoman.

She pointed to some of Vitter's votes, including one against the Lilly Ledbetter Fair Pay Act of 2009, which aims for pay equity between men and women. Democrats also plan to tie Vitter to Jindal's policies. Jindal's popularity has suffered in recent polls.

Vitter "would like for people to believe that he is not with Jindal, but all of his ideology and voting record would be right in line with what Bobby Jindal has done,'' Alvanitakis said.

State GOP officials don't expect to take a position in the race, particularly if there is more than one major Republican candidate. But if Vitter runs, "he'll receive widespread support across the state,'' said Jason Dore, executive director of the state Republican Party.

"His conservative record speaks for itself,'' Dore said. " He's one of the most conservative members of the Senate and has very effectively voted to represent Louisiana's conservative values.''

In Washington, Vitter has been out front opposing the 2010 Affordable Care Act, President Barack Obama's signature issue.

Vitter has repeatedly blocked nominations and legislation, including a bipartisan energy bill, to draw attention to his own health care bill. That legislation would reduce or eliminate the premium subsidy that lawmakers and their aides receive when they switch from federally provided health insurance to new health care exchanges created under the health care law.

Earlier this year, Vitter, the top Republican on the Environment and Public Works Committee, led GOP panel members in boycotting action on Gina McCarthy's nomination to head the Environmental Protection Agency.

"He's been the proverbial thorn in the side (of his Senate colleagues) on a number of issues and bills, and has not made himself popular in the Congress," said Pearson Cross, head of the political science department at University of Louisiana University at Lafayette. "In his defense, I don't think Vitter cares very much whether he's popular in the Senate. I think he cares much more about following his own kind of inner star and representing what he sees as the interests of Louisiana."

Supporters say Vitter's health care measure and conservative positions on other issues could help in a run for governor.

But Vitter also should expect his past links to a Washington escort service — his number appeared on the service's phone list — to re-emerge if he runs for governor. Vitter apologized for a "very serious sin'' in 2007.

Vitter has been raising money and had nearly $1 million in campaign cash at the end of September, according to the Center for Responsive Politics. A super PAC also has been set up to help support either Vitter's run for the governor's office or his Senate re-election bid.

Louisiana Republicans acknowledge the importance of the governor's race but say they're more focused right now on defeating Democratic Sen. Mary Landrieu, who is up for re-election this year.

"We're not going to be pulled into the governor's race in 2014,'' Dore said. "We have a deep bench (for the governor's race) ... We'll be represented well.''

Republican Lt. Gov. Jay Dardene has said he intends to run for governor. Republican state Treasurer John Kennedy and Scott Angelle, a member of the Public Service Commission, also are potential candidates.

On the Democratic side, state Rep. John Bel Edward announced his bid for governor earlier this year, and New Orleans Mayor Mitch Landrieu may enter the race.

"We could have a very wide open governor's race for the first time in a long time,'' Pinsonat said.

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/KnGydg