Health hike

Story and photos by Gregg McQueen

Drastic.

Those are the kinds of changes some advocates are claiming are needed to better the health outcomes of uptown residents.

Kathleen Sebelius, former Secretary of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, recently visited East Harlem for a panel discussion with Clyde Williams, a Congressional candidate for the 13th District, and Dr. Prabhjot Singh, Director of the Arnhold Global Health Institute at Mount Sinai Hospital.

The group discussed President Barack Obama’s Affordable Care Act, also known as Obamacare, and how it impacts urban communities.

Held at senior center Casabe Houses for the Elderly on Wed., Feb. 17th, the event was arranged by Williams, who seeks to replace Congressman Charles Rangel and served as a former Democratic National Committee Political Director and policy advisor to President Bill Clinton.

Williams and Singh are both Harlem residents.

Sebelius told attendees that she was delighted to be back in the neighborhood, as the nearby Boriken Neighborhood Health Center was one of the first clinics she visited as Health Secretary.

She dismissed talk by Republican detractors that Obamacare is “falling apart” and does not work.

“That is not true,” Sebelius stated. “The fact is that 18 million Americans have health insurance now that didn’t have it before, the largest increase in healthcare coverage that we’ve ever seen.”

Singh added that Obamacare has made healthcare more readily accessible in community clinics and health centers, and more interactive with community-based organizations and social services agencies.

“It’s brought about a wave of change that has allowed doctors to think of not just that individual in front of them, but to look at the entire community,” he remarked. “It’s shifting care out of hospitals and into the neighborhoods where it belongs.”

Sebelius said it was important to expand access to affordable care to those who previously had no coverage because of their job or medical condition.

“We also need to lower the overall cost, but by improving the care system, not by cutting off benefits,” said Sebelius.

Singh said that better preventative care and population health would be an increased focus for physicians in the community.

“If we’re being paid to keep people healthy, instead of taking care of your when you’re sick, that is preferable,” said Singh.

“We need to come up with ways to bring health services to people who need it,” stated Williams. “In this district, 30 percent of people live at poverty level or below; in East Harlem, it’s 37 percent. We need to make certain we do something drastic to change that dynamic for generations to come.”

In low-income neighborhoods, it is vital to focus on prevention, said Sebelius, who stressed that efforts must be made to keep kids from smoking and eating unhealthy food.

Williams lamented the lack of healthy, affordable food options in Northern Manhattan, saying that many people from the community have complained to him about the difficulty in purchasing nutritious things to eat.

“You’ve got Associated in Washington Heights under attack, Pathmark up the street has closed,” remarked Williams.

While Singh acknowledged that healthy food is scarce, he said positive changes were on the way.

“We see Pathmark closing,” noted Singh. “But a Whole Foods is about to open in Harlem.”