Army Staff Sgt. Robert C. Murray of Tuckahoe, who received the Medal of Honor posthumously after saving the lives of his squad in Vietnam on June 7, 1970. (Photo: Submitted Photo)

He died a hero's death, throwing himself on a grenade to save the lives of his squad in Vietnam.

For his selfless act on June 7, 1970, near Hiep Duc in South Vietnam, Army Staff Sgt. Robert C. Murray, of Tuckahoe, was posthumously awarded the nation's highest military decoration, the Medal of Honor.

Forty-five years later to the day, more than 100 family members, veterans, friends and strangers gathered Sunday at Gate of Heaven Cemetery in a somber graveside ceremony to remember him.

"We just know it was the right thing to do," said Debra Palazzo, of Daughters of Liberty's Legacy, which organized the event along with Eastchester's VFW Post 2285. "It was our obligation to give voice to Robert Murray and to share his story of sacrifice with the next generation."

Section 43 of the cemetery was lined with U.S. flags for the remembrance, which began with the presentation of colors by a color guard accompanied by the Westchester County Police Emerald Society Pipes and Drums. Nearby, a huge flag flew from a Thornwood Volunteer Fire Department tower ladder truck.

Palazzo and Daughters of Liberty co-founder Cynthia Kaufman made brief remarks, as did Chaplain Capt. Robert Donnelly of American Legion Post 135, VFW Post 2285 Commander Robert Foster, Deputy Westchester County Executive Kevin Plunkett and Robert O'Donnell, a 1964 classmate of Murray's at Fordham Prep.

Buy Photo Grave at Gate of Heaven Cemetery in Hawthorne of Tuckahoe native Robert C. Murray, a U.S. Army staff sergeant who posthumously received the Medal of Honor for saving his squad in Vietnam on June 7, 1970. (Photo: Rich Liebson / Staff Photo)

Others in attendance included Westchester County legislators Sheila Marcotte (R-Eastchester) and Michael Smith (R-Mount Pleasant), former county Veterans Service Agency Director Vito Pinto, who is chaplain for VFW Post 2285, and Dan Griffin, executive director of Vietnam Veterans of America's Westchester chapter.

Two of Murray's sisters, Margaret Innes and Frances Tavolilla, laid a wreath at his grave as his brother, Jim Murray looked on. A third sister, Tricia Wunsch, was unable to be there. Murray's mother, Frances Murray, died a few weeks ago.

The ceremony ended with a rifle salute, the playing of "Taps" and the singing of "God Bless America."

"It was wonderful to see everyone here to pay tribute to my brother," Jim Murray, of Bronxville, said after the hour-long tribute. "He was a wonderful guy, and his death was a terrible loss for our family, especially for our mother and father."

Twitter: @RichLiebson

Buy Photo Graveside ceremony at Gate of Heaven Cemetery in Hawthorne for Tuckahoe native Robert C. Murray, a U.S. Army staff sergeant who posthumously received the Medal of Honor for saving his squad in Vietnam on June 7, 1970. (Photo: Rich Liebson / Staff Photo)

Read or Share this story: http://lohud.us/1IvWqWX