McBee brings on Garcia as exec VP — Ketchum names McIntyre head of D.C. office — Hispanic lobbying group names 2015 leadership — Chamber's Hite moves to Gas Processors

With Anna Palmer

FIRST IN PI … McBEE BRINGS ON GARCIA AS EXEC VP: McBee Strategic has hired Noe Garcia to serve as executive vice president. In his new role, Garcia will establish a formal grassroots capability for McBee, direct stakeholder engagement, and play an active role on the lobbying side. Garcia, founder of Monroe Strategies will be bringing over his clients. His previous roles include senior policy adviser for then-Senate Majority Leader Bill Frist (R-Tenn.), White House associate political director during the George W. Bush administration, and director of intergovernmental affairs and public liaison at the Department of Treasury.

Story Continued Below

Garcia’s move follows a few weeks of uncertainty at McBee after founder Steve McBee left to work for one its biggest clients. Law firm Wiley Rein announced last month its intention to acquire McBee, which will operate independently as a subsidiary.

SPOTTED … Motion Pictures Association of America CEO and former Sen. Chris Dodd and John Kerry having dinner at Fiola Mare. MPAA confirmed the dinner but declined to disclose if the recent North Korea-linked cyberattack on Sony Pictures' that led to the entertainment company canceling the release of "The Interview" was discussed.

HAPPY FRIDAY AFTERNOON, where it’s been 171 years since Charles Dickens published "A Christmas Carol." Have a great weekend, and send us your lobbying news, gossip, tips and scoops to tparti@politico.com. And keep up with PI on Twitter by following @ PoliticoPI.

KETCHUM NAMES McINTYRE HEAD OF D.C. OFFICE: Public relations firm Ketchum has named Bill McIntyre director of its Washington office. McIntyre most recently served as executive vice president and group head for the Washington office of Edelman.

“Bill is a passionate leader who has proven he can grow business and teams, while merging traditional and digital engagement for clients, always with an eye toward the future,” said Barri Rafferty, Ketchum senior partner and CEO of North America. “In addition to his strong relationships in the public affairs sector, Bill’s expertise will help to strengthen and evolve our grassroots offering and coalesce the diverse talent of our Washington, D.C., public affairs, digital, social marketing, brand and health care teams.”

HISPANIC LOBBYING GROUP NAMES 2015 LEADERSHIP: The Hispanic Lobbyists Association announced its 2015 leaders: Susan Santana, assistant vice president of federal relations at AT&T, will serve as the association’s president; Susie Saavedra, a senior legislative director at the National Urban League, will serve as vice president; Liz Lopez, executive vice president of public policy at the Opportunity Finance Network, will serve as secretary; and Omar Franco, a managing director at Becker & Poliakoff, will serve as treasurer.

CHAMBER’S HITE MOVES TO GAS PROCESSORS: Matthew Hite, an executive in the environment, technology and regulatory affairs division of the U.S. Chamber of Commerce, is leaving to serve as vice president of government affairs for the Gas Processors Association.

BUCKALEW RETURNS TO THE HILL: Adam Buckalew, a lobbyist for American Osteopathic Association and the American College of Osteopathic Family Physicians, is returning to Capitol Hill to serve as Oklahoma GOP Rep. Markwayne Mullin’s deputy chief of staff. Buckalew previously worked for Republican Mississippi Rep. Gregg Harper.

Buckalew is one of several lobbyists who have left their jobs in recent weeks to take up positions on Capitol Hill. POLITICO’s Anna Palmer has more on these moves: “The trend is in part because Republicans are taking control of the Senate next year, opening up attractive jobs once held by Democrats.

And while former-staffers-turned-lobbyists often end up back in public service — the revolving door has been swinging for years — there is a notable increase in the pace of K Streeters making the move back to Congress this month.” Full story: http://politi.co/1C8uS69

LAST OF THE HOLIDAY PARTIES: National Association of Manufacturers had more than 600 attendees at its annual holiday party Thursday evening at the association’s headquarters. Spotted at the party were: Sen. Amy Klobuchar, Rep.-elect Barbara Comstock, former Virginia Gov. George Allen, Lisa LaFontaine of the Washington Humane Society, former Sen. Blanche Lincoln, Julie Conway of Shamrock Advisors, Fran McMahon of Capitol Counsel and Heidi Brock of the Aluminum Association.

The Distilled Spirits Council of the United States also had its holiday bash Thursday evening with plenty of distilled spirits around. The group had a tasting bar featuring premium American whiskeys, scotches, cognacs and tequilas along with cocktails created by D.C. mixologist Rico Wisner. Spotted were Matt Haller of International Franchise Association, Andrew Kovalcin of the U.S. Chamber of Commerce, Dennis Wharton of National Association of Broadcasters, Bill Miller of Business Roundtable, Rick Klein of ABC News, CNN’s Chris Moody and Ben Terris and Reid Wilson of The Washington Post.

ELSEWHERE IN THE INFLUENCE WORLD:

MORAN IN TALKS WITH AZERBAIJANI GROUP: Retiring Rep. Jim Moran negotiated potentially working for an Azerbaijani lobbying group, the Sunlight Foundation reports. Moran was also in talks with a lobbying firm and an energy company. http://bit.ly/1z9Ojdt

KIRK’S FUNDRAISING IDEA: Illinois GOP Sen. Mark Kirk wants to have a reelection fundraiser at a screening of "The Interview." http://bzfd.it/1C91j4h

YEAR IN REVIEW: The Brennan Center for Justice looks at the 14 things we learned about money in politics in 2014. http://bit.ly/1sDihPN

NEW JOINT FUNDRAISING COMMITTEES (Members of JFC):

None

NEW PAC REGISTRATIONS (Type of PAC):

Whatever Derek Moore Says Goes PAC (Super PAC)

Speed PAC (PAC)

NEW LOBBYING REGISTRATIONS: (Firm: Client)

Bradley Arant Boult Cummings LLP: Locust Street Group (for America's Health Insurance Plans)

Capitol Hill Strategies, LLC: Biogen Idec

Covington & Burling LLP: Weigel Broadcasting Co.

Liebman & Associates, Inc.: Cargill, Inc.

Reinecke Strategic Solutions, Inc.: National Alliance of State Health Co-Ops

The Nickles Group, LLC: Emergent BioSolutions

NEW LOBBYING TERMINATIONS: (Firm: Client (Type of Termination))

Robert E. Juliano Associates: UNITEHERE (Q4 Termination)

The Washington Tax & Public Policy Group (formerly The Washington Tax Group): EES, Inc. (Q2 Termination)

** A message from the National Retail Federation: Retail is more than great products, or the sound of a cash register. More than a storefront, or a website. It’s working together as a community, creating the things people want, today. It’s the smile at the end of every transaction and the effort and innovation that customers don’t see. Retail businesses – 98% of which are small businesses – are at the heart of many towns and neighborhoods nationwide. That’s why when retail thrives, communities thrive. Think you know retail? Think again: http://bit.ly/this_is_retail #thisisretail **