NOVI, MI — Michigan Gov. Rick Snyder will head into the general election with Lt. Gov. Brian Calley at his side.

Calley bested tea party organizer Wes Nakagiri on Saturday at the Michigan Republican Party’s statewide nominating convention in Novi, winning support from nearly two of every three voting delegates, according to an unofficial tally.

Results were not made public because Nakagiri moved to make Calley’s nomination unanimous once the outcome was clear.

The battle had been brewing for months, but Calley’s team entered the convention with confidence after putting together a massive project to recruit precinct delegates.

The question wasn't whether he would win, they said, it was by how much.

"I think the margin was very important," former GOP Chair Saul Anuzis said as the results came in. "I think the fact it looks like he’s going to break 60 percent is a significant message that the party is united and believes there ought to be a Snyder-Calley team, which I think is good for the ticket and good for Republicans."

Ron Weiser, a longtime player in the Republican Party and major fundraiser, narrowly succeeded in his quest for nomination to the University of Michigan Board of Regents after being hit with nasty and anonymous attacks in recent weeks. He’ll join Dr. Rob Steele on the ticket this fall.

Nakagiri and his tea party supporters set their sights on Calley due to frustration with the administration over Medicaid expansion under the Affordable Care Act and the governor's support for Common Core education standards, among other issues.

But Snyder, opening up the convention, called Calley “a strong conservative voice” and the best lieutenant governor in the country.

“We don’t always see eye to eye, but he speaks up,” Snyder told delegates. “He’s somebody I rely on his wisdom, his judgement, and we work as a team. He’s so important his office is next to mine, not several floors down like the history of lieutenant governors in the state.”

Donna Nakagiri, who spoke in support of her husband, said he was “a leader who can galvanize conservatives” turned off by the Snyder administration.

“If the base doesn’t turn out in November, then we’ll get Mark Schauer, and nobody wants that,” she said, referencing the Democratic gubernatorial candidate. “We need conservatives to be energized, to stuff lit bags, to knock on those doors and to get out the vote in November.”

Common Core was a common theme at the Republican convention, with various state board and university regent candidates knocking the national education standards despite Snyder's public support.

West Michigan U.S. Rep. Justin Amash, who backed Calley’s nomination, called him a strong conservative voice who “will push back against policies not delegated to the federal government under the constitution, like Common Core.”

Snyder, speaking with reporters later in the convention, reiterated his support for Common Core but would not discuss Calley's position, saying that "we don’t talk about our differences publicly."

Weiser pulled out the big guns in his bid to win over the tea party crowd. After bringing U.S. Sen Ted Cruz to town earlier this month, he hosted a pre-convention party on Friday night in Novi with Fox News contributor Allen West, and his convention video featured an audio endorsement from Sen. Rand Paul.

Still, Weiser topped former regent Dan Horning by less than 200 votes, according to an unofficial tally. Former GOP treasurer Carl Meyers finished fourth.

Weiser has worked as a finance chair for the National Republican Committee, and some supporters suggested this week that his nomination could benefit the rest of the ticket, including U.S. Senate candidate Terri Lynn Land of Grandville, who will face Democratic U.S. Rep. Gary Peters this fall.

Land, a former Michigan Secretary of State who did not face opposition in the primary, turned her focus to the general election during an address to convention delegates, repeating her vow to “repeal and replace Obamacare” while knocking Peters for criticizing her position on women’s issues. Land has said she supports equal pay for women but would not have voted for the Paycheck Fairness Act.

“Whenever liberal men tell me what women should care about, I get suspicious,” she said.

Maria Carl of Macomb won a party nomination for the state Board of Education despite accusations of anti-Semitism. Former state Rep. Leon Drolet passed out pamphlets highlighting newspaper coverage of the party’s 1992 convention, when Carl reportedly said she would not vote for a Republican National Committeewoman who was Jewish.

Jon Williams of Jackson will also appear on the ballot as a Republican candidate for the State Board of Education.

Michigan Attorney General Bill Schuette and Secretary of State Ruth Johnson, who did not face any convention challengers, were unanimously renominated, as were Supreme Court Justices David Viviano and Brian Zahra.

Kent County Circuit Court Judge James Robert Redford will join them on the non-partisan portion of the ballot as a candidate for the Supreme Court.

Melanie Foster of East Lansing and Jeff Sakwa of West Bloomfield, who ran for the same posts in 2012, won nominations for the Michigan State University Board of Trustees. Satish Jasti of West Bloomfield and Michael Busuito of Troy will also get a second shot at the Wayne State Board.

Despite some grumbling, many Republicans were talking unity by the time the convention was over. Nakagiri urged support for the ticket, and Snyder even indicated that he would drop by Nakagiri's post-convention party.

“There’s been all this talk about division and tea party versus establishment, but it’s all being settled right here,” said political consultant Jake Davison of Advantage Associates. “Nobody’s walking out of this place saying I’m not going to vote for Snyder, or for the ticket. This is it, we’re settling our differences in house.”

Jonathan Oosting is a Capitol reporter for MLive Media Group. Email him, find him on Facebook or follow him on Twitter.