Seasoned and aspiring leaders in administrative healthcare will be flocking to the Texas Medical Center campus in Houston this weekend for the 2nd International Conference on Healthcare Leadership, hosted by the South East Chapter of the American College of Healthcare Executives (ACHE) — the largest ACHE-affiliate, with over 2,800 members from 29 counties in Texas. The chapter is joined by their affiliate Educational Foundation, which was founded in 2012 to support the educational needs of its regional members, and as a public charity. The three-day conference will run from Sunday, October 19 until Wednesday, October 22, and will feature world-renowned speakers coming all the way from different parts of the U.S., France, the Ivory Coast and China. Invited to give a special opening keynote address entitled, The Joy of Caring, is Dr. Patch Adams, the inspirational, humanitarian doctor who was played by the late Robin Williams in a semi-biographical blockbuster hit in 1998. His address is scheduled Monday morning at 8:00 a.m.

Attendees can expect the conference to cover a wide range of leadership issues in the field of health care such as public and private health strategies adaptable for hospital administration in today’s rapidly-changing health industry. Discussions will also touch on the Affordable Care Act, disparities in healthcare, how to be an effective leader, global health care, and collaborative opportunities. Each day of the conference will feature a keynote speaker:

Monday – Florence Patenotte, PR and General Affairs director of the French Association of Hospital Executives, speaking on the Ungovernable Public Hospital

– Florence Patenotte, PR and General Affairs director of the French Association of Hospital Executives, speaking on the Ungovernable Public Hospital Tuesday – Arthur Garson, Jr., M.D., director of the Health Policy Institute at the Texas Medical Center, speaking on Diverse Populations and Healthcare Workforce Needs

– Arthur Garson, Jr., M.D., director of the Health Policy Institute at the Texas Medical Center, speaking on Diverse Populations and Healthcare Workforce Needs Wednesday – David C. Pate, M.D., CEO of St. Luke’s Health System in Boise, Idaho, speaking on Lessons in Leadership

The conference opens on Sunday with a networking session from 5:00 to 7:30 p.m. Subsequent educational sessions over the next two days will run from 9:45 a.m. to 5:30 p.m. on Monday, 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. on Tuesday, and 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. on Wednesday. The event’s hosts are Michelle Riley-Brown, the chapter President and President of Texas Children’s Hospital-West Campus, and Todd Caliva, President of the Educational Foundation and CEO of the West Houston Medical Center.

The event venue will be at the Rice Bioscience Research Collaborative Center on the TMC campus. Those interested in registering on-site may do so beginning 2:00 p.m. on Sunday, and again at 7:00 a.m. on Monday. Online registration is also an option until midnight on Sunday. Registration fees are as follows: $495 for professional ACHE members inclusive of 12 hours of Face-to-Face Category 1 CEUs and $595 for non-members; $295 for student associate members and $375 for non-ACHE member students.