For the well-heeled few who can afford it, California’s exclusive Malibu Beach neighbourhood offers pristine sands, fine surfing, and some of the best real estate on America’s West Coast.

So when a ranting, naked man appeared outside the gates of Rey Cano’s house recently, it was something of a shock.

“He was completely nude, with cuts, and looked like he had been climbing through mud,” said Mr Cano, 54. “It was kind of startling to see.”

Bereft of his clothes – and his senses, the visitor could not explain why he was covered in mud, nor where he had been. But when he asked Mr Cano to help him get to a drug and alcohol rehabilitation centre down the road, all became clear.

For Malibu has now become the “Rehab Riviera,” with scores of clinics opening up to fix the minds of wealthy drug addicts and burnt-out celebrities. And just as if an unwanted supermarket was opening in the Cotswolds, the usually liberal denizens of “The Bu” have had enough.

“I have heard from neighbours that there have been other incidents of patients escaping or getting out,” said Mr Cano, 54, who called the local sheriff’s department after fetching his nude visitor some shorts and a shirt. “I’m worried about my family’s safety.”

Malibu, with its 21 miles of prime Pacific coastline, has long been a popular Hollywood hang-out, as well as a film location. The cult Coen Brothers film The Big Lebowski was shot here, and in the 1970s, it was the beat of James Garner’s fictional private gumshoe Jim Rockford, star of The Rockford Files.

Increasingly, though, the same relaxing climes that attract celebrities at the top of their game also attracts them at the bottom. Residents say that their narrow winding streets are now clogged with cars. They also complain of excessive noise from late-night recovery meetings, and a proliferation of paparazzi at the end of their roads.

Last month the actress Lindsay Lohan emerged from one Malibu clinic after an apparently successful treatment for alcohol addiction.

Both Lindsay Lohan and Charlie Sheen have been residents of Malibu clinics (Rex Features)

“No one has a problem if people follow the rules, but this has become a $100 million business in Malibu,” the town’s mayor Joan Harris told The Daily Telegraph. “What’s happened is the rehab places have said 'We are here and you adhere to our standards,’ rather than the other way around.”

With former clients such as Robert Downey Jr, Charlie Sheen and Diana Ross, the luxurious clinics that have sprung up amid Malibu’s palm trees charge more than $30,000 (£20,000) a month, catering to a myriad of “Hollywood” addictions such as tranquillisers, sexual compulsion, and even the internet. They feature rose gardens, infinity pools, sun decks and “life purpose” counsellors, as well as “recovery nutritionists” providing gourmet meals. Matthew Perry, the former Friends star, who struggled with alcohol and painkiller addiction in the past, recently converted his own $13 million Malibu home into a “Sober Living Centre” for reformed addicts.

The clinics are world leaders in what they offer. Malibu is home to the number one rehab centre on the planet, “Passages”, according to Healthcare Global magazine, where new arrivals are greeted by a Statue of Liberty replica on the lawn. They then walk through a facade reminiscent of a mini-Parthenon before being assigned their own 10-person support team, including therapists, doctors and acupuncturists.

Passages did not return a request for comment, although on its website, Chris Prentiss, who co-founded it following his son’s addiction to heroin, says its programme is “unique” and has “saved thousands.”

But in a recent letter to the Malibu Times, resident Jo Geise, who lives next to one of Malibu’s most exclusive beaches, complained that a centre had opened there and was extolling its location in “exclusive and private Malibu.”

“It’s not private anymore when day and night staff and 'guests’ hog the parking on our neighbourhood street and hold meetings which attract dozens of cars,” she said.

Malibu City Council, the guardian of its 12,000 citizens’ quietude, has taken up the gauntlet and is accusing the rehab centres of overwhelming local infrastructure. Specifically, the council claims they are violating planning rules designed to limit their size.

Malibu’s council claims rehab centres are “clustering” by buying up adjoining properties, getting more licences for those buildings and thereby creating “campuses.”

Christi Hogin, the City Attorney for Malibu, said: “The rehabilitation facilities have all this money and they have burrowed their way into a loophole in the law and bought up properties in the same block. We are going to take some action to enforce the residential zone.”