Aiding Burke’s cause has been an anti-Walker group heavily funded by organized labor, the Greater Wisconsin Committee, which has spent just under $1 million since it begain airing ads like this one last month.

By of the

Since June, Democrats have narrowly outspent Republican Gov. Scott Walker on broadcast television in Wisconsin, according to a Journal Sentinel analysis of advertising buys around the state.

That’s a surprising state of affairs — and it seems unlikely to endure this fall.

But the competitiveness of the ad wars in recent months is a big change from the 2012 recall campaign, when Walker thoroughly dominated the airwaves, outspending his opponents on TV by roughly 2 to 1.

“In the recall, (Walker) had an advantage in paid media that one rarely sees in competitive campaigns,” says ad expert Ken Goldstein, a University of San Francisco professor and former head of CMAG, a company that tracks political advertising. “This year, he’s not going to massively out-advertise the other side. It’s going to be a much more competitive place when it comes to the air wars.”

Polls show that Walker is locked in a tight re-election fight with Democratic challenger Mary Burke after winning his first two races for governor by six points in 2010 and seven points in 2012.

Walker’s campaign has spent just under $2.1 million in the state’s five principal television markets from the start of June through Sept. 9, according to a review of public records at 19 local TV stations. Those records are filed with the Federal Communications Commission and available online.

Burke has spent just under $1.6 million.

But aiding Burke’s cause has been an anti-Walker group heavily funded by organized labor, the Greater Wisconsin Committee, which has spent just under $1 million since it begain airing ads last month.

So while Walker has spent more than Burke since early summer, he has been modestly outspent by the combined forces of Burke and the Greater Wisconsin Committee.

The Democrats have the spending edge since June in two major TV markets — Milwaukee and Green Bay — and two much smaller ones: Wausau/Rhinelander and La Crosse/Eau Claire.

Only in the heavily Democratic Madison market does Walker have a spending advantage in recent months, due largely to the fact that Democrats have spent almost nothing on what is generally regarded as home turf for them.

The rest of the state is covered by two Minnesota TV markets -- the Twin Cities and Duluth -- where Wisconsin candidates typically don’t run broadcast ads because they end up paying to reach mostly out-of-state voters. But Republicans have aired cable ads in those markets.

None of this means Walker will be outgunned in the ad wars this year.

Republicans had a big spending advantage early in the year. In Last February and March, the Republican Governors Association spent more than $1 million on broadcast and cable ads attacking Burke, according to sources in both parties.

Further, Walker is stepping up his own ad buys, records show. And the RGA is just now plunging back into the Wisconsin governor’s race. The group has reserved around $1 million in airtime on broadcast stations around the state during September and October. Those ads have only just started to run.

All these figures on broadcast ads do not reflect what the campaigns are spending on other forms of advertising — cable TV, radio, mail and digital. But broadcast TV remains the single biggest weapon that campaigns wield in getting their message to voters.

And that battle is shaping up to be far less lopsided than it was in 2012, when the governor’s campaign was fueled by millions of dollars in uncapped contributions, permitted in a recall race under Wisconsin law but not in other campaigns.

What effect if any is political advertising having in this race so far?

Public opinion about Walker in Wisconsin is so polarized and entrenched that there are relatively few persuadable voters who might be swayed by television ads.

“How many undecided voters could there be left in the state of Wisconsin?” asks Goldstein, who spent many years as a political scientist at the University of Wisconsin.

But the biggest story may be how Burke has weathered the air wars. The Democratic challenger, a little-known figure without much political history, withstood an early wave of GOP ads designed to drive up her “negatives.” In polling by Marquette Law School, Burke actually closed the gap with Walker after that early GOP advertising blitz, and before Burke began running her own ads at significant levels this summer. In effect, Burke survived a very dangerous phase in the campaign, and has been battling Walker since then on a much more even footing on television.

Follow Craig Gilbert on Twitter @WisVoter

***

Graphic: TV ad spending in governor's race