The Employee Retirement Income Security Act influences virtually every facet of employee benefits programs. Understanding ERISA is critical for employers because noncompliance can lead to costly penalties.

Anne Richter is chief strategy officer for Ameriflex, a Carrollton-based third-party administrator of health care benefits and other HR programs. She reveals five myths about ERISA.

Myth: My plan is small; ERISA doesn’t apply

Fact: Many federal laws exempt “small-group” plans. When it comes to ERISA, however, the law applies to virtually all employer-sponsored benefit plans, regardless of size. Even if there is one participant in the plan, ERISA applies. The Department of Labor does exclude certain types of group health plans from ERISA, specifically, those offered by nonprivate employers such as municipalities or churches.

Myth: Plan documents are optional

Fact: ERISA has strict requirements with regard to plan documents. They are required in almost all circumstances and serve as a written instrument to provide participants with a notice of benefits offered, obligations under the plan and relevant procedures and guidelines.

Myth: My voluntary benefit plan is exempt

Fact: ERISA has an exception for voluntary benefit plans (short-term disability, critical illness, dental, life insurance, etc.), but it only applies if the employer has no involvement other than allowing the voluntary carrier to advertise the plans to employees, and to collect and remit employee salary reductions toward the premiums. If the employer has any significant involvement, including the appearance of endorsing the voluntary plan or offering employees the opportunity to make premium payments through a cafeteria plan, the plan is probably subject to ERISA.

Myth: I am not a fiduciary for my plan

Fact: Individuals or entities other than the “official” plan administrator can become a fiduciary for their plan without realizing it. That’s because the Labor Department bases fiduciary status on functions performed for the plan, not on a person’s title or specific designation. Understanding your plan’s fiduciary status is important because beyond the responsibilities conferred upon them, fiduciaries can be exposed to legal liability.

Myth: The likelihood of an audit is low

Fact: Historically, pension plans and 401(k) plans have been the primary target for Labor Department audits. Following passage of the Affordable Care Act, health plans are receiving the same scrutiny. A solid knowledge of ERISA — and, if necessary, support from an outside benefits consultant or ERISA attorney — is crucial for ensuring compliance with the law.