Southwest winds across Florida helped at least five cities along the Atlantic side of the state observe record high temperatures on April 26th.

Miami, Fort Lauderdale and West Palm Beach all hit 96 degrees on Sunday. The temperature reading for each city broke its previous record high for the date.

Vero Beach and Melbourne were also in record territory during the afternoon. Vero Beach warmed to 95 degrees, with Melbourne registering a 93 degree high temperature.

Despite the mid and upper 90s observed along the east coast, no cities on Florida's west coast set any records. In fact, temperatures remained only in the mid 80s in Tampa and Sarasota with upper 80s and low 90s recorded in Naples and Fort Myers.

The reason for the notable difference in temperature between each coast revolves around the wind flow across the peninsula.

Sunday featured a strong west and southwest oriented wind through the entire day. This setup is called an onshore wind flow along the Gulf coast regions. It's called "onshore" because the wind is blowing from over the water toward the shoreline. (See step one in photo)

Current buoys in the Gulf of Mexico are measuring the temperature in open waters well off Florida's coast near 80 degrees. Data collected closer to land like off Fort Myers Beach indicate warmer water temperatures. For instance, the buoy off Fort Myers Beach as of Sunday afternoon listed the water at 84 degrees.

Though these water temperatures are mild for April, they are well cooler than the air temperatures measured on land. In fact, high temperature readings for the past two days in Fort Myers have seen the city warmer than 90 degrees.

With winds coming from the southwest as they were on Sunday, the cooler air over the water is moved toward Southwest Florida. This in turn keeps areas in closer proximity to the water cooler than they would otherwise be because they're being impacted by the relatively lower water temps.

What is important to note when considering wind is that temperatures can change drastically when air moves into different environments. The cooling effect that an onshore wind flow has on coastal areas changes within a few miles of the shoreline. (See step two in photo)

As the strong southwest winds continued through Sunday afternoon, the air originating over the cooler Gulf warmed up as it moved from southwest to northeast across the peninsula. That's a key point in why temperatures ended up so much warmer on the east coast than the Gulf coast.

Another key part in the record heat setup on Sunday was the inability of a significant sea breeze to develop from the Atlantic Ocean. (See step three in photo)

The sea breeze is staple feature of Florida meteorology. Land warms up far faster than water does. When this happens, the rapidly warming temperatures over land cause air over the state to rise. This rising motion triggers air over the relatively cooler water to replace it, forming a flow or breeze that typically develops in the early afternoon.

The movement of this cooler air generally progresses inland, capping and lowering temperatures with its movement. But when the prevailing wind, moving in a different direction than the sea breeze is too strong, it overpowers prevents that cooling wind from water to penetrate over the land part of Florida.

That's exactly what happened on Sunday. Without a sea breeze moving from east to west off the Atlantic Ocean, there was no force or cooler air mass to push back the rising temps. No showers or storms developed on Sunday, allowing nearly unfiltered sunshine to reign down keeping air temperatures sweltering.

Monday's weather will again feature a southwest wind, but the good news during the work week is that a storm system is expected to start pushing down the peninsula. This will help to spark showers and thunderstorms in parts of South Florida on Tuesday and Wednesday. Rain acts as a cooling mechanism, and once the front moves from the area a cooler and drier air mass is expected to replace it by the upcoming weekend.