Albany, NY, May 25, 2016 (GLOBE NEWSWIRE) -- “PharmaSphere: Healthcare Information Technology Software and Services Report Vertical Market Analysis of Leading IT Business Process Outsourcing and Electronic Medical Record Vendors" report discusses the various platforms, service models, and go-to-market strategies of the major players in the IT BPO, and EMR markets. The research provides an assessment of vendor strategies, outsourcing agreements, significant deals and corporate developments, and contract vehicles signed by these BPO and EMR firms over the past three years.

This report also examines the impact of both the Affordable Care Act and the HITECH Act, Meaningful Use and the industry’s transition to ICD-10, and how these vendors are helping healthcare organizations develop clear implementation strategies. This HITS&S report includes a drill-down analysis by healthcare sub-verticals Payers & Providers, Life Sciences, State/Local, and Federal and by three geographies Americas, EMEA, and APAC examining each of these segments business development strategies.

For more info, get a Sample PDF:http://www.researchmoz.us/enquiry.php?type=S&repid=187494

Key Questions Answered

What are the HIT implications of the ACA, HITECH ACT, Meaningful Use, and the shift to ICD-10?

What specific strategies are these BPO and EMR companies employing to gain market share?

Which trends will affect the healthcare IT marketplace over the next few years?

What particular services or capabilities are my competitors developing?

What specific business development activities are taking place, in terms of contract deals, partnerships or M&A?

Scope

This report provides analysis of the key drivers and trends shaping the HIT outsourcing market in the US, particularly the Affordable Care Act, the HITECH Act, Meaningful Use, and the industrys shift to ICD-10

Comprehensive analysis of BPO and EMR vendors, the overall market size, and estimated HIT revenues for leading BPO and EMR firms

The report contains a discussion of business line and regional segment strategies

An examination of the strategic developments, acquisitions, service delivery and HIT solutions that these BPO and EMR firms are offering healthcare organizations

A brief overview of cloud computing, its characteristics, the types of deployment clouds, and service models

The delivery of care anywhere through the use of cloud solutions

View TOC (table of content), Figures and Tables of the Report:http://www.researchmoz.us/pharmasphere-healthcare-information-technology-software-and-services-report-vertical-market-analysis-of-leading-it-business-process-outsourcing-and-electronic-medical-record-vendors-report.html

Reasons to buy

Analyze the strategies that these HIT vendors are using to gain share in this increasingly competitive market

Use this information as an independent source for your due diligence and transaction strategy

Organize your sales and marketing plans to identify companies with specific service capabilities to capitalize on opportunities for strategic partnerships

Track contract and deal terms of your competitors

Leverage this report to identify and select potential vendors to outsource back-office functions

About Us

ResearchMoz is the world’s fastest growing collection of market research reports worldwide. Our database is composed of current market studies from over 100 featured publishers worldwide. Our market research databases integrate statistics with analysis from global, regional, country and company perspectives. ResearchMoz’s service portfolio also includes value-added services such as market research customization, competitive landscaping, and in-depth surveys, delivered by a team of experienced Research Coordinators.

Mr.Nachiket Ghumare State Tower, 90 State Street, Suite 700, Albany NY – 12207 United States Tel: +1-518-621-2074 USA - Canada Toll Free: 866-997-4948 Website: http://www.researchmoz.us/