Congress is focused on passing legislation to fund the federal government and renew tax policies, two measures that could have a sweeping impact on the energy sector.

ADVERTISEMENT

The current government funding measure runs through Wednesday, leaving lawmakers with a tight timeline for action as they also seek to extend certain tax policies and incentives before the holidays.

Republicans have been pushing to insert a provision into one of the bills that would lift the 40-year-old ban on exporting crude oil from the United States, the top priority for the oil industry.

But in return, Democrats want to renew a tax credit for renewable energy on a long-term basis, or see other green energy measures included.

The spending bill could contain other big news for energy and environmental advocates.

Specifically, the GOP has been fighting for provisions to block major Obama administration regulations such as the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) limits on carbon dioxide pollution from power plants and the rule on Clean Water Act jurisdiction.

Democrats don’t want any environmental restrictions in the spending bill, but because the entire process is part of a bigger negotiation, they might be willing to give in some areas.

Meanwhile, the wind and solar energy sectors are keeping a close eye on the tax extenders bill for incentives for their industries. The production tax credit for wind power expired last year, and solar power’s investment tax credit will expire next year without renewal.

Wind and solar advocates, and their Democratic and environmental allies, want long-term renewal of their credits. The potential for an oil exports provision could increase the likelihood of a trade-off that includes renewable energy credits.

Before lawmakers start to formally consider those bills, a subcommittee of the House Natural Resources Committee on Monday will hold a field hearing in Colorado on legislation to boost mining education.

The measure is one piece of House Republicans’ legislative response to the EPA’s mine waste spill earlier this year in Colorado. It would direct some federal funding toward mining and mineral engineering programs at mining schools.

Senior White House adviser Brian Deese will be the featured guest Wednesday at an event examining the future of climate policy after the United Nations climate talks in Paris, hosted by the New Republic.

The Wilson Center will host its own event to look at climate change policy after the Paris talks Wednesday. The White House National Security Council’s Paul Bodnar will speak, along with experts and think tank representatives.

RECENT STORIES

Nations on cusp of climate pact

http://thehill.com/policy/energy-environment/262958-nations-on-cusp-of-global-climate-pact

Deal to end oil export ban in sight

http://thehill.com/policy/energy-environment/262874-deal-to-end-oil-export-ban-in-sight

Lawmakers cancel trips to Paris climate talks

http://thehill.com/policy/energy-environment/262649-lawmakers-cancel-trips-to-paris-climate-talks

Cruz blasts ‘alarmists’ at climate change hearing

http://thehill.com/policy/energy-environment/262515-cruz-blasts-climate-industrial-complex

Kerry says he’s looking to the private sector to solve climate change

http://thehill.com/policy/energy-environment/262314-kerry-private-sector-is-key-in-climate-fight