Packers Blog The Journal Sentinel's team of Packers beat writers provide the latest news, notes and analysis SHARE

By of the

San Jose, Ca. - Given three weeks to prove he's a legitimate NFL player, wide receiver Jared Abbrederis apparently showed the Green Bay Packers all they needed to see.

The Packers signed Abbrederis, the former Wisconsin receiver and Wautoma native, to their 53-man roster Saturday. Abbrederis had been cut at the end of training camp but the Packers signed him to their practice squad where he has been working the past three weeks.

The signing of Abbrederis appears to be a concession that Davante Adams is not going to be back very soon from his ankle injury. On Saturday, he was downgraded to doubtful for the game Sunday against the San Francisco 49ers after the Packers held a practice here in the Bay Area.

It's not known whether Adams tried to practice or was just deemed not ready.

The Packers also downgraded S Morgan Burnett (calf) to doubtful. Coach Mike McCarthy thought he was doing better at the end of the work week, but he's all but certain he won't play against the 49ers.

To make room for Abbrederis, the Packers cut DL Bruce Gaston.

The Packers have not announced a roster move to activate veteran Letroy Guion, who is eligible to return from a three-game suspension. The Packers have an open roster spot from TE Andrew Quarless being placed on injured reserve / designated to return this week.

However, Guion gets placed on the 53-man roster immediately after his suspension ends and if the Packers didn't have a spot for him they would have had to make room. The Packers had asked for and received a roster exemption for four days this week so they could practice Guion without having to cut someone.

The Quarless move gave them the extra spot. The Packers just refused to announce Guion's placement on the 53. Guion is expected to be active

According to a source familiar with the situation, Adams has a high ankle sprain, which involves a different part of the ankle than a traditional sprain and generally takes much longer to heal. The source didn't know for sure if it would be the case, but it's very possible the Packers could shut down Adams through the bye week to get him healthy for the second half of the season.

Adams first sprained his left ankle in the first half against Seattle, but returned in the second half to play. It was clear he was not 100% when he returned and after attempting to play the following week against Kansas City lasted a couple plays before aggravating it.

He did not return to the game.

Abbrederis missed all but one day of training camp because of a concussion he suffered on the first day. The Packers didn't clear him until the week before the last exhibition game. He played a significant amount of snaps in that game, but the Packers didn't feel he was ready to play.

The three weeks on the practice squad gave him an opportunity to get back into football shape. Abbrederis missed all of last season with an ACL injury, so he hasn't played a down of football since his last game with the Badgers at the end of the 2013 season.

The Packers have six wide receivers on the roster: Adams, Randall Cobb, James Jones, Ty Montgomery, Jeff Janis and Abbrederis. Montgomery is pegged as the No. 3 receiver and it will be between Janis and Abbrederis for the No. 4 spot.

Presumably, Abbrederis will be on the 46-man gameday active list. Janis has been excelling on special teams and the Packers may want him to focus more on that. Or it's possible Abbrederis will take over some of Janis' special teams duties so that Janis can be freed to play receiver more.

Janis played 16 snaps on offense against Kansas City after serving solely on special teams against Seattle.