Three months of discussion between two health agencies culminated with an agreement that changed the management of 14 area primary care practices this week.

Announced Thursday evening, the Mountain Area Health Education Center will now lead the primary care practices of Mission Medical Associates, the physician group practice of Mission Health system.

MAHEC President and CEO Dr. Jeff Heck described the agreement as "a very natural connection" between the two Asheville-based health entities.

"As we move into the sort of new view of health care, there's much more accountability required in terms of being able to show quality standards are high — and that requires a lot of specialized expertise," Heck said.

However, Heck emphasized, it's an expertise that the neutral education entity already has in its wheelhouse.

Through its Center for Quality improvement, MAHEC provides consulting services to medical practices throughout the 16 westernmost counties of North Carolina.

Much of the consulting work, Heck said, will translate into the new management role MAHEC will bring to the 14 primary care practices.

"Though patients may not see any major changes when they go to these practices, at the office and systems level, there's going to be changes," he said.

A large part of those changes will involve updates to information and office systems to track quality measures. For example, if a primary care practice sees a high volume of patients with diabetes, it's important for physicians to make sure patients are not only being tested for blood pressure and cholesterol, but that they're also having eye exams.

Leadership at Mission Health said they noticed this, and pursued a partnership.

"Mission sought out MAHEC to provide management services because of their expertise and leadership," said Jill Hoggard-Green, chief operating officer of Mission Health and president of Mission Medical Associates. "Given that we also share a common vision that is patient-centered, evidence-based and safety net oriented, we wanted to leverage their expertise as a perfect complement."

Made up of 54 doctors, the MMA primary care practices are scattered throughout Western North Carolina.

Though MAHEC operates the family practice residency program in Henderson County, in collaboration with Pardee Hospital and Blue Ridge Community Health Services, there are no practices in Henderson County that will be affected by the new management agreement.

Statements from both BRCHS and Pardee Hospital indicate they will not be affected by the agreement either.

However, three practices in Transylvania County are now under MAHEC's leadership: Brevard Family Practice, Medical Association of Transylvania and Toxaway Health Center.

With the latest agreement, MAHEC now manages 19 primary care practices in the region.

Though it was not the major driver of the agreement, the requirements set forth in the Affordable Care Act, also known as Obamacare, played a role.

"As health care continues to evolve, we feel confident that novel arrangements like this will enable us to meet the needs of our communities despite declining reimbursement, increased regulatory requirements and other factors that could impede care," said Mission Health CEO and President Dr. Ron Paulus.

Heck said in regard to quality improvement measures, the federal health care law simply amplified the discussion.

"Provisions in the Affordable Care Act incentivize primary care practices to work together to improve quality. There's no question about that," he said. "But regardless of if the Affordable Care Act left tomorrow, that train (toward quality improvement) is already moving."

One of the changes these practices will be incorporating is more of a team-based approach to care.

"A patient may have a specialized visit with a pharmaceutical expert to make sure no drug interactions are harmful. If a patient is having challenging times in life, they may have access to a behavioral specialist in the office," Heck said. "Regardless of where you live, whether it's two doors down from Mission Hospital or out in Graham County, we want to make sure you're going to get the same quality of care regardless of where you're located."

___

Byrd can be reached at caitlin.byrd@blueridgenow.com or 828-694-7881.