Over the past three decades, Congress has conducted a major experiment in anti-poverty policy. Legislators have restructured benefits and tax breaks intended for the poor so that they penalize unmarried, unemployed parents — the modern-day version of the “undeserving poor.” At the same time, working parents, the aged and the disabled are getting larger benefits.

Legislative changes in three major programs have driven these shifts.

Before 1996, Aid to Families With Dependent Children was the single most important program that provided direct cash payments to poor families, the overwhelming majority of which were headed by single women. Just under 60 percent of adult recipients were never-married mothers, and 24 percent were divorced or separated mothers.

Welfare reform enacted in 1996 by a Republican Congress and signed into law by President Clinton replaced A.F.D.C. with the far more restrictive Temporary Assistance for Needy Families, which limited the lifetime receipt of welfare benefits to five years, and required recipients to find a job within two years of entering the program. The number of welfare recipients fell from 12.3 million in 1996 to 4.4 million by 2010.

The second legislative change was the enactment, in 1975, of a modest version of the earned-income tax credit. In subsequent years, the number of people covered and the cost of the tax credit has been repeatedly enlarged — in 1986, 1990, 1993, and 2001. More than 40 percent of recipients are married couples, a far higher proportion than in the original A.F.D.C. or the current T.A.N.F. population. In fact, the earned-income tax credit favors married couples by granting them credits at higher levels of income than is the case for single parents.

The third legislative initiative was the passage in 1997 of the child and dependent care tax credit, which provides a tax credit to low- and middle-income workers for child care costs. This credit was expanded in 2001 and 2002 and also provides benefits disproportionately to married couples.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

A 2005 study by the center-left Urban Institute found that the earned income tax credit and the child and dependent care credit, along with other changes in tax law, effectively ended the marriage penalty for low-and middle-income working parents, and instead created a tax “bonus” exceeding $2,000 for most cohabiting parents who get married.

“There has been a redistribution away from single parent families and to married parent families,” Robert A. Moffitt, an economist at Johns Hopkins University, declared in May in his presidential address to the Population Association of America, the text of which he provided to The Times. In addition, Moffitt told the group, “there has been a redistribution from those at the bottom of the private income distribution to those above it, including those up to 200 percent of the poverty line, which has led to greater inequality of government support within the low income population.”

These trends are documented in Figure 1.

Photo

For the poorest of the poor, the results have been devastating: in 1983, 56 percent of total government transfers going to the poor and near-poor went to those on the bottom, those making 50 percent or less of the federal poverty level income. By 2004, that number had fallen to 32 percent, Moffitt found.

Overall, according to Moffitt, federal spending on the poor has grown substantially since the mid-1980s, by 74 percent from 1975 to 2007, adjusted for inflation. But those on the lowest rungs of the ladder have seen their government benefits decline, again in inflation-adjusted terms.

Moffitt noted in an email that “the work incentives in the government safety net have greatly increased over the last 20 years: less welfare payments if you don’t work, and much greater government payments if you do.”

The 2010 enactment of the Affordable Care Act reinforced the pattern of rewarding those above the official poverty line. The A.C.A.'s major provisions make everyone earning from 100 to 138 percent of poverty level income eligible for Medicaid (in states that sign on to the program) and grant subsidies for the purchase of health insurance to those making from 138 percent to 400 percent of poverty level income.

These policy alterations have subsidized the earnings of millions of low-income workers, particularly of married couples with children, pushing them above the official poverty line. If, however, the question is how successful these changes have been in getting poor people into the work force, then the answer is not very.

In 1990, 50.2 percent of all adults between the ages of 18 and 64 with incomes below the official poverty level did not work; 39.8 percent of poor men did not work; and 56.9 percent of poor women did not work.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

By 2012, the percentage of poor people who did not work had grown substantially. In 2012, 59.7 percent of all poor adults between the ages of 18 and 64 did not work. Among poor men in 2012, 56.7 percent did not work, a 16.9 percentage point increase. For women in 2012, 62.0 percent did not work, a 5.1 percentage point increase.

Some researchers in the field of poverty and welfare are taking a hard line on the nonworking poor: “Nonworking adults must be expected to work,” writes Lawrence Mead, a conservative political scientist at N.Y.U., in an essay, “Restoring Work By Poor Fathers,” co-authored with Ron Haskins, a former adviser on welfare policy to George W. Bush and a senior fellow at the Brookings Institution. “Social policy must seek points of leverage where work can be made an obligation that the jobless have to discharge, on pain of some sanction.”

In an email to The Times, Mead described his basic premise: “Overwhelmingly, American poverty is due to failure to work at all, not working at low wages. The working poor are vastly outnumbered by the nonworking. Nor is nonwork due to lack of jobs, since only 10.5 percent of nonworking poor adults blame inability to find a job for their joblessness.”

Mead’s views do not have widespread support among mainstream economists, including among some experts on the center-right.

In two papers published by Brookings, three economists — Chinhui Juhn of the University of Houston and Kevin M. Murphy and Robert H. Topel of the University of Chicago — concluded that in the 1980s and 1990s, the rate of non-employment had increased because new patterns of labor demand “reduced the returns to work for less-skilled men.”