BOULDER — Now, if Colorado sophomore quarterback Sefo Liufau could just get back that opening play. Liufau threw deep into triple coverage on the game’s first play from scrimmage Saturday and was intercepted by Hawaii cornerback Ne’Quan Phillips.

Give Liufau credit for resilience. Successful quarterbacks must have a short memory in times of adversity, and the native of Tacoma, Wash., continues to demonstrate the ability to focus forward rather than dwell on the past.

Shaking off that blunder, Liufau threw two touchdown passes and led Colorado (2-2) to a 21-12 nonconference victory over the Rainbow Warriors on a sun-splashed afternoon with 39,478 watching at Folsom Field.

“It’s about getting the ‘W,’ ” Liufau said.

When asked about the first snap, Liufau said after the game he thought that, in another area of the field, a Hawaii defender would be called for pass interference against freshman wideout Shay Fields. So Liufau just heaved a high pass down the field to Nelson Spruce, evidently with no concern about the coverage.

“I thought we had a free play,” Liufau said. “I’m not going to just throw the ball up there if there’s no foul. But that’s it. That was the end of that. We were moving on.”

And how. Later in the first quarter, Liufau spotted Spruce in single coverage down the left sideline and hit the sure-handed junior for a 71-yard touchdown.

As has been the norm of late, Spruce contributed a huge game. He set a school record by catching a touchdown pass in his sixth consecutive game and finished with 13 receptions for 172 yards.

“Nelson is my safety blanket,” Liufau said.

A seven-point favorite, CU added two more touchdowns in the first half: a 13-yard receiver run by Fields with a nifty cutback and a 9-yard flip from Liufau to fullback George Frazier. Those enabled the Buffs to take a 21-6 lead into halftime.

Liufau finished the afternoon with 287 yards passing. But the Buffs failed to score in the second half and seemed to put all the pressure on their defense. CU defenders responded in a stuffing sort of way, especially inside the Buffs’ 20.

Hawaii (1-3) failed to get into the end zone and netted a total of just 9 total yards for 11 plays in the red zone. Hawaii’s points came on four field goals. The Rainbow Warriors, perhaps just a couple of big plays from challenging for the lead, could not add to their modest point total in the fourth quarter.

“We’re building an identity,” CU sophomore safety Chidobe Awuzie said of the Buffs’ defense. “We’re trying to play tough and we’re trying to cause turnovers and we’re trying to play fast. This is just the start of it.”

Colorado senior cornerback Greg Henderson became a thorn in Hawaii’s game plan of hitting receivers on crossing routes. Henderson deflected four Hawaii passes and, on one play, stuffed the stats sheet by recording a sack, a forced fumble and a fumble recovery when getting to quarterback Ikaika Woolsey on a blitz in the first half.

“Greg Henderson is one of the best defensive backs in the Pac-12,” Spruce said. “Going against each other in practice makes us both better.”

CU coach Mike MacIntyre said with his team stuck on 21 points, it wasn’t the easiest game for him to watch.

“That was kind of an exhausting win,” MacIntyre said. “We had them (beaten), but all you’re thinking is, ‘(The Rainbow Warriors) are hanging around.’ But our kids just kept battling and battling.”

CU completed the nonconference portion of its schedule, and it’s back to Pac-12 play for the Buffs on Saturday at California.

Tom Kensler: tkensler@denverpost.com or twitter.com/tomkensler

Game balls

1. Nelson Spruce, CU junior receiver — Set CU record by catching a TD pass in his sixth straight game and finished with 172 yards on 13 catches.

2. Sefo Liufau, CU sophomore quarterback — Shook off an interception on first play to finish 29-of-45 for 287 yards with two touchdowns.

3. Greg Henderson, CU senior cornerback — Broke up four passes and caused fumle with a sack.



Tom Kensler, The Denver Post