LETTERS

Waleed Ali articulates what I have been wondering about ever since the shooting down of MH17 ("Inequality in death reigns as it does in life", July 25). Suffering and death is universal yet we cannot respond equally to every tragic event. We would be paralysed.

Nevertheless, there seems something excessive about the number of news conferences, statements, press releases and photo opportunities associated with our Prime Minister's reaction to one dramatic event. It is becoming unseemly, given the tragedies that befall individual Australian families every day. And the fact that we are allowed to hear nothing about the suffering of asylum seekers at the same hands.

I predict that will be hearing about MH17 for a long time from a politician in a lot of electoral strife.

Chris McGregor Cabarita

Advertisement

Waleed Aly complains that we worry more about sudden mass deaths of our own citizens than about continuing attrition of larger numbers here (road deaths) or of much larger numbers of distant people (Palestinians, South Sudanese, etc). He feels that the selection is political .

I don’t think that is the situation. The loss by trauma of one’s own adult child is said by experts to be at the upper end of the catastrophe scale (which has been my own experience). Then with increased separation the sense of loss decreases. We still look with horror and sadness at Gaza and South Sudan, but the visceral effect is less. We can't mourn all of the victims in the world or we would lose our minds.

I see the current rituals around the MH17 victims as giving them honour and respect, vital to the grieving relatives; they are part of our community, not just body parts looted by drunken rebels. Please, Mr Aly, let us mourn and respect our dead as we think we should.

Richard Evans Exeter

Waleed Aly writes: "I hope for a world where the value of human life is universal enough that we can outrage ourselves." A classic example of this is the way we view and treat asylum seekers who attempt to find refuge in our country. They are seen as not being our equal because they are a different ethnicity, colour and religion, as a result we are suspicious of them and have no hesitation in having them locked up in isolated locations far from our vision. Of course, if they looked like us we would have no hesitation in giving them our sympathy and having them live within our community.

Con Vaitsas Ashbury

Further to Waleed Aly’s article, one can only ponder the role of the media and the government's response in determining how collectively "moved" we, the Australian public, were by the MH17 tragedy, and how this was influenced by the number of Australians killed. Would we have seen the same level of media coverage and government response, for example sending personnel to the crash site, if only a few Australians had died? I tend to think not and, sadly, the word "opportunism" comes to mind.

David Walker Woollahra

Apology: Peta Credlin A letter to the editor (July 23) may have been taken as suggesting the Prime Minister’s chief of staff, Peta Credlin, welcomed the MH17 disaster for the opportunity it presented for political advantage. The Herald unreservedly retracts any such suggestion and apologises to Ms Credlin for any harm and embarrassment caused.

Parental leave

Few would entirely reject Sex Discrimination Commissioner Elizabeth Broderick’s claim that "discrimination on the basis of pregnancy, parental leave and return to work from parental leave continues to be widespread", and that it is a real cost to workplaces and the economy ("Pregnancy discrimination rife in workplace, report finds", July 25).

However, like most issues there are two sides to an argument, and fairness for parents and employers is two-way street.

As a working mother of six, I experienced years of the exhaustion and frustration from juggling family and work responsibilities, including negotiating adequate maternity leave, fighting for childcare, returning to work while breastfeeding, panic about the welfare of my babies, paying fines for late collection of kids from childcare due to traffic, using up paid then unpaid leave to care for sick kids and the constant fear that all the wheels would fall off.

When first entering this world there were no childcare rebates, no accredited childcare facilities and much less debate about addressing the issues confronting working parents.

But even then I experienced no discrimination by my employers, and I honoured the conditions of my maternity leave. This wasn't so with many parents, who took all leave available and subsequently never returned to work. This was "a very real cost to workplaces". The Coalition’s Paid Parental Leave paid parental leave scheme contains no obligation for mothers to return to work and implies a questionable cost to both employers and taxpayers.

If we want the best contemporary arrangements and support for working parents, we should acknowledge that many employers also seek this and wish to retain valuable staff, and that fairness is reciprocal.

Robyn Dalziell Castle Hill

International law

Going on what has been reported thus far in the on-going Gaza conflict it will be hard to dispute that both Israel and Hamas have committed war crimes, and it is welcome news indeed that the United Nations Human Rights Council has voted to establish a war crimes inquiry into the indiscriminate attacks on civilians on both sides of the equation (‘‘Israel, Hamas in war crimes inquiry’’, July 25).

Now if only the US administration, which voted against the resolution calling for the creation of a commission of inquiry to look at "all violations" of international law, and the 17 states, 10 of them European, which abstained from the vote, can onlyget their heads out of the sand.

Eric Palm Canada Bay

Suppose the Palestinians did stop firing rockets, and gave up any form of offensive and defensive attacks, what would the Israelis do? If there is no confidence, let alone a guarantee, that the Palestinians will have their occupied lands returned to them and be allowed to live free and unrestrained lives, then they have no reason to ever stop their bombardment of Israel.

Sandra Pertot Diamond Beach

Baird has no choice, Alhadeff must go

The recent one-sided comments on the Gaza conflict by the chairman of the Community Relations Commission, Vic Alhadeff✓, who is also CEO of the NSW Jewish Board of Deputies, call into question his competence to foster the great opportunities for mutual understanding afforded us by the diverse cultural groups in our community (‘‘Muslims unmoved by Alhadeff apology’’, July 25). He is known for similar comments in past years.

Given the eye-opener we've had onto the workings of government in NSW over the recent past, the question is what deal might have been done by the NSW Coalition government in appointing Mr Alhadeff as chairman of the CRC. Can Mike Baird demonstrate his promised integrity and meet the challenge of putting our community's interests ahead of back-room politicking by appointing a community figure capable of fostering inter-cultural respect and harmony? If he can, we will all benefit immensely and next year's Premier's Ramadan Iftar dinner may be an event of true Arab inclusion.

Peter Geelan-Small Glebe

In multicultural Australia, it is completely understandable that different groups will have different opinions. Premier Mike Baird is right to support Vic Alhadeff in his role as Community Relations Commission chairman because, as a democratically elected officer, he understands that Mr Alhadeff is as entitled to his opinion as are those who hold a contrary view. Happily, Australia is not a totalitarian state where only one view is permitted but is instead a vibrant, diverse and creative democracy.

Gabrielle Lord Randwick

Make Obeid's (and our) dream come true

I see the Australian Tax Office has, Capone-like, presented Eddie Obeid's family with a huge tax bill (‘‘ATO goes after Obeids’’,✓ July 25). Bit of a worry, that. Mind you, Obeid said he would "love" the Director of Public Prosecutions to try to bring a case against him. So how about it, guys? It might cheer him up, or are you, Illinois State-like, going to continue doing nothing?

Steve Moore Leumeah

$9 million. Is that all? Really?

Russell Norden Pymble

Hockey not as big as before but his ego is

A somewhat "premature revelation" from the Treasurer and very unfortunate timing (‘‘Hockey book steals Abbott’s thunder’’, July 25). Obviously a child of the '70s and a fan of the Skyhooks hit Ego Is Not a Dirty Word.✓

Elizabeth Starr Chiswick

I refer to the biography of Joe Hockey, which was discussed in your editorial (‘‘Hockey’s attempt to impress is pretty average’’, July 25). I disagree with the sentiment contained in the title of the book, Hockey: Not Your Average Joe✓. Mr Hockey is a very average Joe indeed. I am wondering, after the revelations in the book, how many other average Joes there are wishing to impose their prime ministerial ambitions upon us. Please desist. Two are enough.

Paul Sweeney Newtown

Too soft? Joe Hockey considered his budget too soft. He is going to totally undermine the funding of the university system and ensure that young Australians are saddled with a $100,000 debt before they get into the workforce. Added to that, the increase in interest rates of these HECS debts will stop young women from interrupting their careers to have children.

If that is too soft maybe we should just send our young people straight to the salt mines. Would that make you happy, Joe?

Eric Sekula Mount Colah

Judging from the contents of Mr Hockey’s new book the age of entitlement is only over for us little people.

Hilton Symes Randwick

Combet 'deal' odious

Greg Combet's announcement of then Prime Minister Julia Gillard's offer to make him prime minister in the collapsing days of a failed government reeks of new contempt for the electorate and is the clearest confirmation yet of the very desperate and unstable state of that government's leadership and direction (‘‘Gillard to Combet: I’ll make you PM’’, July 25).

The only real difference between the legacies of the celebrated Whitlam and the then Rudd/Gillard Labor eras was the size and level of chaos they left behind.

Phillip Regan Aberglassyn

Commonwealth of mates

The affinity shown between the Australian and Scottish athletes at the Commonwealth Games in Glasgow should come as no surprise. During the Korean War, when the 1st Battalion Argyll & Sutherland Highlanders✓ and the 3 Battalion RAR fought together in the 1st Commonwealth Division✓, it was easy to identify them when they were on R&R leave in Tokyo. The Jocks would be wearing the slouch hats while the Aussies sported either Balmorals or the Glengarries✓ of their Scottish mates.

Keith Ridler-Dutton Killara

Sounds more like negative hearing to me

Wealthy property investors say that getting rid of negative gearing would be a disaster for house prices (‘‘Undoing negative gearing would hit house prices, agency warns’’, July 25). They would, wouldn't they? Big business says that Australia's 20 per cent renewable energy target would be a disaster for the economy, or maybe just for them. I am sure plenty of wealthy families turn their family trust into a tax avoidance scam. The self-interest of the top 20 per cent is appalling.

William Bielefeldt Kembla Grange

But wouldn't the removal of negative gearing mean lower prices for the rest of us?

Dave Horsfall North Gosford

Muslims in jail

Corrective Services NSW rejects the suggestion that there is any particular concern at the moment about radicalisation in prisons, either generally or in the case of Aboriginal inmates (‘‘Imams called in as Aboriginal inmates warm to radical Islam’’, July 24). For years radicalisation has been an issue in prisons as well as in the general community, and we have had practices in place to deal with it and to support our Muslim inmates. These include the employment of Muslim chaplains, the exchange of appropriate information with other government agencies, and open dialogue with the Muslim community. An example of this was Beyond Punishment✓, a public one-day forum we held recently with the University of Sydney involving many representatives of the Muslim community.

Peter Severin Commissioner, Corrective Services NSW, Sydney

Selfie in poor taste

A ‘‘selfie’’ at Auschwitz may in context not be seen as disrespectful by those of us drowning in the relativism of modern society, Jen Vuk, but when so many of our young people ask for, even demand, respect for their views I think that a little more thought should accompany the distribution of the ‘‘snap’’ (‘‘Taken in context, Auschwitz selfie no act of disrespect’’, July 25).

Perhaps Breanna should have paid more attention in the history classes that ‘‘left her cold’’. She could then have understood the context of the holocaust as well as being ‘‘interested’’ in it. I have some trouble reconciling the two facts. By all means visit the places of horror and notoriety. Take photos if you must; but respect the ground and the people who have been there before you. The last thing most people want of any place of mourning is a grinning ‘‘selfie’’ to announce their presence.

Glenda Ellis Red Hill (Qld)

Let others pay for your sins, eh people?

The Australian Chamber of Commerce warns that every household will be slugged $49 a year in extra power bills if the Renewable Energy Target is retained (‘‘ Industry puts cost of target at $29b’’, July 25). Less than a dollar a week or less than half a short bus journey.

So we now have a price that big business proposes is too high to pay to better ensure that our grandchildren and generations after them will have a future. This is the ethics of the cash register in rapacious overdrive. When the history of climate change is written, these people deserve a special chapter.

Simon Chapman Stanmore