Dozens of platinum and gold records gleaming with names such as Celine Dion, Pink Floyd and Michael Jackson hang on the walls in TruPhonic Studios, a small recording studio hidden behind a liquor store off S.C. Highway 61.

To those who don’t know Vlado Meller, or why he’s renting a small room in the back of the building, the prestigious records seem out of place in this less-than-glamorous location.

But in fact, these albums are barely a sampling of Meller’s portfolio from his nearly 50-year career as a top mastering engineer in the global music industry.

Initially, it’s tempting to get hung up on this portion of Meller’s story: the celebrities he’s worked with (many of whom he considers close friends), how he got into the music business and what led this two-time Grammy Award winner to set up shop in Charleston, of all places.

But then Meller emerges from his tiny corner of the studio. He’s casual in dress and demeanor, warm and welcoming. And he has this accent you don’t hear very often in the Lowcountry. It’s Eastern European and New Jersey.

So he sits down and starts from the very beginning, back home in Czechoslovakia, where the extraordinary events that have become his life story were set in motion.

Legacy of survival

The first came well before his birth, before his parents even met. His mother and father were among the third of European Jews who managed to survive Nazi persecution during World War II. His father endured Auschwitz and a few other concentration camps by working in factories until Americans liberated him at the end of the war.

His mother, meanwhile, hid for four and a half years in the third floor of a stranger’s home, with two small children and little more to sustain them than milk for her infant and some pieces of bread once a day.

When the war ended, his mother and father returned home to Czechoslovakia, where they met and later gave birth to Vlado Meller.

Growing up in Eastern Europe under the Soviet Union’s sphere of influence meant little, if any, exposure to Western culture. Music was strictly classical, travel was forbidden, even certain foods weren’t allowed.

But in 1968, rulers of Czechoslovakia started subtly trying to reform the totalitarian aspects of the government to give citizens more personal freedoms. It was then that Meller heard The Beatles for the first time, at age 21.

Seeing the reforms as a threat to its control over the region, the Soviet Union invaded the small country in August of that year and took over its government buildings, radio stations and army bases.

Meller remembers being home from his university in Prague, where he was studying electrical engineering.

“All my life I’d never seen tanks or airplanes, and for 24 to 48 hours, planes were just landing and landing, and when I looked out the window, all I could see was tanks for miles,” he says. “I’m told for 20 years these are your brothers, your saviors, your everything ... I was confused. My father was in a concentration camp, so I knew all of what was happening before. But this wasn’t Germany, it was Russia, our neighbor. So, I made the decision on my own that I was going to escape.”

He said goodbye to his parents about a month later and set out to cross the southern border into Austria. Many of his classmates in Prague had already fled on the same route, but it was a risky plan.

“I didn’t know what was happening at the border. It’s not like there were cell phones to verify if other guys had escaped,” he says. “My parents had visions of those people in East Germany, being shot down from the wall.”

Lucky for those who fled early on, the border was still protected by the Slovaks, not the Soviets.

“The Slovaks were so scared, they didn’t know what would happen if NATO or the U.S. intervened, they figured they’d be the first ones executed if they harmed their own people, so it was just a very confusing time.”

Meller goes West

After spending a few months in an Austrian refugee camp, Meller was sent to another refugee organization in Italy, where he was told to choose where he’d want to start a new life.

“I figured I’d go to the U.S. What did I have to lose?” he says.

In spring 1969, he arrived in New York City with a group of Eastern European emigrants, speaking no English and with only a few months of living among foreign, Western culture.

“That’s where my crazy journey started again,” Meller said.

He was placed in a home with a young German family in the Bronx.

“They could be ex-Nazis, I didn’t know,” he says. “But it was a nice little family, hardly spoke English, and they had cooperated with a church or something like that to give me a little room.”

Soon he landed his first job ever using the only skills he had, electrical engineering, making circuit boards at a small factory. His salary was $70 cash each week.

When he found out a woman next to him was making twice that for an easier task, he demanded better pay, and was swiftly shown the door.

So there he was, jobless again, speaking very little English, with nobody to turn to. And along came another unexpected turn of events.

Into the music

Wandering the streets of Manhattan, Meller ran into a Polish guy he’d met back in Italy, one of the few people he knew in the United States. And this guy happens to work for CBS Records, a top record label where he’s a mechanical assistant of some sort.

Meller had no idea what CBS was, but he had similar skills as his friend, and figured he could try to work there, too.

By the end of his first year in America, Meller was working for CBS Records making $225 per week, which was not just good pay for a semi-skilled immigrant, but for any average American. He was able to buy a car and move into his own apartment in New Jersey.

For several years he worked as a studio technician, preparing the tapes for recording and making sure all the equipment was in working order before any artists came in.

“I see the sessions and one day it’s Johnny Cash, the next it’s Simon and Garfunkel. I never knew who these people were before and here I am mingling with them in the studio,” he says.

The tech job was a good opportunity, but it wouldn’t satisfy him for very long. Meller was still the young guy who would leave everything he knew for a better life, who wasn’t scared to go after what he wanted.

So he talks with his boss, and figures out that the next step is to either become a mixing engineer, who handles recording, or a mastering engineer, who cuts the record and makes edits to perfect the sound quality. Mixing seemed to be the more glamorous option, but a mastering position was the first to become available.

Mastering his craft

While it may have been sheer luck that got him to this point in his career, from then on it was pure gumption that made Meller the go-to mastering engineer in the music industry.

At age 22, he was much younger than most in his field, which actually worked to his advantage. He’d take on any project, from rock to hip-hop and anything in between, and so younger, cutting-edge artists preferred to work with him.

“Year after year, they saw my name on the records, and it just grew and grew,” he said. “The next thing I know, I’m the chosen guy to do all the biggest albums from all different labels.”

Along the way, Meller married and settled down in New Jersey. CBS Records also turned into Sony. By the mid-2000s, the music business was a whole different animal, and record labels had mostly done away with their studio facilities since most artists preferred to record in a variety of locations.

Meller went out on his own and he ended up renting space in Masterdisk, a New York recording studio. He partnered with Paul West, a former executive of Universal Studios, to help him with the business side of things.

The two eventually realized there wasn’t anything holding them to New York anymore. Their tasks were all handled electronically — labels send over a final mix, Meller masters it and sends it back — so his equipment could really be set up anywhere.

West had plans to end up in Charleston eventually. He bought a house in downtown Charleston about a decade ago, but didn’t spend much time there until recently. But one time, West met Bruce Freshley, who wanted to build a recording studio in West Ashley that would later become TruPhonic Studios. A music industry veteran, West gave him some pointers on how to make a professional recording space.

Then early last year, Meller traveled to Columbia to visit his daughter, a University of South Carolina student. Bored with the city after a night or two, he took a side trip to Charleston and West convinced him to go check out TruPhonic.

“I’m like typical New Yorker, who in the world would build a studio in Charleston? My idea of Charleston was good food, tourist town, Southern hospitality, but a studio? That’s a joke,” Meller said.

But he went anyway, and realized he’d be paying millions for this sort of professional space in New York. A month later, all of Meller’s equipment would be set up in the studio.

After a year in Charleston, Meller says he’s busy as ever. He recently mastered Kanye West’s latest single “All Day” featuring Paul McCartney, which was No. 6 on Billboard’s chart of top hip-hop songs last week.

He’s now working with Charleston-based artists as well. In the past year, Meller has mastered albums by Dangermuffin, The Royal Tinfoil and Sol Driven Train.

“If somebody wants to make a professional recording, there is no need to go to Nashville, or L.A., or New York. It’s all right here,” Meller says.

He’s also teaching workshops periodically for aspiring mastering engineers to continue a legacy that he says “can’t be taught in books or in school.”

“This is my saviour, this business,” he says. “What I’ve learned is invaluable to the next generation.”

Reach Abigail Darlington at 937-5906 and follow her on Twitter @A_Big_Gail.