East Ridge Girls Cross-Country: One-two punch powers Raptors to another section crown

Brenley Goertzen took second at the Section 4AA meet with a time of 14:56.7. (Bulletin photo by Jace Frederick)

Emily Betz won her second straight Section 4AA title as she turned in a time of 14:45.3 at the University of Minnesota Oct. 22. (Bulletin photo by Jace Frederick)

Emily Betz and Brenley Goertzen have been key components to the Raptor girls cross-country dynasty that’s formed over the past half-decade.

So it seemed only fitting that the duo would go one, two at the Section 4AA meet -- with Betz winning her second straight section title and Goertzen finishing right behind her -- as East Ridge cruised to its third-straight section title Oct. 22 at the University of Minnesota.

“Yes, Emily and Brenley have certainly been such an integral part of this team. They've represented ER with such class on and off the course,” East Ridge coach Chad Cronin said. “They are amazing young women and I'm.glad they've led the team so well. It was great to see.them take the top spots.”

And just behind Betz and Goertzen was a slew of fellow Raptors. Olivia Hummel finished in fifth and Megan Schiferl placed sixth. Six Raptors finished in the top 19 as East Ridge won the section crown by 50 points over second-place White Bear Lake.

“It certainly took all of them to earn such a great score,” Cronin said.

Cronin said the Raptor girls also obtained gold status for academics, with Betz, Goertzen, Hummel and Schiferl earning academic All-State honors, as well.

“I’m proud of them in so many ways,” Cronin said.

And though state trips may seem like old hat for this East Ridge team these days -- the Raptors have won four of the past five section titles -- Cronin told his runners the achievement should “never feel like less than an amazing accomplishment.”

“It's special,” he said. “It's a different mix of runners each year and we are so.proud of their work and this.moment.”

Still, Cronin admitted that the past state experience many of the runners possess could help the girls achieve the lofty goals they’ve set for this year’s state meet.

“They definitely are aiming beyond our rankings throughout the year,” Cronin said. “They have their sights high, so we'll see. They are tough.”