Stephen Loiaconi | Sinclair Broadcast Group

WASHINGTON " While much attention is focused on President Barack Obama TMs use of the n-word during a podcast interview with comedian Marc Maron that was posted Monday morning, some are complaining that the controversy over the word obscures the point about racism that Obama was making when he said it.

The interview, on the popular WTF with Marc Maron podcast, covered a broad range of topics, from last week TMs shootings at a Charleston church to Obama TMs ideological evolution during his years at Occidental College in Los Angeles, not far from the garage where Maron TMs show is recorded, but race was frequently at the forefront.

In arguing that racism still exists in American society, Obama said, The legacy of slavery, Jim Crow, discrimination in almost every institution in our lives, that casts a long shadow and that TMs still part of our DNA that TMs passed on. We are not cured of it|It TMs not just a matter of it not being polite to say n***** in public. That TMs not the measure of whether racism still exists or not. It TMs not just a matter of overt discrimination.

Progress is real, and we have to take hope from that progress, Obama said, noting that he has seen significant advances in race relations in his lifetime, but what is also real is that the march isn TMt over and the work is not yet completed.

However, Obama did discuss many other issues besides racism:

The frequency of mass shootings in the U.S. is unique to our country and we TMre not doing enough about it

The podcast interview was recorded last Friday, less than 48 hours after a white man allegedly shot and killed nine people at a historically black church in Charleston, South Carolina, and Obama addressed that incident and the numerous other mass shootings he has seen during his presidency early in the interview.

The point I made in the immediate aftermath of the killing was that I TMve done this way too often, Obama said. During the course of my presidency, it feels as if a couple of times a year I end up having to speak to the country and to speak to a particular community about a devastating loss, and the grieving that the country feels is real.

I think part of the point that I wanted to make was that it TMs not enough just to feel bad, Obama said. There are actions that could be taken to make events like this less likely and one of those actions we could take would be to enhance some basic common sense gun safety laws that, by the way, the majority of gun owners support.

Obama said he was disgusted that Congress failed to act on the issue after the killings of 20 children and six adults at Sandy Hook Elementary School in Connecticut in 2012, but he believes legislative changes will only come if the public demands them.

It TMs not going to change from the inside, he said.

The American people are overwhelmingly good, decent, generous people

Obama said one of the challenges he has faced as president is that, while most people are fundamentally good and want to work together, they are divided by political rhetoric and partisanship.

The problem is that there TMs a big gap between who we are as a people and how our politics expresses itself, he said.

He added that he has come to recognize the importance of communicating policies to the public to convince them of his arguments because media outlets and politicians can polarize and distort the issues before people have a chance to understand them.

When it gets translated into politics, it gets all confused, he said. And trying to bridge that gap between the good impulses of the overwhelming majority of Americans and how our politics expresses itself continues to be the biggest challenge.

Sometimes, small changes have to be enough

Obama acknowledged that some of his supporters have been disappointed by his actions in office and feel that he has not brought about the sweeping changes they expected from him, but he said the reality is that change comes slowly and abstract views cannot always be translated into concrete policies.

You have to balance what you want and where you TMre going with what is and what has been, he said.

On the issue of gun control, he said it is necessary to respect legitimate traditions of hunting and sportsmanship with guns while finding ways to prevent a deranged person from getting their hands on a firearm.

Sometimes, your job is just to make stuff work, he said. Sometimes, the task of government is to make incremental improvements.

Obama is confident Supreme Court will side with him on Affordable Care Act

With a key Supreme Court ruling on King v. Burwell looming, Obama said he believes the law is clearly on the administration TMs side and he is confident the court will recognize that.

The case, which focuses on whether the Affordable Care Act allows the government to provide subsidies to help people afford health insurance in states where the federal government runs the insurance marketplaces, is one of several the Supreme Court is expected to issue an opinion on by the end of June.

If the court finds that the subsidies are illegal, Obama said 5 to 6 million people could be unable to afford insurance without them.

Tensions between minority communities and police are linked to larger problems that can be solved

Cops have a really tough job, Obama said. And part of the reason cops have a tough job, particularly in big cities, is that there are communities that are poor, are systematically locked out of opportunity, that suffer from legacies of discrimination that have been built up over generations, and we send cops in there basically to say, keep those folks from making too much trouble.

He said the tensions that arise with law enforcement in those communities are linked to economic and racial issues that need to be addressed.

When you look at how to deal with racism, how to deal with issues of some of the police shootings that have been involved, I TMm less interested in having an ideological conversation than I am looking at what has worked in the past and applying it and scaling up, he added.

One example he noted is that increased access to early childhood education has helped break cycles of racism and poverty in some communities.

Solutions to some of the nation TMs problems are within our grasp, Obama argued, and he hoped speaking on the podcast would help him reach Americans who share that belief.

Some on social media have criticized Obama TMs use of the n-word and others have defended it, but many comments expressed frustration over the focus on one particular word in an hour-long interview.