Two candidates for U.S. Congress wrangle over higher education costs, gridlock

U.S. Rep. Jared Polis and George Leing laid out for voters how they'd tackle rising higher education costs, international threats to the country and gridlock in Washington during a spirited debate one week before Election Day.

Polis and Leing debated on the University of Colorado campus in front of nearly 200 college students and community members Tuesday evening.

Polis, the incumbent Democrat, and Leing, a Republican, are vying to represent Colorado's 2nd Congressional District in the U.S. Congress. The debate was co-hosted by the College Republicans, the College Democrats and No Labels, a bipartisan group.

To make college more affordable, Polis said he wants to reform the federal student loan program so that students make income-based repayments after graduation. He said he also wants to lower the cost of attendance by making textbooks more affordable through open-sourcing and collaboration.

Leing — who has served as chairman of the Republican Party in Boulder County and as a member of the Colorado GOP executive committee — said students need to be able to find well-paying jobs after graduation to help them repay their loans. He also advocated for integrating online courses into the traditional college setting.

"There are creative ways we can make this less expensive," Leing said.

Advertisement

The two candidates jabbed at each other when asked how they would work across the aisle if elected to Congress.

Leing said Polis has "made clear his desire" to become chairman of the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee, a job "that is intended to be partisan."

"Although I like what the congressman says, the 'No labels, bringing the parties together,' when you look at what's happened in the past and what (his) intentions (are for) the future, it's just not going happen," Leing said.

Polis fired back.

"My opponent is a former party boss himself," Polis said. "He oversaw the Boulder County Republicans. He helped write a platform that was against legalizing same-sex marriage, that wanted to remove existing environmental protections we have for fracking. He helped oversee the authorship of that platform as a party chair."

Leing said he did not agree with everything in the Republican party's platform. On the issue of same-sex marriage, Leing said he did not think the government should be "in the position of telling people what to do."

The two candidates disagreed about the Affordable Care Act, with Polis blaming the Republican-led House for repeatedly trying to repeal the law rather than fix it, and Leing pointing out that the law "didn't live up to its promises."

"We were supposed to be able to keep our insurance coverage if we liked it," Leing said. "It's just not working."

If re-elected, Polis said he would keep working to improve parts of the law that didn't work while ensuring health care is available to everyone.

"It'll be a failure to go back to a system we knew wasn't working," Polis said.

Sarah Kuta: 303-473-1106, kutas@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/sarahkuta