Kevin Durant wants you to know that he’s here just so he won’t get fined.

The Thunder star, who has become more unfiltered when speaking with reporters, was questioned during all-star weekend about coach Scott Brooks’ future with the team. His response, via The Oklahoman’s Darnell Mayberry:

“You guys really don’t know (expletive). “To be honest, man, I’m only here talking to y’all because I have to. So I really don’t care. Y’all not my friends. You’re going to write what you want to write. You’re going to love us one day and hate us the next. That’s a part of it. So I just learn how to deal with y’all.”

His latest comments came a day after he told reporters during Friday’s all-star media availability that players, not media, should be the ones who vote on NBA awards — even though media voted for him as the league’s most valuable player last year.

“I’m 26 years old so I’m in my mid-20s, almost to 30,” Durant said. “My first few years in the league I was just finding myself. I think most of the time I reacted based off of what everybody else wanted and how they viewed me as a person. And I’m just learning to be myself and not worry about what anybody says. I’m going to make mistakes. I just want to show kids out here that athletes, entertainers, whoever, so-called celebrities, we aren’t robots. We go through emotions. We go through feelings. And I’m just trying to express mine and trying to help people along the way. But I’m not going to sit here and tell you that I’m just this guy that got programmed to say the right stuff all the time and politically correct answers. I’m done with that. I’m just trying to be me and continue to grow as a man.”

While his teammate Russell Westbrook has a lengthy history of not wanting to deal with media, Durant’s stance came to light last year, when he spoke to USA Today’s Sam Amick:

“I just realized that I’m just trying to be myself,” Durant said. “When I’m upset, now I feel comfortable being upset. It’s cool that I can be upset. I may cuss one time in an interview, or I may yell at my teammates. And it’s all right. I understand that it’s cool for me to be that way because that’s me. I’m human, and I have times when I’m upset. I think that’s what people didn’t see.”

And when asked about his withdrawal from Team USA last summer:

“Seriously, to be honest, I was like ‘(expletive) ’em.’ You can write that, too. Seriously, though. I’m just going to be me, man, and that’s how I felt.”

After Durant’s tirade, Wizards guard John Wall was asked for his thoughts on the media and the players’ interaction with reporters. And his take was a bit different: