Man's suicide prompts town to declare: 'We need to think and act like a neighborly community'

The temperature hovered around 10 degrees when a delivery driver from D. P. Dough pulled into the Boulder Police Department north parking lot shortly before midnight March 1.

Alyssa McClelland, the driver, noticed a white Chevrolet pickup truck in the lot but thought little of it as she hurried a pizza into the building for a hungry dispatcher. McClelland emerged just a few minutes later to a horrifying sight.

A middle-aged man was lying on his back near the truck in a large pool of blood. A black Smith & Wesson Governor .45 caliber handgun was on the asphalt by his right foot. There was a single fresh entry wound under his chin. The blood was already starting to freeze.

The sad and sudden end of 40-year-old Nathan Rockwell Haselbauer, author, investor and founder of the second-largest high IQ society in the world, was soon determined to be a suicide. He not only ended his life practically at the cops' doorstep; he left a note of explanation in his truck labeled "Police Only."

"I'm sorry for the mess," read the note found within a manila envelope. "I didn't want to do this at home because I have two puppies around 1 year old and didn't want to risk them biting an officer while finding my body at home."

But questions concerning Haselbauer's motivations, and about what his death meant for the small mountain town of Gold Hill — where his renovations at an old house he'd purchased just months before had triggered a complaint to county officials — continued to haunt long after the police investigation was concluded.

Advertisement

Some feared that an enforcement action from the county pushed Haselbauer to the brink, but ample evidence would eventually surface that he was a successful, brilliant — but depressed — man who had battled loneliness much of his life.

The tragedy also laid bare a vexing dilemma well known to those who inhabit the small and somewhat isolated enclaves scattered through the Front Range foothills: When does a problem merit a call to government authorities, and when is it best kept just between neighbors?

Nathan Haselbauer (Courtesy photo)

'Then it kind of got stopped'

"I met him shortly after he bought that place," said Hugh Moore, owner and proprietor of the Gold Hill General Store. "I hadn't known him before."

Moore's business sits a block or so away from 601 Gold Run St., often referred to by locals as the Weaver property. It was long in the hands of Joe Weaver Sr., a former miner also known for driving the town's road maintainer. It then passed into the hands of Joe Weaver Jr., who died in 2014. Haselbauer purchased the 852-square-foot property in December for $90,000.

"I talked to him (Haselbauer) several times," Moore recalled earlier this month. "He started coming in for lunch. Nice guy. Friendly and open about the work that he was doing. A lot of work. I think that house needed a lot of work inside.

"And then it kind of got stopped."

Gold Hill, a town fewer than 200 people call home, has a five-member historic zoning committee. The board advises property owners on whether work they are doing is compatible with the character of a town where two main hubs, the Gold Hill General Store and Gold Hill Inn, are both on the National Register of Historic Places. The downtown core also earned a place on the register in August 1989.

"Usually, if somebody wants to modify their house, they should come to historic zoning first with plans," explained Bear Carlson, a resident and member of the historic zoning committee. "The proper procedure, the one we like to follow, is they come to us and get suggestions. And then they go to the county with that. If someone goes straight to the county without us, they usually refer them back to us."

Peter Swift, town council chairman, works in his home office in Gold Hill earlier this month. (Mark Leffingwell / Staff Photographer)

Haselbauer did none of that. It was installation of a new oversized window that caught the eye of someone who suspected the work was not properly permitted. That somebody picked up a phone.

"We had received basically a complaint from a neighbor that there was work going on there without permits," said Bryan Harding, a senior planner handling code compliance and public information in the Boulder County Land Use Department.

A county building inspector supervisor went to Haselbauer's property Feb. 25 with a stop-work order.

"Mr. Haselbauer was very responsive," Harding said. "He got in touch with our office the afternoon of February 25th, and it sounds as though he talked to one of our staff members. ... He emailed on the 25th, and she responded on the 26th."

That was the last Boulder County officials heard from Haselbauer.

"Our interaction was pretty limited," Harding said. "Unfortunately, we never really got a chance to work with him."

Haselbauer would be dead three days later.

Live and let live

Nathan Haselbauer was an ambitious man with an incisive mind who, although he would complain of loneliness, nevertheless helped thousands of strangers network.

Born in Denver but raised in Rochester, N.Y., Haselbauer launched his career as a stockbroker for Dean Witter in Rochester, according to an online tribute. He relocated to New York City, where he worked as a trader on the New York Stock Exchange.

It was in April 2000 that he started a website called the New York High IQ Society, in a bid to stimulate discussions on a variety of intellectual topics. By July of that year, the organization changed its name to the International High IQ Society to reflect its growing international membership base.

In less than two years, it had become the second-largest high IQ society in the world, second only to the better-known Mensa International.

In the online tribute to Haselbauer, the society's communications director Laura Luckey called him "the heart and soul of the group" and wrote: "The society he created was a safe haven, a place of intellectual discourse — sometimes cordial and sometimes hostile, such is the nature of that world — but more than anything it was a place in which people found a great camaraderie."

The International High IQ Society was also an avenue for Haselbauer to promote his love of puzzles, brain teasers and game tournaments. He was masterful at backgammon and chess.

Amazon lists no fewer than 16 titles by Haselbauer published between 2004 and 2011. Titles include "Test Your IQ (Brain Gym)," "The Mammoth Book of New IQ Puzzles," "The Mammoth Book of Codeword Puzzles" and even "The Little Book of Bathroom Brainteasers."

A 2006 news release for the society announced its search for the "World's Smartest Person." In that release, Haselbauer was quoted as saying the contest was seeking "the best of the best."

Claiming his organization at that time boasted more than 15,000 members from 87 countries, Haselbauer said, "Clearly, intelligence knows no borders, and by employing the Internet we can open our contest to literally hundreds of millions of people."

And yet he never met his new next-door neighbor in Gold Hill.

Carlson, a University of Colorado professor emeritus in mechanical engineering, owns the adjacent property.

"He was working there, and I kept wanting to go speak with him," Carlson said. "But every time I went over, he was not working at the time."

Haselbauer lived since October at the Lofts at Peloton at 3301 Arapahoe Ave., Boulder, while working on his new mountain home. When in Gold Hill, other than for the casual chats with Moore, he is not known to have made any fast friends there.

"This really is a town of live and let live," said Moore, sitting outside his general store, shaded from the brilliant afternoon sun. "It's a good community because you can choose to be involved socially or politically, or not, and people will leave you alone."

The police investigation into Haselbauer's death suggests he certainly felt alone.

Calling authorities 'a last resort'

At the April 13 meeting of the town council, chairman Peter Swift, according to minutes posted to the town's website five weeks later, had something on his mind.

"Peter brought up that some unknown person reported Nathan Haselbauer, 601 Gold Run Street, to the county for working on the house without a permit, resulting in a stop-work order. He apparently had not spoken with Historical Zoning either," according to the minutes prepared by secretary Gretchen Diefenderfer.

"This unfortunate man committed suicide shortly thereafter, and Peter strongly expressed his upset that someone would go to the authorities rather than speaking with the person and that this might have contributed."

Ensuing discussion included members saying the incident highlighted the need to bring up neighborhood issues one on one, rather than calling in authorities unnecessarily.

"The consensus was that we need to think and act like a neighborly community," the minutes concluded. "Resorting to the authorities should be a last resort."

Public discussion of the tragedy didn't end there. Swift brought up at the June 8 meeting that the recording of his comments needed to be fixed. Minutes from that session now state, "Peter wanted his statement corrected to say that 'it was possible, but not probable that this might have contributed (versus just 'that this might have contributed').' With these corrections, the minutes were approved."

Swift, 68 and a five-year resident of Gold Hill, has now had six months to reflect on the tragedy, and whether someone's contacting the county about Haselbauer's work helped trigger his violent end three days later.

"Since that time, I have talked to a lot of people, and it turns out that this fellow had a history of depression, and my feeling is the same as I expressed in that meeting," Swift said in a recent interview. "Maybe there is a possibility (of a connection), but I'm not sure that this is a probability."

'Hopefully you can forgive me'

The available evidence suggests that the reporting of Haselbauer's unpermitted work was a minor factor at most.

The police report on Haselbauer's death — officially labeled a suicide by the Boulder County coroner April 16 — reflects that interviews with family members painted the portrait of a man troubled long before he went to work on a historical property in Gold Hill.

On March 9, Boulder police Detective Steve Faber interviewed family members who left little doubt that Haselbauer was brought down by demons more deeply rooted than bureaucratic red tape.

His sister told Faber that Haselbauer "was lonely his 'whole life,' and since he had turned 40 years old in January 2015, he could not see getting a family and being alone the rest of his life," the police report states.

Haselbauer's mother told police he had confided to his brother "that he (Haselbauer) was always alone and did not want to spend the rest of his life alone."

Police learned that Haselbauer had a serious girlfriend with whom he had split about 18 months before, when he was still living in New Hampshire. He had moved to Colorado, complaining that New Hampshire winters were "rough," cold and long; and he wanted to be closer to his sister, who lives in the Denver metro area.

When police arrived at Haselbauer's unit at the Lofts at Peloton, they found he had clearly taken steps to leave everything orderly so that putting his affairs to rest would not be any more difficult for others than necessary.

Police found on a center island of his kitchen his birth certificate, land title guarantee paperwork, American Kennel Club paperwork pertaining to his dogs Roscoe and Izzy, a student loan form, blank checks, $2,720 in U.S. currency and another $85 in foreign currency, a 10-pound silver bar, even a certificate of ownership for a "125 A: Mao" by Andy Warhol, a synthetic polymer paint and silkscreen ink on canvas valued at $3,950.

Leashes, collars and ID tags for the dogs were laid out carefully. The refrigerator and freezer had been cleaned out completely.

And there was a typed note to a sibling.

According to a police report, it read, in part: "Take care of mom and (his step-father) for me. I love you and I'm sorry about the way I acted over the student loans. I regret that very much. Hopefully you can forgive me. Your loving brother, Nathan."

There is nothing in the police report that clarifies or elaborates on the significance of the student loan issue.

The police report gives no indication that any notes Haselbauer left behind even mentioned the Gold Hill property.

County zoning officials soon heard about Haselbauer's death. They were aware it came right on the heels of his stop-work notice.

"Any time something like this happens, it's unfortunate, and we all feel for folks," Harding said. "But there is nothing that stands out to me ... given how minor the violation was, there's nothing here that stands out as unusual — obviously, of course, until March 1."

Boulder police Sgt. Tom Dowd said, "I would say that we can't pinpoint the exact incident that may have prompted this person to do what he did.

"With this case and most similar investigations that we deal with, ultimately, it's only the suicide victim that knows the real answers. Even in some cases where people leave notes, oftentimes the family and the investigators still have questions as to why. And, unfortunately, the only person who knows the real reason why they did it is the victim of the suicide."

Moore, who believes he is one of perhaps only two people in Gold Hill who knew Haselbauer, views the complaint, the county's action and the violent end to a life in a police parking lot as unconnected.

"It just seems it had to be a coincidence," said Moore, who makes a point of not tapping into the town gossip as he minds his store. "It just doesn't seem that catastrophic to me to get that interference from the town, especially from strangers — although maybe that makes it worse, that no one in this town knew him."

Complainant's name remains mystery

Fueled by the wet spring and early summer, the untended grass surrounding the empty house on Gold Run Street is over 6 feet high in spots.

It's unclear what the fate of the property will be. But it's clear that the code of conduct preached by Swift — neighbors resolving issues at the neighborhood level — is endorsed by many in Gold Hill.

"I think that's kind of what a small town is all about," Carlson said. "I totally support that.

"I am always in favor of talking to your neighbors rather than blowing the whistle, so to speak. To me, that's what a small community like Gold Hill is all about — not people spying on each other and ratting on each other and that sort of thing."

Garry Sanfacon, flood recovery manager for Boulder County, said the zoning enforcement approach in unincorporated Boulder County is "complaint-based, for the most part."

"We're not out there driving around looking for zoning violations. We typically have to be informed — especially in the mountains."

Dale Case, director of the Boulder County Land Use Department, explained.

"Typically, we've got two compliance officers to cover 740 square miles of the county. Something that we cannot readily do is drive around and process every violation that we might see," Case said.

Harding, the Boulder County senior planner, also said that even when a citizen complaint is received, enforcement actions aren't always the first step.

"The thing we try to stress with folks is that typically, when a complaint comes in, we will do our diligence to determine if there is a resolution. We will try to work with them toward a resolution; it doesn't have to be confrontational. We try to support people the best we can to get things straightened out."

No one in Gold Hill claims to know who made the complaint about Haselbauer's renovation work. Harding said county records also do not reflect that person's identity; complaints are sometimes made anonymously.

"Nobody knows," said Swift, the town council chairman. A moment later, though, he added, "Somebody knows."

What would Swift say to that person now?

"I would say ... please communicate with us if you see anything that you have a problem with. We're not going to ostracize you. We're all pals here."

At the general store, Moore saw a sad irony in the complaint against Haselbauer.

"As far as I can tell, he basically replaced a picture window with another picture window," Moore said. "In other words, the window that was being replaced was not historic, either."

As for the "live and let live" many locals espouse, Moore said, "When somebody screws up, I think generally people do forgive and move on."

Although the Haselbauer property is less than a block from his store, Moore expressed surprise upon hearing how high the untended grass now stands there.

"I'm going to get that grass cut," he vowed.

Charlie Brennan: 303-473-1327, brennanc@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/chasbrennan