In football, a 72-16 score would be a blow of the kind that would be an embarrassment to most teams. Fortunately for the pro-life movement, that’s the score pro-life legal groups have amassed against the Obama administration in their attempts to stop President Barack Obama from forcing Christians obey the HHS mandate that compels them to purchase insurance covering abortion-causing drugs for their employees.

The Alliance Defending Freedom scorecard that has been tracking the potential demise of the Obama administration’s abortion-pill mandate in the courts now shows the mandate losing by an overall score of 72 to 16.

“No one should support a government mandate that forces people to choose between their conscience and their careers,” said ADF Senior Legal Counsel Matt Bowman. “Just as the Supreme Court rejected the mandate in the case of family businesses like Conestoga Wood Specialties and Hobby Lobby, it should reject the administration’s attempt to foist it on non-profit groups like faith-based charities, Christian colleges and universities, and pro-life advocacy organizations.”

The U.S. Supreme Court will soon have the opportunity to consider one of those non-profit cases, such as the ADF lawsuit Southern Nazarene University v. Burwell.

The mandate forces employers, regardless of their religious or moral convictions, to provide insurance coverage for abortion-inducing drugs, sterilization, and contraception under threat of heavy penalties by the Internal Revenue Service and other federal agencies if the mandate’s requirements aren’t met.

Earlier this month, the Obama administration renewed its attempt to force a Catholic religious order, the Little Sisters of the Poor, to comply with the HHS abortion mandate. The government is still trying to force the nuns to either violate their deeply held religious convictions or pay crippling fines to the IRS.

Keep up with the latest pro-life news and information on Twitter. Follow @LifeNewsHQ

Last year, the Supreme Court ruled that the Christian-run Hobby Lobby doesn’t have to obey the HHS mandate that is a part of Obamacare that requires businesses to pay for abortion causing drugs in their employee health care plans.