Republican Gov. Matt Bevin's administration says it will cost $236,000 to dismantle kynect, Kentucky's popular health insurance exchange.

Former Democratic Gov. Steve Beshear set up the exchange with an executive order based on the federal Affordable Care Act. Before leaving office, Beshear said it would cost $23 million to dismantle the system.

Health and Family Services Cabinet Secretary Vickie Yates Brown Glisson said Kentucky will move to a supported state exchange model. That means Kentucky will move to the federal system, but share in the costs with the federal government. The federal government will pay for most of the cost, with the state paying for some administrative functions.

Nearly 100,000 people have purchased private health plans through kynect with the help of a federal subsidy.

Healthcare cost has been a focus of the 2016 Primaries on both sides.

The Republican candidates have been discussing dismantling Obamacare, with Hillary Clinton defending it and Bernie Sanders pushing for a single payer solution.

Former Kentucky Governor Steve Beshear released a statement Wednesday afternoon in response to Bevin's latest declaration dismantle Kynect.

“This morning, Governor Bevin took yet another step toward dismantling Kynect, Kentucky’s homegrown, model healthcare exchange,” said Governor Beshear. “Why must he insist on destroying this sustainable and successful healthcare system that over the past three years helped more than 500,000 Kentuckians gain access to insurance for the first time?”

“From 2014 to 2015 the number of people who enrolled in Kynect grew by more than 23 percent, and just this morning a Kentucky Health Issues Poll was released with data showing the percentage of Kentuckians without health insurance was cut in half from 2013 to 2015. Kynect’s success is undeniable, and it has become a national model for other states that are creating their own exchanges.”

“Governor Bevin insists on moving all Kentuckians to a federal healthcare exchange and cites dollars saved as his number one reason. However, his math doesn’t add up. This morning he claimed dismantling Kynect would save Kentucky $20 million per year, which is simply untrue. In fact, Kynect was created using federal tax dollars and since January 2015 has been funded with revenues from a one percent premium assessment on insurance companies. Zero dollars have been taken from the Kentucky General Fund to pay for this exchange,” said Beshear. “So there are no savings to use elsewhere.”

“In addition, the federal government recently sent Governor Bevin a letter outlining in detail a laundry list of complex steps needed to be taken in such a transition, including the maintenance of a call center and also the possible return of $57.5 million to the federal government. And these are just the costs we are aware of so far,” said Beshear. “No one yet knows for sure how much all of the additional steps being required by the federal government will cost.”

“In spite of study after study indicating that our current health system is both sustainable and affordable, Governor Bevin continues to say otherwise. However, to date he has offered absolutely no proof in support of his conclusions. He now throws out illusionary numbers about the cost of dismantling Kynect, again with no backup material in support of the numbers. Unless Governor Bevin is willing to show the people of Kentucky the evidence and the backup materials to support his conclusions, he should quit playing politics with the well-being of Kentuckians.”

“Governor Bevin, you have stated you will keep Kynectors—but how many and at what cost? With a move to the federal exchange, will Kentuckians need to go to a Social Service office to sign up for healthcare? And where is the evidence to back up your numbers on costs savings? The people of Kentucky deserve answers.”