KRASNAYA POLYANA, RUSSIA — When Picabo Street looks back at her Olympic breakthrough 20 years ago this month in Norway, she said it’s like looking through a pane of glass at Christmas with frost around the edges. That image frames her memories of a silver medal in downhill claimed when she was 22 years old, bringing the first burst of fame to her and portending what would become one of the greatest careers in the history of American ski racing.

Memories of Lillehammer, seen through the glass brightly.

“I look through that porthole and I see people arm in arm, dancing together,” Street said Saturday at the men’s and women’s downhill training. “I hear the crowds singing to Tommy Moe, ‘Happy Birthday.’ I feel the cold T-bar underneath the back of my legs on the way up to the slalom. I hear my coach, when I’m trying to run the slalom, telling me, ‘You ski like blank,’ and it’s not a good word.

“Lillehammer was this warm, fuzzy, amazing experience. I surprised myself with a medal, and even though I won a gold in Nagano, Lillehammer still for me is my favorite Olympic memory.”

Ski racing fans knew she was a potential star in Lillehammer because she had won a silver medal a year earlier at the world championships. But America was unprepared for the irrepressible spirit from Triumph, Idaho, who was as colorful as she was gifted.

“I didn’t have a very good run,” Street said that day in Lillehammer. “I skied like a dirtbag, but I had my race face on and I was charging down the mountain.”

A month before the Olympics she had finished seventh in a downhill at Cortina d’Ampezzo, Italy, giving her the confidence she needed to charge in Lillehammer

“I went, ‘Bing.’ It all kind of lit up and I went, ‘Hmm, maybe I could pull something off in Lillehammer,’ ” Street said. “But I honestly went in just wanting to get the first Olympic jitters out of my system. When I started popping fast in training, and then I won the last training run, that’s when I really had to scramble to get ahead of (my emotions), wrap my brain around it, harness it and ride it, not have it run away from me.”

Her medal ceremony was special because that same night Norwegian hero Johann Olav Koss received one of his three gold medals for speedskating.

“I had 200,000-plus people there to cheer for me,” Street said. “I felt like a rock star. I felt like an American hero, because I had a cowboy hat on and I was representing.”

In subsequent years, she would become the first American to win a World Cup discipline title in downhill — which she did twice — and win the super-G at the 1998 Nagano Olympics 14 months after blowing out a knee in a training run at Vail. She also inspired a generation of girls to pursue ski racing.

Lindsey Vonn decided she wanted to become a ski racer at age 9 after meeting Street. Jacqueline Wiles of Aurora, Ore., was the same age when she met Street for the first time, and she told Street that in the finish area here Saturday. Street inspired her to become a ski racer, and now she’s an Olympian at age 21.

“We got your picture. We got to meet you and talk a little bit,” Wiles told Street. “It was inspiring. I had a picture of you on my wall.”

Today, Street lives near Birmingham, Ala., and is raising four boys. She is working in Sochi for Fox Sports 1.