Donald Trump speaks during a Republican presidential debate at the University of Miami on March 10 in Coral Gables, Fla. (Joe Raedle/Getty Images)

Conservative intellectuals are fond of quoting Margaret Thatcher: “First you win the argument, then you win the vote.” Ironically, many of these same conservatives, along with party regulars, are valiantly fighting to beat Donald Trump at the polls and convention while too many have given up trying to win the argument.

The mainstream media narrative that Republicans are complacent or allowing the Trump takeover to proceed has been shattered by weeks of dogged effort — however unsuccessful — to reach a critical mass of #NeverTrump voters. Millions in ads, hours in TV appearances, mastery of the convention delegate rules and millions of pixels (not to mention support for viable not-Trump opponents) reflect the dogged, albeit belated, effort to save the party and the country from Trump. More than 30 percent of Republicans, according to polls, are willing to abandon their party with a third candidate in order to stop Trump, even knowing that it may benefit Hillary Clinton. Yes, they are that serious about defeating Trump.

Unfortunately, there is less effort to win the argument. Granted, there is little evidence that the mass of voters is listening to any logical arguments these days. The phrase “nothing matters” is the catchphrase of conservatives who despair that facts and reality are no match for the Trump-media show. But conservatives are accustomed to making principled but futile arguments, and there is some percentage of conservatives who are still interested in reality. Why then has there been comparatively little effort among campaigns and pundits to attack the heart of Trump’s big lie, namely that we are “losing” on trade and immigration?

Trump’s trade views are obviously, provably false as The Post’s fact-checker Glenn Kessler lays out:

Trump frequently suggests the United States is “losing money” when there is a trade deficit, but that reflects a fundamental misunderstanding. Americans want to buy these products from overseas, either because of quality or price. If Trump sparked a trade war and tariffs were increased on Chinese goods, then it would raise the cost of those products to Americans. Perhaps that would reduce the purchases of those goods, and thus reduce the trade deficit, but that would not mean the United States would “gain” money that had been lost.

Kessler then goes on to detail the facts regarding U.S. manufacturing (“As a result of NAFTA, the United States, Canada and Mexico constitute an economically integrated market, especially for the auto industry”) and currency manipulation (“China has not manipulated its currency for at least two years and in recent months has been selling dollars and running down its reserves in an effort to keep the currency from weakening during an economic slowdown.”). Trump’s opponents have been tentative — to put it mildly — about debunking the protectionist hooey and the broader notion that the United States is “losing.”

On trade, and more so on immigration, both his opponents and the conservative media have adopted Trump’s premises. With regard to the conservative media, too many of them were on the anti-immigration fantasy train before Trump jumped on, so they are not now about to correct him by pointing out that illegal immigration has ground to a halt, deportations are up and immigration of highly skilled workers unarguably boosts American growth and innovation.

Likewise, too much of Trump’s lunacy on foreign policy goes unresponded to. The French victims in the Paris attack, faced with squads of terrorists with suicide vests and military-type weaponry, would have been saved if not for gun control? This is madness, yet Trump goes unchallenged by his opponents and in much of the conservative commentariat. He wants to force allies South Korea and Saudi Arabia to pay us and force Mexico to pay for the wall? His opponents should have been laughing in his face.

A few things are going on here.

First, too much of the conservative echo chamber bought into the protectionist/anti-immigration philosophy themselves. Media personalities like Sean Hannity and Laura Ingraham, once-respected think tanks like Heritage and even more august conservative publications themselves peddled propaganda from anti-immigration groups, swallowing a whole set of falsehoods about immigration. They are in no position to disagree now that Trump has carried their notions to their logical extremes. They gave Trump the launching pad for his populist, know-nothing campaign.

Second, the last man standing with a chance to beat Trump, Sen. Ted Cruz (R-Tex.), also adopted the “if you can’t beat ’em, join ’em” attitude on many of these issues as he attempted to ride the wave of populist anger. He now is ably confronting Trump, for example, on the results of a 45 percent tariff on Chinese goods. Missing, however, is the defense of the Trans-Pacific Partnership, the best (only?) economic and diplomatic accomplishment of the Obama presidency. He, unfortunately, abandoned support of H-1B visa expansion, a solid pro-growth conservative idea. Conceding so much to Trump makes it doubly hard to now show how dangerous and destructive his agenda is.

Third, understandable fatalism has washed over many well-meaning conservatives who see the impossibility of competing with Trump for media time. However, the argument that it is too late for a rational debunking of Trump’s views is no excuse; it’s an admission of their own laxity in combating the rise of wrong-headed populist notions meant to assuage an angry electorate.

Fourth, Cruz and even son-of-a-mailman Ohio Gov. John Kasich lack a comprehensive alternative agenda to Trump that has real benefit for working- and middle-class Americans without betraying conservative principles and relying on blatant untruths: tax cuts without big savings for the rich (e.g. payroll tax relief); pro-work measures like expansion of the Earned Income Tax Credit; K-12 and higher ed reform along the lines Jeb Bush and Sen. Marco Rubio (R-Fla.) laid out; a concrete, easy-to-understand alternative to Obamacare that emphasizes the “affordable” part of what was supposed to be the Affordable Care Act; a package of pro-innovation proposals (R&D, keeping high-skilled foreign students in the country) and an attack on cronyism in government (a Trump specialty).

One or more respected conservative publications or think tanks should take on the task of creating the comprehensive case against Trump’s nonsensical views. Whether it is the $10 trillion debt that his tax plan would create or his economic illiteracy on trade, Trump is offering fool’s gold to the voters. It behooves candidates to lay out the comprehensive case against Trump’s non-conservative, non-reality-based views and provide a succinct alternative agenda.

On the foreign policy front, the John Hay Initiative’s Choosing to Lead lays out a reasonable post-Bush, post-Obama approach to national security. A counterpart on the domestic side, “Room to Grow” provides alternatives to bogus populist concoctions — all geared to improving middle- and working- class incomes. The remaining non-Trump candidates should distill several of the best ideas and roll them out as the real solution to America’s problems, in contrast to Trump’s “con” — an agenda as phony as the curriculum of Trump University.