GUEST COLUMN

While listening to the State of the Union address by the coolest president ever last week, I felt an odd chill go up my leg (because of the polar vortex) when I mused over why people loyally vote for and trust those who instinctively make things worse every time they try to fix something.

Missteps have happened so much during the Obama administration, one might be tempted to think they are happening on purpose. After all, what is the alternative? We have an administration full of dummies? Or do they just look that way on purpose, so they can pull off their Wreck-it Ralph agenda?

Forget what you heard during the State of the Union address, the economy stinks. The Commerce Department and ABC News tell us the economy was much weaker last year than it was in 2012, growing at a lackadaisical 1.9 percent.

I may not be an economist, but I am smart enough to know that Reaganomics worked. Raising taxes, stimulus spending and inhibiting job growth by over-regulation is either a really dumb agenda to fix the economy or fixing the economy really was not on the agenda.

So, we should assume that fixing health care was…on the agenda? Well, healthcare would need to be broken, first, right?

Back in 2009 when the economy needed fixing and Democrats owned Washington, they told us straight up our healthcare system was broken. With a little tweaking…obliterating…or something, everyone could keep their doctors and plans and there would be plenty left over for the uninsured. Nonsense.

If dismantling the U.S. healthcare was not enough, just last week at the State of the Union address, Obama said, “No American can ever again be dropped or denied coverage for a preexisting condition…”

Well sure, you may not lose coverage for asthma, but you will surely lose it if you have a “preexisting condition” like having a preexisting insurance plan of which Democrats disapprove!

Obama and Democrats downplayed the more than 5 million people that lost coverage last year, discounting them as “just 5 percent” of the population but get their panties in a wad over the job-creating “1 percent.”

Weird thing is, coverage for pre-existing conditions is yesterday’s news. Prior to 1996, insurance brokers offered a “guaranteed renewability” option to individuals, guaranteeing policy renewals without charging higher premiums for chronic illness. Then along came the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) in 1996, wherein guaranteed renewals were no longer optional, but mandatory.

What’s more, Obamacare demolishes the healthcare privacy rights guaranteed under HIPAA, according to Rep. Joe Barton (R-Texas) who recently said, “The law specifically designed to protect your medical privacy, HIPAA… is being violated under this law.”

Sounds right, considering Healthcare.gov is a veritable hacker’s paradise and some of Obamacare’s unvetted hired helpers (navigators) are a little shady. California hired 43 convicted criminals as navigators.

It’s not clear who is really helped by Obamacare, but we do see many hurt. According to Fox News’ Jim Angle, 80 million people with employer plans are expected to lose coverage sometime this year. Of course, that will be the Republicans’ fault…or Bush’s…or Reagan’s…or Fred Flintstone’s…

We were told Obamacare would insure the uninsurable and Democrats made it sound like they were talking about the masses when it is really just around 1 percent of the population who do not have group or individual insurance and are ineligible for Medicare or Medicaid, according to National Review.

Here’s the bottom line: Democrats spent trillions to “fix” the economy and wreck the entire U.S. healthcare system when they could have fixed real problems and helped real people in need with less government involvement and much less money.

Yes, something needs to be fixed in Washington, but unfortunately, it’s really hard to fix stupid.

‑ Susan Stamper Brown is an opinion page columnist.