New Jerseyans shopping for health insurance at HealthCare.gov have a new website, PlanCompass.com, where they can check to see if their preferred doctors, hospitals and other health care providers are part of the plan they're looking to buy.

Clifton-based health care startup Vericred last week launched PlanCompass.com for the New Jersey individual insurance market, with plans to expand to the Northeast in January and nationwide in 2015. There is no charge for consumers who use the PlanCompass.com website.



Also in January, the company plans to launch a version of the website for small employers to help their workers chose their health plan.



Vericred Chief Executive Officer Michael Levin said he co-founded the company in March 2014 to build a business around improving the accuracy, eﬃciency and transparency of health care provider data.



The inspiration for Vericred’s first product, PlanCompass.com, grew out of Levin’s experience shopping for a 2014 health plan for his family on HealthCare.gov. He and his wife have four sons, and the family sees five different doctors.



HealthCare.gov is the Affordable Care Act website where New Jerseyans shop for health insurance plans; three insurers sold plans there for 2014, and that has increased to five for 2015 open enrollment, which began last month and continues through Feb. 15, 2015.



When Levin, who lives in Bergen County, went on HealthCare.gov to buy a 2014 plan, “I was presented with a choice of 28 plans.” He proceeded to comb through the plans, searching for ones whose network included all five of the family’s doctors.



“I thought it would be simple, but it ended up taking me six hours,” Levin said. “I was flabbergasted.”



Levin said that, currently, PlanCompass.com gets most of its information about which health care providers are in which networks from the insurance carriers:



“So, today, PlanCompass is only as good as the data that the carriers present publicly: If it’s on the carrier’s directory, it’s on PlanCompass.”



But Levin said the company is developing its own network verification solution “so that we will quickly understand if a doctor is no longer taking patients or if they are no longer in the area, or if there are any other changes” in the network that need to be updated.



Levin said the company will begin implementing network verification early in 2015 and, over time, “We expect to have the best provider data available anywhere.”



Health care experts say there are typically some inaccuracies in the carrier networks; for example, a physician may have stopped taking patients, retired or moved, and it takes time to update the information in the carrier network.



Levin said PlanCompass can help consumers navigate the new “narrow networks.” Insurers are offering lower premiums to consumers who agree to use a narrower network of doctors and hospitals, and it’s up to the consumers to make sure the doctor they want is in the narrow-network plan they buy.



“With narrow networks, tools needed to be developed to help people find the right plan for them without taking hours or days,” Levin said.



Levin said that, over the next month and a half, PlanCompass.com will be in New York, Connecticut, Massachusetts, Vermont, Rhode Island and Maine, then expand to the entire U.S. by the fall of 2015, when open enrollment begins on HealthCare.gov for 2016 coverage.



There is no charge to individuals who use PlanCompass.com. Levin said the company will generate revenue by offering businesses a tailored solution that helps their workers find a company health plan that matches their preferred health care providers. He said the company will launch its employer product by the end of January for small businesses with fewer than 50 employees, and later expand to larger employers.



“Today, it’s very hard for businesses to engage their employees in the selection of health plans, and it’s nearly impossible to find a plan that matches your employees’ doctor set,” Levin said. “We’ll solve both of these problems and make the tool available to businesses for a nominal charge.”

Click here to subscribe to the NJBIZ e-newsletters



Levin said the way this will work is: “The company will disseminate a link to the employees, who will (anonymously identify) the doctors they want to keep. PlanCompass will aggregate those doctors and look for the best matching small-business plan and present that information to the employer.” He said this could result in “Employees who are engaged in the process, as opposed to just being involved at the very end, when they have to sign the paperwork.”



He said company is also exploring opportunities to offer insurance carriers solutions that help them “better serve people looking for health plans.”



“Finding the right kind of health insurance has always been complicated, so any tool that can accurately simplify the process could be helpful,” said Ray Castro, senior policy analyst at New Jersey Policy Perspective. He said many people searching for insurance on HealthCare.gov had insurance before and want to keep their current provider, “but finding out how to do that is not easy.” Those who were uninsured for long periods may want to select a plan that includes a provider that they have heard about or who treat members of their family, and Castro said selecting a provider is particularly important for individuals who need specialized care.



“Unfortunately the current process (on HealthCare.gov) is difficult,” Castro said. “A person has to go to the website of every insurer and find out if the provider is included in the directories. To make matters worse, while the state requires that the directories are periodically updated, they are not always accurate. Furthermore, even if the providers are accurately listed, they may not be participating in the specific plan the consumer wants. To be on the safe side, consumers should always check with the provider to make sure they are participating in the plan they want.”



Levin also suggested that, after checking PlanCompass.com, individuals might want to check with the health care providers to make sure they participate in the specific health plan the individuals want to buy.



Ward Sanders, president of the New Jersey Association of Health Plans, the trade group for the state’s health insurers, said, “Health plans already provide a number of tools to assist consumers shopping for coverage determine if their doctors and hospitals are in-network.” He said of PlanCompass.com: “This seems like it could be another helpful tool for individuals looking to purchase health insurance, but we would encourage shoppers to confirm their doctors are in-network with the health plan they finally choose.”

Linda Schwimmer, vice president of the New Jersey Health Care Quality Institute, said she tried out PlanCompass.com and, “It is a great tool. The thing people really want to know is whether their doctor is in the network. But, because it is difficult to find the information and sometime the information online is inaccurate, the consumer is left to choose primarily on cost — which is also an important, but not the only, factor. Tools like this are desperately needed. “



David Oscar, a health insurance broker with Altigro, said PlanCompass.com could improve the health plan selection process: “What they are talking about is transparency and assistance, and one of the big issues in New Jersey is skinny networks. If this can help us get through that, then why not?”



Castro said consumers should review all potential health plans, regardless of whether or not they include a specific provider. “A person may find a plan that is much more affordable that does not include the provider they want. They should be careful not to select a plan that includes their provider —only to find out later that the out-of-pocket costs are so high they cannot afford the provider’s care.”



Levin said Vericred’s launch was funded by $1.1 million in seed capital, and in January the company will seek an initial $6 million venture capital round “to fund the expansion of our team and our product rollout.”



Claudine Leone, director of government affairs, New Jersey Academy of Family Physicians, said: "Knowing whether your personal physician is participating in your health plan's network is an incredibly important part of the purchasing decision as consumers are visiting HealthCare.gov during this 2015 enrollment period. It is often not an easy task, since this information may have to come from multiple sources."



Leone said family physicians "are open to any resource available to patients and physician practices that can help patients navigate the system of health plan networks with current information. The ultimate objective is to allow patients to make informed decisions on the selection of health plans, which may be a combination of premium cost and access to personal physicians they have come to trust for themselves and their families over the years.”



Leone said decades of peer-reviewed studies have shown two factors that contribute to better health outcomes for individuals — health care coverage and a usual source of care. "We also know from research that patients who have a continuous and longitudinal relationship with a primary care physician have better health care outcomes at lower costs than those who do not."

ALSO ON NJBIZ:

Cushman & Wakefield to acquire regional investment sales firm Massey Knakal

Former Genova Burns name partner joins established firm

NJBIZ presents the 24 Lists of Christmas, Day 15: Top Hospitals