Charles Boustany has endorsed Scott Angelle for Congress, Angelle's campaign said. (Photo: Submitted photo)

Incumbent congressman Charles Boustany, R-Lafayette, has endorsed Scott Angelle for his 3rd District seat, a seal of approval revealed Friday on Angelle's campaign Facebook page.

Angelle, a Public Service commissioner, former interim lieutenant governor and former secretary of the state Department of Natural Resources, is seeking to replace Boustany, a six-term U.S. representative. The 3rd District encompasses most of Acadiana.

READ MORE: Angelle shows early strength

"I am proud to support Scott Angelle for the Third Congressional District. I've worked with Scott to support our farmers, our ports, and to restore our coastline. We fought together against the Obama administration in the wake of the Gulf drilling moratorium and won," reads the endorsement touted by Angelle. "I'm supporting Scott because he's the best candidate to stop Washington's war on oil, repeal Obamacare, and secure our border."

READ MORE: Field says Angelle is not inevitable

Boustany is leaving his House of Representatives seat to run for Senate. If elected, he would replace incumbent David Vitter, who, after an unsuccessful bid for Louisiana governor in 2015, announced he would not seek re-election to the Senate.

Angelle finished third in that 2015 race for governor, just behind Vitter. Boustany endorsed Vitter in that race; there was speculation that Angelle would seek the Senate seat that Boustany is pursuing.

6 are vying to replace Boustany

Six candidates — Angelle, Greg Ellison, Brett Geymann, Erick Knezek, Gus Rantz and Grover Joseph Rees — have qualified to seek Boustany's House seat.

READ MORE: Lots of time before election

The Hayride, a Louisiana political web site, reported Friday that Rantz said Boustany had promised not to endorse any of the six candidates at the first stage of the election. None of the candidates contacted by The Daily Advertiser said Boustany had made such a promise. Repeated messages to the Boustany campaign were not answered Saturday.

"Endorsements are not going to decide this race," Knezek said in an issued statement made late Friday. "Career politicians haven't gotten the job done.

"It is time for the hard-working voters to choose a political outsider with the business experience and fortitude of a veteran to stand up for our Constitutional rights and conservative principles. I’m the candidate who is prepared for this challenge. Failure is not an option for me in this election or moving our country forward."

Ellison: Endorsement won't matter

Ellison, too, said the endorsement would not matter.

"It's time for good people to step up," he said Saturday. He noted that he placed second among the six candidates in a preferential poll, and that he trailed only Angelle in raising funds.

"We're running hard every day. We're going to be there. We fully anticipate making the runoff."

Boustany, Angelle and Dr. Ralph W. Baucum, who is seeking the 4th congressional district seat, share the same fund raiser, The Bautsch Group in Washington.

That group represented Angelle in the 2015 governor's race.

The election is scheduled for Nov. 8.

The runoff, if needed, will be held Dec. 10.

Read or Share this story: http://www.theadvertiser.com/story/news/2016/05/07/boustany-endorses-angelle-congress/84079220/