By Megan Boehnke of the Knoxville News Sentinel

Knoxville City Council members Tuesday unanimously passed a symbolic resolution supporting Gov. Bill Haslam's Insure Tennessee plan.

George Wallace was absent from the meeting, and Vice Mayor Nick Pavlis abstained, citing a conflict with his day job as a lobbyist in Nashville.

Councilman Dan Brown first suggested the resolution urging local lawmakers to support the plan, and six council members joined as co-sponsors.

Council member Marshall Stair called Insure Tennessee "a no-brainer" that would provide health care to low-income residents around the state.

"It's a symbolic resolution and there are a lot of these going around," he said before the vote. "But it's incumbent on us to keep working toward this until it's achieved."

Chattanooga's city council passed a similar resolution earlier this month.

Five members of the public, including two University of Tennessee students, spoke in favor of the measure, citing an obligation to help neighbors and those who fall in coverage gaps.

"Facts are not at the heart of this debate, because acceptance of Insure Tennessee is, above all, a moral issue," said John Stewart, a volunteer with Tennessee Health Care Campaign, a statewide advocacy group. "Your adoption of this resolution will put our Knoxville community on the right side of this moral issue. It will send a clear and compelling message to the General Assembly."

Mayor Madeline Rogero, after the vote by council members, said she was pleased to see the resolution.

Health department statistics between 2005 and now show little change in the number of insured Knox County residents ? 86.4 percent as of 2014. Proponents of expanding Medicaid, or TennCare, maintain those numbers would change by closing the gap in coverage for around 280,000 Tennesseans who make too much money to qualify for TennCare but not enough to qualify for federal subsidies to help them purchase health insurance through the Affordable Care Act marketplace.

Initially, those people would have been covered by expanding Medicaid, which was part of President Barack Obama's ACA plan. But the Supreme Court ruled the decision of whether to expand the public insurance program should be left up to individual states. Gov. Bill Haslam's proposed Insure Tennessee plan is one compromise. The federal government would initially pay 100 percent of a Medicaid expansion, dropping to 90 percent by 2021, with the state responsible for 10 percent of costs. Tennessee hospitals have volunteered to pay the state's share of costs.

News Sentinel reporter Kristi Nelson contributed to this story.