Transcript for Cokie Roberts: Clinton 'Not on Her Game' in First 2016 National Interview

Also this week, we saw the first major television interview in the campaign for Hillary Clinton. Gave it to CNN. Here's a little bit of it. I have never had a subpoena. Again, let's take a deep breath here, everything I did was permitted by law and regulation, I had one device, when I mailed anybody in the government, it would go into the government system. You had that. Didn't get the best reviews over the course of that interview. No, and that's where she really has a problem, not so much the e-mails, but that's hard for voters to care about. But she's not on her game in these interviews, she's just not there yet. She did say one thing that we'll be hearing a lot about, she said, what voters care about, who will be there when they need you. I think that's going to be her theme. That somewhat plays into the grandmother theme. Your grandmother is there when you need her. That's the way of dealing with this age issue. That's going to be a real issue. See, I don't think it made a bit of difference that interview. She's unique in politics. People who love her will still love her. People who hate her will still hate her. I think all of this did is sort of call off the dogs, because the national media was insisting on an interview. I don't think it made a bit of difference. Well, I think she was kind of pushed into it. She had that horrible moment, where they got pictures of having ropes pulling reporters away from her. That looked terrible. She had to do something. But, the moving rope, I think she had to do something, she did something. She checks the box. Had she been doing a bunch of interviews we would be saying, she's overexposed. No matter what she does, she's Hillary Clinton. She's going to be controversial. Everything I did was legal. That's probably not the headline that you really want out there, in Hillary Clinton, I think for some democrats there's a little bit of nervousness, you have seen these big crowds showing up for Bernie sanders. By the way, sanders is winning about a quarter of the democratic party. Is he undercutting this idea of democrats -- Look at some of the things he says. He's a socialist. I don't think he's being taken seriously. Whereas trump is tapping into something that bothers a large portion of the population. So, there's a difference. But sanders is tapping into something, too, he's tapping into the sense that the big guys get everything and the little guy's ignored. They're all saying that. They're both tapping into different strands of populism. Exactly. I can't get off the things that he's written and admittedly in the early '70s he wrote about some study for the cure of cancer -- That's about the staying power, right now -- He's less likely to stay in than trump is. Money. One thing that will keep -- I'm actually not sure about that, either, but I want to move on, one thing that's going to keep Jeb bush in is money. We learned this week that he raised $114 million. But, van Jones, you saw democrats take off on this need to work longer hours comment. He later clarified saying it was for part-time workers. We'll hear more from that. Absolutely. This is very dangerous territory for Jeb bush. Look, I trust that he's being taken out of context to a certain extent. The reality is, when you have someone like him saying, you need to work harder. That sounds horrible. That's not what he said. He said longer hours. That's a different thing. Let me get back to that. I think the most important thing that we have to take seriously here is that American people are working long hours, the wages haven't kept one those longer hours. Testimonies are going to be it heing hard on this part of want stagnation. Republicans are vulnerable because they're against the minimum wage hike. Those things don't sound good at this moment. What he says and what the reporters who were there say was that he was talking about one of the reasons wages are low because people aren't working long enough hours to be able to get it. Right. Not running on cylinders is the problem. I think what he's trying to say that if we're running on seven out of eight cylinders, that's not the kind of economic growth we need. And the dangers of media, you dare to speak to them and they'll sound bite it to death. They'll cut it. Don't you think he's doing a good thing of going out there every day and talking. And talking. Get the facts right. Because actually in voluntary part-time work has actually gone down because of obamacare, because of obamacare, we have fewer people involuntary working. I just want to say, there's this idea that the republicans have been beating up on, obamacare is a disaster, that's actually the -- the Numbers are different than what republicans are

This transcript has been automatically generated and may not be 100% accurate.