The legislative committee overseeing the state health insurance exchange Wednesday questioned the competence of a volunteer board guiding the exchange.

“Did this get set up properly with a part-time, volunteer board?” asked committee chair Sen. Ellen Roberts, R-Durango.

The exchange was set up to increase access to health care coverage, she said, “but we get bottlenecks instead of better care.”

Roberts said there has been chatter about whether the Legislative Health Benefit Exchange Implementation Review Committee was trying to help Connect for Health Colorado or sink it.

“We don’t know yet,” Roberts said.

She expressed concerns about the board makeup and potential conflicts of interest.

The board has nine voting members — five whose terms expire in July — and three non-voting members from state government. Voting members represent physicians, IT companies, health plans and health-related nonprofits.

The governor appoints five members and state legislators select the remainder.

Roberts also was critical of the high pay at the exchange. She focused on the nearly $200,000 annual salary offered to CEO candidates and to the interim CEOs, especially compared with public service salaries, such as a governor who’s been making roughly half that amount.

“Public service means you do things on a reduced pay basis,” Roberts said. “We, meaning … the exchange, have a credibility problem here among the legislators and my constituents.”

Roberts said, despite the high salaries, there has been a revolving door of C-Suite staff — CEO and the chiefs of finance, technology and other departments — who gained experience at the exchange and then bolted for jobs in the private sector.

Connect for Health board chair Sharon O’Hara said the exchange used a consultant and salary survey to determine the salary range, and then offered a salary from the lower end of the range. The salaries are comparable to those paid at other state-based exchanges, she said.

“This is a hybrid we’re trying to staff,” board member Steve ErkenBrack said of the exchange, which is an independent nonprofit with a public purpose — but not a state agency.

The new interim CEO, Kevin Patterson, who began work Friday, has expressed a willingness to continue in the position longer term, ErkenBrack said. The search for a permanent CEO has been suspended in the short term, in part because it’s possible there will be five new board members in July, he said.

Sen. Kevin Lundberg, R-Larimer County, told exchange representatives not to plan too far into the future.

“Forget about the long term,” Lundberg said. “It is impossible to know what role Obamacare and the exchange will play.

“Find the team that can pull you through to the next year,” Lundberg said.

Outgoing interim CEO Gary Drews acknowledged the exchange was at a critical point, with transitions both in leadership and revenue sources, as federal grants come to an end.

Committee members had dozens of questions about possible fee increases at the exchange. However, it is the exchange board that must approve them, not the legislative committee.

Exchange staff have recommended raising the fee on each individual plan sold on the exchange — charged to insurers and passed on to consumers — to 3.5 percent from 1.4 percent. Other fees also could be increased.

The Colorado exchange has charged lower fees and had smaller budgets than most state-based exchanges – and most states were set up to recover some costs from Medicaid, whose enrollees also use exchange resources, Drews said.

Colorado’s exchange was not set up to recover any Medicaid administrative costs. It should recover those costs, Drews said, but it is in the research phase at this point.

“When will the research phase end, and when we’ll we see dollars coming in the door?” asked Sen. John Kefalas, D-Fort Collins.

Patterson told Kefalas he is taking an aggressive approach on Medicaid recovery.

Roberts also brought up online enrollment problems consumers still vexing consumers.

She said she is still receiving complaints two or three times a week from “constituents on the verge of tears, in tears or yelling about problems.”

“The problems still aren’t getting sorted out,” she said. “You have people who have tried to enroll and still are thrashing about.”

Drews said any talk about Colorado scrapping its exchange for the federal model was short-sighted.

“Simply converting to the federal exchange is not as straightforward as you may imagine,” Drews told legislators. But he didn’t go into detail about the costs states carry in the federally facilitated exchanges.

Electa Draper: 303-954-1276, edraper@denverpost.com or twitter.com/electadraper