There exist understandable reasons why well-intentioned Republicans who think the worst of Donald Trump could be convinced to support him. Among those reasons is that the next president will likely have the opportunity to appoint a few Supreme Court justices. Despite Trump's many shortcomings, he is better fit to do so than Hillary Clinton, right?

Not necessarily.

The Supreme Court's duty is to overturn unconstitutional acts, including those of the president. President Trump would not likely nominate justices who would constrain his power to its constitutionally limited bounds.

Professor Randy E. Barnett, Director of the Georgetown Center for the Constitution, told THE WEEKLY STANDARD, "I am not saying that Trump's judicial picks might not, in some respects, be better than Hillary's."

But George Bush picked John Roberts to be Chief Justice because of his commitment to judicial deference to the "politically accountable" branches of government—the Congress and the President himself. And that's the judicial philosophy that gave us the Supreme Court's Obamacare decision. What makes us think that a President Trump would appoint a justice who would stand up to him? That's just not the type of person he is.

George Washington University Law Professor Orin Kerr told The Weekly Standard that Trump will nominate pro-Trump justices.

When Trump realizes that judges can block a President's actions, but that he gets to nominate judges, he'll put two and two together. He'll nominate cronies who would rubber-stamp whatever Trump does. That's not a conservative position or a liberal position. It's just a pro-Trump position.

If Trump has a choice between an originalist conservative with sterling credentials who would often block Trump, and buddy of his who hasn't read the Constitution but would let Trump do what he wants, who do you think Trump would pick?

For conservatives who would vote Trump for judiciary: When Trump learns that judges can stop a Prez's agenda, he'll only nominate cronies.— Orin Kerr (@OrinKerr) May 4, 2016

George Mason University Law Professor Ilya Somin argues similarly in the Volokh Conspiracy.

Some conservatives and libertarians hold out hope that Trump would appoint judges who will protect important constitutional rights by enforcing the original meaning of the Constitution. But, given Trump's longstanding hostility to freedom of speech and constitutional property rights, that is highly unlikely.

Trump is also no friend of the First Amendment, Second Amendment, and Fifth Amendment, among others.

He is proud to say he never takes "no" for an answer, even when it comes to the Constitution and attempting to take elderly widow Vera Coking's home. Some have argued she ought to have sold her house to him instead of resisting. It is important to note she is not legally obligated to do so, and those who believe Trump was right to sue her might have seen things differently if Trump was trying to take their homes.