Total Wine & More hopes to open eight to 10 locations in Tennessee, including one in Nashville and one in Cool Springs this year. (Photo: Courtesy of Total Wine & More) Story Highlights General Assembly bill would limit wine and business licenses to two and stall wine in grocery stores.

There’s a big date coming on Tennesseans’ calendars: July 1, when grocery stores can legally sell wine. But recent actions by the state legislature have put that date in jeopardy, and there’s a familiar reason: the liquor lobby.

A bill before the legislature, HB2586/SB2094, would allow grocery stores to place orders before July 1, in order to be prepared for customers on Day One of the new law. This makes perfect sense, and it’s one that every reasonable business owner supports.

But tucked away in this bill is a limit to the number of liquor stores someone can operate in Tennessee — and that’s something any defender of the free market should find completely ridiculous.

Under the bill, liquor store owners would be limited to two stores across the entire state. Right now, there is no limit in Tennessee. Conveniently, however, the bill would allow anyone who currently has more than two stores to be grandfathered in. Once again, the old, entrenched interests would be protected, while entrepreneurs and new businesses in the market would be shut out.

When the state passed the "wine in grocery stores" bill in 2014, many people acknowledged that liquor stores had been protected from competition for years. That protection was no accident. The liquor lobby hates competition, and they use money and influence to try to stop it. When it was clear the people of Tennessee had spoken on the sale of wine in grocery stores, liquor stores were allowed immediately to sell beer, giving them a two-year head start in the race to stock up.

Now, some liquor store owners want more than a head start — they want other competitors taken out of the race entirely. Such a move is more of the same from a group that seems to think it is entitled to your business, instead of having to compete for it like everyone else.

Businesses like mine, Total Wine & More, would love to come to Tennessee. With each of our stores comes 50 jobs, more than 75 percent of which are full-time with benefits.

David Trone (Photo: Submitted)

We offer thousands of beers, wines and spirits that include products from local breweries and distilleries. We are already in Georgia, North and South Carolina, and Virginia, and we see Tennessee customers all the time traveling across state lines to visit our stores. Your fellow Tennesseans are spending money that could and should stay in Tennessee.

There is no reason the two-store limit should be put in place, except to target companies like ours and to protect the same businesses that think they shouldn’t have to compete.

Because of these owners’ selfishness, they have put in jeopardy not only your choices as a consumer, but also the ability of grocery stores to be ready to sell wine by July 1. It’s more of the same from this group, and Tennesseans should expect better. Please ask your lawmakers to remove the anti-competition provisions from this bill and let Tennesseans decide who deserves your business.

David Trone is Founder and Co-Owner of Total Wine & More.

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/1oRx9iB