A Charleston start-up company wants to change the way companies find workers and how workers find jobs by matching qualifications, skills and other factors rather than using resumes and keywords.

Using millions of bits of data, Job Market Maker aims to pair a person's skills with a given position in any employment sector and then help find the resources for the applicant to close any gaps that exist between the candidate's qualifications and the job opening's requirements.

For instance, a company may be looking for a manager who can operate a forklift, but the applicant doesn't have a forklift license. The company will connect the applicant with the necessary training provider through a one-day program to fill the gap.

Led by Joseph Hanna of Daniel Island, a former Oracle employee, Job Market Maker is currently set up in the SIB building on upper Meeting Street. It has six full-time employees and about nine others working as consultants, but Hanna expects it will easily have 25 full-time workers by mid-2015. That's when it will have to find a larger working space.

"The challenge is in finding the talent, not the space," Hanna said.

All of its employees are current college graduates from Charleston area institutions of higher learning. Hanna received a computer science degree from the University of Alexandria in Egypt and an MBA from Duke University.

Job Market Maker is in its private, market-testing phase to fine tune the system. It has nine clients including a 37,000-employee Fortune 100 company in Chicago. It will go into a public, testing phase in late October to test the product before fully launching in January, Hanna said.

Job Market Maker works by allowing an employer or job applicant to fill out online information about themselves and then create a skills profile including a list of success factors, which are weighted by importance and proficiency.

"We will show you jobs that are available that you are qualified for," said Taylor Wilson, head of customer success for the company.

The firm estimates 20 million people in the U.S. are unemployed or underemployed and about 4 million jobs are currently unfilled.

It said its patent-pending system is the only four-way, multisided platform to match people with jobs. Job candidates, employers, training providers and funding from third parties all come together in the Job Market Maker system.

"Current recruiting tools and job boards are antiquated for today's labor market," Hanna said. "Employers don't want to have to look at 2,000 resumes, and candidates don't want to have to apply to 100 jobs. We're setting out to redefine recruiting."

The company is one of 24 finalists in Innovate+Educate's The Close It Summit's national Jobs Madness contest. If it wins on Oct. 28, it will receive $50,000. "Close It" refers to closing the skills gap.

Reach Warren L. Wise at 937-5524 or twitter.com/warrenlancewise.