He may make a run for president, but former Florida Gov. Jeb Bush shows no sign of backing away from controversial "Common Core" learning standards denounced by tea party conservatives as well as many educators.

Conciliatory at one moment and defiant the next, Bush last week blasted thousands of public school districts across the country as "government-run, unionized, politicized monopolies who trap good teachers, administrators and struggling students in a system that nobody can escape."

"Welcome to a really, really good fight!" the potential Republican presidential contender told hundreds of adoring fellow reformers gathered for a "national summit" hosted by a group he founded, the Foundation for Excellence in Education.

Bush's presidential prospects may be swayed by how he handles his signature issue of school reform.

He's been passionately promoting reforms since he rolled up his sleeves at a charter school in Miami's Liberty City nearly two decades ago and then carried them out as governor from 1999 to 2007.

But some Bush backers said last week he should unchain himself from Common Core — controversial standards that infuriate critics from the right and the left. Opposition is so intense that some fans fear the flap could jeopardize his chances for the Republican nomination.

"I think Jeb needs to find a way to disown it. For many, many, many conservatives, they simply will not support a Republican who supports Common Core," said Sid Dinerstein of Palm Beach Gardens, former chairman of the Palm Beach County Republican Party and "a huge Jeb Bush fan."

-

"Common Core is ultimately Obamacare for education," Dinerstein said, meaning he believes it leads to nationwide strictures. "It's the nationalization of a curriculum. The concept was to set standards for states to try to obtain. But it literally tells you, 'This is how children must subtract one number from another number,' across the country."

Some Republicans hope Bush can defuse the controversy because he poses the party's best chance to win Florida, the nation's largest swing state with 29 electoral votes.

"I hope he can meet somewhere in the middle with those who may oppose him," said John Dowless, a Republican campaign consultant in Orlando. "Because in terms of the general election, he takes Florida off the battleground-state list — and that's huge for Republicans."

Bush said he found the debate over Common Core "troubling." He acknowledged that his views "might be in the minority some of the time."

"I respect those who have weighed in on all sides of this issue," he added. "Nobody in this debate has a bad motive."

But he remained determined to challenge schools that "set the bar too low" for students.

"In Orange County, Florida, last week, the school board voted to make it impossible for a student to receive a grade below 50," Bush told the Foundation crowd. "You get 50 out of a 100, just for showing up and signing your name."

The idea is to ensure that struggling students don't lose hope. But Bush warned, "An overriding concern for self-esteem instead of high expectation does not get you to number one."

Common Core has become a flashpoint in the school-reform debate. It means different things to different people but generally sets goals for what a student should know and be able to do at the end of each grade. Adopted by 43 states, including Florida, and promoted by the Obama administration, the standards were devised by academics and state leaders to ensure that students graduate from high school with the skills and knowledge needed to succeed in college or the workplace.

The standards encourage students to analyze and explain their answers rather than simply come up with correct ones.

But tea party groups and other critics say it's a way for government-funded and unaccountable groups to impose intrusive and misguided policies nationwide.

"Every aspect of your child's school and personal life, including all their interactions with their teachers, will be monitored from 'cradle to career' by a massive database shared with the federal government, other states, researchers and private corporations without consent," warns The Florida Stop Common Core Coalition, a private advocacy group based in Port Charlotte.

Some educators and liberal groups, meanwhile, fear that Common Core restricts teachers and leads to over-emphasis on standardized tests to measure performance.

Bush set in motion reforms that evolved into Common Core after losing narrowly to Democrat Lawton Chiles in his first race for governor 20 years ago. After congratulating Chiles, Bush the policy wonk plunged into an under-served Liberty City community scarred by poverty and past race riots to help establish a charter school.

He developed ways to measure performance by grading schools A through F based on student test scores. His plan requires students to meet standards before moving to a higher grade. It bases teacher pay on student performance. And it calls for more choices, including charter schools and vouchers to help parents pay for private schools.

Bush carried out some of his ideas while governor — riling many teachers, some parents and public-school advocates — and has crusaded for them across the country ever since.

"Everybody wouldn't agree with what he did. Everybody wouldn't agree with his attack on teacher unions," said David Colburn, director of the Bob Graham Center for Public Service at the University of Florida. "But I would say most people thought public education in Florida needed to be challenged to do a better job in educating children from all backgrounds."

Now Bush is fighting for his ideas in the national arena, maybe all the way to the White House.

"Most of the time, it's going to require a big political fight," he said. "Monopolies do not go quietly into the night."

wgibson@tribpub.com or 202-824-8256