MOBILE, Alabama – After five months of work, the University of South Alabama’s presidential search committee is ready to present its three finalists to the campus community.

The finalists are Sheri Noren Everts, provost and vice president for academic affairs at Illinois State University; Jerome A. Gilbert, provost and executive vice president, Mississippi State University; and Dr. Arthur J. Ross III, dean of the School of Medicine, West Virginia University.

Gilbert will be the first to visit the campus. On Thursday, he will meet with the Board of Trustees at 2 p.m., then answer questions at a public forum at 4 p.m. at USA’s Mitchell Center.

Gilbert earned a bachelor’s degree in biological engineering from Mississippi State and a doctorate in biomedical engineering from Duke University. He met his wife, Leigh, while both were studying at Duke.

The couple has three children: Peter, Sallie and Caroline, all graduates of Mississippi State. Peter is now a graduate student at Duke; Sallie is in law school at Georgetown University; and Caroline has a job in fashion merchandising with Nordstrom in Nashville.

“I’m sincerely honored to be a candidate for president at a university like South Alabama,” Gilbert said. “… I’m excited about the possibility of taking the University of South Alabama to the next level.”

As he was preparing to get on the road to Mobile on Wednesday, Gilbert took time to answer 10 questions from the Press-Register.

How do you envision the role of a university president, particularly a university that also owns three hospitals?

The president has to be a leader who uses data and expert input in making decisions. The president is the ultimate decision-maker, but he or she has to listen to the vice president and others before moving forward. I would rely heavily on the counsel of the vice president for health systems and the vice president for health sciences when making decisions impacting the hospitals, as well as input from the Board of Trustees.

How will you work to enhance dialogue and improve communication with the Faculty Senate and the Student Government Association?

I would want to establish clear and open lines of communication with the Faculty Senate and the SGA. I would want to meet periodically with leaders from both groups. They would both be on my list of scheduled meetings.

The Board of Trustees has just implemented a five-year strategic plan, with six goals, including a mission to strengthen the university’s financial standing and to expand the cultural, public service, athletic and economic development aspects of the university. How will your strategies for fundraising and outreach fit in with that plan?

I would want to be an extremely active president with respect to interfacing with alumni, our supporters, and industry and government leaders in the area. Building meaningful relationships would be one key to my strategy of building additional support for the university. I would set some aggressive fundraising goals and spend significant time talking with alumni and supporters about what we could do together as a team to advocate for excellence at South Alabama.

The university also has a goal to increase enrollment to 20,000 within 10 years. What strategies do you have for increasing enrollment?

We will need to be aggressive, in state and out of state, in recruiting students to the University of South Alabama. This will involve not only an aggressive set of recruiters -- which we obviously already have -- but also creating a stronger brand for the university. Marketing the strengths of the university and telling the stories of our current successes will be one way to convince students to consider USA as their college of choice.

Where do you stand on the idea of a football stadium on campus?

I think having a football stadium on campus is a great idea. However, it would have to be proposed and weighed against all of the other needs of the campus that will require a substantial investment. Additionally, a clear funding mechanism would need to be in place before moving forward.

The Board of Trustees has raised tuition and fees for three years in a row. What strategies should be considered to keep tuition affordable and still attract a diverse student population?

Keeping tuition affordable and having the necessary resources to maintain the quality education that is desired are two items that have to be balanced against each other. It will be important to establish the resources necessary to accomplish the vision for the future and then to identify possible revenue sources, of which tuition is one. When setting tuition, one needs to look at other universities in the state and region and determine if you are in an appropriate place with respect to the others.

How will the Affordable Care Act affect the university’s health care division, and what measures should the university take to prepare for its impact?

It is too early to tell exactly how the act will impact the university’s health care division. Clearly, contingency plans need to be in place for multiple scenarios. Advice from business and health care experts, internally and externally, needs to be sought. Being financially conservative would be my initial reaction, as well as planning for enhancing ways to ensure good patient outcomes, since they will be used in determining reimbursements.

What makes USA unique to the region, and where do you see USA in 10 years?

I think having a strong academic institution with a vibrant medical center uniquely places the University of South Alabama in a position for growth in size and stature. The city of Mobile, with its strong industries, and the location in the Gulf region are two great assets of the university that give it a unique character and special opportunities.

I see the University of South Alabama as one of the strongest universities in the state in 10 years, with great academic programs, research programs, medical services and industrial partnerships.

With the increase in infrastructure, parking is the No. 1 student complaint. How is that issue being addressed at Mississippi State University?

We have managed our parking at Mississippi State University by designating parking zones, which help manage traffic and efficiency of lot usage. We’ve also relied heavily on a shuttle system to transport students around campus. There are incentives in the fee structure to encourage parking at remote sites that are serviced by the shuttles. We have a long-term plan for adding additional parking as enrollment increases, and we have identified revenue streams from parking fees to fund the parking system.

What skills and experience do you have that make you stand out as a candidate for USA’s president?

I have 18 years of administrative experience at a major research university and have served in a variety of capacities. I’ve made judgments on the promotion and tenure applications of faculty members from diverse and varied backgrounds. I’ve led strategic planning efforts and have overseen campus master planning efforts. I’ve worked very closely with my president in running our campus and feel confident that I can take on the job as president.

I think that my field of biomedical engineering has given me insights into the technology and medical arenas and has prepared me to be a problem solver. I feel confident that my background and leadership style lend themselves well to working with the university’s trustees, supporters, faculty, staff, alumni and students toward advancing the university.

I will serve the university with integrity, energy and a commitment to excellence.