Bill Miller Bar-B-Q put a "skinny plan" in place for its 4,200 workers last year. Photo: austinlunchreview.blogspot.com Employers hoping to avoid penalties under the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act are increasingly turning to what some call a “no minimum value plan.” These are group health plans – also often called “skinny” plans – that provide basic medical care, but may not satisfy the 60 percent minimum value threshold under the health care reform law. And despite that, they’re perfectly legal, at least for now. Complete your profile to continue reading and get FREE access to BenefitsPRO.com, part of your ALM digital membership. Benefits:

Your access to unlimited BenefitsPRO.com content isn’t changing. Once you are an ALM digital member, you’ll receive: Critical BenefitsPRO.com information including cutting-edge post-reform success strategies, comprehensive service provider listings, educational webcasts and videos, resources from industry leaders, and informative eNewsletters.

Exclusive discounts on ALM, BenefitsPRO Magazine and BenefitsPRO.com events.

Access to other award-winning ALM publications including LifeHealthPro.com, ThinkAdvisor.com and Law.com. Register Now Already have an account? Sign In X Sign in with your ALM Account Remember Me Or... Sign In With LinkedIn

While a typical “skinny plan” may offer preventive services such a wellness element, a few doctor visits per year, and generic drugs, for example, it doesn’t provide arguably the most important element of any medical coverage: payments for surgery and hospitalization. Under a “skinny plan,” if your Pinto gets rear-ended and you land in the hospital and need an operation or two, financially, you are on your own. Regardless, these plans are permitted under PPACA regulations. Some benefits experts suggest they might have been a deliberate attempt to provide relief to industries that have rarely been able to afford health care for their workers -- those with high-turnover, low-wage and low-skilled employees – but many share the view of Susan Sonkin, a compliance specialist at EBS Capstone, a United Benefits Advisors company based in Boston. “It was an oversight,” she said.