Bonnie Inscho (Photo: Courtesy Photo)

July 4 is known as an all-American holiday, but it is not the only all-American event this July. The 50th birthday of Medicare is also being celebrated. Many local and national events are highlighting Medicare's success, culminating with The Healthcare Justice March on the National Mall, in Washington, D.C., on Aug. 1. Visit www.healthcarejusticemarch.org for more information.

The League of Women Voters (LWV) celebrates Medicare's success and sees it as a model for improving healthcare in the U.S. In 1993, the National LWV issued a position statement outlining fundamentals to promote "access to a basic level of quality care at an affordable cost for all U.S. residents" and "cost control mechanisms to ensure economical delivery of care." It calls for a national health insurance plan financed through general taxes while retaining patient choice for private practice providers and hospitals. This is commonly known as the single-payer approach.

The LWV continues to work for healthcare reform and supported the Affordable Care Act of 2010 (ACA), which — although not a single-payer system — is a step forward. However, according to Physicians for a National Health Plan (www.pnhp.org), under the ACA, 39 million adults aged 18-64 remain under-insured and about 27 million will remain uninsured by 2025. High-deductible health plans now comprise a third of all private coverage, leaving even those with insurance financially vulnerable; 62 percent of all personal bankruptcies in the U.S. are still linked to medical bills or illness. Clearly, there is more work to be done to improve healthcare access and affordability.

So what is Medicare and how can it be improved and expanded to cover all Americans?

Medicare is a federal insurance program signed into law July 30, 1965, by President Lyndon Johnson, now covering 55 million people, or about 17 percent of the U.S. population. People eligible for Medicare are aged 65 and older, and younger people with permanent disabilities, regardless of income or health status.

Medicare is more cost effective than most private insurance plans, spending about 2 percent on administrative overhead. This compares with private insurance overhead and profits amounting to 12-14 percent, according to Physicians' for a National Health Plan. More cost control mechanisms are needed, such as allowing negotiation for drug prices with pharmaceutical companies (prohibited by Medicare Part D legislation, enacted in 2003).

The goal of a single-payer healthcare system remains a priority for the LWV, as well as other national and state organizations and legislative efforts. On the national level, the "Medicare for All" Bill/HR 676, sponsored by Rep. John Conyers Jr. (www.medicareforall.org/pages/HR676), is prominent. At the state level, more than 20 states, including Colorado, are offering initiatives for healthcare reform. (See www.coloradocareYES.co)

Watch for the "Happy Birthday Medicare!" banner at local Farmer's Markets in July, sponsored by the LWV-Larimer County's HealthCare Team and HealthCare for All Colorado NoCo chapter. We will greet you with refreshments and more information about Medicare and single-payer healthcare.

For information about the LWV of Larimer County, visit: www.lwv-larimercounty.org.

Bonnie Inscho lives in Fort Collins and is a member of the League of Women Voters of Larimer County's Health Care Team.

Read or Share this story: http://noconow.co/1LVIFi2