'Gentle Giant's' Lawyer Endorsing Ben Carson?

Benjamin Crump, the race-baiting attorney representing the families of Trayvon Martin and Michael Brown, among others, really likes presidential candidate Dr. Ben Carson. In a third Time magazine article in two days to profile the retired neurosurgeon, Crump opines on "why we should take a closer look" at a man he has "known for quite some time." If you recall, Benjamin Crump is the Black Grievance Industry's legal eagle who scurried to Ferguson to craft the "hands up, don't shoot" argument against Officer Darren Wilson in the shooting of "gentle giant" Michael Brown. At the time Crump joined forces with one of BGI's founders, Al Sharpton. The pair fabricated evidence which led to rioting, vandalism, burning of businesses, attacks on police and looting.

In his Time piece, Crump says he met with Carson in Ferguson a few weeks ago and discovered he has a lot in common with the candidate. Does he? The article comes soon after Carson's remarks to the St. Louis Dispatch that he would not have shot Michael Brown, he would have just arrested him. Then, last week Carson offered a “just kidding" after he recounted to a conservative audience how he and other kids in his neighborhood threw rocks at police cars, “back in the day before they would shoot you.” Leftist sites like Daily Kos had a field day, writing that Carson told the truth about police, and then “backed off.” Crump also writes that as an African-American man he has had to overcome the same societal obstacles as other African-American men including Carson. Because of their "innate life experiences" Crump felt inspired by Carson's story in much the same way he did "when Obama was running for President." Crump seems to be smitten to the point of practically endorsing Carson for president. From Time: He is too valuable for our community to lose, and regardless of my political affiliation, there is a part of me that wants him to do well. No matter the outcome of the presidential race, Carson’s credibility should be left undamaged because he will still be a role model and a hero for many Americans, especially African-Americans—including myself. Warming up to race-baiting schemers like Crump while winning over conservative audiences is quite a feat for even the most astute politician, let alone an outsider. Then there’s Crump’s weird, head-scratching praise of Carson in Time that begs the question... Who is Ben Carson?