When it comes to women’s health care Texas Republican leaders seem determined to score political points at the expense of the state’s public health.

State health officials, at the behest of Gov. Greg Abbott, have given Planned Parenthood 30 days notice on its intent to strip the women’s health care provider of the ability the ability to treat to poorest women in the state, who often find themselves in crisis or simply need a low-cost way to get medical care so they can continue to support their families.

The reason, according to Inspector General Stuart Bowen Jr.: “Earlier this year, [Planned Parenthood] committed and condoned numerous acts of misconduct captured on video that reveal repeated program violations and breach the minimum standards of care required of a Medicaid enrollee.”

Nevermind that the videos in question were heavily doctored and examinations by multiple states have not turned up a determination that the health care provider violated state or federal laws.

Regardless of where you sit on the abortion debate, this week’s move is essentially penalizing Planned Parenthood for offering constitutionally legal services. The effect will undoubtedly mirror the effects of when the Texas sidelined Planned Parenthood through the creation of the Texas Women’s Health Program, which offers far fewer services that Planned Parenthood clinics and has resulted in a decrease in health care access to the tune of about 9.1 percent. In Central Texas, despite being one of the fasted growing areas of the state, participation fell by nearly 11 percent between 2011 and 2013, according to the state’s performance report released in January 2015.

This short-sighted, political fixation of women’s ability to make babies completely misses all the other reasons why women need clinical services — urinary tract infections, ovarian cysts, yeast infections, irregular menstrual cycles, endometriosis, menopause and infertility. None of which are covered by the Texas Women’s Health Program. Also, once the Texas Women’s Health Program determines that you are pregnant, you still have to find another Medicaid provider to handle your prenatal visits.

Cutting women and their unborn babies off from preventative health care and other screenings hardly meets the definition of supporting a culture of life. Let us not forget, spending federal tax money on abortions has been illegal since 1976 except in the rare cases of rape, incest and the health of the mother.

The decision is also rife with irony after years of conservative agitation over the Affordable Care Act (aka Obamacare). State officials said that Texas couldn’t expand Medicaid coverage because we have a shortage of providers. Now, just a few short years later we suddenly have enough in all parts of the state to accommodate that thousands of women on Medicaid who currently use Planned Parenthood clinics?

The anti-Obamacare contingent also railed over the desire to choose their own doctor and their own healthcare setting — unless, of course, you are a poor woman who has come to rely on Planned Parenthood.

Once again policy makers have institutionalized the poverty penalty, which requires people with the least amount of time and resources to cobble together medical care. For those women, cost is a complicated equation that includes more than just the price of services. Transportation, wait times, comfort and choice all come into play. The net result is that if the penalty is too steep poor women choose to postpone care, often resulting in more costly and harmful outcomes.