It's foolish to pin any hopes on imaginary born again voting bloc.

Republican presidential candidate, former Pennsylvania Sen. Rick Santorum visits with students at the Dayton Christian School, Monday, March 5, 2012, in Miamisburg, Ohio. Santorum won the Iowa Republican primary that year. (Photo: Eric Gay, AP)

As they plot strategy and evaluate candidates for 2016, too many Republicans embrace the notion that the key to victory lies with hordes of disillusioned Christian evangelicals for whom today's GOP isn't nearly conservative enough. Long before Sen. Ted Cruz, R-Texas, made this assumption the explicit basis for his campaign, this comforting idea percolated through talk radio and activist cadres, with frequent reference to the three million (or four million, or six million) "missing conservatives" who failed to show up to support Mitt Romney and thereby doomed his hapless, "mushy moderate" campaign.

This analysis gives rise to a stirring but dangerous fantasy: that a huge segment of the electorate is merely waiting for a "courageous conservative" pure and uncompromising enough to mobilize the legions of newly inspired true believers who will then surge to the polls to ensure the next GOP landslide. In his announcement of candidacy at Jerry Falwell's Liberty University, Sen. Cruz boldly proclaimed: "Today, roughly half of born-again Christians aren't voting. They're staying home. Imagine instead millions of people of faith all across America coming out to the polls and voting our values."

Actually, one of the nation's most influential organizations promoting those values, Ralph Reed's Faith and Freedom Coalition, conducted a survey after Obama's 2012 victory in the key swing states of Florida and Ohio and reported evangelical turnout between 75% and 80% — one of the strongest turnouts for any segment of the electorate. Moreover, in spite of the fears that Christian conservatives wouldn't support a Mormon from Massachusetts, national exit polls showed self-identified "white, evangelical or born-again Christians" comprising 26% of the overall electorate, as large a proportion as ever before.

In 2004, when George W. Bush placed special emphasis on drawing active church-goers to the polls, white evangelicals amounted to 23% of all voters but enabled Bush to achieve his margin of victory over John Kerry. Bush campaigned as the most outspokenly Christian candidate of recent years and drew an impressive 79% of the born-again vote — precisely the proportion Romney won in 2012, whatever his weaknesses as a candidate.

The record-levels of GOP support by evangelical voters undermines the notion that Republicans can rely on mobilizing heretofore apathetic Christians to sweep the country. So why would prominent and sophisticated politicos endorse this strategy for 2016?

The most obvious answer involves the prominent position of Iowa in the primary calendar, where polls show evangelical voters representing a clear majority of the Republican electorate. The last two Republican winners of the Iowa Caucuses — Mike Huckabee and Rick Santorum — specifically targeted Christian conservatives and managed to win upset victories against better-known, better-funded rivals.

But even here, conventional wisdom proves misleading and contradicts hard numbers from the Hawkeye State. Yes, Huckabee won big in 2008 with 34.4% of caucus-goers supporting him. But the combined vote of his five principal rivals — 65.2% — gives the lie to belief in automatic evangelical domination since none of those competitors (Romney, part-time Hollywood actor Fred Thompson, John McCain, Ron Paul and Rudy Giuliani) enjoyed robust support in the Christian conservative community.

Four years later, the Iowa results provided even less evidence of the centrality of religious voters or religious issues. Santorum managed to claim first place (by 34 votes over Romney) with his tireless, heartfelt appeals to evangelicals, but his leading competitors (Romney, Ron Paul and Newt Gingrich, who could hardly count as religious rabble-rousers) nonetheless combined to out-poll him (59.2% to 24.6%) without particular emphasis on social issues. Even in states like Iowa with their devout and church-going population, evangelical sentiments don't necessarily dictate voting.

None of the slate of candidates in 2016 can afford to ignore or dismiss Christian conservatives, who remain an essential element in the Republican Party base. As more than a quarter of the total electorate in 2012, exit polls show that these believers made up a larger voting bloc than African-Americans (13%) and Latinos (10%)combined. Nevertheless, the widely held belief that conservatives can carry the day by discovering — or manufacturing — invisible armies of Christian true believers represents the sort of groundless wishful thinking that only wrecks campaigns and undermines the cause.

hosts a nationally syndicated talk radio show and is a member of the USA TODAY Board of Contributors.

In addition to its own editorials, USA TODAY publishes diverse opinions from outside writers, including our Board of Contributors. To read more columns like this, go to theOpinion front page.





Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1HdfJOO