TAMPA — Even those who came just to watch the Special Ops Spartan Sprint had to sign a waiver.

“There is a risk of injury and/or death from participating as a spectator,” the first line of the yellow form read.

But that didn’t deter thousands of people who came to watch or participate in the 3.5-mile obstacle course and race at Raymond James Stadium on Saturday.

It was Tampa’s first Spartan race, an internationally renowned competition in which participants scale 8-foot-high walls, crawl through mud under barbed wire and jump over pits of fire.

It was the third Spartan race for Brian Szymanksi, who came from Jupiter for the event.

A regular running race can be boring, he said, and the Spartan races include strength training.

“There’s some extra stuff in there, a little mud and a little water,” said Szymanski, 24. “It’s a good workout.”

If the barbed wire and the rope climbs weren’t enough, volunteers waited for the runners at the end of the course, ready to hit them with large padded dumbbells,

For Amber Starr, 30, and Kayla Fisher, 28, both of St. Petersburg, the promise of a free beer at the end was what would propel them across the finish line.

Neither of them had run a Spartan race before, but they found a good discount on Groupon and decided to try it. Still, they were nervous before their turn.

They watched videos from other races online to psych themselves up for the event, Starr said.

“But I think the videos made it worse,” Fisher said.

The idea to bring the race to Tampa was planted two years ago, organizers said, during International Special Operations Forces Week, when commandos from nine countries put on a capabilities demonstration that included “freeing” Tampa Mayor Bob Buckhorn who was “taken hostage” by “violent extremists.” The event drew thousands of people to downtown Tampa.

Buckhorn officiated the race’s opening ceremony Saturday, which included paratroopers and a speech from Socom’s commander, Adm. William McRaven.

A portion of the entry fees, which ranged from $75 to $100 depending on sign-up date, will go to military-related charities, organizers said.

Spartan races are intense, but they are safe and “extremely well-run,” said Kurt Huebschman, 44.

He was visiting family members in Orlando, down from his home in Pennsylvania, where he ran his first Spartan race. He and his brother-in-law are running a half-marathon at Disney World next weekend and wanted to run the Spartan course at Raymond James, too.

“This was my Christmas present,” he said.

Ebehrman@Tampatrib.com

(813)259-7691

Twitter: @LizBehrmanTBO