Angel Garcia, of Denver, shows how to dress your tattoos in black. Garcia, a make-up artist and stylist, also recommends no crazy patterns. If you must do patterns, go simple, with polka dots or stripes, she says. ( Iman Woods / Courtesy photo )

My new floral-print dress matched my eyes, hair color, makeup and facial skin tone. I had followed all the fashion rules and shopped within my color palette.

But it clashed with my arms. My left arm, in particular.

The fabric print was nearly the same color scheme as my arm tattoos. Nearly, but not quite. It was just similar enough to blend in and just different enough to compete. I looked as if I had paired my dress with a mismatched blazer, one that I could never take off.

The dress had to go. It was easier to replace than my arms.

As increasingly more people, especially women, get tattoos, these kinds of fashion issues get more mainstream.

A Fox News poll last year found that nearly half of women under the age of 35 have tattoos (47 percent), nearly twice as many as men in that same age group (25 percent). Other polls have indicated even higher percentages, but one trend seems to be consistent: Women want ink.

(Insert counter-criticisms about tattoos here, and then embellish with sexist commentary about "femininity" that holds women to different rules, standards and levels of judgment about their physical appearance than men. Make sure you use this as an opportunity to dog female sexuality and perceived promiscuity, of course.)

(Now insert me owning my own body for my own personal reasons that I don't have to justify to anyone else.)

With our new skin colors, patterns and pictures come new fashion considerations.

Boulder professional stylist Jennifer Krigsman, owner of ColorOnStyle, recently published a blog on the topic of dressing for your tattoos.

Courtney MacArthur, who founded the Boulder County Bombers roller derby team, believes black complements her tattoos. (Molly Plann / Courtesy photo)

"It can be hard to marry this, and we haven't really had this issue before. It's new," Krigsman says. "It can be hard. Sometimes when I look at people with big, beautiful tattoos, they're not always wearing what's supporting it."

There are two ways to look at your fashion choices, Krigsman says.

First, via your comfort level and personal character. If you have a bold or quirky personality that naturally lends itself to a more bold or quirky style, that will affect what you can "pull off," she says. Really, "pulling off" something is what you're comfortable wearing, and if you want to put plaids or polka dots next to your floral tattoo sleeve, then go for it, she says.

But if you're in doubt or looking for more ideas, it also can be helpful to examine your style via some basic rules of a designer's eye.

In an ideal world, she recommends getting your colors professionally done before getting a tattoo. Bring the swatches of your most flattering colors to your artist and request he or she incorporate those into the design. Or just go black and gray, she says. That's easier to match.

If you have a bold tattoo, she suggests toning down your outfit, as to not overwhelm. The eye needs somewhere to land, and when things get too busy, it's difficult to know where to focus. The famous Coco Chanel saying, "Before you leave the house, look in the mirror and take at least one thing off" rings especially true for a person with colorful, prominent tattoos.

Jennifer Krigsman

"You can think of a tattoo as a supporting artist," she says. "It's something that enhances your look, like the right piece of jewelry."

A single solid neutral color is an easy go-to, but you can make that interesting, too, she says. Instead of just a black tee, pick a top with nice lines or unique accents.

Or pick a single color that will complement your tattoo. This might be the contrasting color on the color wheel. For example, if you have a tattoo with lots of green, pick a toned-down red, but in the same warm/cool color family that flatters your non-inked skin. Or, if you're basically a walking rainbow, she says it can be fun to highlight a single matching color by matching it to a "pop" of an accessory or monochromatic outfit.

But don't limit yourself to a specific fashion genre, Krigsman says. The tattoo scene for women might have flourished in the rockabilly and Kat Von D scene, but as with all style, you can continue evolving.

Just because Kat Von D had black hair and high-contrast makeup doesn't mean you have to be her cliche.

"Everybody shows up in a different way. We may have a lot of stereotypes out there, but we don't necessarily want that look," Krigsman says "If you still style your hair in the classic way or wear an elegant dress, you start to change people's ideas of what tattooed women look like. 'She has tattoos but looks so elegant and feminine.' If you're consistently showing up like that, it changes people's ideas of what they think tatoos are, and maybe starts to open it up for more people."

Bottom line: Only you know what's right for you, she says.

"You'll know because you'll know how you feel when you put it on," she says.

Aimee Heckel: 303-473-1359, heckela@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/aimeemay