More than 1,200 people enjoy free show

Vocalist Tim Allums sings Hark the Herald Angels Sing at the United States Air Force Academy Band "Holly & Ivy" show at Thompson Valley High on Sunday. ( Aaron Atencio / Loveland Reporter-Herald )

Margaret Rose traveled with her husband, who worked on the railway, from Tennessee to Vermont to Louisiana to Colorado to California in the 1930s.

Along the way, she recalls a love of dancing, snow, Colorado cowboys and "Hollywoodland."

Sue Bachman, dressed in red shawl and matching spectacles, shared this story through a musical journey while playing the character Margaret Rose at the Air Force Academy Band's production of "Holly & Ivy" on Sunday.

The United States Air Force Academy Band presented its 60th annual show through an afternoon of music to over 1,200 people at Thompson Valley High School. Musical numbers included "Let it Snow," "Jingle Bells," "I Wonder as I Wander" and "Christmas for Cowboys."

Bachman as Rose acted as emcee and shared a love of family and travel while introducing the magnificent band.

"I'm guessing family is at the heart of your holiday memories, too. I can remember mine like it was yesterday, playing outside in the snow, getting chilled to the bone," she said on stage. "Running indoors, stripping off our snowshoes and our boots, hanging our socks and mittens over the register to dry, burning our tongues on steaming hot cocoa ... and all the while in the background was the sound of the radio."

The band played clips of a radio show where the broadcaster asked everyone to put their hands over their hearts for the "Star-Spangled Banner."

Of course, the orchestra took this challenge on and everyone in the auditorium rose for the national anthem.

Advertisement

Lt. Col. Daniel L. Pierce directed the concert, which included an orchestra and several vocalists: Master Sgt. Tim Allums, Master Sgt. Susan Govier, Tech. Sgt. Krista Joyce and Airman 1st Class Jamie Teachenor.

The Air Force Academy Band also invited children on stage near the end of the concert for a sensory storytime experience where Margaret Rose read "The Polar Express." Children listened in rapt excitement as the children as the screen behind Rose showed the pictures of the book and the band accompanied the story with its own score to add suspense and dramatic moments.

Vocalist Krista Joyce leads the band in song at the United States Air Force Academy Band presents Holly & Ivy show at Thompson Valley High on Sunday. (Aaron Atencio / Loveland Reporter-Herald)

Santa Claus even showed up to pass out candy canes.

Jessica Benes: 970-669-5050 ext. 530, jbenes@reporter-herald.com, Twitter.com/jessicabenes.