Topics: American History, Editor's Picks, Elections 2016, John Boehner, Tea Party, Ted Cruz, News, Politics News

The Tea Party’s most recent antics, which have forced the Speaker of the House to retire and prevented a new one from being chosen, demonstrate once again that its members don’t know much about American democracy, just as the name they chose for themselves demonstrates that the don’t know much about American history.

Apparently, they thought that they Boston Tea Party was some sort of protest against what they really hate, which is government regulation. The original Tea Partiers’ disparaging depiction of Native Americans, which would be completely unacceptable at present, apparently didn’t deter them from making use of this event, but the fact of the matter is that they didn’t understand it. The tea that was destroyed in Boston Harbor belonged to a private firm, the East India Company. That company had been authorized by the British government to sell tea to the American colonies at a cheaper price than its American competitors; in other words, it got the sort of privilege that people like the Koch brothers and Sheldon Adelson are hoping to get from a Republican president.

What the original Tea Partiers wanted was a return to the system of government regulation that had prevailed before the privilege was granted. Of course, the people behind the Tea Party didn’t like paying the taxes that were part of that regulatory system (mainly because the colonies had no representation in Parliament). But what really got them angry was Parliament’s displacement of government regulation by special privileges granted to a private company.

The current Tea Party’s more serious misunderstanding involves the nature of democratic government, specifically the idea of a loyal opposition. When historians and political scientists began investigating the Nazi regime after its defeat, they were surprised to discover that it had been much less efficient in mobilizing for war than its democratic opponents. They expected that such an aggressive, totalitarian regime, although monstrously unjust, would also be ruthlessly efficient. What they realized, however, is that dictatorships, in any form, don’t work very well because the leader’s subordinates can never be sure where they stand, who will be the next leader, and what will happen if they lose a battle for succession. The result is that they withdraw their resources from the general government and try to build up separate, independent power bases that they can use to seize power or protect themselves if they should fail.