What’s the deal with the ominous red drips on a photograph of a classroom in a Democrats for Education Reform-financed direct mail piece in the Colorado State Board of Education 3rd Congressional District race?

Reader Seth Levine of Durango, who teaches at an alternative high school, forwarded us a photo of the mailer and sees blood, literally.

He and his wife, also a teacher, were upset and offended by the “terrifying” mailer, which seeks to draw a stark contrast between incumbent Republican Marcia Neal of Grand Junction and Democratic challenger Henry Roman of Pueblo.

“A classroom dripping with blood is my greatest fear in the whole world,” Levine wrote in an e-mail. “I brought this ad to school today to show my fellow teachers and we were all outraged. Violence in our schools should not be fodder for political campaigns.”

Jen Walmer, the Colorado state director for Democrats for Education Reform, which through an affiliated group has spent more than $200,000 on direct mail, radio and other media in the contested state board races, sees it differently.

“The imagery in the mailer represents the shade of red that partisan Marcia Neal is painting our classrooms,” she wrote. “I apologize if anyone thought otherwise, but clearly the intent was to show the red hue of partisanship brought on by Marcia Neal.”

Walmer said it is important to communicate to voters the difference between the candidates, something she said can be difficult for the candidates themselves in a loud election season in a sprawling district.

Her group portrays Roman, a retired superintendent and charter school administrator from Pueblo, as “a seasoned educator who focuses on kids and giving all of Colorado students access to a high-quality education.” She said Neal has become more partisan, pointing to language on her web site underscoring her focus on ensuring her party maintains board control.

Before we received a copy of the red-hued mailer, Walmer provided a kinder, gentler, direct mail piece with pencils, a globe and excerpts of newspaper endorsements of Roman (including one from Neal’s hometown paper, The Grand Junction Dail Sentinel).

Notably, there is no Republican equivalent independent group spending money in the state Board of Education races.

The conservative group Americans for Prosperity has waded into local school district races before, including in Douglas County. But the group has focused heavily on vouchers, not much of an issue in the state board race.

Van Schoales, CEO of the pro-education reform group A+ Denver, cited the shifting positions of Republicans – many of whom have been aligned with reform-minded Democrats in the past – on standards, testing and other issues.

“Historically, Republicans have had an orientation towards having more choice, and also having greater accountability for school performance – the No Child Left Behind, Jed and George Bush approach,” said Schoales, who formerly worked for DFER. “Recently, there’s been a move to try to roll back these things arguing it’s a federal overreach. Some folks are really struggling with what is more important, accountability for performance or local control.”

In an e-mail, Neal said she heard a radio ad that represented the same theme as the red-hued mailer.

“These are really ugly ads,” she said. “The reader that compared them to blood was right. Being portrayed as an evil doer that wants to harms kids is unsettling … In my last race we had a very spirited ongoing discussion. But we both respected one another.”

What say you? Does the flier call to mind Sherwin Williams or the elevator scene from “The Shining?”