Bayada Scores Home Health Contract with Temple University System

A Pennsylvania-based health system has secured Bayada to manage its home health division. It is yet another example of a health system looking to expand home health offerings—a trend that has been driven in part by Affordable Care Act programs that give hospitals an incentive to better manage patients across the care continuum.

Bayada Home Health Care — a privately held, New-Jersey based company that operates in 21 states — signed a management services agreement with Jeanes Home Health, the home care division of the Temple University Health System and a department of Jeanes Hospital, on Oct. 5.

Financial terms of the management services contract have not been disclosed, the Philadelphia Business Journal reported.

The management services deal gives Bayada the responsibility for the operations of the division — renamed Temple Health at Home — including all administrative and office functions. Additionally, Temple home health providers are set to join the Bayada staff.

“As a result of this new relationship, patients will benefit from Jeanes Hospital’s commitment to serving its growing community, and Bayada’s experience in offering the most sophisticated home health care services,” Marc. P. Hurowitz, the president and CEO of Jeanes Hospital, said in a prepared statement.

The contract with Bayada is expected to give Temple Health the chance to expand its home care services throughout its entire health system, Hurowitz added.

Jeanes Hospital, a member of the Temple University Health System since 1996, is the only acute care Quaker-founded hospital in the United States. The hospital offers communities in Northeast Philadelphia, Bucks County and Montgomery County advanced medical, emergency and surgical services, along with its home health care division.

Bayada Home Health Care provides nursing, hospice, therapeutic, rehabilitative and assistive care services to children, adults and seniors in their homes. The company employs over 20,000 home health aides, nurses, therapists, medical social workers and other home health care professionals who serve communities in 21 states from more than 300 offices, the Business Journal reported.

Written by Mary Kate Nelson