The black bear that roamed Berrien, LaPorte and St. Joseph counties last summer has been captured and euthanized after becoming aggressive, but conservation officers won't be surprised if more bears show up here in the future.

When the bear was first spotted in Indiana last June it marked the first confirmed wild black bear sighting in the state in 144 years. Hunting and habitat loss eradicated the species in the 1800s.

Over the past 20 years, the imaginary line in Michigan where bears rarely crossed has moved about 120 miles to the south with sightings not uncommon now near Lansing, Grand Rapids and even farther to the south and east toward Ann Arbor, according to Mark Sargent, a spokesman for the Michigan Department of Natural Resources.

Previously, it was rare to ever see a bear south of Big Rapids, Mich., which is about 60 miles north of Grand Rapids and where Sargent in 1996 became the first conservation officer to a trap a bear that had been getting into beehives and barns.

It's believed the bear that was euthanized near Stevensville on April 9 came down from the Muskegon area, which is about 50 miles south and west from Big Rapids.

Sargent said the gradual migration south is from an increase in forested areas once farms get sold and subdivided for residential use.

Like many others his age, this bear was more than likely pushed away by the mother acting on instinct to do so a year after birth, Sargent said. Sometimes, though, cubs away from their mother for the first time venture out for unusually long distances.

Many times, strays return to their native area but this one didn't, perhaps, because of having plenty of food and cover.

Sargent wouldn't rule out the possibility of another bear coming as far south as Indiana. "Never say never," he said.

Should another bear show up in the area, Sargent suggested that residents discourage it from staying by placing garbage cans into a fenced-in area and putting away bird feeders once a bear gets into them.

The black bear that was trapped last week has been cremated. A local Indian tribe is seeking the bear's hide, Sargent said, but a decision has not been made. He would not disclose the tribe requesting the skin because of the ongoing talks.

Sargent said the bear was a healthy, 302-pound male, which is about twice as heavy as estimated last year.

It's not uncommon, though, for a bear at such a young age to gain that much weight so quickly, said Sargent.

He said the bear was believed to be about 30 months old, but his exact age won't be known until one of the bear's teeth is sliced open, said Sargent. The inside of a tooth is much like a tree with a circle for each year of existence, he said.

The bear at least twice last year visited Pete Livas' honey farm near Michigan City, knocking over beehives and trash cans. Livas was disappointed to hear that the bear wasn't taken farther north and released.

But Sargent said the bear was not released back into the wild because it was no longer fearful of humans and thus was a potential threat. Relocating it would have only been relocating the problem, he said.

"We have a healthy bear population in Michigan. It's a game species. There's not a large demand for bears in captivity. It was habituated to human activity and there was a safety issue," Sargent said.