Yesterday, House Speaker John Boehner announced he is pursuing a lawsuit against President Obama because of what the speaker deems to be the president’s excessive use of executive orders and other administrative actions. The speaker is pursuing the suit on behalf of the House of Representatives, which will have to vote on legislation to authorize it. President Obama indicated earlier this year that he would be more aggressive in his use of executive orders and administrative actions because of his frustrations with Congress.

Clearly, the president’s tactics do not sit well with the speaker, who has cited among his concerns a shift in power from the legislative branch to the executive branch. In a memo to House Republicans, the speaker wrote, “If the current president can selectively enforce, change or create laws as he chooses with impunity, without the involvement of the Legislative Branch, his successors will be able to do the same. This shifts the balance of power decisively and dangerously in favor of the presidency, giving the president king-like authority at the expense of the American people and their elected legislators.”

[SEE: Cartoons on President Obama]

The White House says the president has acted within his authority on the executive orders. Additionally, a Brookings Institute fellow told The Hill that the speaker's claims that the president has overstepped will be hard to prove. However, if the speaker feels the legislative branch is losing power to the executive branch, perhaps he should look inward and examine the actions of the Congress in which he serves.

Since they regained the majority, the House Republican agenda has been primarily focused on preventing the president from doing anything. While this effort has resulted in dozens of pointless votes on issues like repeal of the Affordable Care Act, it has not enabled Congress to pass much legislation of substance or enact new laws. A general unwillingness to compromise throughout the legislative body has caused short-term renewals of major policies rather than long-term reauthorizations that would allow legislators to leave their mark. With few exceptions, the legislative process has all but ground to a halt. So, yes, one might say Congress has less power than it used to.

Ultimately, the courts will decide whether the speaker's suit has merit. But a Congress that legislates would surely help reverse the power shift he is concerned about.