Northeastern has received a grant from the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation to develop a comprehensive user’s guide for population-based health metrics, which can be applied to national payment reform and preventative care efforts. Photo via Thinkstock.

“What leads to healthier people?” asks John Auer­bach, Dis­tin­guished Pro­fessor of Prac­tice and director of the Insti­tute of Urban Health Research and Prac­tice in the Bouvé Col­lege of Health Sci­ences. “It’s not just the care they get from doctor,” he says, “but their lifestyle choices and the envi­ron­ment where they live and work.”

These fac­tors, Auer­bach explains, are used to build population-​​based health met­rics. And these met­rics, he says, are essen­tial tools that can be used to treat patients, estab­lish pre­ven­tive care mea­sures, and save big health­care dollars.

“When you create population-​​based met­rics, you’re not just looking at how you treat a patient who’s suf­fered a heart attack,” Auer­bach says. “You’re also mon­i­toring the myriad envi­ron­mental aspects that impact the patient’s health.”

Auer­bach is the prin­cipal inves­ti­gator on a grant North­eastern recently received from the Robert Wood Johnson Foun­da­tion, the nation’s largest phil­an­thropy devoted solely the public health. The grant—which dove­tails with Northeastern’s com­mit­ment to pur­suing use-​​inspired research in health, one of the university’s core research themes—will be used to iden­tify a uni­versal set of population-​​based health met­rics and then inte­grate them into a toolkit. The toolkit will be used by health­care orga­ni­za­tions to imple­ment pay­ment reform and other mea­sures aimed at improving patient care and low­ering costs.

The health­care industry has con­tinued to focus on ways to improve cur­rent pay­ment struc­tures as Pres­i­dent Obama’s land­mark Afford­able Care Act and other ele­ments of health­care reform go into effect. Global pay­ments, in which health­care providers receive large lump sums from payers to cover the expected costs of care, have been put in place to help the health­care industry tran­si­tion away from the tra­di­tional pay-​​for-​​service model. Sup­porters say global pay­ments incen­tivize the health­care industry to coor­di­nate and deliver effi­cient and effec­tive care, par­tic­u­larly through pre­ven­ta­tive care.

The idea is that access to population-​​based health met­rics, which link patients’ clin­ical expe­ri­ences with the broader envi­ron­mental fac­tors in their com­mu­ni­ties, would help insurers make deci­sions that empha­size pre­ven­ta­tive care and avoid unnec­es­sary, costly med­ical tests.

Auer­bach says the health­care industry is eager to start working within an accepted frame­work to mea­sure providers’ ability to improve pop­u­la­tion health. While there are many mean­ingful efforts aimed at iden­ti­fying evidence-​​based pop­u­la­tion health indicators—the Insti­tute of Med­i­cine and the Cen­ters for Dis­ease Con­trol and Pre­ven­tion are but two—no one has yet cre­ated a con­sol­i­dated and readily acces­sible list of such met­rics. That’s where Auerbach’s group comes in.

Last month, his team began facil­i­tating dis­cus­sions with key orga­ni­za­tions and indi­vid­uals cur­rently working on pop­u­la­tion health mea­sures in an effort to gather the most up-​​to-​​date data avail­able. These many stake­holders will be involved throughout the process as Auerbach’s team builds the com­pre­hen­sive user’s guide for pop­u­la­tion health metrics.

To be suc­cessful, Auer­bach says, the toolkit will need to be acces­sible and under­stand­able. It will also need to be fea­sible for large insur­ance com­pa­nies, small community-​​based doctor’s offices, and orga­ni­za­tions in between.