Hagan said the group's priorities are not aligned with the needs of her constituents. Hagan slams the Koch brothers

Vulnerable Democratic Sen. Kay Hagan shrugged off the massive amounts of money being spent in her race by a group backed by the Koch brothers, saying her state’s residents will stop them from trying to “buy” her seat in the Senate.

“The people in North Carolina are not going to let the billionaire Koch brothers buy this seat,” Hagan said on MSNBC’s “All In with Chris Hayes” on Wednesday night.

Story Continued Below

POLITICO reported Wednesday that the Koch-backed Americans for Prosperity has already spend $8.2 million against Hagan’s reelection in her state.

( Also on POLITICO: Koch brothers bombard vulnerable Senate Democrat Kay Hagan)

But Hagan said Wednesday that the priorities of the group are not aligned with the needs of her constituents and they won’t be “fooled.”

“My state, as you said, is being flooded with millions of dollars, funded by outside interest groups,” Hagan said. “They’ve opposed the bipartisan farm bill that is extremely important to the agricultural sector in my state. They opposed the bipartisan budget bill that turned off sequestration. At the same time, they’ve gotten tax cuts for the wealthy and put that burden on 80 percent of the middle-class families, increasing their taxes. These are not policies that North Carolinians want, and they’re not going to be fooled by this outside money.”

A key part of the barrage against Hagan and other Democratic senators that Republicans perceive as vulnerable in 2014 is tying them to Obamacare, something Hagan defended.

“The people in North Carolina have the fifth-highest signup on the exchanges, after Florida, New York, California and Texas, it’s North Carolina, so they’re very interested in this,” Hagan said. “We want to show that the Affordable Care Act is something whose time has come. It’s going to really change how the cost of health care will not have these huge increases that we’ve been seeing every year.”

Hagan also referenced the “war on women” theme pushed by Democrats.

“You know what my opponents want to do? They want to personally get involved in the health care decisions, especially of women,” Hagan said. “Every one of my opponents to date has said that the state has the authority to ban contraception. I can guarantee you, that’s what women will not want to have to hear.”