Both GOP and Democratic 2016 presidential hopefuls tested their messages in front of a pro-union crowd on Tuesday during a forum held by the

The conference hosted potential contenders like Sen. Marco Rubio Marco RubioThe Trail 2016: Interleague play Rubio: I'd speak on Trump's behalf at convention Top Republican urges Rubio to run for reelection MORE (R-Fla.), Sen. Ted Cruz Ted CruzFiorina returns to attack Clinton's 'lust for power' Trump clinches GOP nomination Eleven states sue Obama over transgender bathroom directive MORE (R-Texas), Sen. Lindsey Graham Lindsey GrahamSenate amendments could sink email privacy compromise Trump: Romney 'walks like a penguin' Romney should endorse Clinton MORE (R-S.C.), former New York Gov. George Pataki (R), former Maryland Gov. Martin O’Malley (D), Sen. Bernie Sanders Bernie SandersThe Trail 2016: Interleague play Clinton laughs off idea of Trump-Sanders debate Colorado gov sports Trump socks MORE (I-Vt.) and former Sen. Jim Webb (D-Va.).

Wisconsin Gov. Scott Walker, who on Monday signed a “right to work” bill in the state and has angered public sector unions, did not attend the event. Neither did New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie, who also has a difficult relationship with organized labor.

Walker was briefly criticized from the podium for his comment last month that he could take on the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria (ISIS) because he had taken on union protesters in Wisconsin.

“Any politician who compares demonstrators to ISIS … just is flat out wrong,” Pataki said.

Speakers from both sides of the aisle touted their support for the working class.

“For the rich and powerful, big government has been a good deal,” Cruz said. “But working men and women across this country are hurting.”

He urged reforms that would cut taxes for small businesses and said that a full repeal of ObamaCare. His line about ObamaCare fell flat in the room, according to reports.

Rubio praised the work of first responders like those who had helped his daughter when she was in an accident.

"You're an important part of the ability of our governments to respond,” he said. “And we'll continue to be allies and advocates for the causes that are important to your profession.”

Other Republicans also calibrated their messages to appeal to the pro-union crowd.

"I’m a proud Republican, but I’ll tell you this folks — we are all one car wreck” away from needing support from government, Graham said.

The South Carolina Republican said that Congress had endangered government programs that helped the middle class like social security.

“And Congress allowed that to happen because we don’t know what the hell we’re doing up here,” he said.

Democrats were also quick to draw a contrast with Republicans, who are generally seen as less supportive of pro-union laws.

O’Malley said as he began his speech that there were two things that the audience would not have heard from the Republican speakers.

“One is a commitment to collective bargaining,” he said. “And the second is a commitment to increasing funding for public safety.”

“Here’s what I believe: I believe that you don’t play games with public safety. I believe that you don’t play games with peoples’ lives. Not now, not ever,” he said.

The former Maryland governor deployed a populist message that some have said is designed to appeal to progressives who are dissatisfied with Hillary Clinton Hillary Rodham ClintonJudge seals all video interviews in Clinton email case State aide thought Clinton email was for ‘family and friends’ Clinton: I'm ready for Trump's 'fantasy' campaign MORE, the race’s prospective Democratic frontrunner.

“[I]f a bank is too big to fail without harming our nation, then it’s too big and we must break it up before it breaks us,” he said.

Sanders and Webb played to the union crowd as well.

“Maybe, just maybe, it’s time for corporate America and the wealthy to start paying their fair share of taxes,” Sanders said, to loud applause.

Webb said that he was the only person elected to statewide office in Virginia “with a union card, a purple heart and three tattoos.”

Vice President Biden also attended the event one day earlier.

Former Florida Gov. Jeb Bush, who would be considered a frontrunner for the nomination if he decides to run, did not attend but greeted attendees in a short pre-taped address.