Topics: From the Wires, Entertainment News, News

ST. PETERSBURG, Russia (AP) — As FIFA descends on St. Petersburg for the World Cup preliminary draw Saturday, it is entering the capital of a sponsorship empire.

Government-controlled Russian gas company Gazprom is a huge presence in St. Petersburg, where it owns Russian champion football club Zenit and bases many of its roughly 400,000 staff. Entire streets in the historic center are lined with boards on lampposts reading: “Gazprom for the city.”

Gazprom, whose boss Alexei Miller is a close political ally of Russian President Vladimir Putin, is almost as omnipresent in world football.

It is a major FIFA sponsor ahead of Russia’s 2018 World Cup, its logo prominent at the draw ceremony. With FIFA embroiled in scandal after the arrests of officials in May, some FIFA sponsors have criticized the organization and its president Sepp Blatter, but Gazprom has not. By sponsoring the Champions League, it has access to UEFA boss Michel Platini, the favorite to succeed Blatter.

Despite spending an estimated $100 million a year to display its brand in some of world soccer’s most desirable competitions, Gazprom doesn’t sell directly to fans. Instead it specializes in vast energy supply, selling billions of cubic meters of Russian gas.

As a result, some suspect Gazprom’s sponsorship empire may be an attempt to influence European political decision-making, or even a vanity project grown out of control.

“What they’re seeking to do is to influence countries,” says Simon Chadwick, a professor of sports marketing at Britain’s Coventry University. “They’re seeking to influence the consumption of gas by countries, but they’re also seeking to influence decisions around the distribution of gas.” Sponsoring a club can give Gazprom public support in foreign countries while negotiating trade deals, as well as access to politicians, Chadwick argues.

The company holds a monopoly on all gas exports from Russia, giving it huge influence on world markets. However, it is often accused by European politicians of misusing that power to further the Russian government’s political aims, including raising prices to put pressure on neighboring countries.

At World Cup and Champions League games, sponsors gain access to VIP hospitality areas which can contain major decision-makers such as the FIFA officials embroiled in disputes over Russia’s right to host the 2018 World Cup, or club owners who may be major political players in their own right.

Using AC Milan’s owner Silvio Berlusconi, a former Italian prime minister, as a hypothetical example, Chadwick outlined how he believes Gazprom’s sponsorship could help the Russian government further political aims.

“Rather than have to go up through normal diplomatic channels to negotiate with the Italian prime minister or even meet with the Italian prime minister, what you do is you sign a Champions League deal,” he said. “AC Milan plays in the Champions League and immediately you’re in the corporate hospitality lounge of the club that’s owned by Berlusconi. So I think it’s about networking, it’s about influence, it’s about attempts to lobby.”