LANSING —Blue Cross Blue Shield of Michigan will not reinstate cancelled plans for customers who buy their own health insurance.

The news came shortly after the state insurance commissioner announced that Michigan health insurers could extend their 2013 plans through 2014 if they want to. The move is allowed under a policy change announced last week by President Barack Obama.

But the state's announcement, backed by Gov. Rick Snyder, is essentially meaningless to thousands of members of Blue Cross, the state's largest insurer with a majority of the individual market. On Friday the company said it will continue transitioning members into plans that comply with the Affordable Care Act for 2014.

There is one exception: A pre-Obamacare plan called “Keep Fit” will still be offered for 2014 to customers, since the plan's renewal date comes before Jan. 1, 2014. That was already an option before the state made its announcement Friday.

“As Blue Cross discontinues our non-compliant health plans, we will be transitioning those members in Keep Fit to make sure their coverage continues,” said company spokesman Andy Hetzel.

At least 225,000 Michiganders were among millions of people nationwide who buy their own insurance and had received discontinuation notices from various insurers, according to a count by the Associated Press.

Blue Cross has about 175,000 members in the individual market, including about 35,000 who were in the Keep Fit plan for 2013. It sent letters to the remaining 140,000 members notifying them that their current plans would be discontinued in 2014. In many cases new options that include additional benefits are significantly more expensive than their existing plans.

So far an additional 12,400 members have chosen Keep Fit, for a total of 47,400. The company is receiving calls and interest in the product daily, according to Terry Burke, vice president for individual business. People who aren't currently Blue Cross members have until Dec. 1 to enroll in Keep Fit, while current members have until Dec.12.

Related: Blue Cross, Priority Health talk Obamacare changes

Since Blue Cross spent the past few years planning to discontinue its non-compliant individual plans, it hasn't increased rates since 2011. If it did extend those policies another year, it would raise rates by 30 percent or more to catch up.

While the Keep Fit premium won't change, customers will pay more next year to cover taxes and fees associated with the Affordable Care Act.

Blue Cross would prefer its members enroll in Obamacare-compliant plans, which offer more benefits and come with the possibility of tax credits, Hetzel said.

“We are not encouraging people to take a backwards step,” he said, noting that the new plans “are good for the future.”

Email Melissa Anders at manders@mlive.com. Follow her on Google+ and Twitter: @MelissaDAnders. Download the MLive app for iPhone and Android.