Emory Healthcare has appointed Dr. Jonathan S. Lewin as president and chief executive officer.

Emory Healthcare has appointed Dr. Jonathan S. Lewin as president and chief executive officer after conducting an extensive national search.

When he takes the helm on Feb. 1, 2016, Lewin will also serve as executive director of the Emory University's Woodruff Health Sciences Center as well as executive vice president for health affairs for the university.

He currently serves as senior vice president for integrated healthcare delivery and as co-chair for strategic planning for Johns Hopkins Medicine.

[Also: WellStar backs out of Emory Healthcare merger]

Emory President James W. Wagner in a statement said Lewin possesses "an impressive track record of innovative and high-impact research, exceptional patient care and visionary administrative acumen."

At Johns Hopkins University, Lewin also serves as professor and chair of the Russell H. Morgan Department of Radiology and Radiological Science and is also the radiologist-in-chief at Johns Hopkins Hospital, with secondary appointments as professor of oncology, neurosurgery and biomedical engineering.

Lewin, in a statement, said he was excited to be "educating tomorrow's healthcare workforce, pursuing discovery and innovation in the health sciences, and providing skilled and compassionate care to our patients" at Emory.

Prior to his tenure at Johns Hopkins, Lewin served as director of the Division of Magnetic Resonance Imaging and vice chairman for research and academic affairs in the Department of Radiology at Case Western Reserve University and the University Hospitals of Cleveland.

[Also: Emory Healthcare adds CarePayment option for flexible payments]

In 1981, he earned his undergraduate degree in chemistry from Brown University, and secured his doctorate in medicine at Yale four years later. He completed his internship at Yale-New Haven Hospital; his residency in diagnostic radiology at University Hospitals of Cleveland; a magnetic resonance fellowship in Germany; a neuroradiology fellowship at the Cleveland Clinic; and further training in head and neck radiology at the Pittsburgh Eye and Ear Hospital.

He's also a Fellow of the International Society for Magnetic Resonance in Medicine, as well as the American College of Radiology. Some of his current roles will remain unchanged when he makes the transition to Emory -- Lewin will continue to serve as president of both the American Roentgen Ray Society and the International Society for Strategic Studies in Radiology.

Like Healthcare Finance on Facebook

In addition to those accomplishments, Lewin is accustomed to seeing his name in print, having published roughly 200 peer-reviewed scientific manuscripts, as well as more than 60 chapters, reviews, commentaries and papers on a range of different topics.

To cap things off, Lewin has developed more than 20 patents, and has been principal or co-principal investigator on more than $10 million in grants from the National Institutes of Health and other federal and state funding agencies.

Twitter: @JELagasse