Socialists don't seem to understand that if people wanted to buy healthier foods, supermarkets would stock it. But to a lefty everything I just said is crazy talk.

And so we're out another $500 million. Because Obama.

With the obesity epidemic in full swing and millions of American living in neighborhoods where fruits and vegetables are hard to come by, the Obama administration thought it saw a solution: fund stores that will stock fresh, affordable produce in these deprived areas. But now, three years and $500 million into the federal Healthy Food Financing Initiative, there's a problem: A study suggests it's not working. Adding supermarkets to areas with short supplies of fresh produce does not lead to improvements in residents' diets or health outcomes, according to a report published Monday in the February issue of Health Affairs.

Let me get this straight, stores don't stock a product because people don't buy it, instead of people not buying a product because stores don't stock it? And that means that stocking a product will not make people buy it?

It's great that we have a country run by "wonks" who sneer at monkeys with MBAs, but who think that they know how business works because they watched Wall Street.

When a grocery store was opened in one Philadelphia food desert, 26.7 percent of residents made it their main grocery store and 51.4 percent indicated using it for any food shopping, the report found. But among the population that used the new supermarket, the researchers saw no significant improvement in BMI, fruit and vegetable intake, or perceptions of food accessibility, although there was a significant improvement in perception of accessibility to fruits and vegetables.

Accessibility is one of those stupid liberal buzzwords that implies the problem is with some sort of external inhibition instead of individual choices.

Supermarkets didn't stock the food that wonks thought black people should eat because... black people weren't buying it.

But I'm sure liberals have learned their lessons and will respect individual choices instead of... sorry. You know that's not going to happen. Thugs will be thugs even when they're white poetry majors who moved on to nutritional policy.

Cummins said in an email that lawmakers ought to consider policies that will change community behavior to incorporate healthy food into everyday diets. "These might include economic initiatives such as taxes on unhealthy foods and subsidies on healthy foods, marketing initiatives that focus on in-store promotion of healthy food, and programs that focus on skills related to buying and cooking components of a balanced diet," Cummins said.

Sure, let's tax the food people want to eat and subsidize the food people don't want to eat. It's the same stupid policy, but now it comes with fines baked in.

It worked for ObamaCare. It's bound to work for ObamaFood.