Published Nov. 17, 2013 at 5:12 a.m. Tweet

The "Social Circle" is a group effort between readers, social networkers and the OnMilwaukee.com editors. Every Monday, we ask a question via Facebook and Twitter and then post the responses from our Facebook "likers" and Twitter followers in this column. Well-known Milwaukee movers and shakers will contribute, too.

A recent conversation in the editorial office prompted this week's odd Social Circle question and the OnMilwaukee.com editors were pleased by how seriously some took it.

And yet others took the question to a new, equally-amusing place. Feel free to add your thoughts via the Talkback feature.

Classic Slice, Transfer, Pizza Man and other imaginative, local pizzerias: you taking notes?

Eric Cooper: "Dates. To me, dates, even though a fruit, are candy to me. They are oh so good."

Michelle Drewek: "Pepperoni and chocolate coins."

Helene Feider: "Bit-O-Honey shavings in the crust. Or ice cream."

Elisha Ann Fields: "M&Ms on Dairy Queen's ice cream pizza."

Yana Glik Gainizamanov: "How about someone at OnMilwaukee.com is having hormonal disbalance?"

Steve Gondek: "I consider bacon candy."

Beth Jaworksi: "In Germany I saw gummy bear pizza."

Kirk Jonssen: "Candied ginger?"

Jennie Duehr Jontry: "Mozzarella-flavored Jelly Bellies."

Sarah Klein: "Peeps."

Elba Lopez: "Milky Ways."

Colleen McShane: "Fruit slice gummy candy and pineapple."

Brian Patrick Maguire: "Are we putting the candy on before or after baking it? That would make a difference. Butterfinger and bacon pizza might be pretty good. Or Reese's Peanut Butter Cups and bacon."

Daniel Mayeshiba: "Boston Baked Beans. Or a Hawaiian pizza with cherry coins on it."

Dan Polley: "Anything chocolate if you made a dessert pizza. Maybe Snickers and honey crisp apple with a caramel drizzle."

Michelle Rangel: "Butterfingers."

Steve Rickun: "Black licorice."

Bonnie Ristow: "It depends on if this is a lunch / dinner pizza or a dessert pizza."

Alex Stafford: "Oreo cookies would be better."

Steven Wroblewski: "Big League chew."