Judge Paul Dunkelman found that probable cause exists to support 17 of the 18 theft and fraud charges filed against Cynthia Johnson during a preliminary hearing Friday in Eagle County District Court.

The charges, including one under the Colorado Organized Crime Control Act, are in connection with a coordinated bank scam in western Colorado in 2015, District Attorney Bruce Brown announced in a news release.

Johnson, who is also known as Jacquelyn Murray, was charged in connection with her involvement in a racketeering conspiracy involving theft through a credit card scam perpetrated on western slope banks in Eagle, Garfield, Mesa and Summit counties in September and October. If convicted on the racketeering charge, Johnson faces a mandatory 96-year prison term.

“The gathering and sorting of evidence from multiple law enforcement agencies across three states has been one of the major challenges in this case,” said Assistant District Attorney Heidi McCollum.

“We seek additional suspects involved in this racketeering enterprise and will continue our coordination with the several agencies taking part in this complex investigation,” she said.

Johnson was arrested Oct. 14 in Frisco after a failed attempt to take a cash advance of nearly $5,000 from Alpine Bank using a credit card under a false name. When the transaction could not be completed Johnson claimed it was because the credit card company was not aware of her travel plans. Johnson then encouraged the unwitting teller to call the number on the back of the credit card that was answered by an accomplice impersonating a Capital One customer service representative who gave a fake authorization number to the teller to force the transaction, the release said.

Johnson and two co-conspirators replayed the scenario at Alpine Bank locations across the western slope. Vanessa Ravare was arrested Oct. 21 in Silverthorne and an unknown man, who perpetrated the scam in Frisco and Vail in September, remains at large, the release said.

The Breckenridge, Frisco, Silverthorne and Avon police departments worked with the Eagle County Sheriff’s Office on the investigation.

Johnson will be arraigned March 9. Ravare has a disposition hearing Feb. 17.