As parent leaders for Together Colorado — a non-partisan, multiracial, multifaith community organization — we advocate to have good schools for our kids. We expect teachers to be accountable for teaching our children what they need to know to be successful in school so they can go on to the college and career of their choice.

More than that, we expect our children to be accountable for their own education. That is why we will make sure our kids not only take the tests they are supposed to take, they also will take those tests seriously.

Last week, students throughout Colorado began taking state standardized tests that will give us important information about how our children, our schools, our districts and our state are doing.

In order to have good data that can drive a positive change, we need students to take the tests they are required to take and to do so to the best of their abilities. For us, it is about teaching our children the value of personal responsibility. It is also about responsibility to the community.

When parents encourage their children to opt out of taking tests, or condone not taking the test seriously, it affects everyone. Schools and districts do not get good data — and that means it is even more difficult to have an accurate understanding of their performance. When students opt out in high numbers, it threatens much-needed funding for low-income populations. This may not matter to people in more affluent parts of the state, but it matters to our communities.

Historically, areas with high minority and low-income populations have faced equity issues in the quality of teachers our children learn from and the expectations for what our students can achieve. As parents with children in Denver Public Schools, we are deeply committed to making sure all students are held to the same high standards.

Children rise to the level of expectations that are set for them at home, in the community and in school. For too long, parents in areas of Denver have been led to believe that they should be happy with schools that parents in communities outside of Denver would rightly say are unacceptable.

The Colorado Academic Standards have evened the playing field by setting consistently high expectations for every student in this state. But setting a high bar is not enough. We need tests that allow us to know how the children in our families are doing so that we, as parents, can make sure they are on track from semester to semester and year to year.

We need to know that if they move from one grade to the next, it is because they have learned what they need to know. Too many of our children get passed on to the next grade even if they are a full grade level behind. Or, even though they are told everything is fine all year, they are held back at the end of the school year.

If we want our teachers to do their jobs, we have to insist that our children do theirs. For us, this is a matter of teaching them personal responsibility for their own lives and responsibility to the community in which they live.

We hope it is a value that parents throughout Colorado share. We will be telling our children to take the tests that are required and to take them seriously. We hope other parents will do the same.

Nancy Paz and Yesenia Quintana are parents of students in Denver Public Schools.

To send a letter to the editor about this article, submit online or check out our guidelines for how to submit by e-mail or mail.