AUSTIN — Texas lawmakers return to work Tuesday with a host of challenges and a fresh lineup at the top, including the first new governor and lieutenant governor in more than a decade.

Tax cuts, border security, school improvements and new highways are priorities for many legislators. But guns, abortion and other hot button issues also will be in the spotlight.

Gov.-elect Greg Abbott and Lt. Gov.-elect Dan Patrick, who will be sworn into office Jan. 20, have made it clear they want to put their own brand on the session and already have laid out key priorities for lawmakers.

Meanwhile, Speaker Joe Straus becomes the veteran in the state triumvirate in his fourth session as leader of the House. Many lawmakers and special interest groups are looking to Straus and his leadership team to have a sobering influence on the Senate, which has turned even more conservative with nine newcomers in the 31-member chamber.

Republicans will continue to control the agenda in both houses, meaning the major battles over legislation could come down to battles over how far to take state policy to the right.

“We have the majority in the Senate. We have the majority in the House. And we should be able to pass whatever we want,” Patrick told a gathering last week. To make sure, the new lieutenant governor is backing a rule change in the Senate that would diminish the influence of Democrats in the upper chamber.

Elections last year only solidified the conservative hold on the state.

“No one would accuse the Texas Legislature of being moderate, particularly in this decade,” said Jerry Polinard, a political science professor at the University of Texas-Pan American. “The real question is how much more conservative it will get.”

The leadership changes are not just at the top, but also in key positions in the House and Senate.

Both budget-writing committees will have new chairmen, as will the House’s tax policy panel. The Senate State Affairs Committee, which traditionally has handled everything from dense but important public-employee pension reforms to volatile social and partisan issues such as gay marriage and voter ID, will also have a new leader.

Patrick has yet to appoint chairmen, but he promised on the campaign trail last year that the number of Democrats in positions of authority would be whacked.

The defeat of Dallas-area Republican Sens. John Carona and Bob Deuell in last year’s primaries, combined with the departures of veteran Sens. Robert Duncan of Lubbock and Tommy Williams of The Woodlands, badly weakened the “centrist conservative” bloc in the chamber, said Rice University political scientist Mark Jones.

“The centrist wing has been effectively gutted, and their members have been replaced by movement conservatives,” he said. That will create a noticeable policy shift to the right in the Senate, while in the House, “It’s going to be business as usual.”

Lawmakers meet for 140 days every other year, not counting specially called sessions. Thus, their work is often frantic, as they try to write a two-year budget that spends about $100 billion of state revenue and tackle scores of issues. House members and senators will offer thousands of bills and resolutions, all with an eye on local concerns, ideological positions and their own political futures.

Straus, R-San Antonio, remains firmly in control of the House. He is expected to easily turn back a challenge from second-term Republican Rep. Scott Turner of Frisco when members choose their leader Tuesday.

“If anything, the Scott Turner challenge has put a spotlight on how solid Straus’ control is — and the extent of his support, even in the movement conservative wing of the party,” said Jones. He noted, for instance, that tea party-backed Rep. Giovanni Capriglione, R-Southlake, supports the incumbent.

One of the session’s biggest mysteries is which Dan Patrick will show up to lead the Senate. Patrick’s three opponents in the GOP primary — including incumbent David Dewhurst — intensely disliked him. And Patrick made a number of enemies as an outspoken conservative leader in his eight years as a senator from Houston.

But he struck a more conciliatory note last week.

“I’m committed to delivering on what the people of Texas have asked us to accomplish. However, as a former senator, I clearly understand and respect the fact that it will be the senators that will achieve those goals and get the credit,” he said.

But the new lieutenant governor, a favorite of tea party adherents and social conservatives, is still expected to push senators to pass legislation those groups want. That could force Straus and his allies to either kill those measures in committee or allow votes in the full House that could fracture their current coalition of Republicans and Democrats.

Two examples are private school tax credits and possible repeal of a 2001 law that offers in-state tuition rates to those in the country illegally. Patrick has endorsed both ideas.

“Repealing the immigrant tuition law could become one of the most emotional issues of the session,” said Sherri Greenberg, a former House member who directs the Center for Politics and Governance at UT’s LBJ School of Public Affairs. “Let’s not forget that Rick Perry and many Republicans supported the law. The party is clearly divided on it.”

The most popular school voucher idea in Texas would provide public funds for private and religious schools by allowing businesses to get tax credits for donations made to those schools.

There is strong support in the Senate, but House leaders have been lukewarm to the idea in the past.

Two years ago, “a voucher proposal went down by 103 votes” out of 150, noted House Public Education Committee Chairman Jimmie Don Aycock, R-Killeen. “An awful lot of people would have to change their minds before it goes anywhere this year.”

Public education groups and Democrats are vigorously opposed to the idea, saying public schools are already suffering from inadequate funding that has forced teacher layoffs and oversized classes in recent years.

Even in areas where there is broad agreement, working out the details will be difficult.

Take tax cuts. They have widespread support in both chambers, and both Abbott and Patrick have called for a reduction in property taxes and business taxes.

“You should expect some form of tax relief this session because our citizens deserve to keep more of their hard-earned tax dollars,” Abbott said last week.

But the plunging price of oil, which drives much of the state’s tax revenue, has sharply downsized expectations.

“It will definitely sober some of the tax cut fervor,” said Sen. Kirk Watson, D-Austin. Watson has offered a measure to increase the mandatory homestead exemption for school property taxes.

On two hot-button issues that emerge in almost every legislative session — abortion and guns — experts believe there will be more action on guns this time around.

While some Second Amendment proponents want to repeal Texas’ ban on open carrying of handguns, Jones of Rice University said GOP leaders may find it easier to pass long-stalled legislation to allow concealed-handgun permit holders to bring their weapons onto college campuses.

To reach a deal, such legislation would probably have to let private colleges opt in and state universities opt out, he said.

On abortion, some lawmakers will try to make it harder for minors to get around the state’s parental-consent law. But it’s unlikely to spark the major battle that tough new restrictions on clinics and doctors caused in 2013.

Social conservative groups are also turning their attention to other issues. Jonathan Saenz of Texas Values said certain GOP lawmakers will push for constitutional amendments to enhance protections for religious liberty. He cited efforts by Houston Mayor Annise Parker to subpoena sermons of pastors who discussed gay-rights issues as the city battled over protections against discrimination.

“The left wants to ignore what happened in the election, but they will be met with significant opposition,” he said.

On health care, hospitals, urban county leaders and some insurers will again push the Legislature to seek a compromise with the Obama administration. One often-discussed idea would allow Texas to draw tens of billions in federal Medicaid money but cover certain poor adults with private insurance rather than traditional Medicaid.

However, even hospital lobbyists concede privately that the mere mention of “Obamacare” will probably unravel any effort at a deal. Conservative lawmakers fearful of a primary challenger might rush to oppose the proposal, as they did in 2013, hospital lobbyists say.

Follow Terrence Stutz on Twitter at @t_stutz and Robert T. Garrett at @RobertTGarrett.