Sen. Bennet sheds light on local issues in GJ visit





The Affordable Care Act is making headway against costs most everywhere but in western and central Colorado, U.S. Sen. Michael Bennet, D-Colo., said Friday.

Those areas have “some of the most expensive health care on the planet,” Bennet told The Daily Sentinel editorial board.

Fixing the act, frequently referred to as Obamacare, is next to impossible in the politically charged atmosphere in Washington, D.C., in which Democrats refuse to change it at all and Republicans want to toss it wholesale, Bennet said.

Grand Junction, which was touted as having some of the lowest Medicare costs, also has some of the highest health care costs overall, according to a database study of spending by insurance plans.

Resolving such issues is no clear task, Bennet said.

“I don’t have answers for Grand Junction, but I’m aware of the problem,” he said.

The region’s dependence on energy is similarly problematic, Bennet said, noting that renewable sources of energy as well as even coal can be utilized.

Clean coal still can have a place in the nation’s energy portfolio, Bennet said.

“We have to get to neutral” in terms of carbon emissions, he said.

“What we want is tax incentives for clean energy, whatever the source is,” Bennet said.

Bennet is seeking re-election for the first time this year. He was appointed by Gov. Bill Ritter in 2009 to replace Ken Salazar when Salazar was appointed Interior secretary in the Obama administration. Bennet defeated Weld County District Attorney Ken Buck in 2010.

A decision by Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell, R-Ky., rejecting hearings for Merrick Garland’s nomination to the Supreme Court will boomerang on a Republican president who wants to make a nomination late in his last term, Bennet said.

The nation’s fight over immigration is unsettling for people outside the country who worry about barriers to Muslims and the construction of a wall on the Mexico border, causing difficulty for others who wish to emigrate to the United States — both positions advocated by the presumptive Republican nominee Donald Trump, Bennet said.

“The GOP has to take up where it is on immigration,” he said.