Newest problem involves delivering forms to clients who need to file their 2015 taxes. Meanwhile, a divided Legislature appears content to let the health exchange run status quo another year.

The MNsure website (Photo: Times screenshot) Story Highlights Local county officials know MNsure technology is not user friendly

Extreme critics want to scuttle MNsure; others want feds to take over

In three years of operations, MNsure has proven two points: It's an expensive, functional nightmare. It's provided more Minnesotans with health coverage.

While the latter is a good thing, improving its functionality is a major challenge — and one this board hoped would be addressed with substantive solutions by the 2016 Legislature. Three weeks into the session, though, it appears MNsure will undergo no major reforms until 2017.

From a consumer perspective, that's too bad.

The theory behind this state-run health insurance exchange is it could provide a "one-stop shop" for people needing access to health insurance. Based on their income levels, consumers' choices are enrollment in a public health plan, getting a public subsidy to help purchase coverage, or paying for their own coverage.

That sounds good in theory, but MNsure continues to prove it's hard to make a reality. For example, again this year, the exchange had to extend deadlines and hold weekend office hours to meet demand as enrollment closed.

Now, though, a new challenge has arisen. As Twin Cities media reported last month, more than 13,000 MNsure clients who received subsidies for coverage last year need forms from the exchange so they can file their 2015 taxes. The forms should have gone out by now, but it is unclear whether they will be sent in time for clients to meet the tax-filing deadline of April 18.

On another front, the March 21 Times news report "Counties struggle with MNsure system" explained how area county officials say MNsure's IT system used to enroll low-income people continues to be plagued with errors, delays and unreliability.

And, of course, opponents of MNsure and the overarching federal Affordable Care Act are quick to (correctly) point out the exchange, which cost taxpayers about $300 million to build and is supposed to be self-sufficient, continues to struggle to meet projections on client numbers and revenues generated.

All those factors are why intense critics want MNsure scrapped while more moderate voices want to let the federal exchange take over. Defenders, meanwhile, promise solutions and service improved. Such words, though, ring more hollow every year.

From a political perspective, legislators seem willing to leave MNsure alone this session — probably in large part due to the partisan split between the Republican-controlled House, DFL-led Senate and DFL Gov. Mark Dayton.

Indeed, compromise is never easy when one side sees a functional nightmare and the other sees expanded health coverage.

Read or Share this story: http://www.sctimes.com/story/opinion/2016/03/29/mnsures-fate-wont-resolved-soon/82340842/