"Religious liberty is the right to live out your faith, personally," Marco Rubio said. | Getty Rubio returns to religion in final Iowa push

MARSHALLTOWN, Iowa — Marco Rubio returned to his religion Tuesday in his final push to win over voters ahead of next week's Iowa caucuses.

The Florida Republican expounded at length about his views on religious freedom and how he would be guided by his personal faith as president.

Story Continued Below

"Will faith influence me as president? Absolutely," Rubio told potential caucus-goers at Marshalltown Community College. "Our nation should hope that our next president is someone who every day and every night and at every moment drops to their knees and asks the Lord for guidance and asks the holy spirit for inspiration and asks him for wisdom. The wisdom of Solomon to make difficult decisions on behalf of the greatest and most important country."

Rubio's move to highlight his faith and how he would govern as a Christian comes as he has reintroduced the more optimistic part of his personal biography on the campaign trail. It also comes as his operation sees an opening to try and lock down more of the key Iowa evangelical-voter bloc as Sen. Ted Cruz's support has shown signs of splintering.

Cruz tried to rally a group of evangelical leaders Monday by telling them Donald Trump could be "unstoppable" if he wins in Iowa. Trump has recently soared past Cruz in polls and has clinched key endorsements from religious leaders such as Jerry Falwell Jr.

Rubio also spoke about religious liberty and how, as president, he would appoint an attorney general who would defend groups like Little Sisters of the Poor, which has asked the Supreme Court to allow it to not provide Obamacare-mandated birth control.

"Religious liberty is the right to live out your faith, personally," the Florida senator said. "Not imposing it on anybody. No one is talking about that. I'm a Christian. You can't impose Christianity. Christianity is about the free gift of salvation. It has to be willfully accepted. You can't force someone to convert to Christianity. It won't be legitimate."

This is just the latest instance of Rubio talking about and being asked about his faith. His campaign released an ad in early January about how Rubio, who is Catholic, is guided by faith.

"As a Christian, I am called to share my faith whenever asked, and I am proud to do so," Rubio told reporters after the campaign event, when asked why he believes Iowa voters are asking him about religion. "I hope that I influence others that perhaps have become stagnant in their faith to kind of rediscover [their faith]."

His comments were well received by many in the crowd, including Rubio supporter Carlene Illum, who was here to see Rubio for the third time.

"First of all, his faith, that to me is very important to me that we have a Christian president in our country," Illum said.