President Obama talks with Rebekah Erler of Minneapolis at Matt's Bar during his visit to the city. (Jerry Holt/Star Tribune via Associated Press)

This post has been corrected.

Each night, President Obama reads 10 letters or e-mails from ordinary people. On Tuesday, some of them will attend his State of the Union address.

Eight of the 23 people invited to sit in first lady Michelle Obama's box during the speech wrote letters to Obama, according to the White House. Others are people the president met over the past few weeks as he has traveled the country, playing spoiler to his speech, announcing initiatives such as a free community college plan, faster Internet service and paid sick leave.

Each year, the White House invites a cross section of people, from elected officials to working people plucked out of obscurity, to watch the speech from the box.

This year, Obama is focusing on the letter writers -- a constituency he met with a number of times over the summer.

The State of the Union guests include a 13-year-old from Chicago who wrote a letter to Santa with this message: “All I ask for is safety. I just wanna be safe.”

A nonprofit organization forwarded the letter to the White House, and Obama wrote back to the boy.

Astrid Muhammad, 39, received a brain tumor diagnosis in May 2013 and didn't have health insurance. She enrolled in coverage through the Affordable Care Act and had the tumor removed. She wrote to Obama last year thanking him for signing the law.

Others were chosen in other ways. Prophet Walker of Carson, Calif., served a six-year prison sentence for robbery, got out and became a construction engineer.

"Oh, wow, that's incredible," he said in a White House video that showed staff members calling to invite him to the speech.

The White House also invited Alan Gross, a U.S. contractor who spent five years in a Cuban prison and was freed last month as the United States worked to normalize relations with the island nation. His wife, Judy, also will attend.

Obama has read letters from people each night throughout his presidency as a way to stay connected with Americans and hear their hopes, fears, hardships and accomplishments.

"It's one of the most important things I do -- it's right there next to my national security briefing and whatever policy issues that we're supposed to be working on -- because it reminds me of why I ran for office," Obama said in Denver in July. "And so I have a chance just to hear from people as they tell their stories."

The president spent the summer meeting with many of these writers, taking them out for dinner or coffee. He also instructed his Cabinet secretaries to spend time with people who write them letters to see how policies translate to real life.

Obama invited a few of those people, including Rebekah Erler of Minneapolis, an accountant and mother of two young children who wrote to the president after her husband's construction business failed.

The president spent the summer boosting his populist bona fides on the road, meeting with the writers, going out for fast food and discussing the idea of "economic populism." His focus ahead of the State of the Union address is again on the middle class; over the weekend, the White House announced a plan to raise taxes on the wealthiest Americans.