It really is the business community. It's not the large or the medium or the small."

CLEVELAND, Ohio – Twelve years after local economic-development groups joined forces to form the Greater Cleveland Partnership, the small- and big-business sides of the organization are getting a bit more cozy.

The partnership – the metropolitan chamber of commerce – and the Council of Smaller Enterprises announced restructuring Saturday that will merge their back-office operations and, they hope, put them on a better path for growth.

What does that mean for local businesses, from tiny shops to corporate titans? Not much, at least initially.

The partnership has 8,500 members between its core audience of 600 large and mid-sized companies and COSE's roster of 7,900 smaller businesses. All of those members will have access to the same services and benefits. But the employees serving those companies now will work together, on a single team, instead of in two groups that separate small businesses from their larger counterparts.

What does it mean for employment? Joe Roman and Steve Millard, who lead GCP and COSE, respectively, stressed that the organization isn't cutting jobs. But the leaders acknowledged that they're not necessarily filling empty positions.

"We're really getting rid of some redundant functions," Millard said. "We said to our staff pretty clearly at the end of last year that we would be making some of these changes to work better together, but we weren't going to be doing big layoffs."

The Greater Cleveland Partnership is one of the nation's largest chambers of commerce. It was created in 2004 through a consolidation of business groups. COSE, launched more than 40 years ago to represent the little guy in Northeast Ohio business circles, was one of those groups.

But GCP and COSE have maintained some administrative separation, including different advocacy and sales staffs and different boards with say-so over finances.

Merging those functions will make the broader organization more efficient, Roman said. He believes the changes, which started in January and will be complete in March, will put the nonprofit in a better position to serve companies of all sizes.

"In our industry, most chambers are actually decreasing their support for smaller businesses," Roman said. "I think we can be one of the few chambers in the country that can actually represent that whole continuum and do it extremely well."

Hanging onto members and finding ways to boost revenue is key for GCP at a time when some traditional chambers are struggling to hang on to their base. COSE lost nearly half its members between 2009 and early 2015. The recession, competition from free or low-cost business-networking groups and the Internet played a role.

But the Affordable Care Act, sometimes called Obamacare, took the biggest bite. COSE helps small businesses buy insurance. After the national healthcare law took effect, some businesses no longer needed COSE's buying help. Or they found cheaper options on the health insurance marketplace created by the ACA. In response, COSE cut back.

"We're in a really good financial position now," Millard said.

Still, he added, it didn't make sense to have two groups of people performing the same tasks for small and large businesses that, increasingly, have similar interests. And since GCP and COSE already collaborated on their budgets, it didn't make sense to maintain so much separation.

"You get to the point where it's kind of silly to be billing each other," he said.

The reorganization maintains staffing for various GCP affiliates, including a tech-focused group called OHTec; the Middle-Market Initiative, tailored to mid-size companies; and the diversity-centric Commission on Economic Inclusion.

"It really is the business community," Roman said of bringing everyone together on lobbying initiatives, philanthropic efforts and other activities. "It's not the large or the medium or the small. That's what we're trying to project."