Topics: Books, laurence olivier, Mark Twain, stage fright, Tom Sawyer, Life News, Entertainment News

The oldest account of stage fright on record has to be the story of Moses, who expressed understandable anxiety when asked by God to lead the Israelites out of Egypt. He wasn’t the man for the job, he protested. Who would listen to him? He was a poor speaker. He stuttered. “Slow of speech and of a slow tongue,” he described himself in that first conversation at the burning bush. God wasn’t buying. “Who gave you a mouth to talk with,” He pointedly asked, before relenting: “Isn’t Aaron your brother? He’s pretty good with words.” Thus Aaron became the front man and Moses his ventriloquist.

Several thousand years went by before the next reported case of stage fright. According to a story told by Carl Jung, it took place in ancient Athens, where Socrates was grooming his protégé Alcibiades to be the most celebrated orator and statesman of his time. As a young man, Alcibiades was incapacitated by a fear of public speaking. Socrates accompanied him on long walks through the streets of Athens, introducing him first to a blacksmith, then to a shoemaker, asking if he was afraid of the one and then the other. When Alcibiades answered no and then no again, Socrates demanded, “Then why should you be afraid of the people of Athens? They consist of those people, they are nothing but faces.”

It was Mark Twain who coined the term stage fright, and though he claimed to have experienced it only once, it must have been a memorable experience, given the devastating portrayal in The Adventures of Tom Sawyer. The scene takes place at the end of the school year, when Tom is required to deliver the “Give me liberty or give me death” speech before an audience of parents, teachers, and students. The cocky boy is quickly reduced to a puddle of jelly:

A ghastly stage-fright seized him, his legs quaked under him and he was like to choke. True, he had the manifest sympathy of the house but he had the house’s silence, too, which was even worse than its sympathy. The master frowned, and this completed the disaster. Tom struggled awhile and then retired, utterly defeated. There was a weak attempt at applause, but it died early.

The term stage fright has come under occasional challenge, since fear of the stage isn’t really the issue. A terror of performance can strike anywhere. But unlike other terms used to describe the condition—social phobia, cold feet, chicken heart, the jitters, glossophobia (fear of speaking in public), communication apprehension, paruresis (fear of urinating in the presence of others), the yips (in baseball, cricket, basketball, and tennis), dartitis (in darts), target panic (archery), the schneid (a losing streak in cards, sports, or dating), and the Thing, not to mention biting the apple and plain old performance anxiety—“stage fright” conveys that deer-in-the-headlights feeling that escorts people to the podium, the playing field, and the stage.

Standing in the spotlight, one struggles to counter the feeling of being exposed, of feeling naked and alone. Hip-hop musician Jay-Z got to the heart of it in a 2010 interview on NPR’s Fresh Air, when host Terry Gross asked why rappers grab at their crotches. It was more than straight-out vulgarity, he responded. It was about young men onstage, often for the first time in their lives, looking out at an ocean of fans and feeling naked and scared to death. “So when you feel naked, what’s the first thing you do?” he said. “You cover yourself.”

In the twenty-first century’s age of anxiety, everything is performance: “Work, play, sex, and even [political] resistance— it’s all performance to us,” writes new media theorist Jon McKenzie in Perform or Else, a quasi-academic study that links artistic, organizational, and technological performances. Performance, he observes, is the filter through which we consider every imaginable product: “high performance” cars, stereos, lawn mowers, toilet paper, and missile systems. The world has become a “test site” in “an age of global performance,” from art and spectacle to Wall Street warfare and air fresheners. Anthropologists have analyzed the rituals of indigenous peoples as performance; sociologists have applied the word to describe every day social interactions from the way one nods hello to a silent flirtation; cultural theorists have examined race, gender, and social politics in terms of performance.

Contemporary culture presupposes performance, a put-up-or-shut-up mind-set in which virtually every activity, from the banal to the most intimate, is photographed, documented, videotaped, and evaluated. The zeitgeist begins with birth, an experience now often celebrated as a social event, with friends dropping in to offer encouragement, bear witness, record the delivery, tweet about it, and post it on Facebook. The conversation is no longer limited to how well the new mother is doing, but extends to how well she did. Back in the bedroom, Big Pharma awaits with its billion-dollar line of products for boosting sexual performance. Regardless of whether the anxiety strikes in the penis or at the piano, the same rule applies: You have to be in control of your instrument.

Many performers eschew the subject. Studies have shown that up to 30 percent of orchestra musicians rely on beta-blockers to slow their autonomic nervous systems prior to a performance. Many of them willingly share their prescription stashes with their colleagues, but few care to delve into the problem that precipitates it. “It’s such a touchy topic,” a young pianist in New York told me, practically recoiling. “It seems like it would be bad luck to talk about it.” The American psychiatrist Glen Gabbard wrote about “an unspoken conspiracy of silence” among musicians and other performers about stage fright. Before a performance, he noted, “the experience of stage fright is seldom alluded to, as if the mere mention of it will cause the reaction to intensify.” It’s been said that every pianist’s anxiety is as unique as his or her fingerprints. One detects an almost existential dread of contamination, as if stage fright were as transmittable as a virus on a doorknob.

And maybe they’re right to steer clear. Though anxiety contagion can’t be traced as systemically as bird flu, it shares some of the same qualities. That much was demonstrated in the spring of 2012, when a succession of Tourette-like cases ran through the small western New York town of Le Roy. A cluster of high school girls, many of them cheerleaders, had begun to exhibit uncontrolled tics, twitches, stutters, and jerks. It happened at the dinner table and in the classroom. TV news cameras raced to record the girls, their arms lurching, heads yanking, legs tottering like zombies in a B movie. Two cases jumped to eighteen, and parents grew convinced that there had been an undisclosed environmental disaster. Erin Brockovich, the environmental activist, was called in to investigate. In the end, the girls were diagnosed with a condition called “conversion disorder,” a mass psychogenic illness better known as mass hysteria. The neurologists who treated them concluded that they were subconsciously converting stress into physical symptoms.

As it happens, cases of mass hysteria have more than once involved cheerleaders. In a New York Times Magazine story about the Le Roy case, reporter Susan Dominus suggested that it was the girls’ organizational unity that made them susceptible to influence. She cited a 2002 incident in which ten students, five of them cheerleaders, from a rural town in North Carolina suffered nonepileptic seizures and fainting spells. In 1952, 165 members of a cheerleading squad in Monroe, Louisiana, fainted before half time at a high school football game. Five ambulances raced across the field to attend to the stricken girls. “It looked like the racetrack at Indianapolis,” a spectator told the Associated Press. In Le Roy, doctors advised parents and school administrators to stop talking about it so publicly. The media attention was halted, and after a few months, the girls improved markedly, mostly after learning relaxation techniques and, in some cases, taking anxiety medication.

Stage fright exposes the foolishness of the body, so easily deceived and outmaneuvered by the mind. Naturally, people are loath to accept it. How can symptoms so excessive and seemingly life-threatening proceed from mere anxiety? The British actor Michael Gambon, the lovable Dumbledore in the Harry Potter films, has twice been rushed to the hospital for symptoms of stage fright. In 2013, his performance anxiety forced him to with draw from a play at the National Theatre in London. The American evangelist Rick Warren, minister of the twenty-two-thousand- member Saddleback Church in Southern California, has explained his public-speaking problem as a purely physiological brain malfunction, though most neuroscientists would call it stage fright. His symptoms are so extreme that they have temporarily blinded him: “When I stand up to speak and adrenaline hits my system, I cannot see until that adrenaline drains out. It is a very rare disorder; I have been to all the top clinics in the world, and they said they may name a syndrome after me! There are only fourteen or fifteen people they know of who have it. It makes public speaking excruciatingly painful. Everyone knows that adrenaline is a public speaker’s best friend: If you do not have adrenaline, you are boring. You need it for passion. So when I get up to speak, adrenaline hits my system like any public speaker. I am not talking about nerves; I speak to 22,000 people every Sunday morning. I am not talking about stage fright. I have spoken in the Superdome three times. I have spoken to over a million people at one time. But when adrenaline hits my system, I go almost blind until it drains out. When I got up here, you did not know it, but I could not see you. I could not even see my notes.”

A syndrome was named after Steve Blass, the Pittsburgh Pirates pitcher who woke up one day in 1973 to discover he could no longer find the strike zone. He had been among the dominant pitchers in the major leagues, with a ninety-mile per-hour fastball and a nearly unhittable slider. The latter pitch was notoriously hard to control, but Blass was so sure of himself that he’d throw it even when behind in the count. He won eighteen games for the Pirates in 1968 and another sixteen in 1969. He was a member of the National League All-Star team in 1972 and finished second in that year’s voting for the Cy Young Award. When he collapsed, when “the Thing” brought him to his knees, it was like a real-life version of Groundhog Day: Inning after inning, as if in a dream, he walked batters, threw wild pitches straight to the back stop, and allowed a multitude of stolen bases. The most mystifying thing about it was that when he threw alone with a catcher in the bullpen, he was as good as ever.

Blass consulted psychologists, tried transcendental meditation, and ran down every tip, no matter how patently ridiculous, including, famously, one fan’s suggestion that he invest in a loose set of boxers. Forty years later, I phoned him at his home in Pennsylvania. A good-natured man who had spent the intervening decades as a Pirates TV color commentator, he didn’t mind talking about it. “Steve Blass disease” had become part of the baseball lexicon. He understood the fascination: “It’s so damn illusive unless you’re living it.” And though he never could figure out why it struck him in the first place, he all too clearly understood the physiology. “I would physically tighten up—and you can’t pitch like that. No flow, you’re just hoping the ball will go where you want it to, but you don’t expect it to.”

Tightening up is the key, as etymology bears out. The word anxiety comes from the Old French anguere, meaning to choke, constrict, strangle, or cut off at the airway. It describes the very hallmark of performance anxiety—the rapid, shallow breathing that occurs when the muscles contract and you begin to shake. Utterance of the word forces the tongue backward, blocking off the throat. In other words, just saying the word embodies its very meaning. The harder you try to control these muscles, the more they tremble. So we choke, bite the apple, and gasp for breath.