Tara Parker-Pope, New York Times News Service

Every marriage has highs and lows, but some relationships are both good and bad on a regular basis. Call it the ambivalent marriage — not always terrible, but not always great, either.

New research shows that ambivalence in a relationship — the feeling that a partner may be unpredictable with support or negativity — can take a quiet toll on the health of an individual.

The findings, by researchers at Brigham Young University, are part of a growing attempt to parse the so-called marriage benefit, the well-established notion that married people are healthier and live longer than the unmarried.

“Unfortunately, a lot of the research on the benefits of marriage measures relationship quality on this unidimensional scale,” said Wendy C. Birmingham, who led the study, published in Annals of Behavioral Medicine. “They look at whether you’re happy or you’re not happy, or you feel supported or you’re not supported. But not all relationships are one-dimensional.”

In a carefully controlled study of 94 heterosexual couples in Salt Lake City, the researchers quizzed each partner privately about interactions in their marriage. The couples had been married, on average, for 5.4 years, but the lengths of their marriages ranged from one year to 41 years.

The researchers asked about the level of positive support the men and women received and gave when one of them needed advice or understanding. They also asked about the level of negativity between the spouses, or when they were excited or happy.

Next, the men and women were given baseline blood pressure readings and wore a monitor from morning to bedtime. After random blood pressure readings during the day, twice each hour, subjects recorded exactly what they were doing at the moment.

The findings reveal the complex nature of marital relationships and the subtle effect positive and negative moments can have on physical health. Researchers found that the men and women in ambivalent relationships consistently posted higher systolic blood pressure readings. That suggests that one of the well-established benefits of marriage — better cardiovascular health — may not be as robust for couples in ambivalent marriages.

Arthur Aron of the Interpersonal Relationships Lab at Stony Brook University in New York, notes that every marriage will inevitably have good and bad qualities. But he said the results suggest that it is the unpredictable nature of an ambivalent relationship that may be taking the toll.

“Being sometimes supportive and sometimes not supportive is not the same thing as being moderately supportive all the time,” Aron said. “Part of the issue may be the unpredictability. When you know someone is not going to be supportive, you acclimatize to that. But if they are sometimes one way and sometimes the other way, it’s much harder.”