The old saying goes, “it takes a village to raise a child,” and these days, the phrase holds true for many area students as well.

If it wasn’t for her colleagues, family and church community, Michele Carter, 43, said her degrees and simultaneous career at Central Texas College probably would never have happened.

“As a mother, a full-time employee and going to school, I say this — and I don’t say this in jest — it was truly by the grace of God that I did everything,” she said, laughing Wednesday.

Carter was named the new deputy chancellor of finance and administration at CTC in mid-November, one of the highest executive positions at the school.

Starting off as a receptionist at the college in 1991, she completed her associate, bachelor’s and master’s degrees while holding down a full-time job at CTC.

She said some people joke she could be the college’s poster child.

“One of the most defining moments for me was when I graduated with my associate’s degree,” she said, recalling the May 1996 event.

Continuing her educational endeavors, Carter received her bachelor’s degree in 1998 and received her master’s in business administration at the University of Mary Hardin-Baylor in 2000.

Carter said her drive for success began 23 years ago, when she looked at her 1-year-old daughter, Breanna, and wanted to give her something better.

“I knew I wanted upward mobility, but obviously you have to do something,” she said. “I had always worked, I’d worked since I was 16 years old, but I didn’t have any career goals or clear paths when I started at CTC ... I was just a worker.”

Carter said as she began to continue her employment at CTC, her boss, Bill Beebe, sat her down in the mid-’90s and asked her where she saw herself in five years. The questions spurred on Carter’s career and educational goals, and with it, a lot of hard work.

“I would get off work at 5 o’clock, I would go to class at 6 and I wouldn’t get home until around 10,” she said, recalling her work-school-life balance days.

“I would take a nap until 11 or 12, and then I’d wake up and study until maybe 2 in the morning.”

During those times, it was her husband, Antonio, her parents, Sharen and Wesley Morganfield, and her church family at the Cathedral of Central Texas Christian House of Prayer who were her “recharge zones,” in the midst of an already cramped schedule.

She said commitment is a key issue to success.

“Whatever that goal is — in terms of the education or career — commit. Because if you are not, you won’t achieve the goal,” she said. “You must be diligent in your work, you must keep moving, don’t stop, and surround yourself with a really good network of support people who will encourage you.”

In her new role as the chancellor of finance and administration, Carter will act as the college’s chief financial officer and also guide some of its support services. She starts in January.