ANNAPOLIS, Md., Aug. 13, 2015 /PRNewswire/ -- Righttime Medical Care, one of the region's largest urgent care providers, is celebrating its 25th Anniversary this year.

Established as Nighttime Pediatrics in Annapolis, Md., the company began as a single Care Center when several local pediatricians realized that working parents needed care for their children in the evenings and on weekends. Robert G. Graw, Jr., M.D., who still serves as Righttime's CEO, led the group in securing financing and community support. The center was an immediate success and quickly became a trusted source for after-hours immediate children's health care.

Over the following years, Nighttime opened new locations, and expanded its hours and services to care for adults. In 2010, the company unveiled a new identity as Righttime Medical Care to reflect its growth. The following year, Righttime launched its highly successful HeadFirst Sports Injury and Concussion Care Center clinics. Over its 25-year history, Righttime has cared for more than two million patients, ranging in age from two days to 106 years.

With the recent increase in healthcare availability to millions under the Affordable Care Act, Righttime Medical Care fulfills a need for expanded access to trustworthy medical care. Through its expanded hours, patient portal, and other patient services, Righttime's place in the communities it serves has become even more central in recent years.

"When Righttime was founded, the concept of urgent care was totally foreign to both the public and healthcare providers," said Dr. Graw. "It was exciting to set sail in unchartered waters backed by a solid team of dedicated professionals who helped define the notion of after-hours care."

Just as Righttime has expanded, its employees also grow with the company. Eric Crapster, PA-C, first started his career with Righttime nearly two decades ago. "I was an ortho tech/trainer, and worked at Righttime from 1996 to 2000," said Crapster. "When I finished PA (Physician Assistant) school, Dr. Graw hired me back when I finished and I've been here ever since. In the next 25 years, I envision us expanding across the United States and being on the forefront of urgent care."

In celebration of its quarter-century of business, Righttime has launched several initiatives to match its expansion. The company is also adapting to technological changes that are changing the shape medical care in the United States, including telemedicine, new service lines, collaborations with medical institutions, and shared electronic medical records with patients' physicians and specialists.

Righttime's year-long anniversary celebration featured a company-wide gala held in May and attended by nearly 500 employees and guests, including NBC National News correspondent Tracie Potts, who served as emcee. Additionally, teams from the Care Centers and corporate departments created their own "Kindness Calendars" for the month of April. Employees documented charitable activities including participation in local 5K fundraising events and environmental projects. The calendars were on display at the anniversary gala and are posted on the company's dedicated 25th anniversary website at Righttime25.com.

About Righttime Medical Care

Righttime Medical Care simplifies access to trustworthy medical care at its 13 urgent care locations in Maryland. Now in its 25th year, Righttime holds the Certified Urgent Care designation, which distinguishes it as among the top urgent care centers nationwide. Righttime is open from 7am to midnight 365 days a year and offers patients of all ages a 24-hour Call Center and online access for same day appointments, digital x-rays, laboratory testing, prescription services and electronic health records which are shared with patients' physicians, specialists and collaborating medical institutions. For more information, visit myRighttime.com.

Contact: Ann-Marie Sedor, 443-332-4260 x8130

Logo - http://photos.prnewswire.com/prnh/20150813/258328LOGO

SOURCE Righttime Medical Care