The suspension of Broncos receiver Wes Welker has suddenly become a focal point in negotiations between the NFL and players union on a revised drug policy, according to sources on both sides.

The union is working with the NFL on a new drug policy that would allow for testing of HGH and reduced penalties for use of performance enhancing drugs in the offseason, such as amphetamines. Welker was suspended by the NFL this week for four games for violating the league’s performance-enhancement policy. He tested positive for an amphetamine.

According to sources on both sides, had the league’s proposal for a new drug policy been ratified by the union, Welker would not have been issued a four-game suspension.

In return for HGH testing, the league is enticing the union by raising the threshold of marijuana that will trigger a positive test and moving offseason amphetamine or stimulant detection from a violation of the league’s performance-enhancement program — which has a zero-tolerance policy that issues a four-game suspension to first-time offenders such as Welker — to a violation in the substance-abuse policy, where a first-time offender would be placed in an NFL program, but not suspended until a second violation.

If an agreement on the new HGH proposal is reached this weekend, it is still improbable Welker would be able to play Sunday night in the Broncos’ season opener against Indianapolis. However, there is a chance his suspension could be reduced from four games to one or two, according to sources.

Welker is among 29 players over the past three years who would not have been suspended under the league’s new proposal. Welker, an 11-year NFL player who ranks 24th all-time with 841 career catches, tested positive for an amphetamines during the offseason. Multiple sources say Welker tested positive for Adderall, which is commonly used for attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. During the season, a positive test for Adderall or other stimulants would fall under the PED policy.

It might be no coincidence that since Welker’s suspension was announced Tuesday evening, negotiations between the league and union over a new drug policy, and HGH testing, became serious.

One sticking point in negotiations is that the league wants the power to immediately issue a two-game suspension for players arrested on charges of driving under the influence of alcohol and drugs. The union wants players to have due process before such a penalty is issued.

Mike Klis: mklis@denverpost.com or twitter.com/mikeklis