The US pharmacy retail sector suggests immense potential this year, with an expected industry growth of 3.6% year-over-year. The growth rate is expected to accelerate as certain tailwinds kick in, including a healthcare reform and improvement in prescription utilization. Generic drug inflation is also expected to simmer down, insinuating a slowdown in gross margin pressures.

Regarding President Obama’s Affordable Care Act (ACA), Medicaid Expansion, and generic drug costs issue, Bidness Etc undertook primary research to appraise their impact on the drug retail industry.

Bidness Etc contacted 40 outlets of the three largest US pharmaceutical companies, namely, Rite Aid Corporation (NYSE:RAD), Walgreens Boots Alliance Inc (NASDAQ:WBA), and CVS Health Corp (NYSE:CVS), to gain an insight. These 40 stores were selected randomly from a multitude of different states and cities, including New York, Washington, Arizona, Illinois, California, Florida, and South Carolina.

Pharmacy retailers shared mixed reviews about ACA, with its implementation being not so popular amongst the sector. In our latest survey, over 55% of respondents said they have a neutral opinion of the Act, while 20% said they view it favorably, and 25% had an unfavorable opinion.

For pharmacy retailers, the numbers have not drastically changed significantly and the revenues are quite similar to what the survey has found. The companies do not want to repeal the ACA, because by and large, they do expect some favorable numbers in their financials. However, the overall reaction has been somewhat less than enthusiastic.

An estimated 30 million individuals in the US are expected to gain health insurance through the healthcare act, which effectively means that a sizable workforce and inventory levels will be needed to meet the demand surge in the coming years. Many respondents were concerned that ACA is aiming to provide access and quality of care to all citizens by accentuating the shortage of generic drugs on the already fragile pharmacy industry, exacerbated by increasing drug costs.

The survey also suggested that pharmacies had not faced any inventory issues at all. Despite the surge in demand for flu vaccines and usage of medication, particularly during the cold season, 88% of respondents said pharmacies were aptly able to meet demand. Although the ACA might suggest a discrepancy in demand and supply for medications, the poll suggests otherwise.

This is essentially because the Act has not run its full course yet. The legislation was established only last year and has been unable to render its impact significantly. In addition to enrollment delays, both pharmacies and customers are taking their time to comprehend law amendments and implement them pertinently. A respondent from CVS Pharmacy in California informed Bidness Etc: “It is messed up I guess because there are too many changes that people do not understand.”

Because ACA’s implementation is still not rampant, there have not been any inventory issues. Although there might be some in the future, but it is still three to four years before shortages kick in. In addition, with new generic drug launches every year, the possibility of shortages appears too far-fetched.

The general response from the respondents was that even though the legislation has not left any sizeable impact on their revenues so far, they are still optimistic that contribution from the healthcare reform could slightly be greater in 2015. Devin from Rite Aid said: “Yes we have more number of people coming in for insurance and increasing trend for Obama Care, so I think it is having a positive impact.”

As far as generic drug inflation is concerned, majority of the pharmacies purported that drug costs will remain same this year. 73% of the respondents affirmed that drug costs will not rise and are manageable over the next three months. Whereas, 20% thought there are chances for drug costs to rise this year.

Generic drug inflation became the subject of hot debate last year after several firms, including Rite Aid and Walgreens Boots Alliance, lowered guidance reflecting pressure on margins from generic costs. However, recent evidence including Rite Aid’s third-quarter earnings and CVS’ outlook for 2015 suggests that the impact will be manageable.

Moreover, pressure on reimbursement rates appears controllable since there has not been a structural shift in how these companies are reimbursed. Since the reimbursement pressures are faced every year by the corporations, they were more visible this year because generic drug inflation squeezed the spread between what the pharmacy paid to drug manufacturers and what insurers reimbursed them in return.

With drug inflation appearing stable this year, the overall gross margin pressures are also expected to subside after increased ACA utilization kicks in.