Associated Press/Bill Roth

ABRY Partners and H.I.G Capital are the two most sought after U.S. midmarket buyout managers among many secondary buyers, according to a recent ranking by Setter Capital, a firm that advises investors that want to sell their private equity stakes.

Setter ranked the 50 most-sought-after U.S. buyout firms that raised about $2 billion or less for their latest funds, using a liquidity rating system the firm created last year through its Secondarylink.com website. The ratings seek to measure how easily a firm’s funds would trade on the secondary market based on the number of the site’s 1,750 users who indicate interest in the specific manager, among certain other factors, including the quality of prospective buyers. The users include institutional investors, managers and industry participants.

Setter, which launched its liquidity rating system last year, rates fund managers as “good,” “very good” or “excellent.” The top-rated midmarket firms under Setter’s system are Abry and H.I.G., the only two firms to receive “excellent” ratings. Audax Private Equity, Charlesbank Capital Partners and Endeavour Capital are among the firms that earned a “very good” rating, while firms that received “good” ratings include Marlin Equity Partners, RoundTable Health Care Partners and Vista Equity Partners.

Although the system only rates managers and not their individual funds, it highlights the power that larger, better recognized firms can command on the secondary market. Such firms often have a broader base of limited partners, increasing the likelihood that stakes in their funds will come up for sale.

Peter McGrath, co-founder of Setter says that he believes the ratings also provide a good indicator of how investor appetite may shape up for firms when they seek capital for new funds. Interest in midmarket buyout funds has expanded significantly in recent years.

But some secondary buyers say that some of the 150 midmarket buyout firms that have not received any rating from Setter could also offer a potentially attractive buying opportunity.

“It’s less competitive for those opportunities,” said John Kettnich, a principal on the secondary team at StepStone Group. “If you can find a group that’s less competitive for reasons other than GP quality, then you might be able to take advantage of inefficiencies in the market and identify an overlooked gem.”

Private Equity Beat readers, where do you stand? How closely do you think demand on the secondary market correlates to an ability to raise new capital? Which middle market buyout firms would be on your “must have” list?

Write to Laura Kreutzer at laura.kreutzer@wsj.com. Follow her on Twitter at @LauraKreutzer.