Sorry to break it to you, but President Barack Obama's health care law seems to be working.

In addition to the widely publicized and widely criticized individual mandate that penalizes Americans who go without insurance, the law created several programs aimed at correcting the inefficiency in our health system. For a long time, Americans have paid more and received less in terms of health care.

Much attention has been paid to the falling rate of uninsured Americans — since the end of 2013, the percent of Americans without health insurance has declined 5.2 percentage points, according to Gallup.

Some efficiency measures also appear to be working. In the June 2015 issue of Health Affairs, researchers looked at the Hospital Readmissions Reduction Program. The program allowed the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services to penalize hospitals with high rates for patients being readmitted within 30 days of treatment of certain conditions. Historically, there hasn't been much financial motivation for U.S. hospitals to decrease readmission rates. In fact, often higher readmission rates actually meant more money for hospitals, as patients who came in again required more treatment that could be billed to insurance. A lack of data transparency on readmission rates and patient outcomes also meant hospitals could largely keep these numbers to themselves.

Not anymore.

Under the program, CMS will eventually be able to charge a penalty of 3 percent of the hospital's total Medicare reimbursement. The program started at 1 percent in October 2012.

The researchers looked at the readmission rates for patients at New York hospitals in 2008, before the law went into effect, and in 2012.

They found a reduction in readmission rates and some evidence that the benefits were spilling over for non-Medicare patients as well.



Lindsey Cook for USN&WR; Source: Health Affairs, June 2015

The researchers didn't find evidence that hospitals were delaying readmission to past 30 days to avoid patients being counted in their 30-day total, one possible way critics said hospitals may get around the penalty. The researchers found some rise in the use of observation services, another potential workaround, which they said needed more research.