A past participant of the White Marlin Festival Crab Soup Cook-off. (Photo: Submitted image)

Nothing screams Maryland quite like a crab soup cook-off.

On the Eastern Shore, crab soup becomes less of a food and more of a sanctity — so much so that the cuisine has its own competition.

On Saturday, May 2, the 11th annual White Marlin Festival and Crab Soup Cook-off will be held at Somerset Street Plaza in an effort to showcase the area's best chefs.

"The purpose is to bring people to downtown Ocean City before the mad rush of the season begins," said Mary Ann Manganello, administrator of the Ocean City Downtown Association. "It's been going on for 10 years now, so that tells you it's a very popular event."

This year's lineup features many restaurants from Worcester County including Buddy's Crabs and Ribs, Eagles Landing, Fager's Island, Lazy River Saloon, Mother's Cantina/Cowboy Coast, OC Brewing Co., Phillips Seafood, Pickles Pub, The Pour House, Seacrets and Waterman's Seafood.

Pat and Art Vincent of Washington, D.C., pose with the Phillips mascot, Captain Phil, as they attend a previous White Marlin Festival and Crab Soup Cook-off. (Photo: Daily Times file image)

For $12 people can sample all of the soups and vote for their favorite and red and favorite white. There is also a prize for Best Decorated Restaurant Booth.

The 2014 winner for best red was Fager's Island and best white went to Mother's Cantina.

In addition to some of the best soups from the area, the band One Night Stand will be performing throughout the festival. Local organizations such as Ocean City Beach Patrol, Ocean City Surf Club and Ocean City Life Saving Museum will have display booths, as well.

"We usually have around 700 folks come through for tasting and voting and many more enjoy the exhibits and the band," Manganello said. "Hopefully we boost the business of the participating restaurants and the merchants along the Boardwalk."

If You Go

What: White Marlin Festival and Crab Soup Cook-off

When: Saturday, May 2

Where: Somerset Street Plaza

Cost: $12 fee to sample soups

Online: http://ococean.com/events/

Read or Share this story: http://www.delmarvanow.com/story/entertainment/2015/04/26/white-marlin-festival/26418481/