Photo

Here comes one of Washington’s least favorite rituals: the “doc fix.”

Every year, and sometimes more often, Congress passes a bill to make sure that doctors don’t absorb a big pay cut from Medicare. The many, many “doc fix” patches are meant to counteract a law passed in the 1990s that sought to restrain costs by tying doctors’ pay to a formula. Everyone agrees that the formula makes little sense, so lawmakers continually pass a short-term doc fix that keeps the doctors’ payments stable, and occasionally gives them a small raise.

Everyone grumbles about the doc fix: deficit hawks who call it a budget gimmick; doctors; and lawmakers and journalists who have to endure all the scaremongering news releases and congressional hearings, which started up again two weeks ago. (Though I’ve heard people express the opposite sentiment, too: Some call the problem the “full lobbyist employment act.”)

This year, as with several recent years, there is a movement in Congress to pass a “permanent doc fix.” It would erase the law’s inaptly named “sustainable growth rate.” The proposal, while a long shot because of its expense, has bipartisan support. But here’s the thing: The pressure on Congress to find a way to finance doctors’ pay every year has actually reduced federal health spending in general and the Medicare budget in particular.

Even though Congress doesn’t let the doctors’ payments go down, the doc fix still usually achieves the deficit-cutting goals of the formula’s drafters. With only a few exceptions, Congress simply cuts other parts of the budget to compensate for the extra money for the doctors. And that money almost always comes from Medicare or other health care programs.

“It has nearly achieved its original goal of reducing spending and achieving savings in Medicare,” said Loren Adler, a research director at an anti-deficit group, the Committee for a Responsible Federal Budget. Mr. Adler recently reviewed every doc fix bill and found that Congress had paid for 98 percent of the cost of doctors’ raises. “It actually is probably the most effective action-forcing mechanism that Congress has passed,” he said.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Which is a way of saying: The doc fix has worked in reducing the deficit, but not in the exact way that was intended. The threat of all those angry doctors turning away Medicare patients forced Congress to find budget savings they might have otherwise avoided. Altogether, that pesky doctors payment formula has resulted in a total of about $140 billion in budget savings, not adjusted for the time value of money. Those are all savings that Congress probably wouldn’t have passed otherwise. “It’s much easier if you’ve got a fiscal gun at your head,” said Joseph Antos, a scholar at the conservative American Enterprise Institute.

The looming cuts have also kept doctors comparatively satisfied with 10 years of close-to-flat pay rates from Medicare. During the same period, hospitals saw their fees increase by an average of around 3 percent a year, though some particular services were cut.

Mr. Adler’s recent analysis found that cuts to other Medicare programs made up about 61 percent of the doc fix’s cost. Cuts to Medicaid and the Affordable Care Act made up about 29 percent. “Pension smoothing” and other time-shifting maneuvers that Mr. Adler classifies as true budget gimmicks made up 7 percent of the savings, and 3 percent of the cost came from a fee on certain financial services.

Before 2007, Congress shifted doc fix money from near years to far years, but it has ultimately paid for those postponed costs with other cuts. There have been times that Congress didn’t find the money, but other savings sources turned out to be larger than expected, Mr. Adler found, so it all canceled itself out.

Those deficit savings stand in contrast to the conventional wisdom that a doc fix is a mere budgetary fiction. It is considered so certain that doctors’ pay raises will pass each year that both the Congressional Budget Office and the Medicare program’s trustees provide budget projections that ignore the clear language of the law and assume the Medicare budget will swell to fill the hole. But that hasn’t happened so far.

It seems hard to imagine that this will finally be the year that a permanent doc fix becomes a reality. Giving the doctors a raise forever, instead of for just one year, would be very expensive. Congress rarely likes to pass big spending bills without compensating cuts. And cuts the size of a permanent doc fix are hard to find. (Update: Based on an updated C.B.O. estimate this week, fixing the formula this year would cost $137.4 billion, more than six times as much as could be saved by raising the Medicare eligibility age to 67.)

But never say never. Bipartisan groups in both the House and the Senate have been devising a new formula for doctors’ pay, one that would tie payments to certain quality measures instead of productivity. Republicans, who tend to be more comfortable cutting health care programs, lead both houses of Congress. And because of a recent slowdown in Medicare spending and an influx of younger baby boomers into the Medicare program, the price of a long-term fix looks a lot lower than it did a few years ago.

Eliminating the doc fix for good would make the federal budget more transparent, and it would save many lobbyists and journalists a lot of effort. Still, the deficit hawks who hate the dishonesty of the doc fix might miss it when it’s gone.