ATLANTA--(BUSINESS WIRE)--BioIQ, a healthcare technology company that enables organizations to better connect with their populations to achieve health improvement goals, has opened its East Coast headquarters here and has hired one of the nation’s top talents in health information technology (HIT) as its technology chief.

Lisa McVey, a veteran healthcare professional, was named executive vice president for Technology and Operations at BioIQ in August, a newly created position at the company. She will oversee the Atlanta office’s technology and operations expansion plan and help build a high-performing team to meet the company’s growth plans in the southeast and nationally.

Most recently, McVey spent 21 years with another Atlanta-area health IT company, McKesson Corporation, where she served in a wide variety of positions, including as CIO, as well as in acquisitions, management, product development, operations, and sales and marketing, among other key departments.

Headquartered in Santa Barbara, CA, BioIQ is a healthcare technology company with an innovative technology platform that enables organizations to connect with their member populations, measure vital health metrics, and achieve their health improvement goals. The new Atlanta office will be located in Cobb County, near the home of the Atlanta Braves at the new SunTrust Park.

“We chose Atlanta because of its exceptional talent pool,” said BioIQ CEO Justin Bellante. “We selected Lisa to head up our technology and operations because of her remarkable track record and ability to increase further investments for our company. Together, we think we’ll have a terrific foundation for our company as we move forward with our regional and national expansion efforts.”

Demand for health improvement programs and services offered by companies like BioIQ continues to soar. Many prominent health plans, Accountable Care Organizations, and Medicare Advantage programs are stepping up their efforts to close clinical gaps in care as required by the Affordable Care Act (ACA). BioIQ is quickly becoming recognized as the proven “done for you” health screening and management platform to help companies comply with ACA requirements and increase HEDIS scores. Features such as ease of implementation, a broad set of integrated solutions, and a user-friendly interface are just some of the reasons for the company’s growth.

The convergence of demand, need, innovative technology and service has helped the company grow more than 300% over the past three years. It’s also why McVey will play such a critical role in the company’s regional and national expansion plans.

“I’ve been part of the healthcare technology field for 20 plus years and I can say with authority that BioIQ is one of the most exciting companies in Health IT today,” said McVey. “We have a wealth of award-winning health and wellness technology solutions to help our employers, health plans and pharmacy clients obtain successful health outcomes for their populations. Best of all, we have a team of innovative thinkers and a dynamic, customer-centric corporate culture.”

In August, BioIQ was named to the Inc. 5000 list of fastest growing companies and in June, it received the prestigious Stevie Award for Company of the Year – Health Products and Services. The company was also recently selected number 94 in Deloitte Consulting’s 2014 Technology Fast 500.

About BioIQ

BioIQ is a healthcare technology company that enables organizations to connect with their populations, measure vital health metrics, and achieve health improvement goals. BioIQ works with some of the largest employers and health companies in the nation. Since its inception in 2005, BioIQ has launched thousands of successful health improvement programs serving millions of participants.