Courtesy Southern Stone County Fire Protection District/Facebook

A former Wichita Police officer has died following an accident at Table Rock Lake in Missouri.

The accident happened at 3:30 p.m. Friday. According to the Southern Stone County Fire Protection District, the man was injured in a fall from "The Swing" at the Aunts Creek campground.

First responders and EMS used a fishing boat to reach the scene and perform CPR. A short time later, the Missouri Highway Patrol arrived by boat and the man was transported to a boat launch where an ambulance and additional emergency medical personnel were standing by. The district says efforts to revive the man were unsuccessful.

The man has been identified as former Wichita Police Officer Shane Little. Little worked out of the Patrol North bureau and was a member of the SWAT team, but in 2011, he contracted bacterial meningitis and lost most of his vision.

He leaves behind his wife Amanda, who is also a Wichita Police officern and four young children. A Facebook page dedicated to supporting Shane in his recovery says funeral services are scheduled for 1 p.m. Wednesday, May 28 at Central Christian Church in Wichita. Visitation is scheduled from 5 p.m. to 7 p.m. Tuesday evening at Calvary Baptist Church in Derby.

Fundraiser -

News of the death of former Wichita Police Officer Shane Little hits the law enforcement community hard.

Carrie, member of the Wives Backing the Badge group, says "it's devastating. it doesn't matter how close you are to that officer. law enforcement is all one family."

She is part of a group of officer wives. She's hoping to help the Little family heal. "That is what our wives group is about supporting the families or the spouse when something like this happens," said Carrie.

They have started a Give Forward page to help raise funds. Michelle, who is also a group member said, "we're trying to get as many donations as we can to help the family." Donations have been pouring in. "It's kind of been overwhelming with the response that we've had in such a short period of time," said Michelle.

The money gathered will go toward helping the family with funeral costs. While the group says Shane's wife only wants prayers. They're hoping this can alleviate the burden. "We just want to be there and support her for whatever she needs," said Michelle.

A fund has been established to help pay for expenses for his family. You can donate below.