A job search can get quite frustrating these days, with so many people competing for too few openings. To ease the burden, AOL Jobs tracked down the 10 top companies that are hiring this week. From sales jobs to finance positions, full-time to part-time, these employers have a plethora of openings they're looking to fill.Good luck job hunting!: 3,167 openingsUnitedHealth Group currently provides health insurance services to more than 75 million people worldwide and is the largest insurance company of its kind in the U.S. With the onset of states' participation in the Affordable Care Act, the Minnesota-based insurer "has remained especially vague on the number of systems it would participate in," says The Motley Fool , "placing the number somewhere between 10 and 25."



Employee Review: "Good, steady work. Great learning opportunities. Very little favoritism, you get ahead based on your own work. Work at home opportunities help on commuting costs. Great work-life balance, ample vacation time."*



Find a job now with UnitedHealth Group.



2. The Vitamin Shoppe: 2,834 openings.



The Vitamin Shoppe is a New Jersey-based retailer of nutritional supplements. They also operate stores in Canada under the name "VitaPath". The company provides approximately 8,000 different skus of supplements through its retail stores and over 20,000 different skus of supplements through its online retail websites.



Employee Review: "Good growth opportunities and stores opening all over the US all year 'round. Company based out of NJ, so more progressive policies on employment and benefits. Good vacation, health, and dental benefits. Above average pay from minimum wage. Good policies on customer service interaction as well. Focus on Customer service vs. pushing products."*



Find a job now with The Vitamin Shoppe.



3. Firestone Complete Auto: 2,715 openings

Firestone Complete Auto Care is a car maintenance chain that's part of one of the oldest American tire companies. There are more than 1,600 locations nationwide that, along with selling and servicing tires, also do repairs and other kinds of work on cars.



Employee Review: "Higher-than-average compensation for retail, good camaraderie with co-workers. Nice working for large company that you know will be there tomorrow."*



Find a job now with Firestone Complete Auto.



4. Bankers Life and Casualty: 2,706 openings



Founded in 1879, Bankers is a life and health insurance company that services the retirement market. It is based in Chicago, Ill., and operates in 275 offices nationwide. The financial company is a subsidiary of CNO Financial Group.



Employee Review: "For someone who wants a second career after the first big one, with more freedom, flexibility, etc., this is the place!"*



Find a job now with Bankers Life and Casualty.





5. AT&T: 2,499 openings



Wireless giant AT&T continues to hire in large volumes, as many customers upgrade their smartphones and purchase tablets that require LTE data plans. It recently announced that it will be adding more wireless subscribers than expected.



Employee Review: "Cutting edge technology, great opportunities for advancement, union representation for non-management."*



Find a job now with AT&T.



6. PNC: 2,267 openings



Based in Pittsburgh, the regional bank operates over 2,700 branches in nineteen states and the District of Columbia. The company doubled in size in 2008 when it acquired National City, making it the fifth largest bank in the country.



Employee Review: "As a parent I am grateful for a company with a work-life balance."*



Find a job now with PNC.



7. Verizon Wireless: 2,217 openings.



Verizon Wireless operates the largest mobile network in the United States. The Basking Ridge, New Jersey-based company is a subsidiary of Verizon Communications and Vodafone, although Verizon announced in September that it agreed to buy Vodafone's 45 percent stake in the company for $130 billion. Expected to close in the first quarter of 2014, it is the third largest announced deal in the world, Reuters reported.



Employee Review: "The company has top drawer benefits for all employees and on the peer level, employees are united and very close knit, like family."*



Find a job now at Verizon Wireless.



2,208 openingsKnown by its large brown delivery trucks, United Parcel Service delivers over 15 million packages per day. Headquartered in Sandy Springs, Ga., UPS competes with other carriers, such as FedEx and the U.S. Postal Service. The company employs approximately 350,000 in the United States, with another 67,000 around the world. It's begun gearing up for holiday deliveries with the hiring of seasonal employees, and last year reportedly hired about 1,100 workers in Louisville, Ky ., alone, at its largest air-sorting hub.: "I love getting to meet new people all the time and seeing all the different things that we import as a country. I also love the challenges of solving the problems of supply chain and getting items to the good old U.S. of A.."*1,786 openingsEnterprise is the largest rental care company in North America and operates over 900,000 vehicles worldwide, earning it the 15th rank on Forbes' "America's Largest Private Companies" list."Great experience and recognized as an excellent training program by outside companies. Can advance quickly if you hit your goals."*1,737 openings.Dollar Tree, Inc. is an American chain of discount variety stores that sells items for $1. Each Dollar Tree stocks a variety of products including national, regional, and private-label brands. It is headquartered in Chesapeake, Virginia and operates 4,900 stores throughout the 48 contiguous U.S. states and Canada."I liked the laid-back feel. The actual work itself was not challenging. I found managers very understandable and likable."*

*All employee reviews sourced from Glassdoor, a free jobs and career community that offers the world an inside look at jobs and companies. Reviews may have been edited for clarity.

Note: All openings are on CareerBuilder, an AOL Jobs sponsor.