Failure to have Minnesota driver licenses meet federal Real ID standards could impact residents' ability to fly domestically. (Photo: AP)

The Minnesota Legislature's dilemma for complying with the federal Real ID Act boils down to a simple-but-patently-unfair choice: Comply for the convenience of constituents or stick to principles and risk the ire of not just those constituents, but the federal government.

Perhaps the only good news? The feds Friday announced it will be at least two years, perhaps as many as four, before Real ID measures are fully enforced.

Still, thanks to a federal government willing to bully to get what it wants, Minnesota realistically has little choice but to comply with Real ID.

Make no mistake. In the 10 years since it passed, Real ID casts an increasingly dark cloud over fundamental American values such as freedom, privacy and limited government. Primary opposition remains as relevant today as it was when Congress and President George W. Bush put it together after 9/11: Real ID creates a default national ID system — a concept directly contrary to so many principles upon which this nation is founded.

However, failure to comply means Minnesotans will need something more than their standard-issue driver's license to board domestic flights starting in 2018. In a nation where fear now overwhelms freedom and consumers won't wait for anything, that alone is huge bargaining chip.

Sadly, in the wake of countless reports of federal authorities abusing their domestic surveillance powers or having their databases hacked, there probably also is merit in the belief that much of that personal data already can be accessed by government.

Real ID history

In 2009, the Legislature passed a law that prohibited implementation of Real ID, which essentially forces states to gather intense personal data from residents who seek drivers licenses and basically share that information with other jurisdictions nationwide.

As The New York Times reported, eventually the private American Association of Motor Vehicle Administrators, which works with state motor vehicle departments, will have all Real ID-compliant license information. Examples of data required include a person's Social Security number and immigration status, plus the license is to have a readable chip or a magnetic strip containing all collected personal information.

This sample driver's license was provided by the Minnesota Department of Public Safety in 2004. (Photo: AP)

Homeland Security reports that most states and other jurisdictions "have made significant progress in enhancing the security of their licenses over the last number of years. As a result, approximately 70-80% of all U.S. drivers hold licenses from jurisdictions: (1) determined to meet the act’s standards; or (2) that have received extensions."

What to do

Minnesota, though, learned last month it won't get an extension, probably because the law passed in 2009 bans the state from making progress toward compliance.

Legislators are discussing what to do prior to the March 8 opening of the 2016 session. Friday's announcement gives them more time after news last month that implementation could come anytime in 2016.

Their key objective should be getting clear directives from the federal government about the minimum changes needed to current driver's licenses to make them compliant with Real ID standards.

Welcome to the sad realities of a nation in which fear overwhelms the value we place on freedom.

Read or Share this story: http://www.sctimes.com/story/opinion/2016/01/09/state-must-plan-real-id-compliance/78428808/