(Editor’s note: Updated with a no-comment from Gilead.)

This probably won’t go over well with insurers.

Gilead Sciences Inc. /quotes/zigman/72849/delayed /quotes/nls/gild GILD reportedly plans to sell full regimens of its controversial Hepatitis C drug, Sovaldi, for $900 in India — a price that is roughly 1% of what U.S. patients are being charged.

The Times of India reported earlier this week that Gilead offered to sell Sovaldi at what amounts to a 99% discount for the impoverished nation, following its plan to sell the highly effective treatment in Egypt at the same $900 price tag.

Gilead has taken heat for pricing three-month Sovaldi regimens at $84,000 in the U.S., translating to nearly $1,000 for a one-day dose. The criticism has come from a number of corners, most notably from the insurers’ trade group America’s Health Insurance Plans, which has repeatedly said such drug pricing is unsustainable and damage from that pricing scheme could reach far beyond the pharmaceutical industry. Rival drug firms, however, are developing similar treatments that could drive down the price in the U.S. in coming months and years.

AHIP spokesman Brendan Buck said in an email that Gilead’s $900 offer was “more evidence that Gilead is pricing not based on the cost of development, but rather just what it thinks it can get away with.”

The Times of India quoted Gilead spokesman Gregg Alton as saying: “We have set three basic pricing tiers (based on a country’s per capita income and hepatitis C prevalence) that serve as the starting point for negotiations with national governments. The tiers are low-income, low middle-income and upper-middle income.”

Gilead officials would not comment further.

The Times says that at $900, Sovaldi will be cheaper than existing treatments, which cost roughly $6,000 and can take four times as long.

But the publication reports that $900 still will put Sovaldi out of reach for many users in that nation. So Gilead may license Sovaldi to generic drug makers in India.

Gilead shares were up marginally in recent action to $92.44.

Follow @russbrittmktw

Follow @MWHealthBlog

More must-read health coverage from MarketWatch:

Nearly 90% of uninsured qualify for Obamacare exemptions: report

Obamacare rate hikes to average 4% in California in 2015

How health care has swallowed the U.S. economy, in one map