About 13,000 customers of Washington’s Obamacare health exchange had triple their premiums withdrawn from bank accounts this week, a mistake that Washington Healthplanfinder promises to rectify within 48 hours.

The over billing hit exchange customers whose monthly health care premiums are automatically withdrawn from their bank accounts.

Richard Onizuka, CEO of the exchange, issued an immediate explanation/mea culpa:

“On Monday, Feb. 23, the Exchange was made aware that a portion of Washington Healthplanfinder Qualified Health Plan customers had an incorrect amount withdrawn from their bank accounts during our standard monthly playment process.

“The issue affected 13,000 customer accounts that had previously set up automatic payment through their online accounts.

“We are working closely with our system integrator, Deloitte, to reverse the incorrect withdrawals as quickly as possible, but no later than the next 48 hours. We have notified affected customers of this issue and will provide final confirmation when the payment issue has been resolved.

“We apologize to our impacted customers and are working to correct the problem to minimize any further inconvenience they may have already experienced.”

One of those hit by the glitch was David Goldstein, a prominent liberal blogger (Horsesass.org) who has praised the state’s health care exchange. A total of $1,229.61 was withdrawn from Goldstein’s account, triple the $409.87 he pays for an insurance plan with Group Health.

Goldstein was not displaying much sticker shock.

“Fortunately, I no longer work at The Stranger and am no longer living month to month, so I had plenty of cushion in my checking account to cover this unexpected withdrawal,” Goldy wrote Wednesday.

In the other Washington, meanwhile, the Obama administration is dealing with 800,000 people who signed up under Obamacare who were given incorrect tax information.

The U.S. Treasury department said Tuesday that those who owe extra taxes because of the error can keep the money, The Hill reported.