JUDY WOODRUFF: On the “NewsHour” online: Film and TV buffs probably have their Golden Globe picks ready ahead of Sunday’s awards ceremony, but they still don’t know who you’re rooting for. You can take your quiz to get acquainted with critics’ takes on some of the best television and movies from the past year. That’s on our home page. That’s at PBS.org/NewsHour.

And a reminder about some upcoming programs from our PBS colleagues.

Gwen Ifill’s preparing for “Washington Week,” which airs later tonight.

Here’s a preview:

GWEN IFILL: Tears were shed, political gauntlets were thrown, and bombs exploded, and that’s just in the first week of 2016. We take you from Washington to North Korea to Cedar Rapids, Iowa, all tonight on “Washington Week” — Judy.

JUDY WOODRUFF: On “PBS NewsHour Weekend” Saturday: the increasing numbers of women who are pregnant and addicted to painkillers, a look at treatments for mothers and their babies who are at risk.

WOMAN: When you’re an addict, all you can think about is getting that drug, getting that medicine, getting that relief.

NARRATOR: What began with a legitimate prescription for pain following a car accident quickly slipped into abuse.

WOMAN: I knew I had crossed the line when I was — started running out of them a couple days before my prescription was supposed to be gone. And then I found ways to get them without a prescription.

QUESTION: Did you go doctor shopping at all?

WOMAN: If I didn’t have a doctor and I had a pain flare-up, I would go to an E.R. I accrued tens of thousands of dollars in bills.

NARRATOR: Now, at 32, she’s pregnant and attends a clinic for pregnant opioid users.

Dr. Jessica Young started the clinic four years ago at Vanderbilt University Medical Center. Young estimates that two-thirds of her patients are like April, whose addiction started with a prescription for pain.

JUDY WOODRUFF: That’s tomorrow night on “PBS NewsHour Weekend.”

And we will be back right here on Monday, ahead of the college football championship, when we look at what concussions do to players.

That’s the “NewsHour” for tonight. I’m Judy Woodruff.

Have a great weekend. Thank you, and good night.