All six hospitals in Hudson County will see less charity care funding under Gov. Chris Christie's proposed 2015-16 budget, according to figures released by the state earlier this month.

The proposed state budget calls for a cut in charity care funding from $650 million this year to $502 million next year. State officials reasoned that with more people signed up for insurance through the Affordable Care Act (ACA) less charity care funding is necessary.

Officials at "safety net" hospitals, facilities where a majority of patients are uninsured or are insured by Medicaid through the ACA, had hoped they would be spare massive cuts in funding.

"Given the preliminary nature of the projections, we continue to analyze the potential impact based on the increased Medicaid enrollment," CarePoint Health CEO Dennis Kelly said. "However, we remain very concerned as hospital reimbursements continue to be targeted while our burden as a safety net urban provider increases."

Jersey City Medical Center-Barnabas Health would see a cut of $9.2 million, while the CarePoint Health facilities in Hudson County, Hoboken University Medical Center ($6.3 million), Christ Hospital ($2.6 million) in Jersey City and Bayonne Medical ($1 million) would see a combined drop of roughly $10 million.

"Among some policymakers and the public, there is a misconception that the Affordable Care Act (ACA) eliminated the need for stable charity care funding in New Jersey," JCMC President and CEO Joseph Scott said in a recent op-ed piece in The Jersey Journal.

Palisades Medical Center (PMC) in North Bergen and Meadowlands Hospital Medical Center (MHMC) in Secaucus also saw cuts in funding, but increases in funding for graduate medical education (GME) more than made up for the losses. PMC, despite a $950,000 cut in charity care fuding, is receiving $414,000 more than last year from the state because of a an increase of $1.3 million in GME funding.

MHMC would lose $645,000 in charity care under the new budget, but would gain $840,000 in GME funding. JCMC would see a $1.3 million increase in GME funding Hoboken University Medical Center ($600,000) and Christ Hospital ($77,000) would also receive more money.