Buy Photo The home page of Truprice.healthcare, a website that lets patients see the price of health services before they get them. (Photo: BOB BIELK/STAFF PHOTOGRAPHER)Buy Photo

Two South Jersey doctors have launched a website that allows consumers to shop for surgery the same way they now shop for airplane tickets.

Truprice.healthcare is designed to bring transparency and competition to an industry that has little of either in a bid to lower costs and improve care, Dr. Mark Gantner and Dr. Raymond Weiand said.

“The confusion (that comes from a medical invoice) goes away because what we’re trying to do is provide to the consumer one price with no surprises,” Weiand said.

The website is in its early stages. So far, it has prices for more than 30 procedures from about a dozen doctors – orthopedic surgeons, podiatrists and ophthalmologists – in Ocean, Atlantic and Cape May counties.

Its web address is unusual; the doctors took advantage of changes in 2014 that allowed companies to purchase domain names other than .com.

Its target is employers who self-insure their workers and consumers whose insurance plans have high deductibles and strict doctor networks. Instead of going online to buy, say, an airline ticket along with a hotel room and rental car, consumers can put in their cart an arthroscopic knee surgery, a diagnostic image and a few physical therapy sessions.

Truprice.healthcare comes to the market as consumer advocates call on the health care industry to shed more light on the price of its services.

The Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, often called Obamacare, requires most Americans to be covered by health insurance. And some of the policies carry with them high out-of-pocket costs. But consumers rarely know what they – or their insurance company – are paying until after they’ve been treated.

New Jersey gets an ‘F’

States have made little progress requiring that prices be disclosed, according to the Health Care Incentives Improvement Institute and Catalyst for Payment Reform, two research groups that advocate for more transparency.

In the groups’ 2015 Report Card on State Price Transparency Laws, New Jersey was one of 45 states given an F.

“You can’t have a functional market without having information on cost and quality that’s available to all stakeholders,” said Francois de Brantes, executive director of the Health Care Incentives Improvement Institute, based in Newtown, Connecticut.

“Health care is the only industry to date where people thought it was OK that only the health plan – who isn’t in many ways the ultimate buyer – would know what the specific price is for any service for which they negotiated,” he said. “And no one can get an overall price estimate for an entire episode for illness or treatment.”

Gantner, 48, of Toms River, is an anesthesiologist. Weiand, 57, of Egg Harbor is an orthopedic surgeon. Like many doctors, they often commiserated. Their expenses were rising. Their reimbursements were flat. Their patients were saddled with big out-of-pocket expenses.

To top it off, no one knew what anything cost.

‘It’s insanity’

“It’s similar to going onto a car lot and the salesman says, ‘Listen, pick any car you want, we’ll send you the bill in 30 days. No returns, by the way,’ ” Gantner said. “And so you walk around, you have no idea what the price is, you get in a nice car you like and then you get a bill and go, ‘Whoa!’ That’s our health care system. It’s insanity.”

They came up with an idea: Create a website where patients can research the cost of the service and the quality of the doctor – and purchase the service upfront. Consumers or their employers would pay a fee to Truprice that is factored into the price.

They hired a development company from Denver, Colorado, to build the site. They approached doctors to provide price information. And they financed the startup out of their own pockets.

The idea applies free-market rules used by nearly every other industry. But it’s not a slam-dunk. Consumers historically have paid a premium to their insurance companies and not given a second thought about the cost of a doctor’s visit.

After Obamacare, that’s changing. Consumers pay more for their own care and need to consider whether to get treatment and where to go. But only rarely do they get the price beforehand.

Gantner and Weiand envision a site – first focusing on southern New Jersey and eventually nationwide – that lays it out like the TV game show “Let’s Make a Deal.” You can get arthroscopic knee surgery for $4,200 here or you can see how it plays out through your insurance plan.

“The industry needs a model where providers are competing on quality and price because that, in the end, is what’s going to improve health care and lower costs for the consumer,” Gantner said.

Read or Share this story: http://on.app.com/1LlQWiX