The presumptive GOP nominee, Donald Trump, joined Kilmeade & Friends for a wide-ranging interview. Kilmeade and Trump discussed Trump’s belief the democrat primary is rigged in favor of Hillary Clinton, his thoughts on Joe Biden saying he would have been the best president and Ben Rhodes admitting the Iran deal was a fraud. Trump also took a shot London’s newly elected Muslim mayor and weighed in about his sit down with Megyn Kelly for her upcoming Fox network special. Plus, Trump revealed a big secret about our very own Brian Kilmeade, who he called “Mr. Switzerland”!

Listen here:

[audio:http://www.podtrac.com/pts/redirect.mp3/ak.podcast.foxnewsradio.com/talk/KNFCLIP/051116_kilmeade_trump.mp3]

Donald Trump ‘s thoughts on the Democrat delegate process

(Kilmeade) Hillary has lost 10 of the last 15 Democrat primaries and caucuses. Do you have to personally game plan for a Bernie Sanders matchup?

(TRUMP) It’s a rigged system so it’s not going to happen. The system is totally rigged. My system was rigged also but I won by so much and I won a lot more than Bernie. I gave the analogy Brian of a prizefighter, you go into the unfriendly territory and knock the other guy out, there is noting the judges can do. The system is rigged. In the case of the Democrats they have the super delegates and I guess they were just handed them by the bosses it’s crazy. She [Hillary] has so many super-delegates it’s almost impossible for her to lose. So despite all the winning you see [from Sanders] she is going to win.

Trump on Joe Biden saying he would have been the best president

(Kilmeade) Would he [Biden] have been tougher than Hilary Clinton?

(TRUMP) I don’t know. I consider everybody tough. I really don’t know. I can say this, I met his son twice [Beau Biden] and he was a really nice guy and I know that Joe Biden took that really tough, I don’t know. I do think this, it will be really hard to take it away from Sanders, I think politically it would be very hard to say that he ran, he did very well, he came in probably first to Hillary and she doesn’t make it for other reasons, outside reasons and now you are going to give it to somebody else. I just don’t know what the apparatus would be to do that. I think they would like to do that, they don’t like having Bernie Sanders in there. I am not sure they could do much about that in the case of Sanders.

Trump on Ben Rhodes admitting the Iran deal was built on lies.

(TRUMP) It’s a fraud, the whole deal was a fraud. Just like Obamacare is a fraud. He [Pres. Obama] made the statement 100 times. 28 times to be exact, that you can have your own plan, you can have your own doctor, the whole thing, he just kept going over and over, that was a total fraud too. Its almost impossible to believe you cant bring lawsuits over this kind of stuff.

(Kilmeade) There doesn’t seem to be hell to pay anymore.

(TRUMP) No there is not hell to pay. They lie and it’s a big story today and yesterday and within two days nobody is even going to be talking about it. Remember thte guy who defrauded everybody in Obamacare?

(Kilmeade) Jonathan Gruber

(TRUMP) Right. Very good. Because nobody even remembers him now. Nobody remembers his name, nobody remembers anything about it. It’s gone, it has a 2 week shelf life and it goes away. Jonathan Gruber defrauded this country on Obamacare and nobody brings up his name anymore.

Trump on naming a Vice President

(Kilmeade) Who are you going to pick for Vice President? There has been a little bit of a clue with oyur pattern

(TRUMP) OK

(Kilmeade) Senator Sessions has been helping you with immigration and now he is part of your team. Seantor Corker said this about your foreign policy speech, lets listen.

[Audio of Senator Corker saying he thought Trump’s foreign policy speech was a very positive step forward and looks forward to hearing more]

(Kilmeade) It’s been speculated that he will be on your shortlist. Can you tell us if he is and do you feel he has the qualifications to be on it?

(TRUMP) Are you talking about Sessions or Corker?

(Kilmeade) Corker

(TRUMP) Well Corker is a great guy, they are both great guys. I can’t say Brian. I want to keep it as a total surprise. I want to surprise even you. You have such access to me and everything I do, every once in a while I like to surprise even you. But I can tell you, Sessions and Corker are fantastic people, they love the country, they love their party and they love the country.

Trump‘s response to newly elected London Mayor Sadiq Khan saying his views on Islam are ignorant

(TRUMP) Well I assume he denies there is Islamic terrorism. There is Islamic radical terrorism all over the world right now. It’s a disaster what’s going on. I assume he is denying that. I assume he is like our President that’s denying its taking place. We have a serious problem, it’s a temporary ban, it hasn’t been called for yet, nobody’s done it, this is just a suggestion until we find out what’s going on. We have radical Islamic terrorism all over the world, you can go to Paris, you can go to San Bernardino, all over the world, if they want to deny it, they can deny it, I don’t choose to deny it.

Trump talks about appearing on the upcoming Megyn Kelly Fox Network special

(Kilmeade) What can we expect?

(TRUMP) Megyn as you know better than anybody because you were the one, you were Switzerland, we call you Mr. Switzerland, you know what that means?

(Kilmeade) Right

(TRUMP) And you called and said this would be a really good thing, you had a lot to do with this and Megyn called and came over to Trump Tower and I really respected her for doing that because I am not sure I would have been able to do that if you want to know the truth. I really respected her for doing it, I agreed to sit down, we did an interview, just recently taped and I guess it goes on Tuesday night and I think it will be really good. She was very fair, tough but fair and I don’t mind tough as long as it’s fair and I think it will do very well. I think it’s going to be a real winner. It’s going to be on Fox Network on Tuesday night.