25 Patriots stood against the king–well, 24 plus one U.S. Representative who merely voted “present”–and for their courage, t hey will all be punished by the GOP leader with a ferocity reserved for purging one’s own.

What most Republicans don’t understand is why Speaker Boehner doesn’t direct that same fury at Obama for forcing his policies on Americans even though we have made it clear that he does not have our consent.

Obama’s executive orders have increased, not decreased, since the 2014 midterm elections. By overriding Congress, Obama has shown nothing but contempt for the will of the people–executive amnesty, unilateral action on Cuba and ObamaCare–but John Boehner shows Obama the respect that should be reserved for the Patriots who opposed him and “we the people,” whom they represent.

Perhaps most shocking is the absence of a single California Congressman on that list of 25. After all, Obama’s executive amnesty will affect California more than any other state, and California is reeling from the impact of decades of unchecked illegal immigration encouraged by a legislature controlled by Marxist progressives.

Not only can illegal aliens now obtain driver’s licenses in California, but because we have so many illegals who have chosen to make California their home, we have “separate but supposedly equal” Department of Motor Vehicles (DMV) offices set up to handle “illegals only.”

If Obama thinks he can easily process the estimated 5 million who qualify for for his executive amnesty, he ought to visit one of these “illegals only” DMV’s, where 90% reportedly failed to pass the written test at first. If you cannot pass the written test, that does not bode well for you being a “safe driver” out on the road–but then again this was always about politics for the Democrats, not public safety.

So, back to my question: Where are the California Representatives who will stand up for Californians against a man like Boehner, who only cares about currying favor for himself, everyone else be damned?

One reliable conservative, Tom McClintock, put out a statement yesterday defending his vote. The only problem with his rather defensive statement is that it’s all about insider baseball, not the concerns of the voters, who put him back in power to combat Obama’s agenda.

By decrying that the process should have taken place in the Republican caucus back in November, McClintock ignores the fact that public opinion takes time to build. It wasn’t apparent that Boehner was going to enable Obama to the extent he did until he helped Obama push the “Cromnibus” through, funding Obama’s agenda without a fight, and outraging conservatives across the country. That was mid-December, long after the internal procedural moment had passed.

Yesterday’s vote was about heeding the unmitigated anger of Republicans all over the country who worked hard to elect conservatives, only to have the GOP leadership ignore them–and, worse, enable rather than oppose Obama. The fact that Congressmen Darrel Issa, Ed Royce, Dana Rohrbacker, all men you could rely on to do the right thing, didn’t, is deeply troubling. Maybe they’ve been in office too long, and have forgotten that they serve at our consent, not the Speaker’s. They’ll have to answer to their constituents for their vote.