Ezekiel Emanuel Gleefully Predicts the Death of Private Health Insurance Companies

Ezekial Emanuel, brother of Chicago mayor and former Obama staffer Rahm Emanuel, is cheerily predicting that Obamacare will bring about the death of the private insurance companies in the US. Ezekiel makes the provocative prediction in the New Republic.

Emanuel writes that Obamacare is already causing insurance companies to either die or evolve into something else. "The good news is you won't have insurance companies to kick around much longer," he writes.

Obamacare was not sold to the American people as a means of destroying private health insurance companies or even forcing them into turning into a different type of company. It was sold as a means of bringing insurance costs down while increasing access. It has turned out to cause about 6.2 million Americans to lose their insurance while forcing some Americans to buy insurance or pay a fine to the IRS. "If you like your healthcare, you can keep your healthcare," President Barack Obama repeatedly promised. Emanuel's article provides more evidence that the president was knowingly lying, and that people like Emanuel, who were close advisers while Obamacare was being written, knew that it would cause chaos for millions of Americans and their insurance.

Emanuel writes that Obamacare is already causing some medical services providers to seek exclusive contracts with employers, cutting insurance plans out but also limiting the choices available to customers.

Ezekiel has consistently predicted, after Obamacare became law, that it would kill insurance companies. While Obamacare was being debated, Democrats denied that its purpose was to destroy private health insurance companies. Emanuel claims, without providing any evidence, that Americans will be happier in the new employer-based health provider networks.

"So be prepared to kiss your insurance company good-bye forever," Emanuel concludes at the end of the article.

About 85% of Americans were happy with their healthcare before Obamacare.