Protectionism: Officially, the Republican Party is pro-free trade. But it has done a remarkably bad job of explaining the benefits of trade to its rank and file, as exit polls of primary voters depressingly show.

Here’s what the GOP’s 2012 party platform had to say about free trade: “It means more American jobs, higher wages, and a better standard of living. Every $1 billion in additional U.S. exports means another 5,000 jobs here at home. The Free Trade Agreements negotiated with friendly democracies since President Reagan’s trailblazing pact with Israel in 1985 facilitated the creation of nearly ten million jobs supported by our exports.”

The platform went on to say that the Obama administration’s “slowness in completing agreements begun by its predecessor and its failure to pursue any new trade agreements with friendly nations” was “deplorable” and promises that a Republican president “will complete negotiations for a Trans-Pacific Partnership.”

You’d be hard pressed to find many in the Republican base who would agree with that statement today. In fact, exit polls of several primary states show that Republicans are more hostile to free trade than Democrats.

In North Carolina, just 30% of Republican voters say that trade with other countries “creates U.S. jobs” while 58% say it “takes away U.S. jobs.” The spread was similar in Mississippi, Illinois and Ohio.

But what’s really surprising is that, in each of those four states, Democrats were less likely to say trade takes away jobs than Republicans. (See the nearby chart.)

The exit polls aren’t the first to show this trend.

The Gallup Poll has for years asked whether trade is mainly an opportunity for the U.S. Up until 2012, Republicans were consistently more supportive of that idea than Democrats. In their last poll, however, 63% of Democrats and Independents said trade is mainly an opportunity (up from the low 30s a decade ago). But just 50% of Republicans feel this way, which is down from a high of 57% in 2002.

You could blame this as a sign of reflexive GOP hostility to Obama, who recently was pushing TPP. But Obama was silent on trade for most of his presidency. And while Donald Trump is getting the benefit of — and adding fuel to — this anti-trade fever, he didn’t cause it, either. A YouGov poll taken in early June 2015 found that just 40% of Republicans said free trade has been good for the U.S., compared with 51% of Democrats.

More curious still is the fact that Democratic Party leaders have consistently attacked free trade deals, mainly because unions saw them as a threat.

What’s most depressing is the fact that the benefits of free trade are one of the few things that just about every economist — liberal and conservative — agrees on. As economist Alan Blinder put it, “for more than two centuries, economists have steadfastly promoted free trade among nations as the best trade policy.” A recent paper by the American Action Forum concluded, for example, that Trump’s protectionist trade agenda could cost consumers $250 billion a year in higher prices.

Yes, the economy sucks and people are hurting. But trade isn’t to blame. It’s lousy domestic policies — high taxes, massive regulations, ObamaCare, and such.

Seth Mandell, writing in Commentary, said that it’s possible to turn the tide of public opinion toward free trade, “but as long as presidential candidates play on the anti-trade instincts of so many voters, that’s unlikely to happen.”

Sad, but true.