FARGO – One of the reasons Fargo Cass Public Health moved out of the downtown area and into a former grocery store on the south side early this fall was to give its patients, clients and employees more space. But a new report from the agency indicates more patient space may not have been necessary, at least based on the latest numbers.

Patient visits to Fargo Cass Public Health have been declining over the past few years, falling from 6,311 in 2011 to 4,972 in 2014. That represents a 21 percent drop and an average of five fewer patients seen each day.

Once a cornerstone of public health, the number of immunizations given also fell during that period — from 5,404 to 3,932, a 27 percent drop.

Public Health Director Ruth Bachmeier cited the federal Affordable Care Act as the main reason for the declines. She said they mostly serve patients who are uninsured or underinsured, and that pool has shrunk since more people have health insurance.

Bachmeier also attributed the lower patient load to a change recommending less-frequent pap smears, a screening for cervical cancer in women.

"That's affected our clinical services in the family planning area," she said.

Bachmeier said the decrease in immunizations — flu shots specifically — came about because of more locations where people can get them.

"From what I'm sensing is, we've kind of plateaued now as far as the clinical side," she said.

Because Fargo Cass Public Health is not a primary health care provider, it doesn't see patients who are sick. Their bread and butter has always been preventive health, including family planning and immunization services.

With more clinic space available and patient load decreasing, public health may seek a new focus.

"We may have to redesign our mission, see what's most efficient, what can deliver the biggest bang for the buck," said Fargo Mayor Tim Mahoney, who is also the city's liaison to Fargo Cass Public Health.

The building at 1240 25th St. S., former home of a Sunmart and CVS Pharmacy, was purchased and renovated by the city for a total of nearly $11 million. It also houses a police substation and county morgue.

The public health space measures just under 43,600 square feet — almost 10,000-square-feet more than the total of its previous site at 401 3rd Ave. N. and two offsite programs. The Women, Infants and Children Nutrition Program (WIC) and Environmental Health used to be in separate locations, but are now under the same roof at the new building.

Bachmeier said the new clinic space is obviously larger and has seven exam rooms compared to six previously.

Mahoney said planning for that space was tricky, knowing that patient loads were decreasing. But in discussions with Bachmeier, they didn't want to build too small, either, he said.

"If we don't put the sinks, plumbing in right away, it'll be difficult to go back and retrofit," Mahoney said.

With direct patient care fading, where does the public health focus turn now?

Bachmeier says the trend is "population-based health," including policy development, health promotion, smoking cessation and obesity prevention.

"(They're) things that we can do as an agency that will impact the health of the entire population and not just one-on-one," she said.

If one-on-one care diminishes to the point where the clinic space is going unused, Bachmeier and Mahoney say it won't go to waste.

"I think the clinic space could be repurposed for something else," Mahoney said.

Bachmeier said the WIC program continues to grow. As of June, enrollment was already over 3,000, not far from the total number of enrollees for all of last year.

"If the time comes where we need to expand WIC, it's just a wall between there," Bachmeier said. "We could potentially use some of the clinic side for additional WIC offices."

In the meantime, Bachmeier says they'll continue to get settled into the new building and enjoy the extra space.

"It really looks and feels like a clinic now. Not that our old space wasn't a true clinic, but we were packed in there pretty tight," she said.