Loveland Resident John Metcalf built Lego creations of Loveland, which are currently displayed at the Lincoln Gallery

John Metcalf designed this Lego scene of Loveland landmarks and buildings, including the Pulliam building, Rialto Theater Center, Loveland Visitor's Center, Benson Sculpture Park Garden and more. (Jessica Benes / Loveland Reporter-Herald)

Lego Loveland Check out the Lego Loveland display of Loveland buildings and landmarks at the Lincoln Gallery, 429 N. Lincoln Ave., through May 1.

That's the Visitor's Center building, and this one looks like The Dam Store.

There's Dairy Delite and this is definitely the Rialto Theater Center.

And that's John Metcalf's house, because he built this Lego creation that pays tribute to many of Loveland's iconic buildings and landmarks, which means he gets to live there.

Metcalf built a heart-shaped landscape of Loveland's icons, which served as a centerpiece at the Loveland Chamber of Commerce annual dinner a year ago in January, which had a theme of "Close to the Heart."

John Metcalf designed a Lego scene of Loveland landmarks, including this reproduction of the Pulliam building on Cleveland Avenue in downtown Loveland. (Jessica Benes / Loveland Reporter-Herald)

He was just about to break it apart to use the pieces for other projects when he was invited to display the creation at the Lincoln Gallery for the next couple of months.

"Lego Loveland" will be on display at the Lincoln Gallery through May 1.

When designing the Lego display, he started by buying little light posts in bulk on eBay and figuring out how to add poles to them to display heart-shaped Lego pieces.

Then, he started on the Feed and Grain building because he loves the architecture. He used it as a measurement by which the other buildings would be designed.

He added features like the Benson Park Sculpture Garden, Devil's Backbone, Foote Lagoon, the Pulliam building and McCreery House.

"I've been into Legos since I was a kid. I grew up with Legos and Star Wars action figures. That was my childhood right there," Metcalf said.

Some of the buildings are favorite restaurants, like Pho Lan and Dairy Delite. Images of the various buildings included in the display are available on the Reporter-Herald Facebook page or Lincoln Gallery Facebook.

Megan Tracy of Loveland even posted on Facebook that her boys are a couple of "blooming master builders. They were super inspired by this and went home to build their apartment."

Jessica Benes: 970-669-5050 ext. 530, jbenes@reporter-herald.com, Twitter.com/jessicabenes.