President Obama speaks about the Supreme Court's ruling to uphold subsidies provided under the Affordable Care Act on Thursday in the Rose Garden of the White House. Saul Loeb/AFP/Getty Images

This is the week President Barack Obama is scheduled to make a go or no-go call on the most fateful international agreement of his presidency. His judgment will determine how easily Iran can acquire a nuclear weapon.

It is crucial to understand that Obama is not pressing Iran to abandon the covert and illegal atomic program by which the mullahs plan to dominate the region.

The president long ago conceded to the Iranians that he wanted only to contain their ambitions for a period of time -- and offered to pay a recklessly dangerous price to get them to promise even that much.

Because Obama fancies that he can police with certainty the internal machinations of the world's most duplicitous regime -- a government whose leader vows that nuclear inspections on military bases will be forbidden -- the president toys with lifting the economic sanctions that brought the mullahs to a table across which the parties two months ago supposedly nailed down a "framework" that the two sides now interpret as differently as night and day.

A president of sterner stuff and clearer vision would, even at this late date, declare Iran guilty of deal-breaking conduct.

[GALLERY: Barack Obama Cartoons]

In word and deed, Obama acts as though the radical Islamist, terror-exporting state were actually led by rational men who merely await the release of $140 billion as the catalyst for membership in the community of nations. Dream on and enter a nightmare.

As one for instance, former Manhattan District Attorney Robert Morgenthau has written that Obama seems poised to give Ayatollah Ali Khamenei a pass on applying the massive infusion of cash as a force multiplier for terror.

Despite economic sanctions targeted strictly at the mullahs' terrorist activities -- as opposed to their nuclear weaponry -- Iran's documented history of Islamist violence spans four U.S. presidents and includes serving as the primary banker for Hezbollah and Hamas, supplying explosives to kill U.S. troops during the Iraq War, smuggling al-Qaida warriors into Syria and abetting the attack on the U.S.S. Cole in 2000.

While the U.S. Treasury vows to crack down on Iran's terror-funding if and when Obama lifts sanctions, once in Iranian channels, that $140 billion in assets will be untraceable.

Still worse, Obama seems ready to turn his back on Iranian atrocities against the American citizens and soldiers who have won court judgments against the Islamic Republic for the 1983 attack on the Marine barracks in Beirut. Khamenei gets $140 billion in blood money and property. The victims and families are in danger of getting zilch.

[MORE: Political Cartoons on Iran]

As for the terms of the nuclear deal, a bipartisan group of national security experts, both Democrat and Republican, and including some former members of the Obama administration, have warned the president that the International Atomic Energy Agency must have power to inspect all Iranian nuclear sites (a demand rejected by Khamenei), must be able to interview Iranian scientists about past nuclear military program (a demand rejected by Khamenei) and must put limits on the centrifuges that enrich uranium to weapons grade (a demand rejected by Khamenei).

Finally, here's the most horrifying expert opinion about how close Iran will be to producing a bomb as a so-called threshold nuclear power.

Obama scoffed when Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu said Iran could "break out" to building a bomb within three months. The president said the world would have a year to stop the mullahs. Then Obama admitted that Netanyahu had been right about being on the brink.

[RANKINGS: The 10 Worst Presidents]

Now, Alan J. Kuperman, coordinator of the Nuclear Proliferation Prevention Project at the University of Texas at Austin, has checked all of Obama's plans, safeguards and the nuclear materials and equipment the President plans to leave under the mullahs' control in order to determine whether Obama would give the world one year's breathing room.

Here's what Kuperman wrote in the New York Times:

"Unfortunately, that claim [of one year] is false, as can be demonstrated with basic science and math. By my calculations, Iran's actual breakout time under the deal would be approximately three months -- not over a year. Thus, the deal would be unlikely to improve the world's ability to react to a sudden effort by Iran to build a bomb."