On the walls of Sam’s Italian Kitchen are black and white photos. Photos of family, of owner Sam Macri and his wife, Tammy — and displayed prominently in the center of the restaurant — a photo of Sam making a pizza in his younger days at the Volcano Restaurant when it was located in downtown South Bend.

For 55 years, Sam says he’s been in the kitchen doing what he loves — making people happy with good food. Now he is focused on his latest restaurant venture, Sam’s Italian Kitchen, which opened at 910 E. Ireland Road, at the beginning of this month.

Sam has owned a number of successful restaurants over the years.

“I was debating between retirement, but I can’t stay home,” he says. “I love what I do, and I love people.”

Now he’s back cooking his old-fashioned Italian cuisine, recipes he says have barely changed in his lifetime. But nothing is written down, it’s all in his head.

Sam’s Italian Kitchen is open Sunday and Tuesday through Thursday from 11 a.m. to 9 p.m.; Friday and Saturday, it is open 11 a.m. to 10 p.m. It is closed Monday.

Sam and Tammy are there early every morning preparing the food. The menu includes many of the pasta and meat dishes you would expect at a good Italian restaurant, as well as oven-baked subs, sandwiches, and of course, pizza.

And Sam’s pizza is something special. Every pie is a show as he tosses and twirls the dough in the air, a technique that, like his recipes, he says hasn’t changed.

He grabs pieces of fresh Italian sausage for one pizza he’s making, adding the meat to his homemade sauce and dough. He then grabs two big portobello mushroom caps and chops them right before they get added to the pizza as well.

Then it’s into the restaurant’s brick oven.

Sam says the secret behind a great pizza is the dough, and his dough makes a great pizza with a crust that is both light and flaky, but firm enough to hold all the toppings on top without breaking.

The lunch buffet is a good way to sample many of Sam’s dishes. Cost is $9.95 for a salad bar and a number of hot items,like pasta and some American choices like meatloaf and whatever pizzas Sam decides to put together that day.

Sam’s Italian Kitchen also offers catering, and the restaurant has an entrance just for carryout orders.

Winter Restaurant Week

Winter Restaurant Week is back, beginning Monday and running through Feb. 7. Presented by the Downtown Dining Association of South Bend and Downtown South Bend Inc., the week features 16 restaurants in downtown South Bend.

Participating locations will offer value-priced menu items at $11, $22 or $33, depending on the establishment, with about 10 percent of proceeds going to the Memorial Children’s Hospital.

Reservations are encouraged for many of the locations, according to a news release, and diners should mention Restaurant Week when reserving a table. Visit www.EatDrinkDTSB.com for participating locations, menus and hours.

Have you heard?

Fresh Thyme Farmers Market in located at Wilshire Plaza on Grape Road, next to Hobby Lobby, will open at 7 a.m. on Feb. 11. We’ll have more in the coming weeks.

Lincoln Wright’s column runs on Wednesdays and Sundays. Contact him at LWright@sbtinfo.com or 574-235-6324. You also can talk retail at Facebook.com/thebasket and at Twitter.com/marketbasket.