Topics: 2016 Elections, Alec MacGillis, Editor's Picks, Governors, profiles, Race, Scott Walker, suburbs, The New Republic, White people, Wisconsin, Politics News

There are so many GOP presidential hopefuls for whom a path to winning the 2016 nomination seems rife with obstacles. Jeb Bush has money but has been out of the game for a while, and also loves immigration reform and Common Core. Chris Christie … something about a bridge? Ted Cruz has what we may call a narrow, if vociferous, appeal, even among Republicans. Rand Paul doesn’t love constant war enough; Marco Rubio is nothing. As we all know, Romneymentum is sweeping the country with a fervor unlike anything previously recorded in political history, but for whatever reason, he seems intent on not giving it another go.

This is all great news for Wisconsin Gov. Scott Walker! Walker has everything Republicans want in a presidential nominee. Executive experience. A record of right-wing accomplishment in a blue state and fighting hard to save his hide in the backlash. And most important, a diverse coalition of supporters, ranging from white suburbanites to white suburbanites, and then back to white suburbanites again.

The New Republic’s Alec MacGillis writes about Walker at length in the magazine’s latest cover story. And it shows, at least to us, that Walker represents a great test of the crumbling national GOP foundation’s ability to push through a presidential victory. If he’s able to become president, the reconfigured appeal the GOP needs to be nationally competitive again will at least be delayed. If he isn’t, then the party may learn once and for all that time’s up.

Walker’s base is a lot like that of Republicans in other states: whiter rural and suburban parts that go to battle with more heavily African-American and Hispanic cities. As MacGillis explains, though, the racial imbalance in Wisconsin, specifically in and around Milwaukee, is almost total. “Today, less than 2 percent of the WOW counties’ population,” MacGillis writes of the three most populous counties surrounding Milwaukee, “is African American and less than 5 percent is Hispanic. According to studies by the Brookings Institution and Brown University, the Milwaukee metro area is one of the top two most racially segregated regions in the country.”