The district says it will engage each bidder in a review process to evaluate each bid before the district’s board of directors selects an eventual front runner. The district will conduct public forums to explain the selection early next year. District voters will be asked to approve the selection in 2016.

The Petaluma Health Care District is seeking public input on bids from four companies to operate Petaluma Valley Hospital when a current lease ends in 2017. Meetings in December and January, are being devoted to receiving public input at the district’s main conference room at 1425 N. McDowell Blvd.

As many smaller hospitals struggle to maintain services in the face of a challenging economic and regulatory environment, the publicly owned Petaluma Valley Hospital remains an example of a small-town facility equipped to provide care spanning from the start of life to the very edge of death.

The future of those services will depend largely on the offers of the four companies vying to take the helm — whether through lease or outright purchase — in 2017, when a current, 20-year lease with St. Joseph Health expires. But as the publicly elected Petaluma Health Care District that owns the hospital awaits the final bids from those potential operators, the ongoing work at the 80-bed facility off North McDowell Boulevard provides one glimpse of what’s at stake.

“We have to be prepared for a newborn to a 110-year-old,” said Wendi Thomas, nursing director of critical care and emergency services at Petaluma Valley, “and we are.”

With Petaluma’s only emergency room and the sole childbirth center between Santa Rosa and San Rafael, Petaluma Valley Hospital has remained a destination for services as the regional and national health care landscape has evolved in recent years, according to several senior members of the hospital’s administration and medical staff.

Perhaps the most telling single measure of overall hospital activity is the volume of emergency room visits, which recently spiked after Sebastopol’s Palm Drive Hospital shut down in April 2014, said Jane Read, vice president of operations for St. Joseph Health. Petaluma Valley was among the acute care centers in the region that absorbed a share of the patients that would otherwise be destined for that shuttered hospital’s emergency room.

Petaluma Valley’s emergency room activity reached 18,480 visits for the fiscal year that ended June 30, up 10 percent from the year before, according to data from St. Joseph Health. Palm Drive reopened as Sonoma West Medical Center last month.

The upswing caused by Palm Drive’s closure was only the latest surge in the ongoing churn of emergency room activity at Petaluma Valley over the past few years, which Read said was attributable in part to an across-the-board increase in patients in the wake of the Affordable Care Act. While less than a third the size of St. Joseph’s larger hospital to the north, Santa Rosa Memorial, Petaluma Valley has around half the number of emergency room visits.

Read emphasized that the Petaluma emergency room serves patients regardless of insurance, making it the likely destination for the majority of area residents following a serious injury or other medical emergency. She cast it as a crucial role for a hospital located close to a busy stretch of Highway 101, but still some distance from larger hospitals to the north and a smaller acute care center in Novato.

“It’s whatever insurance they have,” said Read, whose organization is among the four bidding to operate the hospital in 2017. “They’re not even asked any questions other than, ‘Why are you here?’ And then we put them in a bed.”

The hospital’s acute care capacity has remained a high-profile concern for both the public and the health care district itself, and it appears unlikely that a proposal that would substantially cut back or even close the emergency department would get very far.