When: 11 a.m. Sunday when the awful 3-8 Giants play at the pathetic 1-10 Jaguars.

What’s up: Beckham was the talk of the league last week after his incredible, one-handed, full-arm extension touchdown catch Sunday night against Dallas. LeBron James, Victor Cruz, Randall Cobb, Joe Haden, Michael Irvin and Andre Reed were among those who tweeted their astonishment, many saying it was the best catch they had ever seen. “That’s as fine a catch as I’ve seen,” said Broncos quarterback Peyton Manning. “It’s just what Newman (High School) graduates do.”

Background: Born and raised in New Orleans, where he went to Isidore Newman School, the same high school as Cooper, Peyton and Eli Manning. Beckham attended LSU, and entered the NFL draft after his junior season. He was the No. 12 overall pick, but a torn hamstring forced him to miss the preseason and first four games of the regular season. He exploded on the NFL in week 9, when on Monday night he had 8 catches for 156 yards against Indianapolis. Against Dallas last week, Beckham had 10 catches for 146 yards and two touchdowns, including one snag that is generating discussion as the best catch ever.

Klis’ take: Ordinarily, I reject ranking anything in the present in the context of best or worst of all time unless there is overwhelming data proving it so. As NHL and former MLB union chief Donald Fehr used to say, history should never be judged by contemporaries. Maybe Don Hutson made a better catch in the 1940s. I say the ’40s were included in all time.

But the Beckham catch was something. The David Tyree helmet catch to defeat the undefeated New England Patriots in the 2007-season Super Bowl had a higher degree of difficulty because he was hammered by New England safety Rodney Harris as he hauled it in. The more remarkable aspect of that play was how Eli Manning escaped the sack for making the heave.

Tyree’s catch required more strength. But in terms of pure athletic feat? Beckham’s was superior. It was how far he had to extend his arm while snagging it that made it.