In the bed of Bucky Rowland’s pickup truck are signs from his recent successful campaign for Maury County Sheriff. The signs bear an emblem of a sheriff’s badge with the words, “You are your choices” on it.

“We all go through difficult circumstances,” said Rowland, 39. “But you can’t let your circumstances define who you are. You need to accept what’s happened, address it, and move forward.”

When Rowland was 2 years old, his father was being detained in the Maury County jail when a fire broke out in the jail’s padded cell on June 26, 1977. The fire, which became the largest mass-death tragedy in Maury County history, killing 42 people, occurred during visiting hours at the jail. Rowland’s mother, grandmother, aunt and two uncles were there to see his father.

They all died in the fire.

Rowland was raised by his mother’s sister, whose husband was one of the fatalities.

“She’s actually who I stayed with the day my family came up to visit my dad,” Rowland said. “She had four kids of her own, and she never remarried, so she was a widow with five kids.”

Rowland attributes his strong work ethic to his aunt, who milked cows for a living and raised all five children on a dairy farm. But all boys need a father figure in their lives, and Rowland was no exception.

“Probably the most influential male role model that I had was my next door neighbor, Elton Sisk,” Rowland said. “He and his wife reached out to me at an early age and actually invited me to go to Vacation Bible School. That’s kind of where it started.”

Elton Sisk’s wife Sharon has a particular memory that summarizes the relationship the couple had with Rowland as a child.

“At our church, all the dads receive a gift on Father’s Day,” Sharon Sisk said. “One year Bucky was at church with us on Father’s Day and someone said, ‘Bucky, you didn’t get a gift to give your dad!’ Then he said, ‘I don’t have a dad. But if I did, I would want him to be just like Mr. Sisk.’”

Elton Sisk said that when Rowland was a kid he would frequently ride his four-wheeler to the couple’s house, and Elton Sisk, who owned a lawn-mowing business, would fill the tank with gas for him before he rode back home.

“He would always say, ‘I’ll pay you back!,” Elton Sisk said. “And he never did. But that’s OK.”

Rowland said Sisk was one of a handful of men who influenced him while he was growing up.

“There were four or five men in my life that really invested in me, from church to hunting and fishing to mechanic work and running equipment,” he said.

Rowland said his positive male role models inspired him to start a children’s ministry. The ministry, Heavenly Views Outdoor Ministries, takes children on trips to do activities such as canoeing, fishing, and horseback riding, while encouraging prayer and Scripture reading. Rowland started the ministry about five years ago, and he plans to continue it during his term as sheriff.

The ministry is open to all children, but Rowland especially encourages those from single-parent homes or who have physical challenges to participate.

“Youth is so important,” he said. “I know what just a little bit of influence from someone, just showing that you care about them and love them, how far that goes.”

Rowland said a goal in every aspect of his life is to leave people better than he finds them, a concept that he plans to take with him when he assumes office Sept. 1.

Kyle Cheek, who was partners with Rowland for six years while working in the K-9 units at the Maury County Sheriff’s Department, said Rowland’s decision to run for sheriff took him somewhat by surprise.

“Ever since we were partners, he told me that one day he wanted to run for sheriff. But it came faster than we thought it would,” Cheek said. “When the sheriff (Enoch George) announced he was going to (retire), he (Rowland) told me that now was as good a time as any to run.”

Sharon Sisk said that when Rowland told his childhood neighbors he was running for sheriff, she told him she would pray that he would get elected if God saw fit for him to hold that position. But if being in office would change Rowland for the worse, she said, she prayed he would not be elected.

Rowland captured nearly 30 percent of the vote for sheriff two weeks ago, enough to clinch the office in a race with five candidates.

“You are your choices,” Rowland says as he motions to the campaign signs in his truck. “How I live my life and what I hope to accomplish as sheriff is to leave people better than I find them. I just want to use what has been entrusted to me to help others.”