Health benefits costly for elected officials in Butler County

Email Newsletters Sign up for one of our email newsletters.

At least three Butler County municipalities — Butler, Center and Washington — pay health insurance costs for elected officials, a Tribune-Review survey found.

In Allegheny County, Ross commissioners drew criticism last month when they voted down a proposal to phase out their township-subsidized health insurance coverage.

Public service should not be about financial gain, said Cranberry Supervisor John Skorupan. “In my mind, it's the way to give back to the community.” He voluntarily stopped receiving benefits soon after supervisors unanimously voted in 2008 to eliminate them for new and re-elected supervisors.

Gerald Patterson Jr., chair of the Municipal Employers Insurance Trust, said he did not know how many Pennsylvania communities offer health insurance to their elected officials. But the cost to those that do can be high, officials said.

Center, which has a population of about 7,900, pays about $10,000 a month for health insurance for four of its five supervisors and their families in a plan offered through the Pennsylvania State Association of Township Supervisors. Township secretary/treasurer Anthony Amendolea declined to name the supervisor who opted out of the plan.

Each supervisor earns $2,500 annually. None could be reached for comment.

Cranberry was spending more than $20,000 a year to provide coverage to two supervisors and their spouses before ending the practice.

“They just felt that this was not the appropriate thing to do,” township Manager Jerry Andree said. “The cost was rising so much.”

In 2005, Butler City Council sharply scaled back the benefits the city offered to elected officials. Officials voted to prohibit families of the mayor, treasurer, controller and four council members from receiving health coverage. It also limited the monthly payments for officials' coverage to $302 each, city Clerk Mindy Gall said, in addition to eliminating dental, vision, life and disability coverage for new and re-elected officials.

Butler Controller Gretchen D. Ehlman is the only elected official who receives the city-paid health insurance from the Municipal Employers Insurance Trust through Highmark, though others received $1,812 this year in incentive payments for opting out of the insurance plan. She could not be reached for comment.

There are advantages and drawbacks to offering health benefits, said Butler Councilman Richard J. Schontz Jr., a retired teacher whose former employer will pay for his health care coverage until he is eligible for Medicare.

“I think with the salaries (of elected officials) being so low that it might entice more people to run. (But) it would definitely be a significant savings if we didn't offer it,” he said.

Butler's mayor earns $10,000 a year, council members and the controller earn $2,500 each, and the treasurer earns $18,000.

Ross dedicated $98,250 to pay for health insurance coverage for commissioners and their families in the 2014 budget, according to township Finance Director Dawn Lane. Starting this year, commissioners in four wards must contribute 10 percent of the premium. In 2016, the requirement will take effect for the other five commissioners. They earn $4,375 a year.

Tory N. Parrish is a staff writer for Trib Total Media. She can be reached at 412-380-5662 or tparrish@tribweb.com.