A man is dead following an officer involved shooting in east Wichita Saturday night. It happened around 6:45 near Central and Oliver.

23-year-old John Paul Quintero died after police fired two rounds at his chest.

One neighbor claims he was outside and witnessed the scary sequence of events leading up to the death of Quintero.

Police were called to a duplex on N. Oliver Saturday night after Quintero's verbal threats turned physical. Police say Quintero was drunk, armed with a knife, and kept trying to get back into the home.

Ted McAdams and his wife live in the unit behind where the party was going on. They ran outside after they heard screaming.

"We got to the end of the driveway that the cops had that fella at gunpoint," says McAdams.

When two officers arrived, they found Quintero and his father sitting in an SUV in the front yard. Police approached the two men.

"The 23 year old was belligerent and confrontation with the officers," says Wichita Police Chief Nelson Mosley.

Police say the father complied with their request to get out of the car, but Quintero did not and started making verbal threats. McAdams says he thought the situation was then under control.

"They said that he was threatening the officers, I don't believe he was," says McAdams. "He was trying to talk to the male officer with compliance trying to tell him, I don't know what all he was saying, but he wasn't resisting or nothing like that from what I could see."

McAdams says he couldn't believe what followed. The male officer tased Quintero, but McAdams tells me he didn't fall to the ground.

"He had his arms up until he got tased, his arms went down to his side."

Police say Quintero then reached toward that officer's waistband, something McAdams says he never saw. The female officer then fired two shots from her rifle.

"If he was told to do something, yeah he should've done it, but that officer had, to my advice and my suggestion, she shouldn't have ever shot him."

Quintero died a few hours later at the hospital. McAdams says he's not alone in thinking this situation was taken too far.

"After that all the neighbors and I threw a little fit at the cops because I've got a wife and a newborn and the safety issue and not just that, the way the cops handled themselves."

Police are still gathering evidence. KBI and the Sedwick County District Attorney are also investigating this case. The two officers involved are on paid administrative leave.