Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share Gov. Ducey's photographer uses an iPhone to document the governor and Kyrsten Sinema snubs the Democratic elite in the Iran deal.

Liberals are fuming over U.S. Rep. Kyrsten Sinema's vote against the Iran deal, and some want her out of office.

MoveOn.org, a grassroots organizing group, told The Arizona Republic it may support a primary challenge to the Arizona Democrat for opposing the international agreement that seeks to stop Iran from obtaining a nuclear weapon, the latest in a string of votes the lawmaker has cast with the GOP.

U.S. Rep. Kyrsten Sinema, D-Ariz., has angered liberal supporters by opposing the president's nuclear deal with Iran. (Photo: Tom Tingle, Tom Tingle/The Republic)

Sinema, who represents a swing district based in Tempe, touts her independence.

She was one of just 25 House Democrats to vote against the deal Friday, along with the entire Republican caucus. Senate Democrats blocked the legislation, paving the way for one of President Barack Obama's major foreign policy goals.

Ilya Sheyman, executive director of MoveOn.org Political Action, called Sinema's opposition "outrageous."

"No Democrat should vote for a path to war over hard-fought diplomacy," Sheyman said in a written statement. "This vote will certainly be a heavy factor in her future campaigns. Frankly, with this vote and the rest of Rep. Sinema's record, it almost seems like Rep. Sinema is begging to be primaried — and we will be looking to see if a progressive challenger emerges."

Sinema previously angered the liberal base by supporting high-profile Republican bills dealing with so-called "sanctuary cities," the estate tax and the government shutdown. MoveOn.org, which says it has 8 million members nationwide, endorsed Sinema in 2012 but launched a petition against her in 2013, when she voted to delay the Affordable Care Act's individual mandate.

Sinema commended the Obama administration's work on the Iran deal but said she could not support it because "the risks ... outweigh the rewards." Allowing Iran to obtain conventional weapons and have access to millions in frozen financial assets by lifting sanctions could escalate conflict in the Middle East, she said.

She threaded the needle, however, siding with Democrats on two related votes on the Iran deal.

The most surprising, given Sinema's arguments for opposing the deal, was her decision to support the president's authority to lift sanctions.

But Sinema said it was a matter of making sure the deal is enforced now that it is going ahead.

"I oppose the deal but will not participate in blatantly partisan attempts to undermine what is now U.S. policy," she said in a written statement to The Republic. "We have to move forward to effectively enforce the agreement and work together to make the best of a very challenging situation."

Read or Share this story: http://azc.cc/1UMGMYh