Photo: Getty Images The feeling of crisis that has been so front-of-mind for health insurance brokers over the past two years finally seems to be receding. It's not that brokers suddenly see the world as rosy. But now that it's become clear that the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act is not the industry death sentence many had feared, they’re settling in and adjusting to a changed — and still evolving — business environment. They told us about their reactions and prospects in Oliver Wyman and Benefits Selling's annual health care survey for 2015. In it, we asked more than 400 brokers and agents for their take on the market, the business environment and their plans for the future. We found producers thinking pragmatically about their situations — what their role needs to be in today's environment; how they can respond to the undeniable challenges of industry consolidation, changing customer demand, and technological disruption; and how to position themselves strategically to prosper. Complete your profile to continue reading and get FREE access to BenefitsPRO.com, part of your ALM digital membership. Benefits:

Your access to unlimited BenefitsPRO.com content isn’t changing. Once you are an ALM digital member, you’ll receive: Critical BenefitsPRO.com information including cutting-edge post-reform success strategies, comprehensive service provider listings, educational webcasts and videos, resources from industry leaders, and informative eNewsletters.

Exclusive discounts on ALM, BenefitsPRO Magazine and BenefitsPRO.com events.

Access to other award-winning ALM publications including LifeHealthPro.com, ThinkAdvisor.com and Law.com. Register Now Already have an account? Sign In X Sign in with your ALM Account Remember Me Or... Sign In With LinkedIn

Overall, brokers are fairly evenly divided in their assessment of where the market is going. Thirty-two percent predict that their average commissions will decline in 2015; 33 percent expect them to decline; and 35 percent either expected commissions to stay the same or said that they didn't know. This is down from last year when almost half of respondents to the 2014 survey expected commissions to decline. But break out those answers by size of brokerage, and one striking difference appears: Of the respondents who thought that commissions would fall by 25 to 50 percent next year, almost all came from shops that employ fewer than 25 people. And all of the brokers who thought that their commissions would fall by more than 50 percent were from brokerages of fewer than 25 people. The smaller brokers see themselves in much greater danger than the larger brokers do.

The exchanges: not for everyone

Opportunities ahead

Where do you turn? That's the tricky part. It's clear brokers should be thinking of at least two key strategies, and we asked them about both. Strategy one: Diversify into ancillary products. Brokers are already well aware of one of the strongest strategies for surviving and growing in today's health and benefits marketplace: offering ancillary products such as life, dental, vision and disability insurance. Eighty-five percent of respondents said they already offered ancillary products and planned to increase their focus on them.