Lobbing a grenade at a key provision of Obamacare, the U.S. House of Representatives on Thursday voted to define the workweek at 40 hours of work.

The bill, which passed largely along party lines on a 252-172 vote, would raise the Affordable Care Act's definition of "full-time employment" from 30 hours to 40 hours a week. Supporters argue that the law prompted companies to reduce hours of their employees in order to avoid the penalties of not providing health insurance to workers.

The Senate has not scheduled a vote, and President Barack Obama has vowed to veto it.

"This law cannot be fixed. It is beyond repair," Rep. Bradley Byrne, R-Fairhope, said on the House floor. "No quick legislative fix can make this law work for the countless American families who have already been negatively impacted including people in my district."

Among Alabama's congressional delegation, only Rep. Terri Sewell, D-Birmingham, voted against the measure.

"My vote today ensures that nearly a million Americans and over 97,000 Alabamians will continue to receive quality and affordable health care," she said in a prepared statement. "H.R. 30, the so-called Save American Workers Act, only seeks to undermine the gains made under the Affordable Care Act, and would negatively impact hard-working Americans across the country."

The bill has the support of the U.S. Chamber of Commerce, Associated Builders and Contractors, the Alabama Grocers Association, the Alabama Restaurant and Hospital Alliance, and other pro-business lobby groups.

Today I voted in support of legislation to preserve the 40 hour work week destroyed by #ObamaCare. #40isFullTime pic.twitter.com/j7SmR5yjC1 -- Rep. Bradley Byrne (@RepByrne) January 8, 2015

On the other side, the ALF-CIO and other unions oppose the bill.

The bill is the latest in a long line of votes in the Republican-controlled House to repeal or chip away at Obamacare. Under current law, most employers have to provide health insurance to full-time workers - those working 30 hours a week or more - or pay a fine.

NBC News offers a good explanation of what the current bill would do. By raising the threshold to 40 hours a week, companies could avoid providing health insurance to workers on the job up to 39 hours a week. Supporters contend that many hourly workers effectively would get pay raises because they would be able to work more hours.

Insanity is doing the same thing repeatedly & expecting a different result. This is the GOP's 54th attempt to undermine ACA #YouBeTheJudge -- Gregory Meeks (@GregoryMeeks) January 8, 2015

Byrne said he supports the change but made clear that he wants to see more.

"Last November, the American people spoke loud and clear. They want to see bold legislative action that pushes back against the failed policies of this president," he said. "I support this bill, but I want to do more. We must do more. I look forward to working with the chairman and the leadership of the House to move forward with a full repeal of this failed law."

The Congressional Budget Office estimates that a million workers would lose employer-sponsored health insurance. The CBO also estimated that it would increase the budget deficit by $53 million over the next 10 years by shifting the cost of providing health insurance for about half of those workers from their employers to taxpayers in the form of Medicaid or subsidized health plans on the Obamacare exchanges.

The House just passed legislation, with my support, to restore the 40-hour workweek under threat from #Obamacare. pic.twitter.com/paFRloUC3Z -- Mo Brooks (@RepMoBrooks) January 8, 2015

About half of the employees would be left uninsured, according to the CBO.

Alabama's six Republican representatives joined 234 other Republicans and 12 Democrats in supporting the bill. No Republicans joined the 172 Democrats voting "no."