Veteran actor Ryan Gosling has reportedly gotten a restraining order against an alleged crazed fan, a woman who he says has been stalking him for three months. The legal documents surrounding the case were made public to the media via a recent post by popular gossip website TMZ, who exclusively revealed the details of the matter earlier today.

The woman in question, named Grace Marie Del Villar, has been ordered to stay at least 100 yards away from both the actor and his daughter, an infant named Esmeralda. Gosling’s sister, who goes by the name Mandi, has reportedly also obtained a subsequently significant order against the woman, as she had allegedly been harassing her as well. It has been reported that Villar had sent multiple messages to the inbox of Gosling’s sister over the past three months, including such alarming conveyance as that she was kicking the head of the woman’s brother.

The alleged stalker in question began sending fan mail to the 34-year-old, which is said to have consisted of magazine cut-outs containing the Canadian’s partner of three years, fellow A-list actress Eva Mendes. The woman reportedly tore out a page containing Mendes and proceeded to staple her contact info to it, following this move up to mailing to it Gosling and having it delivered to him as said fan mail. The situation escalated last month on October 28th, when Villar made the trip from New York City to Los Angeles in order to pay a visit to Gosling’s family residence, at which time she attempted to spread several false claims in order to try to get herself admitted inside his home.

The most significant of these claims was that she was she was Gosling’s twin, which she announced while ringing the buzzer for the home’s security gate.The attempt was unsuccessful, as the appropriate authorities guarding the former Breaker High star’s home were fully aware that no such relative existed, and the woman was denied further entry onto the property as the result of such investigation. Villar is said to have left the premises without any further drama or conflict, but reportedly chose to leave a doll catalogue at the gates as a kind of parting gift, something which Gosling and his family are said to have viewed as significantly disturbing.

Gosling is not the only celebrity in recent history to have a restraining order granted against an unwanted suitor. Former Nickelodeon star Miranda Cosgrove (who rose to fame as the lead character in the sitcom iCarly, recently had a three-year ban granted for her against a man named Joshua Stockton. Stockton had reportedly been sending the 21-year-old various gifts that she had instructed her team to send back unopened, something that the stalker in question found to be very upsetting and reacted accordingly. The situation escalated when Stockton began sending Cosgrove pictures depicting his injured wrists alongside the unopened presents, with a caption stating that his unrequited love was going to lead to suicide if this was how she was going to choose to act.

It remains to be seen whether or not Ryan Gosling’s alleged stalker will continue to pursue affection from the actor. The amount of time on said restraining order has yet to be revealed.

By Rebecca Grace

Sources:

TMZ – 1

Mail Online

TMZ – 2

Photo by starbright31 – Flickr License

Share this: Print

LinkedIn

Pinterest

Pocket

Reddit

Email

Twitter

Google

Facebook

Tumblr