Topics: firearms, gun reform, gun safety, Guns, Law enforcement, NRA, reform, Safety, Politics News

As the one year anniversary of the tragic Newtown shooting arrives next week, there will surely be talk about the current status of the gun safety reform movement. One area that ought to be discussed more is mandatory firearms training for gun owners.

Dick Metcalf’s November 7 firing from Guns & Ammo magazine shows that some in the gun community don’t much like dissent from the idea of unlimited Second Amendment rights. The long-time columnist dared to suggest in his last piece that just maybe gun owners should be required to get some firearms training. Outraged readers deluged the magazine with subscription cancellations, two firearms manufacturers threatened to pull advertising (according to Metcalf) and he got the boot. “It is very clear to me that [Metcalf’s views] don’t reflect the views of our readership,” editor Jim Bequette wrote in an apology.

If so, the readership’s views probably don’t reflect the opinions of most gun-rights supporters, either. In a survey last July of 945 gun owners by Republican pollster Frank Luntz, 74 percent of current or former NRA members said “concealed-carry permits should only be granted to applicants who have completed gun safety training.” In March 2011, gun rights blog The Truth About Guns posted an entry by regular contributor Jim Sutherland arguing for mandatory training for gun owners. And in his majority Supreme Court opinion in D.C. v. Heller, Justice Scalia notes that the adjective “well-regulated” in the Second Amendment implies the “imposition of proper discipline and training.”

There’s a reason that the idea of mandating training won’t stay dead — in volatile situations, a good many gun owners don’t have a fraction of the practice they need to make good decisions or even shoot straight. Kenneth Cooper, a New York State-certified firearms instructor, was in a gun shop last week when a woman came in who’d gotten her handgun license. It soon became clear she didn’t know the first thing about guns — like what a magazine is or the difference between a semiautomatic and a revolver. “This is very scary stuff,” Cooper says. “If she hurts somebody, it’s bad for the gun industry, it’s bad for the person she hurts and it’s bad for her.”

A good guy with a gun might stop a bad guy with a gun, but he (or she) also may well take out bystanders. CDC data show just over 600 accidental firearms deaths and 17,000 injuries for the latest years that data are available. Shooters can miss their targets, like concealed-carry car-jack victim Edward Bell, who fired on his own car as it was being driven away by an assailant and instead killed 69-year-old Geraldine Jackson inside her house. Or they open up on the wrong person, like the concealed-carry holder in Arkansas who shot at what he thought was a bank robbery getaway car but turned out not to be. They make careless mistakes, like the concealed-carry holder in a Florida internet café whose handgun fell out of his waistband, hit the floor and went off, killing another patron. And they make bad choices, like the one that allegedly killed Renisha McBride, who was shot on November 2 after crashing her car and knocking on a door for help — the homeowner claims he thought someone was breaking in and that his gun discharged by accident.

Even experienced cops have trouble handling shoot-don’t-shoot decisions and gun battles well, say police experts. Low light, suspects in motion and combat stress all affect their accuracy and judgment. Quality firearms training makes the difference between taking down an assailant or killing an innocent. Standards vary across states, but on average new police recruits get 60 hours of weapons training. After that, all cops have to re-test on a target range once or twice a year or more, including shooting in dim light and at moving targets. Every year, they also participate in tactical training designed to mimic real-world scenarios.