Topics: Conservative, Editor's Picks, Joe Biden, liberal, Medicare, Paul Ryan, Progressives, social safety net, Social Security, The Left, The Right, Politics News

Between midsummer and Labor Day, Representative Paul Ryan and Vice President Joe Biden gave eloquent defenses of today’s partisan worldviews. Strange to say, Paul Ryan endorsed big-government social democracy, while Joe Biden defined the middle class as those who have enough money to forego the use of any public programs.

I’m not kidding. You can’t make this stuff up.

On July 15, Ryan gave an address entitled “Renewing the American Idea” at a Washington, D.C., branch of Hillsdale College, a conservative school. Much of the speech is a rehash of the potted Straussian history of the U.S. popularized by Glenn Beck, in which sinister early twentieth century progressives betrayed the legacy of the sainted Founding Fathers. But then it gets interesting:

Now, the Progressives were right about something. The country was crying out for a national safety net, especially following the Great Depression… They wanted to enlist the federal government in the service of self-government. They didn’t want to turn over the keys…. Here’s the difference: Everybody understands the safety net, and everybody benefits from it. Take Social Security. We all know how it works — or at least how it’s supposed to work. When you’re working, you pay in. And when you’re retired, it pays out. It’s the same thing with Medicare — simple, straightforward. Everybody gets old. Everybody gets sick. And so everybody contributes in exchange for a secure retirement. Most people think that’s a fair trade. And I agree.

This is as good a defense of the New Deal (Social Security) and the Great Society (Medicare) as I’ve come across in years. So what exactly is Paul Ryan’s objection to the progressive-liberal tradition?

In his speech, Ryan distinguishes among simple, universal programs like Social Security and Medicare (good) and complex, means-tested programs like the Affordable Care Act (bad). This line of reasoning forces him to torture history, as when he tries to father the Affordable Care Act — a version of the conservative Heritage Foundation’s health plan and Mitt Romney’s “Romneycare” in Massachusetts — on the New Deal-Great Society tradition:

Progressives didn’t respect this distinction [between simple social insurance programs and bureaucratic, means-tested programs]. Once they got their foot in the door, they kept pushing. First there was the New Deal, then the Fair Deal, then the Great Society. In 2008, they saw another opening [with Obamacare].

In other words, we need to reject the legacies of the New Deal and the Great Society, while embracing Social Security and Medicare, their major… uh… legacies.

Paul Ryan’s version of center-left history is not entirely bogus. From the 1890s onward, there was and remains a tension to the left of center among proponents of universal social insurance, led in the early twentieth century by the Russian émigré I.M. Rubinow, and progressive proponents of more paternalistic, means-tested, targeted antipoverty programs. Woodrow Wilson, Louis Brandeis and other progressives of the “New Freedom” school — the center-right “New Democrats” of their day — tended to reject nationalized social insurance in favor of programs administered by “nanny state” middle-class social workers at the state and local level.

Ironically, Paul Ryan and other conservatives who want to devolve social insurance to the states while voucherizing it and outsourcing it are the true heirs of the nanny-state “progressive” tradition that Ryan criticizes in his speech. Today it is the Ryanite conservatives, not Rooseveltian progressives, who promote Rube Goldberg schemes in the form of 50 separate state-level programs for sliding-scale, means-tested tax credits to purchase this or that necessary good. These decentralized, privatized safety net programs multiply private as well as public bureaucracy. If Paul Ryan believed his own rhetoric about the superiority of simple, universal, non-bureaucratic, earned benefit programs, he would call for scrapping 401(k)s and other tax-favored private retirement accounts in favor of a simple, straightforward increase in Social Security benefits. And he would introduce legislation to replace the Affordable Care Act — “Nobody understands it, and it makes everyone anxious” — with universal Medicare.

A month and a half after Paul Ryan praised social-democratic universal programs like Social Security and Medicare, his rival for the vice presidency in 2012, Joe Biden, endorsed reactionary neo-Victorian political economy in a Labor Day speech in Detroit. According to Biden:

“…[Being middle class] means you get to send your kid to a decent school, that if they do well and they want to go to college, you can afford to send them to college. It means being able to take care of your parents if they get sick. It means maybe being able to save enough so you hope your kids never have to take care of you.”

Embedded in an otherwise standard progressive speech, this paragraph stands out as a sort of right-wing manifesto. Biden, or his speechwriter, implicitly defines “middle class” status as having the personal financial resources to buy everything — K-12 education, higher education, health care, retirement for yourself and your parents — without reliance on any public program.