Photo

WASHINGTON — When Congress returns for business on Tuesday, lawmakers have scheduled a mere 12 legislative days to find a bipartisan compromise to keep the government open, vote on one of the most contentious foreign policy matters in a generation, reconcile the future of funding for Planned Parenthood and roll out the red carpet — and a few thousand folding chairs — to greet Pope Francis.

What could go wrong?

Ignoring the advice that one should never go to bed angry, members of Congress left for their home states in August with two major fights at full boil.

One dispute is over the Iran nuclear accord, which congressional Republicans and a number of Democrats oppose, set for debate in both chambers this week. Democrats, who have 36 votes in the Senate backing the accord, will try to add five more, which would allow them to block a Senate vote on a resolution to disapprove the deal. Democrats already have enough votes to sustain a veto of the resolution by President Obama, meaning that either way the Iran accord will go into effect.

The other fight is fiscal. Congress must come to a broad new agreement that lifts legally imposed spending caps — the preference of Mr. Obama — or, more likely, pass a short-term measure, known as a continuing resolution, to keep the lights on in government buildings for the rest of the year. Current spending laws expire on Oct. 1.

Photo

“We will do some kind of C.R. of some duration and hopefully start the discussions,” Senator Mitch McConnell of Kentucky, the majority leader, said in an interview last week, referring to a continuing resolution.

Some conservative Republicans, turning to a familiar playbook, are threatening to refuse to vote for any spending bill that provides federal health care money to Planned Parenthood, after a series of undercover videos surfaced this summer claiming that affiliates of the group illegally profit from selling tissue from aborted fetuses to researchers. Planned Parenthood has denied the charges.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

The Republicans, who would like to see money diverted from Planned Parenthood to other health clinics, are using a tactic they employed in 2013, when they refused to vote for a bill that did not include the delay of the Affordable Care Act and a repeal of a tax to pay for it — resulting in a 16-day government shutdown. Earlier this year, Republicans tried to stop executive actions by Mr. Obama on immigration by threatening the funding of the Department of Homeland Security. Both imbroglios ended in failure for Republicans because Democrats and Mr. Obama refused to go along.

The fight has been largely led this time by Senator Ted Cruz of Texas, a Republican candidate for president During the summer recess, Mr. Cruz wrote a letter to Mr. McConnell and then circulated it to his colleagues. It said in part, “The American people should no longer be forced to fund the abortion industry; therefore we will oppose any government funding legislation that would authorize or provide federal funds for Planned Parenthood.”

Conservative Republicans have no clear exit strategy should their plan to defund Planned Parenthood pass the House but fail to get the support it needs in the Senate or from the White House, which many of them admitted was a problem last time.

“In 2013 we offered no alternatives to Obamacare,” said Representative Mick Mulvaney, Republican of South Carolina, who has spent the recess drumming up support for the plan. “Earlier this year we offered no alternatives to the president’s immigration plan. Now, we are offering a clear alternative: Move the Planned Parenthood money to other women’s health clinics that simply do not provide abortion services. It’s not just good policy, it’s good politics as well.”

It will be up to Mr. McConnell and Speaker John A. Boehner of Ohio — who have repeatedly said there would not be another government shutdown — to decide if they want to go through the exercise of trying to use the spending bill to attack Planned Parenthood and go to the brink.

Republican leaders have yet to show their hand and were waiting to return to the Capitol for the all-too-familiar ritual of “listening to members” about how best to proceed with keeping the government open.

For the past five years, that exercise largely consisted of hundreds of the members gathering in a room to eat Mexican takeout food as one conservative after the next told his or her colleagues to ignore the reality of the math that worked against them. Drawn-out floor fights ensued, ending in Democratic victory.

“I am supportive of any and every viable solution to defund Planned Parenthood,” said Representative Diane Black, Republican of Tennessee, who has a bill pending that would move Planned Parenthood funding to community health centers. “That said, I do not support a government shutdown.”

First Draft Newsletter Subscribe for updates on the 2016 presidential race, the White House and Congress, delivered to your inbox Monday - Friday.

For their part, Democrats are spoiling for a fight over the budget caps, imposed after a battle in 2011 over raising the government’s statutory borrowing limit, known as the debt ceiling.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Many Republicans support lifting the spending caps for defense, but Democrats say they will not do that unless other domestic spending gets a lift, too. The caps are referred to as the sequester.

Mr. Obama has vowed to veto any spending bills that do not lift the caps on domestic spending, and Democrats have said they will block any long-term measures to fund the government without such changes.

“There is significant bipartisan support for getting rid of the sequester, which the nonpartisan Congressional Budget Office has recently estimated would create 500,000 new jobs in 2016,” said Drew Hammill, a spokesman for Representative Nancy Pelosi, Democrat of California.

By the end of the year, Congress also has to find a way to fund the nation’s highway system, deal with some tax measures and return to the broader spending question.

For now however, many just want the government to keep going, with as little drama as possible. “I am very concerned,” said Representative Charlie Dent, Republican of Pennsylvania. “I don’t think we need to go do a replay of 2013. It would be an enormous tactical and strategic blunder.”