In Part 1 of 2 of our interview with Wayne Allyn Root, he gives us a preview of the 7 secrets of his success as a political and business leader. Check out tomorrow for Part 2 as he discusses the current presidential candidates, the GOP Debate, Donald Trump and much more!

Congratulations Mr. Root on your new book, The Power of Relentless: 7 Secrets to Achieving Mega Success, Financial Freedom, and the Life of Your Dreams! Can you give us an overview of your book, and maybe just one of the seven secrets?

“The Power of Relentless” is the answer to what’s missing in the Republican Party and the conservative movement. Think about it. Can you even imagine being so weak-willed that you could win in a massive, historic landslide and yet be too timid, or frightened, or cowardly, or self-destructive to take advantage of it? Well that’s exactly what just happened to the GOP. We won last November in such a big way…such a historic sweep…such a repudiation of Barack Obama…that we should be dominating the agenda in Washington, DC.

Obama should be facing impeachment. Obamacare should be defunded. Obama’s amnesty for illegal immigrants should be defunded. Certainly it should not even be up for conversation, without a wall (or virtual wall controlled by drones) first being built to secure the border. Planned Parenthood should be defunded. Obama’s EPA regulations should be neutered. Taxes and massive regulations should be gutted. Obama’s agenda should be in shambles. Obama should be hiding deep inside the White House- embarrassed to show his face after a public drubbing like he took. Yet the opposite has happened. Obama lost badly, yet he’s in total control.

He never lost a step. He never lost confidence. He never let us see him sweat. He disregarded it all, stayed true to his agenda, and just kept on attacking…and winning. He’s gotten everything he ever wanted in the months since he lost in a massive landslide. And the GOP has gotten nothing. That’s “The Power of RELENTLESS!” Obama understands it. The GOP doesn’t.

This book isn’t even a political book. It was written as a business and personal development book. It was written for anyone to apply to their career, or business, or personal goals- to achieve extraordinary success. This book is a roadmap to success. This book is a gameplan for stopping Obama dead in his tracks and taking back America.

Stop bringing a knife to a gunfight. This isn’t badminton with Muffy at the country club. This is a war for the future of America. Obama understands that. Start defending your principles, capitalism, American Exceptionalism and Judeo Christian values. Stop whining and giving us excuses for your failure. Start fighting like your country and your family’s future depends on it…because they do. That’s “The Power of RELENTLESS.”

What three takeaways would you like readers to leave with after reading your book?

First, leadership. I base my life on the last 12 hours of my mother’s life. Those last 12 hours were the model for my life. All of the remarkable success in my life has come after I experienced those last 12 hours.

My mom and dad died 28 days apart in 1992. 28 days after my dad’s funeral, my mom’s doctor called with the bad news. He said, “She fell into a coma earlier today, we rushed her to the hospital, her brain is dead, there is no brain activity of any kind, we have disconnected life support. Her heart will stop beating in a few seconds. She’s gone. Don’t rush home. We don’t want another tragedy in your family. There’s nothing you can do.”

But my sister grabbed the phone from the doctor and whispered, “Rush home. You and I both know mom. She won’t die until you get here. Rush home.”

I rushed to the airport to catch the red eye from LA to New York. I walked into my mother’s hospital room 12 hours after that phone call. My sister had held her hand all night saying, “Don’t die, Wayne is on the way. Don’t die, Wayne will be here.” And when I walked into the room, I heard the most amazing sound- “Beep…beep…beep.” Her heart was still beating on that monitor. The doctor said it was impossible, but mom made the impossible, possible.

I told her I loved her and thanked her for her heroism. Then I said, “Mom what you did was amazing, but now its time to let go.” And her heart monitor stopped at that moment. She was gone.

How did she know I was on the way, if her brain was dead? How did she know to hold on, if her brain was dead? How did she know I was at her bedside, if her brain was dead? How could she do all this if medical science reported her as brain dead?

The answer is “The Power of RELENTLESS.” The answer is heart, spirit, will. My mom proved if your heart is big enough, it doesn’t even matter if your brain is dead.

That’s leadership. If you could bottle my mom’s last 12 hours…if you could bottle the fight and faith in my mom…if you could bottle her spirit…if you could bottle her heart…and put that in a leader…would you follow him or her? Would you believe in them? Would you have faith through thick and thin? Would you follow them through hell? That’s a true leader. That’s a George Washington. That’s an Abraham Lincoln. That’s a Ronald Reagan. That’s “The Power of RELENTLESS.”

This book should be required reading for every GOP politician, officeholder and leader in the country. Don’t tell me America can’t be saved. Don’t tell me Obama can’t be stopped. Don’t tell me Obamacare can’t be defunded. Nothing is impossible- if you believe…if you have faith…if you have heart…if you’re a leader…if you understand “The Power of RELENTLESS.”

Need I say more? This book is the perfect marriage of Mike Tyson and Mother Teresa. With a little Donald Trump and the Energizer Bunny thrown in for good measure. This book teaches you how to master others and master your career, but only by first mastering yourself.

Mike Tyson once said, “Everyone has a plan, until they get punched in the face.” This book is your perfect plan for what to do when you get punched in the face. You get back up, laugh at the other guy, then you hit back…harder. You hit the other guy with a KNOCKOUT PUNCH. This book features 7 secrets to unimaginable success. And as a bonus, a one-of-a-kind, 12-step program for building a foundation of rock solid faith…and a balance of body, mind, spirit and soul.

It’s a unique perspective and a unique combination of who I am- a lifelong Reagan Republican-conservative…a natural born killer in the business world (learned on the mean streets of New York)…and a Jew turned evangelical Christian.

Tell us a little more about yourself!

Favorite movie?

A tie between “Braveheart” and “Act of Valor”

Favorite TV Show?

A tie between “Chicago P.D.” and “Boardwalk Empire”

Favorite food

Steaks or Asian food (Chinese, Thai, Sushi)

Favorite Bands?

U2, Rolling Stones, Guns & Roses, Creedence Clearwater Revival, and Frank Sinatra

Favorite politician ever?

Ronald Reagan and Winston Churchill

Where do you get your news from?

My favorite sites are DrudgeReport, FoxNews, TheBlaze, Newsmax, Breitbart, PersonalLiberty, ZeroHedge, and of course my own site ROOTforAmerica.com

If you could meet any person, dead or alive, who would it be?

A tie between Jesus Christ and Moses

What do you do for fun?

I love to work out in my home gym (2 hours per day, 7 days per week), morning walks, hiking, skiing, swimming and playing football with my sons, gun shooting, watching NFL and college football and I love nice cars!

What books influenced your political philosophy and outlook on life?

The Conscience of a Conservative, by Barry Goldwater

Think and Grow Rich, by Napolean Hill

The Power of Positive Thinking, by Rev. Norman Vincent Peale

Just as I am: The Autobiography of Bill Graham, by Billy Graham

The Art of War, by Sun Tzu

The Bible

Make sure to check back tomorrow to read Part 2 of our interview with Wayne Allyn Root! He’ll discuss the 201 presidential race, Donald Trump, and more about his new and intriguing book!

- See more at: http://www.conservativebookclub.com/12624/author-interviews/what-are-the-7-secrets-to-relentless-success-author-interview-wayne-allyn-root - sthash.dntuOZD1.dpuf