Bill Cosby has asked a federal judge to dismiss or put on hold a lawsuit filed by American International Group Inc. (AIG), which wants to avoid paying for the entertainer’s defense against defamation claims by several women, who have also accused him of sexual abuse.

Cosby cited financial pressures for his request.

In June, AIG filed suit against Cosby in Massachusetts and California over homeowners’ insurance policies the company had issued to Cosby in those states. AIG claims the policies cover personal injury claims – including defamation – but not for personal injury claims arising from sexual, physical or mental abuse.

Cosby is facing defamation lawsuits filed by Tamara Green, Therese Serignese and Linda Traitz in Massachusetts; and model Janice Dickinson in California, based on denials by Cosby or his representatives of claims of sexual misconduct.

In papers he filed in the federal court in Springfield, Massachusetts, Cosby said he would face “substantial prejudice” by being forced to defend simultaneously lawsuits by AIG over the policies, and by the women over the defamation claims.

“Allowing the coverage lawsuits to continue would force Mr. Cosby to fight a multi-front war against both the underlying plaintiffs, in two lawsuits, and against AIG in two lawsuits, thereby draining resources, money and time that could be channeled into the defense against the Underlying Lawsuits,” his lawyers wrote in a brief asking for either a dismissal or stay of the AIG lawsuit. “Forcing Mr. Cosby to fight a four-front battle would demonstrate AIG’s complete disregard for the best interests of Mr. Cosby and would indisputably manifest itself in AIG directly impairing Mr. Cosby’s ability to defend himself in the Underlying Lawsuits.”

AIG has not responded publicly to the lawsuit.

More than 40 women have accused Cosby, 78, of drugging and sexually assaulting them over the course of several decades.

Cosby has not been criminally charged, and his representatives have denied any wrongdoing on his part.

The cases are AIG Property Casualty Co v. Green et al, U.S. District Court, District of Massachusetts, No. 15-30111; and AIG Property Casualty Co v. Cosby et al, U.S. District Court, Central District of California, No. 15-04842.