Queen and court will reign over Blossom festivities May 1 - 4

The 2014 Cañon City Music and Blossom Festival Queen and Court, from left to right: Miss Personality Alexia Phillips; Second Attendant Breanna Lancaster; Queen Cassandra Giammo; First Attendant Carissa Harlow; Little Miss Taylor Jones and Little Mister Josh Boyd. ( Carie Canterbury / Daily Record )

Cassandra Giammo is crowned the 2014 Cañon City Music and Blossom Festival Queen by pageant director Megan McCarter on Saturday during the Music and Blossom Festival Queen's Pageant at Cañon City High School. (Carie Canterbury / Daily Record)

2014 Cañon City Music and Blossom Festival Queen's Pageant Queen - Cassandra Giammo First Attendant - Carissa Harlow Second Attendant - Breanna Lancaster Miss Personality - Alexia Phillips Third Runner-up - Raina Snelson Fourth Runner-up - Tia Parker Interview Merit Award - Morgan Easter Modeling Award - Courtney Lamanna Miss Photogenic - Skye Cochran Spirit of Blossom - Ashley Goad and Raquel Uhland Little Miss - Taylor Jones Little Mister - Josh Boyd Judges: Mina Muirhead, health editor for 'Hat Trick'; D.J. McDermott, 20-year veteran of pageantry and style consulting; Emily Stark, Miss Colorado USA 1995 and Mrs. Colorado 2002.



The Cañon City Music and Blossom Festival Queen's Pageant literally rolled out the red carpet for all 34 candidates vying for the coveted queen's crown during its 69th annual pageant Saturday at Cañon City High School.

Cassandra Giammo, the 2014 Cañon City Music and Blossom Festival Queen, is surprised when her name is called during the Blossom Festival Queen's Pageant on Saturday at Cañon City High School. (Carie Canterbury / Daily Record)

The 2014 Blossom Queen and her court are Cassandra Giammo, queen; Carissa Harlow, first attendant; Breanna Lancaster, second attendant; and Alexia Phillips, Miss Personality. The 2014 Little Miss Taylor Jones and Little Mister Josh Boyd also were crowned in front of a sold-out audience.

Saturday night was not the first time Giammo was crowned on stage during a glamorous Blossom pageant.

Giammo, 18, a senior at CCHS, was crowned Little Miss in 2002, and last year she earned the Interview Merit Award. She is the daughter of Kevin and Lynn Giammo.

"This is unreal," Giammo said following the pageant. "I never imagined it, and I am so blessed to have this opportunity."

She said while reigning over Blossom festivities with her court May 1- 4, she plans to make room to spend time with her family and friends, as well.

"I plan to be an excellent role model for our community, especially with everything that's happened with the Royal Gorge Fire," she said. The 76th Music and Blossom Festival is dedicated to the Royal Gorge Bridge in honor of its strength and endurance following the 2013 Royal Gorge Fire. This year's theme is "Still Standing Tall."

Harlow, 17, is a junior at CCHS and the daughter of Curt and Valerie Harlow. She participated in the pageant in 2013, and said she will also participate next year as a senior.

Following the pageant, Harlow said she was "over the moon."

"This is such a blessing and I am really happy for Cassy and all our court," she said.

Lancaster, 18, is a senior at CCHS and the daughter of Adam and Tami Lancaster. Saturday's pageant was her first.

"I wanted to see what it was all about because there was so much positivity that people say about it, and I wanted to see if that was true," she said, adding that the entire pageantry process indeed was a positive experience.

Phillips participated in the pageant as a sophomore and junior, last year earning the modeling award. Phillips, 18, is a senior at CCHS, and the daughter of Rami Stoner and Thomas Phillips.

"This means so much because all of the girls all voted for me," she said. "This is the most amazing feeling ever — I have the best court.

"Cassy totally deserved queen and first and second attendant, they're all beautiful; I am so happy."

Pageant Director Megan McCarter said this year's court will be "amazing."

"There were a lot of really, really happy, excited and surprised young ladies tonight," she said. "I could not be more happy for the young ladies representing us this year."

Wrapping up her 12th year as pageant director, and having worked with more than 250 candidates through the years, McCarter said this year's competition probably was the toughest she has ever seen.

"There were 34 girls who all could have taken away the title," she said. "And it was just a beautiful show, from the stage to the candidates to the gowns, everything was top-notch, Hollywood glamour, just like we hoped for."

Also recognized Saturday were Raina Snelson, 3rd runner-up; Tia Parker, 4th runner-up; Morgan Easter, Interview Merit; Courtney Lamanna, Modeling Award; Skye Cochran, Miss Photogenic; and Ashley Goad and Raquel Uhland, Spirit of Blossom.

Judges were Mina Muirhead, health editor for "Hat Trick"; D.J. McDermott, 20-year veteran of pagentry and style consulting; and Emily Stark, Miss Colorado USA 1995 and Mrs. Colorado 2002.

For more information on the 2014 Music and Blossom Festival, visit http://ccblossomfestival.com.