Maffei wrong to side with GOP ideologues

To the Editor;

I have supported Dan Maffei and appreciate his intelligence, integrity, values, and desire to find "common ground" -- even at the risk of party disapproval. We need politicians who are willing to see that the "common good" and politics as "the art of the possible" sometimes require hard choices that don't fit the normal alliances. (I believe we have also seen that in the leadership of Sen. Dave Valesky on the state level.).

Nevertheless, I think that his vote with the Republican ideologues in a vain attempt to keep the government open was a mistake politically and particularly absurd on the dawn of the Affordable Care Act that had everything in place to launch this week. Can you imagine a Congress that would have held up a projected space launch a few days before scheduled because it thought that it was the wrong rocket?

It is more than sad that most Republicans have apparently succumbed to the anti-Obama agenda and have been willing to do nearly anything to discredit the president and this program in particular.

Sometimes, Congressman Maffei, even with the best of intentions, there is no real negotiating with some people, but keep looking for the opportunities that may come with more reasonable minds and positions.

David E. Pasinski

Fayetteville

No excuse for the damage done

To the Editor;

Conservatives really hate the Affordable Care Act (Obamacare) and under the leadership of the junior Senator from Texas, they found a way to shut down the government trying to stop it. Ironically, the

ACA is up and running, while the government isn't, furloughing 800,000 people.

In two weeks, they are threatening to not raise the debt ceiling -- to pay the bills they have already passed. This would destroy our country's credit and reputation and possibly bring down more than just our economy. Scary, right? Not even the terrorists, on 9-11, did this much damage to our country and our way of life.

Doris E Cross

Liverpool

Time to clean House

To the Editor;

The Affordable Care Act was not created by President Obama. Congress makes laws, not the executive branch of government, a fact seemingly forgotten by certain House Republicans. The Supreme Court found that the law passes constitutional muster. The law met with far greater voter interest on its first day of implementation than expected.

Shutting down the government because a law passed, reviewed and needed by huge numbers of voters is opposed by a Congressional faction that lacks the votes to repeal it is both hugely irresponsible and destructive.

Throw the bums out!

Steve Ransford

Syracuse

Who are our 'representatives' representing?

To the Editor;

I don't know about you, but when I look around our neighborhoods I see potholes, deteriorating bridges and growing classroom sizes.

And yet, right now Congress is playing politics with the budget and shutting down important government services for those in need. Surprisingly, there are simple solutions.

Pentagon largesse has for too long gone unchecked under the guise of national security. Experts agree that Pentagon boondoggles worth billions like the troubled F-35 can be cut with no affect to American safety.

It's time for my senators and my representative to stop kowtowing to lobbyists and special interests and pass a budget that represents our values of taking care of our community infrastructure, our children and those in need.

Carolyn Barrett

North Syracuse

A sign of change



Karen Grimm of Lafayette sent along the photo at right, saying "Here's what I did with all my Maffei signs from when I campaigned for him."» Have something to say? Send us a letter -- or a cartoon, or a photo.