DFL party endorses Walz: First Congressional District convention hosted Saturday in Worthington

Congressman Tim Walz speaks to the DFL First Congressional District Saturday as his wife, Gwen, and their children, Hope and Gus, offer support. Tim Middagh/Daily Globe

WORTHINGTON — Hundreds of southern Minnesota residents gathered in Worthington Saturday afternoon to officially endorse Rep. Tim Walz as the Democratic-Farmer-Labor candidate in the state’s First Congressional District.

Walz, a veteran, teacher and five-term Congressman, accepted the nomination during the DFL First Congressional District Convention with his wife, Gwen, daughter Hope and son Gus by his side.

It was 10 years ago that Walz and his wife, both teachers in the Mankato school district, sought the support of voters in a campaign for the First Congressional seat. He said Saturday he went to the convention “with the unshakeable belief that it was our generation’s responsibility to make a difference in this country.”

A decade later, Walz said he has less hair, bigger kids and more friends, but he has brought “a lot of positive change,” noting his support for the Affordable Care, DREAM and Stock acts, his support for veterans, increasing the minimum wage and affordable college tuition.

“The Affordable Care Act wasn’t about insurance, it was about health care,” he said to a cheering crowd. “Twenty million of our fellow citizens can now go see someone when they need to and get the health care they deserve.”

As for his support of funding for college education, Walz said, “If this nation wants to continue to innovate, continue to move forward, continue to prosper … we have to have the healthiest and best educated population there is. That’s not government giving things away, that’s smart investment.”

He told the gathering that while much has been done thus far to move the country forward, it’s only a start. Noting the Republican First Congressional District Convention hosted a week prior, Walz said contrary to what they might believe, “We didn’t come here today to beat Republicans. We came here today to make a better country.

“It’s not a game and it’s not about my team winning. It’s about policies that actually work,” Walz said.

“We’re going to make the choices that improve people’s lives, that are based on science, based on the things we know work, an economy that does work. You didn’t come just to make sure Democrats win, but there is a correlation. If we don’t win, those things don’t happen.”

Looking ahead, Walz said the country needs people who believe in the political system and, as such, Citizens United needs to be overturned. He also said it is time to address climate change for a more stable, sustainable future.

“We’ve got work to do,” he said. “It’s with great humbleness, it’s with great appreciation, that we accept this nomination. I am honored every single day … to represent the people of southern Minnesota.”

Speaking in support of Walz and the DFL party supporters via video were U.S. Sens. Amy Klobuchar and Al Franken.

“From supporting farmers in rural communities to investing in transportation, investing in good jobs, Tim understands what is needed in southern Minnesota,” Klobuchar said. “Minnesota’s families and America’s families are counting on us once again. It’s time to give the American people their country back. We’re fighting to take back the U.S. Senate and take back the White House.”

Franken echoed Klobuchar’s comments, saying “2016 is a crucially important year” for the democratic party.

Prior to Walz’s acceptance of the endorsement, Nobles County DFL Chairwoman Deb Hogenson and Rock County DFL Chairman Dale Moerke were among a trio of individuals to speak in support of Walz’s reelection.

Hogenson praised Walz for his work on the Affordable Care Act, saying that if it hadn’t been for the health care reform, she and her husband — both facing health issues in the past six months — would have faced devastating financial consequences.

“Tim’s courageous vote for health care reform literally saved us from financial disaster,” Hogenson said. “Doug and I will always be grateful for the security that comes from health care coverage that can not be taken away.”

Moerke, a 31-year member of the United Food and Commercial Workers union, said Walz has been supportive of organized labor and is quick to respond to any issues in the far southwest corner of his district.

“We have a lot of issues and Tim Walz has been able to support us, whether it’s affordable housing, paycheck fairness and even infrastructure,” Moerke said. “Walz was here to make sure we had the disaster assistance we needed (after the ice storm and spring flooding). Tim has always been here when we’ve needed him and he will continue to be there. I’m proud to support him again as our congressman.”

Minnesota Attorney General Lori Swanson addressed the gathering briefly, reiterating the hard work ahead for the DFL party.

“We’ve got real issues, folks,” she said, outlining the state’s drop in average wages, Minnesota’s ranking as the 12th highest in the nation for out-of-pocket costs for health care and fifth highest ranking in student loan debt. Parents are dipping into their own retirement savings to help their children with the high costs of college, she said.

State DFL Party Chairman Ken Martin spoke of the importance of putting a democrat back in the White House, saying the next president will appoint up to four Supreme Court justices.

“There’s people who believe it’s going to be easy to defeat Donald Trump,” Martin said. “Remember 1998? We said the same thing about someone running for governor and we woke up the next day and we had Gov. Ventura.

“This is going to be a tough election. We need to do what Paul Wellstone always did — run like we’re 20 points behind, go door to door, neighbor to neighbor, person to person, talking about our values.”

As part of the convention, several DFL-endorsed candidates spoke briefly about their 2016 campaign. Among them was Kirby Kruse, who is seeking the Minnesota House seat in Dist. 22B currently occupied by Rep. Rod Hamilton.

“We need to get back control of the House,” Kruse told his fellow Democrats. “We’re just a week out of the end of the session and we still have no bonding bill by the people holding the majority.”

To wrap up Saturday’s convention, attendees were tasked with electing delegates to the Democratic National Convention in Philadelphia. As determined by the outcome of the precinct caucuses earlier this year, the First Congressional District will send three delegates in support of candidate Bernie Sanders and two delegates in support of Hillary Clinton. Hogenson, who was elected chairperson of the First Congressional District earlier in the afternoon, was elected a delegate in support of Clinton.