Reggie Newson (Photo: Contributed)

"In the future this current experience as a youth apprentice will put me apart from others in regards to a resume standpoint from other people that may be applying jobs, it is one the great things I am taking away from this is that I am gaining experiences that many high school youth do not have available."

— Tyler Wolosek, youth apprenticeship, Verso Corporation

Wisconsin's innovative school-to-work programs are preparing students like Tyler Wolosek to graduate from high school with real world employment experiences while partnering with a technical college for short-term training or a two-year degree. To highlight how these programs are moving the state's economy forward, Gov. Scott Walker proclaimed February as Career and Technical Education Month.

It has been ingrained in us for decades that career success requires a four-year degree from a college or university. While undergraduate and graduate studies are important, Wisconsin businesses also require highly trained skilled workers to fill good-paying, in-demand jobs that offer rewarding careers with opportunities for professional growth. As parents, educators, and business and community leaders, we need to be aware of the multiple pathways available for youth to explore and pursue postsecondary education and career goals.

Gov. Walker and the state Legislature understand that Wisconsin's talent development strategies require strong CTE programs to build a robust pipeline of skilled workers and address the skills gap. Last year, the Department of Workforce Development provided Wisconsin youth with expanded access to quality dual-enrollment and work-based learning opportunities through targeted state investments totaling $2.2 million for youth apprenticeship funding increases and $2.1 million for Wisconsin Fast Forward school-to-work grant awards. In addition, a second round of Wisconsin Fast Forward grants was recently announced with up to $3 million available in 2015 to support CTE projects that lead to industry recognized credentials in high demand fields.

DWD's innovative, demand-driven CTE training solutions are valued by employers, educators, students and parents throughout the state. These solutions prepare high school students for postsecondary education and career success, and they fuel business and grow Wisconsin's economy. Last year, the YA program supported work-based learning opportunities at nearly 1,800 businesses across 10 career clusters for more than 2,500 youth. In partnership with YA regional consortiums, DWD anticipates exceeding these impressive outcomes this year.

During Career and Technical Education Month, I look forward to visiting schools across the state and the students who are excelling through work-based learning. The successful CTE programs in place today serve as shining examples for the rest of the state to follow.

I encourage parents to contact their school district to learn about local CTE options. And visit the Department of Workforce Development's YouTube channel to hear directly from students on the benefits of school-to-work programming.

Read or Share this story: http://wdhne.ws/1EzfeyF