Mississippi Insurance Commissioner Mike Chaney is critical of the Republican leadership's handling of the state budget. (Photo: File/AP)

Thank goodness for state Insurance Commissioner Mike Chaney.

He's one Republican state official with the guts to tell the truth about how his fellow Republicans who control the Legislature have massacred the state's general fund budget.

Instead of merely trimming agency budgets, the Legislature "cut down the tree." That is how Chaney described the fiscal hatchet job done by his fellow Republicans at the 2016 session.

FEELING THE BURN: State agencies pondering cuts, layoffs with new budget

And Mike, a veteran of service in both houses of the Legislature, added, "It will take a decade to fix this."

No Democratic lawmaker could have hurled a more devastating verbal blast at the Bryant-Reeves-Gunn combine that produced what they boastfully called a "balanced" state budget.

Even with all the crunching cuts made in appropriations to vital state services and the "sweeping" into the state general fund "special fund" caches of cash collected by agencies from fees and services, many lawmakers believe that red ink will still dominate monthly treasury reports this next fiscal year. That hasn't happened since the Great Depression and the days of Theodore G. Bilbo over a century ago.

(A letter urging the governor to veto the budget bill so that the special fund sweeps could be eliminated was reportedly attempted by most elected state officials, but they never got the letter to Bryant.)

SLOW RETURNS: Budget cuts slow handling of Miss. income tax returns

This latest brouhaha is not the first time Chaney has clashed with the Bryant administration on a major financial issue that endangers the health and well-being of thousands of Mississippi citizens.

Three years ago when Mississippi faced the national deadline to submit a health care insurance exchange plan under the Affordable Health Care Act (aka Obamacare) as a crucial tool for some 275,000 uninsured Mississippians to compare rates and benefits of health insurance companies, Chaney submitted to the federal Department of Health and Human Services a plan he had drawn up, no matter that Mississippi had not indicated its intention to expand the Medicaid program to qualify for benefits under ACA. At the last minute, without notifying Chaney, Gov. Bryant fired off a letter to HHS totally nullifying Chaney's effort.

Consequently, Mississippi has been left only with a federally run insurance exchange that Chaney had previously warned was less favorable than a state-run exchange. One immediate problem was that few insurance companies would agree to participate. So far only three companies have signed on to offer insurance plans under the federal-run exchange.

Despite all the impediments thrown in its way, the federally run exchange has signed up 108,000 uninsured Mississippians for coverage. Unfortunately, some 26 percent of them have not been able to keep their premium payments current. Chaney said lawmakers also failed to fund his agency's rural fire truck program, endangering a vital area of fire protection.

The gutsy 72-year-old insurance commissioner has warned that he will not comply with the Legislature's intended sweep of $16 million he collects from the insurance premium tax. That money has been sent for years to cities and counties for fire protection.

He plans to continue to allocate the money as he has done. If the Legislature doesn't like it, he added, "they can put me in jail."

Bill Minor is a contributing columnist. Contact him at P.O. Box 1243, Jackson MS 39215.

Read or Share this story: http://on.thec-l.com/1T0ZL31