From diaper bags to baby clothes, if you know where to look, you can spend less time worrying about money, and more time taking care of yourself and your baby.

How Uber knows your phone battery is dying and more

Kristine Cortes lies in her hospital bed with her 18-month-old son, Levi Cortes, and her newborn son, Mikah Cortes, who was born on the leap day at Sentara RMH Medical Center in Harrisonburg, Va.

New and expecting moms have a lot on their plates, and a fair portion of the stress of bringing a child into the world is financial. There's the cost of turning your home office into a nursery, the cost of baby-proofing, of buying strollers and high chairs and car seats and stocking up on diapers and formula and adorable onesies with sassy phrases stitched on the front.

All this adds up to one very stressed mommy, who could use a little break from the spending spree required to successfully grow, birth and raise a human child. Luckily, there are a lot of companies offering free stuff for new and expecting mothers. From diaper bags to baby clothes, if you know where to look, you can spend less time worrying about money, and more time taking care of yourself and your baby. We decided to make things even easier and compiled a list of all the freebies and discounts we could for new and expecting moms!

Baby Registry Freebies

A baby registry is a way for the friends and family of an expectant mom to help her stockpile the things she'll need once the baby arrives. Because a baby registry can bring in hundreds or even thousands of dollars to a store, a lot of retailers offer freebies baskets and bonus deals for moms who register with them. Here are the stores we found with the best baby registry incentives:

Recommended: Are you a smart shopper? Take our quiz.

Amazon -- Amazon sends Prime members who create and complete a baby registry online a baby "Welcome Box" after at least $10 of registry gifts have been purchased from their wishlist. The box is valued at $35, and recent recipients said it included baby food samples, a nursing bottle, a pacifier, breast pads, water wipes, baby lotion, shampoo, conditioner and more! This is just one of the many, many reasons why we here at Brad's Deals are obsessed with our Amazon Prime memberships.

Buy Buy Baby -- Register and add items to your baby registry in-store at Buy Buy Baby, and you'll get a goody bag filled with product samples and coupons. Buy Buy Baby doesn't publish exactly what's in the goody bag, but some covert mommy forum sleuthing found that previous recipients have gotten a copy of American Baby magazine, formula, baby food samples, a pacifier and more!

Babies "R" Us -- Babies "R" Us also offers a registry gift bag, which is reusable. Inside, you'll likely find things like samples of formula, nursing pads, breast milk storage bags, cloth diapers, and baby wipes.

Target -- Register in person for a Target baby registry and you'll get a gift bag at Guest Services filled with $50 in goodies. Freebies include coupons for brands like Pampers and Starbucks, and according to one blogger, the samples include things like Aquaphor diaper rash cream, Olly prenatal multivitamins, a MAM pacifier, some Lansinoh breastfeeding storage bags, The Honest Company diapers and wipes, Pampers wipes and a Philips Avent natural bottle.

Formula Freebies

Enfamil -- Sign up for the Enfamil Family Beginnings program to receive up to $250 worth of free gifts for you and your baby. From formula samples and coupons to "unexpected gifts"sent to you throughout your membership, there's a lot to love about this program.

Gerber -- Print out this certificate, bring it with you to the hospital when you give birth, and you'll receive a free Gerber Baby Nutrition Kit, chock full of free formula samples, a breastfeeding blanket and how-to pamphlet, and lots and lots of coupons.

Heinz Baby -- Sign up for the Heinz Baby Club to receive weekly coupons, offers and samples of new products.

Nature's One -- Get a free can of Baby’s Only Organic Formula, PediaSmart, or PediaVance for just a $5.95 shipping fee (PediaVance ships for free).

Similac -- Membership to the Similac StrongMoms program means up to $329 in savings, coupons and freebies, and expert advice on nutrition, health and all things baby!

Store Brand Formula -- Sign up to receive an instant $5 off coupon for Store Brand Formula that's redeemable at all 68 participating retailers.

Diaper Freebies

Huggies -- Huggies Rewards members earn points from purchasing Huggies products, participating in surveys and watching videos. You can redeem your points for things like free diapers, magazine subscriptions, and gift cards to places like Sephora!

The Honest Company -- Sign up for a free trail and get a free diaper and wipes AND a baby essentials bundle for just a $5.95 shipping fee. You'll be getting more than $100 worth of products, including seven diapers, 10 wipes, shampoo, body wash, face and body lotion, a multi-surface cleaner, healing balm and hand soap, and everything is all-natural and environmentally responsible. One caviat: make sure you cancel your subscription within seven days or you'll be auto-enrolled in a monthly gift subscription service. If you like what you got in the freebie box and don't mind paying for it, you don't have to do anything to start getting monthly deliveries of these products.

Pampers -- Create a Pampers account and get free samples, coupons and offers from both Pampers AND their partner companies (Charmin, Bounty, Always, Tide and Dreft).

Seventh Generation – Get coupons, access to new products and exclusive offers when you sign up for the Seventh Generation 'Generation Good' program.

Baby/Mommy Product Freebies

The same company seems to own all of the following sites that offer discounts on baby products. You'll have to pay shipping on these purchases, but that's it. Most of these codes will save you $40-$50 off the product.

Baby Leggings -- Get five free pairs of baby leggings with offer code MYSAVINGS

Car Seat Canopy -- Get a free car seat canopy with offer code MYSAVINGS

Seven Slings -- Get a free baby sling with offer code ENBABY

Udder Covers -- Get a free nursing cover with offer code ENBABY

Nursing Pillow -- Get a free nursing pillow with offer code MYSAVINGS

Breast Pads -- Get 10 free breast pads with offer code MYSAVINGS

Babyganics -- Select the "Samples/Coupons" option in the drop down menu and send them a quick email asking for coupons and samples. Mommy forum research indicates this works best if you're super nice in the email, and former recipients of these samples have received things like a full bottle of dish and hand soap along with extra coupons!

Free Breast Pump -- The Affordable Care Act mandates that your health insurer cover the cost of your breast pump. Learn more about how to get your free breast pump athealthcare.gov.

IKEA -- Join IKEA Family and get product discounts on select furniture, free coffee at all retail locations, 90-day price protection and more!

A word of warning about Facebook "coupons" for new moms...

We've seen quite a few fake coupons for baby products floating around on social media. One popular one is the Johnson & Johnson Baby Relief Kit, which typically goes for around $30. Johnson & Johnson is NOT giving this away for free, and any site that claims this is probably trying to scam you. Another one we came upon in our research for this list is the Gerber Baby Bathtime Set. Again, this IS a real product, but it's not being given away for free. Don't enter any personal information on a site that claims it will send this to you. Spoiler alert: you're not gonna get it.

If you want to learn how to spot fake coupons on Facebook, check out our recent article on this topic and save yourself a headache in the future.

This article first appeared in Brad's Deals.