Interim CEO given permanent appointment

As of Jan. 5, 2015, Colorado Plains Medical Center in Fort Morgan will have a new chief executive officer, according to a news release.

But Dr. Gene O'Hara will not have to go far to take over the role after getting appointed to by the CPMC Governing Board of Trustees in late December.

That's because he already had been serving as the hospital's interim CEO since September.

"Dr. O'Hara brings an extensive background of measurable quality and operations successes to Colorado Plains Medical Center and has been a strong leader since joining the hospital in September," said Brad Owens, chief operating officer of LifePoint Hospitals' Western Group, of which CPMC is a part. "We are confident Dr. O'Hara is the right person to lead the hospital and work with employees, physicians, volunteers and the community to continue enhancing health-care delivery in Fort Morgan."

Since 2012, O'Hara also has served as an adjunct professor and director at the University of Northern Colorado's Kenneth W. Monfort College of Business, according to the release.

Before that, he was the vice president of market management and business strategies for VHA Mountain States, based in Irving, Texas, from 2009 to 2012. That company was the "seven-state regional arm of VHA, Inc., which provides administrative, operational and clinical programs to hospitals and health systems nationwide," according to the release.

Prior to that, O'Hara filled CEO slots at various Banner Health system hospitals while based in Phoenix, Ariz., and Providence Health and Services out of Seattle.

Advertisement

"Dr. O'Hara has an accomplished career, with more than 30 years of health-care management experience at hospitals and health systems across the country," said Dr. Kerry Hart, chairman of the CPMC Governing Board of Trustees. "He is focused on quality and ensuring that our patients, employees and physicians are all satisfied with the care provided by Colorado Plains. We're pleased that he is assuming this role on a permanent basis and welcome Dr. O'Hara and his family to the Fort Morgan community."

O'Hara has a long history with both health care and studying it, having earned multiple degrees, including: a bachelor's degree in pharmacy from the University of Montana, a doctorate of pharmacy from the University of the Pacific in California and a master's degree in health administration from the University of Colorado, according to the release.

"He is actively involved in his local community and the health-care industry, and he is a Fellow of the American College of Health Care Executives," the release stated.

About Colorado Plains Medical Center

"Colorado Plains Medical Center, a part of LifePoint Hospitals, is a 50-bed acute-care hospital, fully accredited by The Joint Commission. With a Level III Trauma Center, a 24-hour Emergency Room and many other services, the hospital chiefly serves a two-county area of 35,000," according to the release.

The diagnostic imaging services available at CPMC include: MRI, nuclear medicine, CT, radiography, ACR-certified mammography and ultrasound; available rehabilitation services include: physical, occupational and speech therapies; the hospital's other services include: behavioral health, cardiopulmonary, surgery, lab, obstetrics, social services, dietary sleep medicine and home health, according to the release stated.

About LifePoint Hospitals

"LifePoint Hospitals is a leading hospital company focused on providing quality health-care services close to home. Through its subsidiaries, LifePoint operates more than 60 hospital campuses in 21 states. With a mission of 'Making Communities Healthier,' LifePoint is the sole community hospital provider in the majority of the communities it serves," the release stated.

Jenni Grubbs: jgrubbs@fmtimes.com, Twitter @JenniGrubbs or tout.com/jennigrubbs