They say it’s for their own survival.

With a $296 million tax incentive program for movie and TV production in Florida already tapped out, with no new dollars flowing into it for three years, industry advocates say they see a nail-biter of a finish right around the corner.

The incentive program is set to expire July 1 unless state lawmakers act.

“We know it’s pretty much do or die time for us,” said Gus Corbella, a Tallahassee lobbyist and chairman of the Florida Film and Entertainment Advisory Council, which has been pushing to get new dollars into the program.

“We’ve been losing productions to other states. With them, go good-paying jobs which are part of a real creative economy. Now that the program sunset is hanging over us, we know we’re at the end of our rope,” he said.

California and New York have always proved the top production states.

But Georgia has overtaken a declining Florida for the third spot, many industry-watchers said. Its rich incentive program has earned it the nickname “Ya’llywood.”

Florida Gov. Rick Scott has never been a fan of the incentive program, which has made $296 million available to 312 projects since 2010. Florida House leaders also have sided with tea party-aligned activists angered by the idea of the government handing taxpayer money to corporations.

While advocates struggle to come up with a proposal to keep some form of incentives alive, Scott shows little interest in courting Hollywood.

Scott is pushing lawmakers hard to approve $250 million that he could dangle before companies interested in moving or expanding in Florida. But film money was again shut out in the $79.3 billion state budget proposal he unveiled on Monday.

“Our state has been in the film industry for 100 years,” said Film Florida President Michelle Hillery, who also is deputy director of Palm Beach County’s Film and Television Commission.

“It makes no sense to walk away from it,” she added.

The county’s film office assists with a couple hundred production permits each year. The movie and television industry brought in $138 million to the county in 2013, according to the commission.

But industry advocates say Florida has lost more than $650 million in film and TV productions since 2013.

Some productions that got away may not have had the allure of a Miami Vice. Hot Tub Time Machine 2 is a film that considered but declined to shoot in Palm Beach County, the industry points out in its list of lost productions.

Despite the productions lost, film and TV projects are still providing thousands of cast, crew, catering and other jobs tied to location shoots, supporters say. Studies show that projects completed in Florida from 2010 to last year paid Floridians almost $1 billion in wages. State economists put the industry’s economic impact in Florida at $4.1 billion annually.

Not everyone is convinced, though.

“I’m in favor of incentives, as long as we get a great return for our taxpayers,” Scott said in Jacksonville last week, following his budget rollout.

A study earlier this year by the Legislature’s Office of Economic and Demographic Research hurt the industry’s self-portrayal as an economic engine. The analysis showed the Florida gets a modest, 43 cents back on every dollar it hands out in tax credits to film and TV productions.

Industry officials dispute those findings, arguing the return is much higher. They fault the way state economists calculate the dollars and say the value of productions can prove hard to calculate.

Hillery said a recent survey by the state’s tourism arm, Visit Florida, showed 22.7 percent of domestic visitors said viewing a movie or television series filmed in Florida contributed to their decision to travel here.

But such claims don’t quiet critics.

“We just don’t think that government should be a bank,” said Skylar Zander, deputy Florida director of Americans for Prosperity, the advocacy organization launched by David and Charles Koch, the oil industry titans and conservative financiers.

AFP has spearheaded opposition to Florida’s tax-credit program for building sports stadiums, and sees the film program in a similar light.

While Georgia has boomed, other states are scaling back like Florida, including once-robust Louisiana, Michigan and North Carolina.

“We want to see a thriving film business,” Zander said. “We just think it should compete, like all businesses have to.”

A problem with the current program is that tax credits were granted on a first-come, first-served basis, leading to the program quickly running through all the available dollars.

Senate Commerce and Tourism Chair Nancy Detert, R-Venice, a leading advocate, has been trying to change that.

She is filing legislation that would renew the program for another five years, but restructure it to require more evaluation of projects seeking state dollars.

Then, she said she’ll work on getting money in the budget.

“What I wanted to see was an energetic film commission seeking out good projects, hoping to lure companies, mainly from California…and bring their industry here permanently,” Detert said at a committee hearing last week, where she lashed out at Scott’s film commissioner, Niki Welge.

Unless it’s fixed, she warned, “It sunsets in 2016. It’s dead.”