The consolidation of Walgreens and Alliance Boots GmbH created the world’s first pharmacy-led health and wellbeing enterprise. When the amalgamation was completed and Walgreens Boots Alliance Inc (NASDAQ:WBA) was formed, many expected this strategic deal to mark a breakthrough for both the corporations. However, there are a lot more issues to grapple with right now than expected. Although the analysts look forward to significant synergies from the acquisition, the entity is being weighed down by macro headwinds and competitive pressures.

Walgreens for the fiscal first quarter posted strong financials with impressive 12.5% year-over-year (YoY) growth in earnings, which came in at $0.81, beating the Street’s estimate by 8.14%. Now with its acquisition of Alliance Boots, the company has made its way on a global forefront. Goldman Sachs also anticipates a good 3.6% YoY growth for the overall healthcare industry coming from increased Rx utilization, procurement, and acquisition synergies and healthcare reforms.

The leading investment firm extrapolates immense potential in the industry this year. The new Affordable Care Act legislation established last year will be one of the factors to boost pharmacy sales in 2015. Being recently introduced, the act has been unable to render its impact significantly, which is why the firm anticipates the effects to show this year, with 5.5 million individuals enrolled into the program this year. This means a lot more people will be entitled to government healthcare benefits and hence, sales for pharmacy retail and drug store chains will turn out higher.

Regarding the procurement and acquisition benefits involved, one can expect the maximum cost synergies from the Walgreens Boot Alliance merger to exceed $1 billion, and a saving rate of 7%. In addition, with increased presence of the company across 25 nations, it will be in a much more feasible position to unveil generic launches, which the analysts project to be worth $24 billion this year.

However, the acquisition has brought more challenges as the company struggles with gross margin pressures, generic drug inflation, and reimbursement pressures, alongside changes in the company’s pharmacy unit on a much wider scale for both the subsidiaries.

In addition, the sell-side firms believe there is limited upside to Walgreens Boots stock in the coming months, since all factors that could favorably impact the company have already been accounted for in its high valuation. Investors have already weighed in on the advantages that were anticipated to be realized from the acquisition, leading to high current price and subsequent target price upgrades by analysts. Therefore, there is immense pressure mounting on the management to perform at par with what investors expect from the consolidation.

The analysts project a far greater return potential resulting from acquisition synergies than from the company’s management tactics alone. The company expects to realize $1 billion in synergies and a further $1 billion from several cost-cutting measures to be taken by the company. Goldman Sachs, on the other hand, believes that the synergies arising from the consolidation will exceed targets coming close to $1.25 billion, while cost-cutting initiatives will be in line with estimate of $1 billion.

Moreover, the competitive landscape of pharmacy retail has also shifted dramatically. There are an increasing number of third-party pharmacy benefits managers, who dispatch prescriptions by mail to grocery stores with in-store pharmacies. Also, small-scale setups are sprouting as new competitors. In addition, big-box retailers like Wal-Mart Stores, Inc. (NYSE:WMT) and Amazon.com, Inc. (NASDAQ:AMZN) have also begun to sell a chunk of their nonprescription merchandise that Walgreens Boots Alliance carries, many a times at discounted prices.

Although the company has steadily expanded its physical footprint with 8,200 stores across the US now, there are hardly any street corners left for the company to cover. Hence, only if the company further expands into new markets such as Russia, China, or Brazil, will there be significant benefits reaped out of its magnanimous scale.

At the same time, benefits realized from synergies and cost savings and the overall industry trends that favor the company will help offset the pressures the company faces from reimbursement rates and generic inflation, in addition to other concerns.

This is why even though a majority of the sell-side firms hold a neutral stance on the company, the mean 12-month target price is still higher at $78.6. Out of the 28 analysts who cover the stock, 16 rate it a Hold and ten have given it a Buy rating.