Topics: 1 percent, Bill Gates, Books, Business, Editor's Picks, Income inequality, Mitt Romney, Steve Jobs, Tea Party, Business News

‘When did you last get a job from a poor person?’ So goes my favorite Tea Party slogan. The Americans are good at slogans but the Tea Party specializes in discombobulatingly daft ones. Of course you won’t get a job from a poor person, we wearily concede, but it doesn’t follow that the rich create jobs, as if they have special powers that turn their gains into a gift of jobs to the rest of us. U.S. billionaire Nick Hanauer is refreshingly honest about this: ‘If it was true that lower taxes for the rich and more wealth for the wealthy led to job creation, today we would be drowning in jobs.’ So why hasn’t the spectacular shift in income and financial wealth to the rich over the last four decades led to unprecedented jobs growth?

First of all, we need to ask what the rich and super-rich do with their spare money. They generally use it to try to get even more, through either real investment or financial ‘investment.’ In the latter case, whether by betting on market movements or buying income-yielding assets, or the many other ways unearned income can be extracted, their actions are unlikely to result in net job creation. Some ‘investment’ is used to buy up firms in order to sell off parts of them – to asset-strip them, in other words. This is likely to result in job losses, and indeed may reduce the ability of the firm to produce in the long run. Many companies have boosted their profits by cutting jobs.

But even if the rich do fund real investment in productive businesses – in equipment, training, new infrastructures or whatever – this may or may not result in job creation. Some businesses need to employ more people if they are to expand, but some do not: they may make more profit by reducing the number of workers they employ, whether by intensifying work for the remaining workers or automating their jobs. Either way, as Nick Hanauer makes clear, hiring more workers ‘is a course of last resort for the capitalist.’ Extra workers may enable more output, but if firms can find other ways of expanding output that are cheaper, they will.

So, even productive investment may be either job-increasing or job-decreasing. The last few decades have seen plenty of ‘jobless growth’ in advanced industrial economies. Contrast that with the post-war boom of the 1950s and 1960s, when the rich controlled a much smaller percentage of wealth than now: then growth was job-creating overall and real wages grew

In the economy as a whole, the number of jobs depends primarily on the level of total or ‘aggregate’ demand. As Hanauer argues, ordinary people create jobs simply by spending their money. Job numbers are most likely to rise when people and businesses are spending more. Aggregate demand is not within the control of individual businesses: it’s their environment. Businesses can’t grow unless demand increases. The current crisis of capitalist economies owes much to the fact that aggregate demand in many rich countries has been stagnant for decades, and only buoyed up by massive expansion of consumer credit. It has therefore become harder to make profits out of producing goods and services. As both cause and consequence of this, there has been a major relative shift in investment, or rather ‘investment,’ in the last 30–40 years from so-called non-financial companies (that produce goods and services) to financial companies that make money directly from money.

But you might ask why a shift in the proportion of national income going to the rich should make a difference to aggregate demand. Isn’t it just a change in who has the spending power rather than a change in the total spending power? The answer is that the rich use a smaller proportion of their money for buying goods and services than do other people. Those on low incomes cannot afford to save because they need to spend all they have just to get by, and if they get an increase it’s likely to be spent on basic things or paying off debts. Those in the middle may be able to save a little, and if they get more, then both their spending and saving can be increased. Hanauer puts it more simply: someone who earns a hundred or thousand times more than the average person is not likely to spend it on a hundred or thousand cars and houses. Yes, they may spend eye-wateringly large sums on themselves, but it’s likely to be a considerably lower proportion of their overall income than for most people. In Keynes’ terms, the rich have a lower ‘marginal propensity to consume’ than the rest of us. So, other things equal, redistributing income to the rich lowers aggregate demand, and redistributing downwards increases it.

This means that ‘trickle down’ arguments are wrong. Yes, the rich employ a few servants and provide demand for accountants, tax advisors and luxury services, but far fewer jobs result from this than would be case if their income were redistributed back to ordinary people with a much higher propensity to consume. The best way to get money to cascade down from the rich to the rest is to tax them – or stop them extracting it in the first place! As Ann Pettifor argues, any trickle-down effect is dwarfed by the reverse ‘hoovering up’ effect of rent and interest in directing money to the wealthy.

So, to come back to the Tea Party slogan: jobs are created by those who control the means of production and finance, subject to the constraints of demand and costs. Those with little money don’t create jobs because they lack the means of production to employ anyone to work; where would they get the capital to do so? But that doesn’t mean we have to depend on the rich. More modestly paid owners and managers of firms and other organisations, including co-ops, can create jobs too, where aggregate demand allows. Or the state can. If it provides services for sale, like public transport, and demand for them increases, then, unless it can find ways of increasing productivity, it is likely to have to increase employment. The state can also create jobs where the services it provides are free to the user, as in schools; it can just raise or redirect taxes to pay for more jobs in education.

But there’s another twist here. For an individual capitalist, say, owning a fast-food chain, it makes sense to minimze the wage bill for any given level of output; but it’s also in their interest that other organisations pay good, indeed rising, wages because that will mean bigger sales of burgers and of other goods, to the advantage of all businesses. As Marx and Keynes pointed out, this is one of capitalism’s contradictions: the interests of capitalists in general are in conflict with the interests of individual capitalists. Neoliberalism ignores this problem of collective action and encourages capitalists to pursue their individual interests – to their ultimate cost. For a while there seemed to be a way round this through globalisation, by employing people where labor is cheap and selling their products where incomes are high, but the resulting ‘hollowing out’ of jobs, particularly in manufacturing in the rich countries, also depressed demand there.

One more twist: the rich, collectively, have another reason for restricting job creation. If employment grows too much, it is likely lead to wage inflation, as workers, now less fearful of unemployment, bid up their pay. That would squeeze profits. And wage inflation would also hit the rich as rentiers, because it would erode the value of the debts owed to them. This is why the rich pressure governments to hold down inflation, and high levels of unemployment help.

‘Enterprise’: aren’t the rich the entrepreneurs?

Here’s another case of how words can mislead. Rentiers don’t call themselves rentiers, and not many capitalists call themselves capitalists, but many of each like to call themselves ‘entrepreneurs.’ Upbeat terms like ‘entrepreneur’ and ‘enterprise’ can be stretched to cover things that don’t deserve them.

To be enterprising is to be resourceful, innovative, determined and bold, showing initiative and engaging in risky ventures that turn novel ideas into realities, with beneficial effects; these are surely good qualities. Who wouldn’t like to be seen as enterprising, or better, as an entrepreneur? But what’s problematic about these words is the company they often keep.

‘Enterprise,’ as a quality or virtue, is what linguists call a noncount noun, but as a count noun – ‘an enterprise,’ ‘enterprises’ – it is often seen as synonymous with private business, as is the term ‘entrepreneur.’ This of course has the neat effect not only of associating the virtue of enterprise with the private sector but of setting up an implicit contrast with the public sector, which is seen as un-enterprising by comparison. No argument is needed to support this implicit claim because this use of the word seems to make it a matter of definition: private businesses are enterprises, therefore their owners are entrepreneurs – special, enterprising people – and whatever is not a private business cannot be enterprising.

But if we think about it, we can see that:

1. An entrepreneur or enterprising person does not have to be a capitalist, although already having a lot of money certainly helps to fund business, perhaps an enterprising one. However, significant innovation takes considerable time and resources, so particularly where businesses are under pressure to deliver shareholder value in the short term, this may stifle entrepreneurial behaviour. The spectacle of major firms spending more on buying back their own shares, so as to push their price up, than they spend on research and development makes a nonsense of the idea that they are enterprising in the sense of innovative and risk-taking.

2. Many communities have people who set up new things, for example, running festivals or sports events, starting a community bank or charity or setting up local ‘freecycle’ systems so members can give away unwanted items to others who need them. Such people are entrepreneurs – social entrepreneurs, we might say – but not capitalists. Cooperatives can be entrepreneurial too.

3. The state – yes, the state! – so often portrayed as rule bound and sluggish, and lacking the spur of competition, can also be entrepreneurial. Even though it usually has a monopoly in certain activities, the public sector sometimes engages in enterprising ventures, such as setting up the National Health Service, establishing the Open University in the UK, highspeed rail services or launching space probes. As we show later, governments have repeatedly fostered fundamental research and borne the risk of ventures failing. Ability to withstand failure is essential if people are to have the freedom to think ‘outside the box,’ for most innovations, like most new small businesses, fail. The road to success is paved with failures; if there’s no room for failure, then people – whether they work for the state or private firms – become conservative and risk averse. And again, enterprise needs patient money, for major innovations can take over a decade to turn into successful products. Market competition may help to drive innovation, but competition for quick gains is more likely to be a brake, especially on major innovation. Obsession with liquidity – with being able to sell off any fixed assets like machinery, buildings or research divisions the minute they fail to yield gains – stifles innovation in production.

4. Pure (non-working) capitalists are not entrepreneurial – they merely own the means of production and extract profit from businesses, delegating any control and direction of activities to managers, who may or may not be enterprising. Their shortterm demands may inhibit enterprising behaviour.

5. Working capitalists may or may not be enterprising: while successful innovations may make firms profitable, there are other ways of making a profit, such as squeezing labor or suppliers. (It’s a sad day when we treat wage cutting as ‘enterprising.’)

6. As American economist William J. Baumol noted, enterprise may be used in devising new forms of rent-seeking that damage rather than benefit the economy (‘unproductive entrepreneurship,’ as he called it). Rentiers may find new ways of extracting rent or interest, but while they might like to think of themselves as enterprising in this respect, they are unproductive – worse, a drain on the productive economy. All sorts of ingenious financial instruments have been designed, often by ‘quants’ – first-rate mathematicians employed by financial institutions – for valueskimming and speculation. While the quality of enterprise involves being willing to take risks, a lot of risk taking is not entrepreneurial: all sheep are animals, but not all animals are sheep. As we saw earlier, when speculators claim to be entrepreneurs because they take risks, they flatter themselves.

7. Workers may be enterprising, but their scope for realising their potential in this respect is limited by lack of money and security and restrictions on what they are allowed to do at work. Alternatively, they may fear that their bosses will take the credit (both financial and symbolic) for their enterprising activity. Those who want to develop new products and ways of doing things usually have to leave and become self-employed or set up a small business.

8. Finally, the romance of the entrepreneur is like the romance of the individual scientific genius; it is rarely simply individuals who do innovative things on their own, but more often groups or networks, and all are indebted to the accumulated knowledge and infrastructure that they inherit from their society. Wittingly or unwittingly, celebrations of ‘entrepreneurs’ in the media serve to render invisible the workers on whom they depend.