Well before writing anything, let me inform you that I am a no blogger, no celebrity, no any influential personality, no any humorist, no absolutely anyone, BUT an average Aamir Khan fan like million others.

Having said that I would like to start writing my response to demeaning article against Aamir Khan by some wannabee blogger/critic/whatever he claims himself to be, with whatever knowledge I have on the issue.

Ever since, Aamir voiced his opinion against AIB, it has created uproar online and each day, every random blogger or site is having their share of 2-minute fame by writing articles against Aamir under the garb of Freedom of Expression.

Well, is Aamir above criticism? NO !

Is Aamir always right? Of course NO !

So its fair to agree/disagree with Aamir. He is mortal and human like all of us, he’s no infallible and neither he claimed ever to be one. But you cannot deny the fact that Aamir is one of the most influential actor in history of Bollywood and in this era at least, he commands a lot of respect and credibility.

The blogger called “Heartranjan” came up with an article named “Why is Aamir Khan Such a Pretentious Prick”.. The article is very demeaning and outright nonsense, very misleading, having half-hearted attempt at healthy criticism (though I doubt he ever meant to be fair) and has very poor skill of humor and sarcasm used in it.

The Blogger starts his article by taking potshot at Aamir’s most Loved movie, Lagaan.

He writes:

Once upon a time in India, Lagaan released. The film was a smash hit, was sent as our choice for the Oscars (but couldn’t win, as the jury grew old and died during the interval) and Aamir Khan suddenly became the thinking man’s conscience.

This actually made no sense whatsoever, thought the writer wanted to poke fun at length of the movie, he somehow manages to connect it with Aamir’s conscience. Most of the Jury after the award ceremony actually came to Aamir Khan and congratulated him for Lagaan and told him that they were surprised Lagaan could not win it. All those Jury were those who had voted for Lagaan. However, if blogger had to stress the point that it was after Lagaan, he “became thinking man’s conscience”, he would have rather chosen Filmfare than Oscar, as it was in 1995-96, Aamir realized Indian magazine awards are compromised and he decided to boycott them forever. The blogger chose rather Lagaan and Oscars to poke fun at and to show the readers, “Hey look Lagaan most glorified and loved Indian movie in the world, I dont like this shit, you know I am cool”.. And it also serves his agenda to show that Aamir as “hypocrite” as he boycotted awards of his own nation and attended a foreign ceremony. Whether Oscars are any good or not is debatable and irrelevant, though no one can deny they are a lot better than a lot of Bollywood private magazine awards, which are nothing but complete mockery. Awards in Oscars are not decided by some 3-5 jury members. They have a different process and have a lot more credibility than any Indian Bollywood Award. Attempt to ridicule Lagaan is a complete fail by the blogger, Lagaan though lost to No Man’s Land, but still is more glorified and loved than the movie it lost to and got many other accolades worldwide and is listed in many “Must Watch Movie Before You Die” movies. Aamir attended Oscars only because it will put his movie on a Global platform and will have much wider reach, in which he was very successful and that is why he is today where he is.

Lagaan had no buyers or financiers whatsoever and Aamir made the movie possible. Lagaan was something impossible achieved, it had lot of obstacles while making. Thats a big achievement, but Heartranjan tries to put it down and tries to overshadow it with his cringe-worthy humor with 2-3 sentences. But fails.

Then, he continues further with his nonsense:

“The guy who would never attend film awards because he didn’t believe in them, suddenly seemed to be jumping up and down the red carpet, promoting his film. But of course, he was doing it for the nation.”

This is misleading and untrue. Aamir never said he does not believe in awards. This is the view he held on popular bollywood awards and this is what he had said actually:

“fact is that I have no objections to film awards per se. I just feel that if I don’t value a particular film award, then I won’t attend it either. Apart from the National Film Awards, I don’t see any other award ceremony that I should give value to. My personal experience about these award ceremonies is that I don’t trust them. I have no faith in them so I would prefer to stay away.“

Had Aamir did not believe in awards, he would have never attended awards ceremony like “Gollapudi Srinivas Award” which are not popular, but for a cynical and prejudiced “prick” like Heartranjan, this would still mean he is being “pretentious” by attending these least known events to prove himself “different”. Aamir boycotting any award he does not believe in is in complete harmony with one’s freedom of choice. It is like, you go out for a shopping to particular shopping outlet but suddenly “you” realize, the quality of products sold in that outlet is poor and they are compromised, and then you have no problem going to another outlet where “you” think, they sell good and genuine products. This is exactly case with Aamir when he viewed Bollywood vs Oscar awards. Aamir never stopped anyone from attending them, neither criticized them, nor encouraged others to boycott them. There are lot of others celebs too who dont attend awards, but their movies have not gone to Oscars, so its easy to pick on Aamir and call him “Prick” and “Hypocrite” .. He has issues with private award shows in general, not the awards itself. But Heartranjan’s heart floats in his own Solar System.

Aamir had even denied to get waxed at Madame Tussauds, simply because he felt, “its not important” for him, but still that would mean very “pretentious” to some because other celebs did get waxed and have no problem. If those getting waxed their respective statues they wont become greedy or fame hungry, and Aamir definitely wont become pretentious by denying it. Its called “freedom of choice”. But only cynics find issue out of non-issues.

Continuing his further whining:

When Lagaan lost out to No Man’s Land, Aamir Khan told the press that the other film deserved to win. When I saw it, said Khan, I knew that it was better than ours. From that moment on, Aamir Khan has somehow projected and marketed himself as the voice of the nation/youth/continent/solar system.. And it’s fucking annoying..

I don’t remember when and where Aamir actually said it. Also, Aamir never spoke on behalf of his nation, youth, continent, solar system, not even once. Whatever Aamir has ever spoken, he has always been very clear about his views and has always confined them to himself. If anything is “Fucking Annoying” here is Heartranjan’s mysterious vile against Aamir and his attempt to portray Aamir as someone which Aamir never showed himself as. If anything is “Fucking Annoying” here, its the blogger’s cynical hallucinations that he presented to us in form an article and made an image of Aamir in his “fucking annoying” mind and wants us to believe in it, just because he thinks he is cool and Aamir is pretentious and its because he thinks Aamir represents our solar system and he is “fucking annoyed” with it.

He further rants:

Alright, so he chooses to do one movie at a time, reads his scripts, and does extensive preparation for it. But all that is fucking expected from an actor in the first place. Just because ours is a hare-brained industry, doesn’t make someone a goddamn Socrates.

So whats the issue in it? Did Aamir claim himself that since I do only a movie per year, I am Socrates? Most of the actors were confined to their comfort zones when Aamir dared to try something riskier (per Indian standards) and achieved success in it, he was the trend-setter and whole industry, fans and critics alike acknowledge this fact. But its “Fucking Annoying” to Heartranjan because in his imaginary “Solar System/Continent”, its pretentious of Aamir, even though he never claimed to be all of these as his achievements.

And sir, Heartranjan Ji, you are trying to put down his work, dedication and his movies as nothing great by saying it is a job of an actor. Of course, it is, but how many actors succeed in that? Aamir has edge over there, he has sold even his offbeats and unorthodox movies well than others. Your saying is like, if some painter painted a beautiful painting and you are ranting against it, whats so big deal about it, a painter’s job is to paint. Maybe in your Solar System, appreciation for doing commendable job, better than others largely, does not exist. You know why Aamir survived for 25 years in the Industry and on what his stardom and influence thrives on?? His movies.

He writes further:

A few months before the release of Rang De Basanti, Aamir Khan sat with the Narmada Bachao Andolan protesters to speak up for their rights. Since then, there has been no word of his involvement with the issue whatsoever.

Heartranjan should “fucking” get his homework and research done properly. Rang De Basanti released in January 2006 and “a few months before release of RDB” means it will be in 2005.. Aamir issued a statement about Narmada Bachao Andolan after release of RDB and it was before Fanaa and not RDB. It had nothing to do with the timing. In a democratic country like India, his movie was banned in state of Gujarat and Aamir was okay with it and he compensated YRF (Yash Raj Film) who were producers of Fanaa, with his own fee. If anyone has to be criticized here, is the Guj Govt for not ensuring free and smooth run of Fanaa in a democracy like India and not Aamir himself for just speaking out for a cause he believed in. Ironically, Heartranjan knowingly or unknowingly ignored the injustice meted out against Aamir’s freedom of expression but instead is “fucking annoyingly” hurt that Aamir spoke for Narmada’s cause. Well, Mr. Heartranjan does not care for AIB’s FoE either, he is just “fuckingly” annoyed with Indian Tom Hanks. (Let me call Tom Hanks, Aamir of Hollywood). I hope it does not annoy our Heartranjan who hails from different “Solar System”. In Heartranjan’s “Fucking Annoying Solar System”, its pretentious to speak up for a cause and it is okay to ban a movie of an actor who was just using his FoE.

And unlike other stars who are shy to comment on any controversial issues, Aamir had guts to speak up for the cause: “I am saying exactly what the Supreme Court has said. I only asked for rehabilitation of poor farmers. I never spoke against the construction of the dam. I will not apologise for my comments on the issue,”

You can read Aamir’s complete interview here: http://www.rediff.com/movies/2006/may/25aamir1.htm

Even in this interview, Aamir has clearly spoken about “Freedom of Expression” and has always spoken for himself and not his nation, youth, continent, solar system, as Heartranjan “fucking annoyingly” thinks.

Seems like the blogger was in hurry to just write anything for the heck of it and get maximum attention to his blog. Sigh!

Heartranjan continues with his “Fucking annoying” crap:

He then made a film on Mangal Pandey, and has been on a Bhagat Singh trip since, telling the nation what’s right, and what’s offensive. In Taare Zameen Par, he showed us how we are all a cruel, insensitive nation that doesn’t know how to deal with special children. In 3 Idiots, he showed us what is wrong with our education system. In PK, he showed us the problems with religion and godmen.

I dont know how is Bhagat Singh and Mangal Pandey are related to each other. And No “fucking annoying” idea what blogger wants to say..

About TZP, it had a lot of impact, not just in India, but even abroad. The International Dyslexia Association screened Taare Zameen Par on 29 October 2008 in Seattle, Washington and it got very heartwarming response.

In his article “Taare Zameen Par and dyslexic savants” featured in the Annals of Indian Academy of Neurology, Ambar Chakravarty noted the general accuracy of Ishaan’s dyslexia. He spoke about the condition and hailed the movie.

In other articles “Wake up call from ‘Stars on the Ground'” for the Indian Journal of Psychiatry, T. S. Sathyanarayana Rao and V. S. T. Krishna wrote that the film “deserves to be vastly appreciated as an earnest endeavor to portray with sensitivity and empathetically diagnose a malady in human life”. They also wrote: “This film raises serious questions on mental health perspectives. We seem to be heading to a state of mass scale mindlessness even as children are being pushed to ‘perform’.”

Public response too was overwhelming for TZP:

The film raised awareness of the issue of dyslexia, and prompted more open discussions among parents, schools, activists, and policymakers. Anjuli Bawa, a parent-activist and founder of Action Dyslexia Delhi, said that the number of parents who visit her office increased tenfold in the months following the film’s release. Many began taking a more proactive approach by contacting her after noticing problems, rather than using her as a last resort. Gupte himself received “many painful letters and phone calls” from Indian parents. He noted, “Fathers weep on the phone and say they saw the film and realized that they have been wrong in the way they treated their children. This is catharsis.”

These reactions have also brought about a change in policies. The film, only ten days after its debut, influenced the Central Board of Secondary Education to provide extra time to special children—including the visually impaired, physically challenged and dyslexic—during exams. In 2008, Mumbai’s civic body also opened 12 classrooms for autistic students. In Chandigarh, the education administration started a course to educate teachers on how to deal with children with learning disabilities.

So, I ask Heartranjan, which movie had such an impact and tell me why any nation/continent or even Solar System will not be respectful and admiring of Aamir Khan for being such influential personality, film industry in particular? 3 idiots and PK too had similar impacts and that is the sole reason why Aamir stands out from others. His movies are his strength. But of course it does not mean you should agree to whatever he says. Likewise, you should not go on to write he is “pretentious prick” just because he does not fit into your imaginary solar system, like the one of Heartranjan’s.

Heartranjan even has problem if Aamir featured in Incredible India Ads and even finds him pretentious in those ads “Aamir Khan tells the nation to be nice to foreigners. Aamir Khan tells the nation to be nice to foreigners.”

What exactly is Heartranjan’s problem, did he expect Aamir to tell in the ad to kick/punch/rape/rob/bully/harass foreigners? Eh? But Aamir is pretentious you know. Why? Because Heartranjan’s Heart says so. And sir, your highness, Heartrajan Ji, Aamir did not make the ad on his own, he was roped in by Govt.. Why? Because Aamir can make impact. Of course, though not in your solar system.

While it would be very lengthy to put all ranting of Heartranjan and quoting his baseless whining, I would shorten his arguments and try to give them a reply.

Heart Ranjan has problem with:

“I also have no problem with him projecting himself as this new-age Carl Shehnanigan who tells the nation how to live”

Yet, you fail to show where Aamir actually asked nation how to live?

“Aamir Khan is a perfectionist. Why? Because he undergoes a physical transformation for every role (which, as any theatre actor will tell you, is the fucking basic thing to do”

Heartranjan has problem even if Aamir undergoes into physical transformation and reminds us that its basic thing to do as an actor. Well, yeah, it is. So? Did Aamir or anyone else claimed only Aamir undergoes extensive physical training for his roles? But yes, he keeps changing his looks and is not confined to do same kind of roles everytime, thats why he got the word “Perfectionist” and being “Versatile”. Heartranjan should rather ask those who gave Aamir that title, his vile against Aamir makes no sense when Aamir himself never boasted about his physical transformations or perfectionist tag.

Aamir Khan is a socially aware star. How? Because he blogs about issues.

FYI, Aamir stopped blogging 4 years ago.

So Aamir Khan, the ever-aware thinking man’s Gautam Buddha slipped out of character and blogged about Shah Rukh Khan licking his toes while he sat on his table.

Well, Aamir stated a fact. There was indeed a dog named after SRK, but not by him, his farmhouse caretakers who named the dog SRK out of love after he had shot some biscuit ad near that location. Aamir exploited it and blogged about it. Of course, it hurt many SRK fans, including his kids, but SRK too had share of digs at Aamir. Aamir for the 1st time decided to take a dig, it turned out to be rude, but he apologized to his kids and his fans. This incident is nothing but proves that Aamir is a human like us. It anyhow does not mean, he has no right to speak about AIB. You grow and learn as a person everyday, Aamir is no exception.

My only problem is with Aamir Khan’s opinions on other artists. You see, Mr. Perfectionist doesn’t give a fuck about other artists. His work is sublime and pure and unadulterated and heavenly. The rest can go fuck themselves.

He never claimed so. Neither did he criticized any other artist. Aamir is the only actor who always has clarity in his views. Aamir claims he works in a movie which has script that appeals to him or impresses him. You should have problem if Aamir goes onto say, I only work in movies which have good scripts. He always maintains, if he loves a certain script/story, he likes to do it irrespective of its outcome. If they turn out to be good ones largely, its not Aamir’s problem. People see his movies because they trust him. Its not like Aamir forces his audience to call his movies better than others.

IMDB lists 6 Aamir movies in Top 250 movies of the world. These are the only Indian movies in the list. All Aamir Khan movies is not a mere co-incident. Its testimony to the fact that he is in league of his own. But heartranjan has “Fucking annoying” problem even with that. One thing is for sure I guess, all those voted for these movies are from this Solar System, unlike our Heartranjan whose heart is ever-aching for Aamir and is living in his own Solar System.

Heartranjan then rakes up issue of CB: Bhagat wasn’t given opening credits.

Well, why should he be given opening credits when the contract said he will be giving rolling credits and CB – your Rakhi Sawant of literature, read and signed on it and then all of a sudden raked up an issue out of nowhere demanding his name on opening credits?

Aamir was not wrong in saying what he said to Chetan Bhagat. The sale of Five Pointe Someone went high after the controversy, though I will not say CB intended to shoot up the sales by raking up the issue. In my Solar System, it does not matter to me. It is irrelevant.

And for Heartranjan’s other bullshit about Delhi Belly and all that nonsense, I would like to share this article from another fellow Aamir fan who clearly speaks about Delhi Belly vs AIB and differentiates them without any bias unlike this wannabee “Prick” Heartranjan, who finds everything pretentious and sinful in Aamir’s gestures and actions:

Link for DB vs AIB: http://bhaskar8883.blogspot.in/2015/02/about-criticism-aamir-facing-for.html?m=0

Also, Aamir produced Delhi Belly does not mean he has no fucking right to speak on AIB, especially when he was asked about it and also Heartranjan seems to have not seen the actual complete video where Aamir spoke about it.

I suggest him to watch the complete, uncut 40-minute video, Aamir spoke about other topics too and it was not just AIB for heaven’s sake. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uEoLPc5yPWQ

Aamir did not ask for a ban on AIB. Aamir did not say AIB should be stopped. He also said he does not support those who are criticizing them just for the heck of it and being harsh on them without any valid reason. Aamir just said, we should be a little careful while using our share of FoE. He spoke about verbal violence. He need not to see the whole episode as it was most filthiest and offensive stage show ever in India involving many noted personalities. He clearly said more he would see, more disturbing it will be.

Also, please note Aamir did acknowledge the fact that many youngsters enjoyed it and he also said “Who I am I to ask anyone or tell anyone on how they should conduct themselves?” But Heartrajan, his holiness, did not watch Aamir’s video response completely and cashed on the controversy and exploited the whole clamorous controversy of this AIB vs Aamir. Just like we say it, “Behti Ganga Mein Haat Dhona”

And less we talk about Russell Peters, the better it is. Anyhow, here sharing an article or open letter by Subhash K Jha to Rusell’s “SHUT UP” on Aamir: http://skjbollywoodnews.com/2015/02/shut-russell-peters/4126526.html

Aamir even spoke about Delhi Belly. Had he been pretentious as the blogger claimed, he woud have avoided the question itself and could have avoided speaking about DB. Also, comparing AIB with Delhi Belly is totally absurd as it did not involve real people. AIB founders have tweeted some outrageous things such as “Kids enjoying rape”, “Masturbating on Breast Cancer Ads”..But in Heartranjan’s Solar System, its Freedom of Expression but Aamir asking to be a little careful becomes “Hypocrite” and “Pretentious”.

And you know Aamir is an alien who has no right on using his share of FoE as per Heartranjan, and according to him, just because:

He produced DB

He supported Narmada Bachao Andolan

He went to Oscars

He came up with a show like Satyameva Jayate,

He does not attend Indian Magazine Award shows

He does a movie per year

He undergoes Physical Transformation

He features in Incredible India Ads. Phew !

I only ask one thing to this wannabee “Prick”, Heartranjan, which “fuckingly annoying” solar system are you from?

My response would be enough or not, at least I tried my best to answer all his ranting and baseless and irrelevant arguments against Aamir. I used my freedom of expression and as a fan, as he did it while he wrote the article, I thought I should though I am not cool and as witty as his highness, Heartranjan. I dont know if Heartranjan’s reads it, I am not sure if this would reach his “Solar System” and he has time to read a fan’s view and not come up with another article calling Aamir fans as fucking annoying pretentious pricks because we serve no purpose to his agenda of being cool or hate Aamir for whatever he does and find all his gestures fucking annoying and come up with mindless and misleading articles.

You agree or disagree with Aamir, its your choice. As said earlier, Aamir is not infallible. But at least don’t vilify him just because he has hurt your fat egos that are floating on “Freedom of Expression” that you think only you have the right on and Aamir has no right to utilize it.

There should be healthy criticism against someone of Aamir’s caliber. No, we are not asking special treatment for him, but his 25 year old career as an actor has some credibility and various achievements and it deserves a bit of respect even in criticism. You are no random rival actor fan who can just call him whatever you want. People admire him and he has a worldwide recognition and following. By simply calling him prick, hypocrite, bias, and other words wont make your argument valid or any good. Aamir is certainly not above criticism, but be relevant and neutral in your criticism. Aamir shared his opinion as a gentleman but those who are bashing him really have no standards with choices of their words and tone they are unleashing on him. But yes, we have evolved a lot, its freedom of expression and a New Cool. So be it, anyways.

Aamir has right to give his opinion and if you think he is being hypocritical, come up with valid arguments instead of painting all his gestures with same brush of “hypocrisy” and call them all as pretentious just because your cynical mind blabbered so.

And sir, Heartranjan, please get over it, why pick on insignificant issues like AIB when Aamir, during the conference, discussed about much more important and significant problems that country is facing. Please watch it and see the clarity Aamir has on all the topics. Tell me which mainstream actor of his generation or any actor in general puts views as clear as Aamir. For God’s sake, there is world beyond AIB. Why such uproar and outrage over Aamir’s harmless opinions and such rude and heartless bashing of all his movies, pattern of work, gestures and causes he supported in the past? Anyhow, you succeeded in what you wanted, you got maximum reach and in your blog, article against Aamir got maximum hits and comments if I am not wrong. I congratulate you for that and effort you put in to malign Aamir, but he has always emerged victorious against his cynics, simply because he is man of integrity. He is brutally honest man and when he speaks, he speaks for himself and not “solar system” as you think.

And Mr. Heartrajan, come on, you are not witty or funny; next time, please try something constructive and pick on Aamir on relevant issues. Even, we as his fans, don’t shy out to point out errors in him. Though we appreciate you never bought his personal family issues and marital issues while most of those who hate Aamir attack him personally for his divorce and family dispute, which are resolved matters and he is living in harmony and is in good relationship with them and fond of them as they are fond of him equally. Respect is mutual. And yes, next time, also please come out of your imaginary Solar System where Aamir is a demi-god and then you go onto prove he is mere mortal. Yes, he is like all of us, but only you tried to show him as a demi-god and you started a revolution by writing an article to show that he is a wrong number, when neither Aamir nor his fans or admirers ever claimed Aamir to be Mr. All-Knowing and Right always. Please calm down and I suggest you come back to the real solar system, because yours is literally “fuckingly annoying”.

Height of cynicism, Heartranjan ji even has problem with Aamir drinking water during Youth for Governance conference and finding loopholes even in that. Sigh !

Thanks for reading such a long response, if at all anyone read it. And not everyone has to agree with this response. To each his own. Apologies for any grammatical errors, I am not a regular writer and not trying to be one either.

Written by blogger dhoomwithme