Covered California Sign-Up Events State officials have set a goal of signing up, by March 31, 35,692 San Bernardino County residents for health insurance under Covered California, an insurance exchange resulting from the health care act. As of Dec. 31, the county has reached 16,057, 45 percent of the total, the lowest percentage among figures available Monday. To boost sign-ups in San Bernardino and Riverside counties, two events have been scheduled. Feb. 20 and 21: 9 a.m. to 4 p.m., San Bernardino Valley College, 701 South Mount Vernon Ave., San Bernardino. Feb. 15: 8 a.m. to 5 p.m., Moreno Valley College, 16130 Lasselle St., Moreno Valley. — Staff report

With San Bernardino County lagging in terms of sign-ups for Obamacare, state officials say they have launched a new recruiting focus to reach more potential enrollees there and in neighboring Riverside County.

During the first three months of a six-month enrollment push, San Bernardino County met 45 percent of the enrollment goal, while the state overall reached 86 percent.

“Due to the geographic challenge in the Inland Empire and the difficult-to-reach rural areas, Covered California has initiated a regional focus to enhance enrollment opportunities,” said Edith Lara-Trad, Covered California regional public information officer.

Covered California is a marketplace, created by the state as part of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, for people and small businesses to buy health insurance and find out if they are eligible for financial assistance to do so.

Of those counties that were reported Monday, San Bernardino County was last, with 45 percent of the initial six-month goal reached, Fresno County was at 47 percent, while Riverside County was 58 percent.

The three-month total for the combined two-county region represents 52 percent of the base projection.

Los Angeles County was at the 74 percent level, while Orange and San Diego counties have already exceeded their target goals for the first six-month push which ends March 31, according to the Covered California report.

In the first three months — October through December — the state has signed up 16,057 San Bernardino County residents for health care insurance under the exchange and needs to reach another 19,635 by March 31 to meet its plan.

“I am confident we can achieve that,” Lara-Trad said, adding that the improvement plan includes a heightened focus on reaching Spanish-speaking residents and young residents — those under age 30.

On that path, sign-up drives are scheduled at San Bernardino Valley College and in Moreno Valley later this month.

Officials at the San Bernardino County Community Clinic Association, which received a grant to hire staff to assist with the Obamacare educational outreach, could not be reached for comment.

Ultimately, about 250,000 San Bernardino County residents will gain health insurance under the 2013 Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, said Dr. Bradley Gilbert, CEO of the Rancho Cucamonga-based Inland Empire Health Plan, which manages care contracts for Medi-Cal patients.

Advertisement

This number is for both expanded Medi-Cal and from Covered California.

“It’s good that this is being spread out. We would have trouble accommodating everyone at once,” he said Monday.