WASHINGTON–Sen. Ted Cruz once looked up to Supreme Court Chief Justice John Roberts and called him the best litigator at the highest court in the land.

Now Cruz is imagining a world in which Roberts was never appointed and the Supreme Court struck down the Affordable Care Act.

While addressing the conservative Eagle Forum’s conference in St. Louis on Saturday, Cruz talked about what he thinks would have happened if former President George W. Bush skipped over Roberts, and if Bush’s father never picked retired justice David Souter.

“If instead of David Souter and John Roberts, the Presidents Bush had nominated Edith Jones and Mike Luttig, Obamacare would have been struck down three years ago, and the marriage laws of every state would still be on the books,” said Cruz, according to video from a liberal tracking group.

width=”560″ height=”315″ src=”https://www.youtube.com/embed/Cw1iADEI_xI” frameborder=”0″ allowfullscreen>

Jones is a judge on the Fifth Circuit Court of Appeals, which covers Texas. Luttig retired from the Fourth Circuit Court of Appeals in 2006.

Cruz asked Roberts to serve on the legal team that helped Bush secure the 2000 presidential election, and the senator modeled his argument style after the judge.

But after Roberts wrote the opinion preserving a key part of the Affordable Care Act in June, Cruz accused him of violating his oath and implied he should resign.

“[Roberts] knows full well that what he did in both of those decisions was not faithfully applied the law but it was to alter the law, to change the law in order to achieve a policy outcome,” Cruz told BuzzFeed in June, also referencing Roberts’ deciding vote in the 2012 case that upheld the Affordable Care Act.

“If members of the court want to write legislation or rewrite it they should resign from the court and run for the Congress,” said Cruz.

Cruz, a 2016 presidential candidate, called the Supreme Court’s summer decisions on Obamacare and same-sex marriage “a decent into lawlessness” and suggested judicial retention elections.

But when CNN’s Jake Tapper asked Cruz how he’d vote on Roberts, the senator demurred.

“One step at a time,” said Cruz.