Sen. Rand Paul (R-Ky.) let loose on President Obama Tuesday at the University of South Carolina, going into candidate mode in using some of his strongest language yet to condemn the president’s dismissal of constitutional forms and the rule of law.

“The president says that ‘if Congress won’t act, I must.’ That sounds like what you hear from a Third World autocrat. That doesn’t sound like someone who believes in a Republic and rule of law,” Paul told a small student audience.

“‘If Congress won’t act, I will?’ Congress is too messy for him. Democracy is too messy for him so he’s just going to do whatever the hell he wants.”

Don’t hold back, senator.

Paul was referring to Obama’s general reliance on fiat rule at the expense of constitutional checks and balances, but his remarks were intended as a direct criticism of the president’s unilateral action to mount a military response to ISIS.

“I think we should do something [about ISIS], but the president is going about it the wrong way,” he said.

“That worries me and it should worry all of us. And it hasn’t been just with war powers. It’s been with immigration, it’s been with healthcare. He’s acted outside the law and we have basically a constitutional confrontation now between an overbearing and arrogant executive who doesn’t believe in the law and a Congress that hasn’t really stepped up to enforce the law.”

Breitbart, which periodically posts exclusive opinion columns penned by the GOP presidential hopeful, had access to Paul following the speech, and learned that the political left is paying enough attention to Paul’s message to send their partisan paparazzi to his speaking engagements — in the hope of collecting attack fodder:

At the event, Paul communications director Sergio Gor told Breitbart News three leftwing trackers-political operatives who wield video cameras to record statements to attack their political opponents-were present: one from the Democratic National Committee (DNC), another from pro-Hillary Clinton operative David Brock-run group American Bridge and another from a local leftwing group.

Paul said the extra attention stems, in part, from his cross-party appeal as a candidate who’s willing to distance himself from establishment GOP positions he considers stagnant or harmful. “I think they fear me because I am outside the mold and I will attract Democrats and Independents and that I can create new constituencies that would allow the Republican Party to win again,” he said.

Paul’s comments came as part of a far-ranging speech that touched not only on foreign policy, but also on domestic surveillance, student loans, civil liberties and, of course, the Fed.

“I’m going to keep pushing for a vote on audit the Fed, and this is the second time I think it’s passed the House and it passed with what 350 votes? There’s overwhelming bipartisan support for it,” Paul said, according to Breitbart.