There have been great baseball-themed movies, including several that drew attention on previous Academy Awards nights. Of course, many were fairy tales, whether masquerading as truth, pseudo-truth (“based on a true story”) or otherwise.

The challenge in making a theatrical- release film that truly captures baseball today is that it would have to run 3 hours and 2 minutes. That’s horrifying to theater operators, studios and much of the potential audience.

That was the average length of a major-league game in 2014.

An average MLB game is not “The Right Stuff” (3:13), “The Godfather: Part II” (3:20) or “The Deer Hunter” (3:02), terrific films that probably left much on the cutting-room floor.

An average MLB game of this era is — and this is being nice — a decent, yet bloated film running 3:02, leaving you fidgeting and spotting the obvious spots for cuts. Plus, the problem with using “average” is that many games ran longer, much longer — and don’t tell me that shorter games mitigated the aggravation. They didn’t.

After an offseason of study and more radical experimentation in the Arizona Fall League, MLB’s Friday announcement of modest measures to address the issue already has some players whining. It’s as if they’re incredulously asking: What problem?

Brace for more outrage from those who wax melodic about the beauty of the absence of a time clock in baseball, about its natural rhythms. These are the same folks — many from my generation — who routinely overintellectualize and romanticize the game, actually insulting it by not allowing it to be what it truly is.

It is a terrific game diminished, not enhanced, by the increasingly languid pace. The running time is just part of the problem. If a game, played at a reasonable pace, goes “long” as an outgrowth of what happens as it is being played, fair enough. But too much of the lengthening of the games is the result of the gradual acceptance of contrived, avoidable delays. Of preening. Of gamesmanship. And even of the nonenforcement of existing rules involving the pace of the game. It all has been allowed into the game’s culture, because baseball permitted it.

Thankfully for Coloradans, one of the measures MLB will try is that hitters generally must keep one foot in the batter’s box between pitches.

Troy Tulowitzki is a great player, but his at-bats are tortuous to watch … granted, until the payoff for one of the best hitters in the game. Step out. Unstrap, restrap the batting gloves. Play with the helmet. On alternating pitches, either recite James Earl Jones’ “Field of Dreams” soliloquy or hum a verse of John Fogerty’s “Centerfield.” (OK, I made that up. But it just seems like it.) And then step back in.

Tulo is far from alone in his approach, but he’s the worst transgressor.

Josh Beckett was his pitching equivalent, and watching a Beckett vs. Jorge De La Rosa matchup at Dodger Stadium meant most Los Angeles fans would be back on the 101 Freeway by the fourth inning.

Granted, some modern realities make inevitable longer games than in the days of yore. Those include more pitching changes and video review, a positive step if allowed to be tweaked along the way. Breaks after every half inning are jammed with revenue enhancers.

The use of a clock to monitor pitching changes and those between-inning breaks will horrify purists, I suppose, but imagine if the 20-second pitch clock used in the Arizona Fall League had been implemented too. (A clock! In baseball!) Yet if these three modest measures help at all directly, and just as important, chip away at the mind-set that made them necessary, it’s a significant step forward for the game.

Nine innings don’t have to be an epic.

Terry Frei: tfrei@denverpost.com or twitter.com/TFrei