West Henderson's Falcon Frenzy will hit the mats for the 18th time on Friday evening.

The tournament will kick off at 6 p.m. and a huge field of 28 teams will be wrestling on six different mats. This year teams are coming from North Carolina, South Carolina and Tennessee to wrestle their way to the monster mat on Saturday afternoon.

Teams this year include West Henderson, North Henderson, East Henderson, Hendersonville, Brevard, Rosman, Polk County, A.C. Reynolds, Asheville School, Charlotte Latin, Dobyns-Bennett (Tenn.), East Rutherford, Elizabethton (Tenn.), Erwin, Gibbs (Tenn.), Riverside (S.C.), Hardin Valley Academy (Tenn.), Madison, McDowell, North Buncombe, Owen, Pigeon Forge (Tenn.), Pisgah, Robbinsville, T.C. Roberson and Tuscola.

“We should have a really solid lineup this year,” Jeff Smith, West athletic director, said.

The tournament has grown steadily through the years, Smith said, and a lot of it is by reputation from the coaches that bring their teams every year.

“A lot of it is word of mouth,” Smith said. “(The coaches) talk. Once we get them here and they see it, we keep them.”

Smith takes pride in the amount of alumni support and help that the tournament uses every year as former wrestlers and their parents return to help the event.

The tournament is for both varsity and junior varsity wrestlers, Smith said, which is another selling point. Then there are the finals on Saturday night. The wrestlers get to wrestle under the mat lamp in a dark gymnasium on the monster mat, which is 56 feet by 67 feet with a 46-foot wrestling circle.

In the end, though, the tournament's main draw is the competition. Teams come in and get to wrestle against wrestlers and teams that they wouldn't generally get to face off against, Smith said.

“Our goal has always been to bring a variety of teams together,” the athletic director said. “Teams you wouldn't normally see. They love the variety of competition.”

All of that mixed together is a recipe that West hopes bleeds across the high school sport.

“Our goal is to set the bar,” Smith said.