A 24 Films

When Amy Winehouse died of alcohol poisoning in 2011, she left behind just two albums, her 2003 debut “Frank” and 2006’s Grammy-award winning album “Back to Black.” Though her catalog was still in its infancy, her mark on pop culture was felt world-wide. At the time of her death, she was a global household name, both for her artistry and as a tabloid fixture.

Read More: ‘Amy’ Director Asif Kapadia on Finding Amy Winehouse’s Voice

This week, Winehouse’s rise to pop stardom is chronicled in the new movie “Amy,” which opens nationwide after hitting theaters in New York City and Los Angeles last Friday. The movie comes from director Asif Kapadia (“Senna”), who chronicles Winehouse’s life through a multitude of home videos and archival footage, dating back to her teen years and all the way up through her final days.

Whether you’re a longtime or casual fan, “Amy” will alter your perception about her life and work. Here are five things to expect.

1. There are no talking heads

Most documentaries use a standard formula of showing clips of the subject, with cutaways to experts or people close to the subject weighing in. “Amy” doesn’t do that. Instead, Kapadia tells the story through Winehouse and her friends, family, the media, and her record-business associates interacting with her on camera. And it’s not hard to find a narrative. Key moments captured on film show how she went from rising singer to drug-addicted celebrity and the emotional toll it took on her.

2. Amy’s humanized

Part of Kapadia’s mission is to give Winehouse a voice before she was famous. In doing so, it’s easy to see she was outgoing, bubbly, and from the looks of it, a fun person to be around; someone who loved singing and took a shot at it. She tells jokes, bites back at bad interviewer questions, and spend most of her waking hours honing her voice.

3. Fame sucks

The end of Winehouse’s life was heavily covered by the tabloids, making her a punchline for late-night TV hosts and a cautionary tale for other up-and-coming musicians. Have you ever wondered what it’s like to be truly famous to a point where you can’t walk out the door without thousands of flashlight bulbs going off in your face or go to a remote island for a vacation without a random fan wanting a picture? “Amy” gives insight into how she lived day-to-day with this and why it was a part of her downfall.

4. Addiction sucks

Everyone knew that Winehouse had a hard time staying sober and “Amy” paints a picture of exactly just how hard her struggle was. It was very hard. She tried rehab facilities (which of course became a punchline, after her hit song “Rehab”) and tried avoiding the public eye. For those who have little experience with someone struggling with addiction, “Amy” gives insight into this world in a way we typically don’t see.

5. In the end, music was still her first love

With all her struggles with substances and fame, in the end Winehouse still loved music. One of the most interesting and endearing scenes involves a session she did with Tony Bennett, just a few months before she died. She was just as nervous as someone entering a recording booth for the first time, doing take after take until she felt it was right. Bennett was a class-act through the whole thing.

Read More: ‘Amy,’ an Artist at War With Herself