Brian Tanquilut, Senior Vice President, Healthcare Services Equity Research, Jefferies & Co., at Nashville Health Care Council's "Wall Street’s View on Prospects for the Health Care Industry" panel in Nashville on Jan. 21. (Photo: Donn Jones for Nashville Health Care Council)

When Wayne Smith, chairman and CEO of Community Health Systems, asked a panel of health care industry analysts to predict which state would be next to expand Medicaid, he found himself on the other side the question.

"When is Tennessee going to do it?" quipped Andy Schenker, a Morgan Stanley vice president of research, in response to Smith's lightning round question at “Wall Street’s View on Prospects for the Health Care Industry," hosted by the Nashville Health Care Council.

Smith, conceding that as the moderator he walked into that, asked the health care industry analysts to weigh in on the Volunteer state.

"When is our legislature going to start thinking seriously about, you know, reform that would help the overall health of the population of Tennessee?” he asked.

The response: No time soon.

“You have the legislature that just didn’t want to do anything. It will take a long time to change the makeup of the legislature,” said Brian Tanquilut, senior vice president of healthcare in Nashville for Jefferies & Co.

The Affordable Care Act earmarked federal funds for states to use to expand Medicaid for those who fall into the coverage gap between traditional Medicaid and buying subsidized health insurance on the federally run exchange.

Tennesseans earning less than 138 percent of the federal poverty level — roughly $16,000 a year for an individual and $27,000 for a family of three — but who do not qualify for TennCare would be eligible for Insure Tennessee, Gov. Bill Haslam's plan to use Medicaid funding to expand coverage.

The legislature killed the proposal despite Haslam being a national leader in negotiating with federal officials for approval on a plan specifically designed for the state.

Insure Tennessee is a two-tiered plan, including a voucher for those with access to employer-sponsored insurance and coverage via the Healthy Incentives Plan for those without access to employer-sponsored plans. Haslam unveiled it in December 2014 and it died quickly in February in a special session in the legislature, and again in regular session.

Haslam got approval for "a really good plan," as described by Tanquilut, around the time Indiana received approval for its proposal.

Medicaid expansion has weighed on the health care industry as it would lead to more people having some sort of coverage when they go to the hospital or the doctor. Hospital operators — including Community Health Systems, HCA and LifePoint Health — have mentioned the uncertainty around Medicaid expansion in financial filings as a factor that could impact their business.

The flexibility U.S. Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services has shown so far will help other states decide whether to take the moneyon the table, said Schenker.

Louisiana announced this week it would expand, which panelists agreed might shore up support in other politically red states, particularly if a Democrat wins the White House in November. Virginia and Florida — and possibly Alabama, per RBC Capital's Frank Morgan — were predicted to be among the next that might take the expansion route.

Chris Rigg, senior managed care and health care services research analyst, Susquehanna International Group, speaks during Nashville Health Care Council's panel on "Wall Street’s View on Prospects for the Health Care Industry." (Photo: Donn Jones)

"I actually believe if Hillary (Clinton) wins then Florida could tip," said Chris Rigg, senior managed care and health care services research analyst at Susquehanna International Group.

But the presidential election looms and states would be prudent to wait for the outcome, according to panelists.

Right now the federal government has agreed to put in 90 percent of the costs but begins to phase out in 2017. In Tennessee, hospitals across the state agreed to an assessment as a way to fund the remaining 10 percent so the state would not have to contribute to the program.

"If you look out more than just a couple of years with a Republican president, and a Republican congress and they need to save money, a very easy way to do that is to push more costs to the states," said Rigg. "You know what you have know but you don’t know what you are going to have five to 10 years from now."

Reach Holly Fletcher at 615-259-8287 and on Twitter @hollyfletcher.

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/1Vcoy3D