Hillary Clinton's favorability is sliding back into political orbit, a result of a sustained public presence over the last month that has amplified scrutiny and heightened criticism of her record.

Quinnipiac University measured Clinton's favorability at 48 percent, down 8 points since last October and down a full 13 points since her peak of popularity after leaving President Barack Obama's administration in February 2013.

It's a trend that was inevitable for the former secretary of State, who has re-emerged as a largely political figure as she hawks her book and opens herself up to hundreds of questions about everything from the tragedy in Benghazi to who she'd like to see play her in a movie. Other polls have found similar slippage, but the Quinnipiac survey is the first in recent memory to show her favorability under the 50 percent marker.

[READ: Hillary Clinton Has Answer for Hobby Lobby, Not Income Inequality]

Clinton's favorability gap is only 5 points now, with 43 percent viewing her in an unfavorable light. Compare that to just last October when her net favorability gap was 20 points.

It appears that self-described independents have caused Clinton's fall from grace. She's upside down with that critical group, with just 41 percent seeing her favorably and 47 percent viewing her unfavorably.

She still treks far ahead of the Republican field who remain largely unknown to a sizable segment of the population. Rep. Paul Ryan, R-Wis., has the best ratio, with a 36 percent favorable rating and 33 percent unfavorable.

New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie is one point better at 37 percent favorability, but also shoulders a higher unfavorable rating than Ryan at 38 percent.

[ALSO: Is 'Hillary Fatigue' Setting In?]

On Sen. Rand Paul, R-Ky., the country is divided at 32 percent each.

Clinton remains atop the 2016 presidential field for the Democratic nomination and leads all GOP contenders by single digits.

The battle for the 2016 GOP nomination is as muddled as it has been all year, with Paul at 11 percent and Christie, Mike Huckabee and Jeb Bush all garnering 10 percent.