Tibetan spiritual leader Ogyen Trinley Dorje offers prayers at The Mahabodhi Temple at Bodhgaya on Jan. 1, 2014. Agence France-Presse/Getty Images

A daily roundup of corruption news from across the Web. We also provide a daily roundup of important risk & compliance stories via our daily newsletter, The Morning Risk Report, which readers can sign up for here. Follow us on Twitter at @WSJRisk.

Bribery:

A Norwegian court sentenced four former top executives at Yara to prison for paying bribes in Libya and India. (Reuters)

The Australian government provided a brief on the PEP risks of foreign bribery.

A former military contractor was sentenced to 54 months in prison for paying a bribe. (DOJ)

The FCPA Blog discusses arbitration transparency. Tom Fox respects CCO authority. The FCPAProfessor looks into how Avon got its license in China. Mike Volkov explains best practices for due diligence.

Cybercrime:

The FBI seized a child pornography website and obtained data on its 215,000 users. (Reuters)

A teenager involved in series of cyberattacks was convicted for his crimes in Finland. (BBC)

Information sharing legislation has stalled in the U.S. Senate but that hasn’t stopped government and industry from collaborating on cybersecurity issues. (Federal Times)

Money Laundering:

A Tibetan monk seen as a possible successor to the Dalai Lama is to be prosecuted for money laundering after an Indian court overturned a prior decision to drop the charges. He has denied wrongdoing. (SKY, AFP)

A money-laundering sting operation led to three arrests. They didn’t appear to be contacted. (Bloomberg)

Nigerian authorities remanded several former governors to prison for money laundering. One former governor and his son were hit with 37 counts of money laundering; they didn’t appear to be contacted. In one case, Nigeria ordered the forfeiture of a former governor’s assets. (Leadership, Nigerian Tribune, Punch, Naija, This Day, Sahara Reporters)

“From Russia With Cash,” a Channel 4 documentary, shows how estate agents helped people posing as Russian criminals launder money in U.K. real estate. (Channel 4, Express, Global Witness, Daily Mail)

India emailed its summons for a former cricket body chief to appear on allegations of money laundering. Separately, authorities are unraveling a money-laundering case. (Times of India, Economic Times, The Hindu)

Sanctions:

Russian companies hit by sanctions are looking to the BRICs for help. (Financial Times)

While Iran said it made new offers in nuclear talks, Western powers were unimpressed. The talks continue amid hangups about a weapons embargo. U.S. lawmakers are powerless to stop them. But what happens if the talks falls apart? (Reuters, AP, Bloomberg, Reuters, Politico, Foreign Policy, Foreign Affairs)

Transparency:

European lawmakers approved a bill requiring public companies to list financial information on a country-by-country basis. (Reuters, Financial Transparency)

A federal judge rejected an effort by JPMorgan Chase to investigate the ownership of a Time Warner Center apartment. (NY Times)

General Anti-Corruption:

Italian police seized assets worth more than $1.77 billion from five Sicilian siblings suspected of links to the island’s Cosa Nostra mafia. There was no immediate comment from the family. (Reuters, AP)

Singapore’s central bank is cooperating with a probe into the Malaysian premier. Malaysian non-profits are trying to fight corruption. (WSJ, Reuters, Malaysian Insider)

Thailand is setting up an inter-agency body to coordinate human-trafficking probes. (Bangkok Post)

How has the Petrobrasandal upended Brazilian politics? Rig operators linked to the scandal hit back. (The Conversation, Bloomberg, FastFT)

The story of a so-called Chinese “princeling” shows the limits of Beijing’s anti-corruption drive. (McClatchy)

SNC-Lavalin says the Canadian government’s softening of anti-corruption rules doesn’t go far enough and raises new legal questions. (CTV, Globe & Mail, McCarthy Tetrault)

An Indonesian court indicted a former governor of Papua, Barnabas Suebu, for graft. He will appear in court next week. (Radio NZ)