2 years ago

We do not like Seuss filibusters.

Such lengthy speeches are full of bluster.

We do not like them in the House.

We do not like them from Todd Palin’s spouse.

We do not like them here or there.

We do not like them anywhere.

404 Error —

Dear Mr. President, the next time you invite a '90s-era, boy band member to the White House to plug HealthCare.gov, make sure he's “ 'N Sync” with the program and gives the correct URL.

Bass later deleted the post. But not before Brendan Buck, House Speaker John Boehner’s spokesman, saw it.

Celebrity Obamacare advocate doesn't even know website URL: https://t.co/tvRSWZhfN8 — Brendan Buck (@BrendanBuck) March 12, 2014

We're assuming he's going with ‘Die’

Not everyone thought President Barack Obama and comedian Zach Galifianakis' viral video hit on the Funny or Die comedy site — basically a better plug for HealthCare.gov than Bass' — was a laughing matter.

Texas Rep. Randy Weber tweeted this at 10:32 a.m.:

The President shouldn't be wasting time on a parody interview. He should be focusing on the current state of affairs across the globe. — Randy Weber (@TXRandy14) March 11, 2014

A minute later:

Instead of wasting time with a parody interview, he should be focusing on finding answers re: #Benghazi — Randy Weber (@TXRandy14) March 11, 2014

He wasn't done:

Instead of playing celebrity, our President should be working on fixing his failed takeover of health care. — Randy Weber (@TXRandy14) March 11, 2014

Colin Powell wins Throwback Thursday

Former Secretary of State Colin Powell posted a spectacular selfie to Facebook for Throwback Thursday. “I was doing selfies 60 years before you Facebook folks. Eat your heart out Ellen!” Ellen DeGeneres went viral on Twitter earlier this month after she scored an epic selfie with lots of A-list celebrities as host of this year’s Oscars.

Secondhand smoke?

Texas Gov. Rick Perry was booed when he took the stage with Jimmy Kimmel. But he got their attention when he talked about decriminalizing marijuana and got a few laughs with an ad-lib.

CNN Digital Producer Eric Weisbrod contributed to this report.