BUFFALO, N.Y. — Chicago Blackhawks star Patrick Kane has hired an attorney and called off what was to have been a public display of the Stanley Cup on Saturday because he is under police investigation over something that may have happened at his home last weekend.

Without providing details, lawyer Paul Cambria confirmed in a text message to The Associated Press that he has been hired to represent Kane. Cambria represented Kane in 2009, when he pleaded guilty to a noncriminal charge of disorderly conduct after being accused of assaulting a Buffalo cab driver over 20 cents.

Cambria is a high-profile attorney who specializes in First Amendment issues. He has represented Hustler publisher Larry Flynt and music artists Marilyn Manson and DMX.

The developments come a day after Hamburg police confirmed Kane is under investigation for an “incident that allegedly occurred” at the player’s offseason home in suburban Buffalo. Hamburg Police Chief Gregory Wickett did not discuss the nature of the investigation. He said police are gathering information and awaiting forensic tests.

In the meantime, Blackhawks spokesman Brandon Faber said Kane will skip the Stanley Cup celebration over Chicago’s third title in six years. Kane had paraded the trophy around Buffalo the previous two times he hosted it. Now, with the investigation in place, that has changed.

Tentative plans had called for Kane to bring the Cup to Buffalo Women’s and Children’s Hospital for what was supposed to be a private visit. There also was to have been a celebration at a downtown bar.

Though Kane is spending the day with his family, people were still hoping he might pop up with the Cup at some of his familiar spots.

A handful of youngsters in Blackhawks shirts and hats camped out in front of Kane’s favorite pizza place in his old neighborhood of south Buffalo. There are autographed Kane jerseys on the walls and a Blackhawks flag outside. Three off-duty Buffalo police officers were patrolling the parking lot before leaving early in the afternoon.

In Hamburg, several cars slowed or stopped to peek into the front yard of Kane’s home overlooking Lake Erie. A police officer was parked in a black and white SUV across the street.

Kane, who wears No. 88, picked Saturday to host the Cup because it is the eighth day of the eighth month.