For two members of the 1993-94 Nuggets, what used to be sleepy NBA nights in March have turned into frenzied postseason college basketball.

LaPhonso Ellis and Bryant Stith are in their time of the year.

Ellis analyzes NCAA games for ESPN, a job he unknowingly started to prepare for when he was playing for the Nuggets. During his time in Denver, he’d been asked to do studio work with TNT and TBS during the NBA playoffs.

An entertainment agent saw Ellis and put a full-court press on to get him to transition to fulltime studio work when his playing days were done. Ellis resisted. But years after retiring, in 2009, he was ready to take the leap. He auditioned for ESPN.

“And they really liked my work in the audition,” Ellis said. “They brought me on, and it’s been so much fun ever since.”

Stith retired in 2002 and, like Ellis, was ready to get away from basketball after a life of sacrificing his body and being away from his family.

“I really just wanted to let my batteries recharge, take care of my body and get back to a point where I could enjoy my quality of life,” Stith said.

That was the plan. But…

His old high school, Brunswick in Lawrenceville, Va., called. They’d fallen upon difficult times and asked their former star player to be the coach.

“I told them absolutely not,” Stith said, laughing. “I told them, I’m sure they had plenty of candidates and they would find a good coach. They told me, they actually had a very shortlist. I asked how short the list was. They said: ‘One. And that’s you.’ “

He talked it over with his family. They gave him the go-ahead, and he took the job. His Brunswick teams made seven consecutive trips to the state title game, losing the first four but winning the last three.

Colleges came calling. But Old Dominion, headed by one of Stith’s old coaches, Jeff Jones, got him.

“And that’s why I’m here today,” Stith said.

Stith’s two sons are both college level players. Brandon plays for East Carolina. B.J. will follow in his father’s footsteps and play for Virginia in the fall.

Christopher Dempsey: cdempsey@denverpost.com or twitter.com/dempseypost