The alleged culprit, 29-year-old French citizen Mehdi Nemmouche from the northern French town of Roubaix, was captured Friday in Marseille, and was said to have in his possession a gun and a Kalashnikov assault rifle of the sort used in the May 24 attack.

The alleged culprit, 29-year-old French citizen Mehdi Nemmouche from the northern French town of Roubaix, was captured Friday in Marseille, and was said to have in his possession a gun and a Kalashnikov assault rifle of the sort used in the May 24 attack.

A report in the Times of Israel , based on unnamed sources involved in the police investigation, raises the specter of more terror attacks on Jews and Jewish institutions in Europe. Chillingly, the suspect has French citizenship and terror ties to Syria.

Belgium investigators are probing a possible terrorist link, noting Nemmouche is believed to have links to Syrian jihadists. Nemmouche last visited Syria in 2013.

This comes on the heels of news that American citizens have been fighting in Syria with the jihad forces seeking to overthrow the Assad regime. Fox News reports:

The State Department confirmed Friday that an American man named Moner Mohammad Abu-Salha launched a suicide bombing against Syrian government troops Sunday, an attack believed to be linked to an Al Qaeda-backed militant group. Spokeswoman Jen Psaki confirmed the man's name in a statement to the Associated Press Friday, but did not provide other details. Earlier, Psaki said Abu-Salha was thought to be the first U.S. citizen to be involved in a suicide bombing in Syria's three-year civil war and was also known as “al-Amriki,” which means “the American” in Arabic.

A look at the alleged photo of Mr. Abu-Salha that is being widely circulated reveals that if he shaved his beard, he could easily walk into any shopping mall, synagogue, community center, museum, concert hall, or other facility, and inflict casualties on Americans.

Jihad attacks are not just the problem of Europe’s remaining Jews.