Rachel Campos-Duffy (Photo: Courtesy of Rachel Campos-Duffy)

It’s hard to believe Wisconsin college students are almost halfway through their first semester. Unfortunately, when the school year started, instead of orientation, our kids got a head full of indoctrination.

The University of Wisconsin-Stevens Point published a list of “Examples of Racial Microaggressions” on its official website. According to UWSP, a microaggression is described as “daily slights visited upon people of color, women, LGBT persons and other historically oppressed communities.” After some unfavorable national media attention this summer, UWSP clarified that the material is used in new faculty seminars and that the university is not banning the words but rather “building awareness” for a safe and inclusive environment on campus. Intentional or not, this list has a chilling effect on speech for new staff and especially young students who are still forming their own beliefs or worry that straying from the school sanctioned list of words and opinions could result in social repercussions or a lower grade in class.

So what qualifies as a microaggression? The list of frowned-upon phrases includes, “America is a melting pot.” Under the subject titled “The myth of meritocracy” are the sentences “I believe the most qualified person should get the job” and “everyone can succeed in this society, if they work hard enough." Why? Because UWSP believes these phrases presume “race is not a factor.” Students also are discouraged from asking a foreign student where they are from, or from asking an Asian person for help in math or science because that is racially stereotyping. The rest of the list is just as ridiculous.

Partial screenshot from University of Wisconsin-Stevens Point's "examples of racial microaggressions" worksheet given to new faculty. (Photo: University of Wisconsin-Stevens Point)

No wonder 79 percent of Americans believe that “political correctness” is a serious problem in our country! We’re growing weary of having our speech monitored and sanitized to suit someone else’s political agenda. Moreover, these self-appointed “thought police” lack basic common sense. Of course some words are offensive, but it is precisely at the university where young people should be learning the power and responsibility that comes with free speech. Not through censorship or shaming, but by encouraging spirited debate and an open dialogue and exchange of ideas — all ideas. This would foster the kind of diversity universities ought to care most about: diversity of thought.

Millions of immigrants come to the land of the free, fleeing countries where daring to think differently is punished. It is sad and alarming that U.S. publicly funded universities are codifying intolerance to different points of view. Moreover, as a minority myself, I reject the patronizing culture of victimization UWSP is fostering. It only adds insult to injury that students are being discouraged, and possibly stigmatized, for discussing or defending the very ideas and values that built this great nation.

Wisconsin tax dollars should be reserved for universities that promote and protect free speech and are committed to education, not indoctrination. I hope freedom-loving students defend their rights and I encourage alumni and taxpayers to call UWSP and your state government leaders. Let them know you disagree with these coercive policies. Wisconsin students deserve better.

To those intolerant, Age of Aquarius professors and administrators muzzling free speech at UWSP, I say: America is a melting pot, and it makes our country stronger and more beautiful. The most qualified person should get the job. As the daughter and granddaughter of Hispanic immigrants who built their American dream through faith, hard work and personal responsibility, I thank God every day that America is still the place where you can succeed if you are willing to work hard enough. That’s what makes us great and that’s what makes me so proud to be an American.

Rachel Campos-Duffy, a mother of seven and wife of Rep. Sean Duffy, lives in Wausau.

Read or Share this story: http://wdhne.ws/1N7y07r