If anyone had told you a few months ago that the subject of restrooms and transgender rights would actually become an issue in the upcoming election, you would have scoffed and said: “What? Not the economy? Not Obamacare? Not the Supreme Court? Not terrorism? Taxes? Immigration?” But reactionary forces have a weird way of rearing their hideous heads, promulgating the oddest, seemingly strangest notions and muscling their way into the spotlight.

This preoccupation with gender and toilets may seem uniquely 21st century in its theater-of-the-absurd way, but the North Carolina law—and statutes like it—meant to restrict restroom access to certain groups of oppressed people is hardly new. A bit of historical digging turns up a sad, illuminating history: In the fight for civil rights, segregationists warned of the dangers of blacks and whites sharing the same facilities, arguing that integration would bring with it toilet seats and towels acting as disease vectors—or, to put it plainly, that white people would catch syphilis from African-Americans. Hiding in plain sight behind this propaganda was the conviction that black men would lurk in stalls to molest white women, the specter of interracial relations being at the heart of the Ku Klux Klan philosophy for a century.

So persistent was this horrid canard that when Little Rock Central High School was forcibly integrated in 1954, one white student purportedly stated that “Many of the girls won’t use the restrooms at Central, simply because the ‘N*****’ girls use them.” The 1964 Civil Rights Act finally made separate-but-equal accommodations illegal, stating unequivocally that: “All persons shall be entitled to the full and equal enjoyment of the goods, services, facilities, privileges, advantages, and accommodations of any place of public accommodation, as defined in this section, without discrimination or segregation on the ground of race, color, religion, or national origin.”

But that law was alas not the final salvo in the toilet wars. In the 1970s fight to enact the Equal Rights Amendment, Phyllis Schlafly, head of the right-wing Stop ERA lobby, included in her platform the threat that passage of the ERA would result in mixed-sex bathrooms. (At least Schafly wasn’t recommending going back to the bad old days of the 19th century, when public facilities were erected for men only, and little ladies were considered too dainty to ever do anything as nasty as relieving themselves in public. This meant you had to either use something called a bordalou—a chamber pot shaped like a gravy boat—or duck into an alley, employing your long skirts as a shield.)

The ERA never passed, and the struggle for full equality goes on. But this doesn’t mean that justice and righteousness won’t eventually win out! After all, who could have imagined, even a very few years ago, the attorney general of the United States speaking out so strongly for transgender rights? But there was Loretta Lynch last Monday, declaring: “. . . No matter how isolated or scared you may feel today, the Department of Justice and the entire Obama administration wants you to know that we see you; we stand with you; and we will do everything we can to protect you going forward. Please know that history is on your side . . . It may not be easy—but we’ll get there together.”

(Thanks to Gillian Frank, whose post on the blog Notches: (Re)Marks on the History of Sexuality, provided some of the material above.)