Real estate mogul and reality-television star Donald Trump announced from New York City on Tuesday that he too will join the 2016 race for president.

Trump becomes the 12th Republican candidate, following an announcement on Monday from Jeb Bush, the former Florida governor, that he also plans to run.

Trump, who has toyed with running for president numerous times over the past two decades, brings a brash and outspoken voice to a crowded contest, but he is not seen as a serious challenger. He is expected to add more distraction to an already confusing race, some political experts say, but many business owners are likely to find his anti-tax, anti-Affordable Care Act, anti-regulation stance appealing.

And perhaps others are just likely to enjoy the theater of it all, as well as the large, entrepreneurial expectations.

"All of my life I have heard a really, really successful person cannot run for public office. Yet that is the kind of mindset you need to make this country great again," Trump said from Trump Tower in Manhattan. "I am officially running for president of the United States and we are going to make our country great again."

But Trump certainly has his work cut out for him trying to connect with voters. One of the wealthiest men in the world, Trump is expected to release documents that detail his net worth later on Tuesday. With assets of about $9 billion, according to the Washington Post, he is the wealthiest Republican candidate to be running, far outpacing Carly Fiorina. The former chief executive of Hewlett-Packard has a net worth of $59 million.

And while Trump is frequently given to hyperbole and grandiosity, he can often go on tangents that put him outside the mainstream of voters. For instance, he again questioned the authenticity of President Obama's birth certificate in an interview with Fox newscaster Sean Hannity at the Conservative Political Action Conference this winter.

He has called Obamacare "a total lie" and a "complete and total disaster," and has advocated for building an extensive wall along the Mexican border as a solution for immigration issues between the two countries.

At the same time, he has advocated for rebuilding U.S. infrastructure including airports and roads, and maintaining entitlements such as Social Security and Medicare by increasing jobs and overall prosperity.

Trump, who turned his father's much smaller New York real estate company into a world-famous brand, currently owns large, glitzy properties throughout the U.S., including 40 Wall Street and Trump International Hotel Las Vegas. But his enterprises don't stop there, as Trump has published books, such as the somewhat iconic Art of the Deal, and marketed colognes with names like "Empire" and "Success." He also owns the highly popular Miss Universe and Miss USA pageants.

If nothing else, Trump's presidential run will raise his business profile, political observers say.

"Trump's greatest talent is self-promotion, and a presidential run presents a grand stage for this," says John Hudak, a fellow in government studies at Brookings Institution, the public policy think tank in Washington, D.C. "He's trying to raise a high profile even higher."