Chris Rusin didn’t need a 98 mph heater or a diabolical curveball to tame the San Diego Padres, or the savage beast that is Coors Field.

Rather, the Rockies left-hander used a surgical 90 to 92 mph fastball, a confounding changeup and a versatile new delivery to pitch a five-hit, complete-game shutout against San Diego on Sunday.

The 5-0 victory was the first shutout by a Rockies pitcher since Tyler Matzek beat the Padres 3-0 on Sept. 5, 2014, at Coors.

“I was just trying to make my pitches all afternoon, use my quick pitch and keep them off-balance. That’s what I was able to do,” said Rusin, who became the 19th pitcher in Rockies history to throw a shutout, and the 13th to do it in Denver. “I was able to get weak contact. I just knew I had good location and was able to hit my spots. I just did that the entire game.”

The victory ended the Rockies’ six-game losing streak — and snapped a seven-game losing streak against the Padres.

The nine innings pitched were a career high for Rusin, whom the Rockies claimed off waivers from the Chicago Cubs last season. He induced 13 outs by groundballs, struck out four and needed only 106 pitches (71 for strikes) to blank the Padres. For good measure, he singled and scored a run in the eighth.

“If you keep the ball down, pitch to both sides of the plate and change speeds, you can pitch here,” Rockies manager Walt Weiss said. “It can be done here. We’ve seen it enough before. Rusin is a heck of a competitor, and he’s unflappable. That was an impressive performance.”

Rusin — 3-1 with a 3.31 ERA in eight games (seven starts) at Coors Field this season — has become a different pitcher. He has added a quick-pitch windup to his arsenal, something Weiss calls a “roll-through windup.” Catcher Michael McKenry calls it a “Cueto,” after Kansas City Royals ace Johnny Cueto, whose drives batters mad by constantly altering his delivery.

“Rusin pounded the zone today,” McKenry said. “He messed with hitters’ timing. He was speeding up his motion and slowing it down.”

Rusin typically throws more two-seam sinking fastballs than four-seamers, but he switched that up Sunday.

“A lot of his pitches were just in, tight,” McKenry explained. “He has a lot of life with that four-seamer. It’s 92 mph, and it sort of sneaks up on (hitters) because he has such a quick arm.”

Rusin walked a tightrope in the sixth. Two-out singles by Derek Norris and Matt Kemp and a walk by Justin Upton loaded the bases. Rusin was then called for a balk by second-base umpire Lance Barrett, sending Norris to the plate for a run. But the umpires conferred and waved off the balk, much to the consternation of San Diego manager Pat Murphy.

“It looked funky because Chris is using that roll-through windup,” Weiss said. “But he was pitching out of the windup. … He wasn’t pitching from the stretch, so he doesn’t have to come to a complete stop. I think that’s what the confusion was.”

After all the fuss, Murphy was ejected, and Rusin got Jedd Gyorko to ground out to third as the Rockies’ 1-0 lead held.

The Rockies finally shattered the pitchers’ duel with a three-run seventh inning against San Diego starter Ian Kennedy. The rally was propelled by McKenry’s three-run double.

Colorado’s outburst began with a whimper. Nolan Arenado hit a two-out popup to Norris at first base. He simply dropped the ball and opened the flood gates. Ben Paulsen followed up with a double, and Kennedy intentionally walked DJ LeMahieu to load the bases.

McKenry stepped up and lashed a double into the gap in right-center. LeMahieu slid in safely at the plate, just beating catcher Austin Hedges’ tag. The Padres asked for a review — one that took 3 minutes, 27 seconds — but the call stood.

Carlos Gonzalez broke a scoreless tie with a solo blast to dead center with two out in the fifth. CarGo teed off on Kennedy’s 1-0, 91 mph fastball for his 27th homer.

Patrick Saunders: psaunders@denverpost.com or twitter.com/psaundersdp