Customized TV Listings are available here: www.latimes.com/tvtimes

Click here to download TV listings for the week of Oct. 20 - 26, 2013 in PDF format

This week's TV Movies

SERIES

The White Queen In failing health and mourning the loss of young Edward, Anne (Faye Marsay) ends her feud with Elizabeth (Rebecca Ferguson) in the series finale. 9 p.m. Starz

The Graham Norton Show Harrison Ford, Benedict Cumberbatch and Jack Whitehall are guests on the variety/talk show and James Blunt performs. 10 p.m. BBC America

Dancing on the Edge Inspired by the Duke Ellington Band's experiences in 1930s London, this new five-part miniseries tells the story of a black jazz ensemble that rises to stardom after catching the eye of the British aristocracy — later becoming entangled in a murder mystery. Chiwetel Ejiofor, Matthew Goode, Jacqueline Bisset and John Goodman star. 10:05 p.m. Starz

MOVIES

Dr. Strangelove Or: How I Learned to Stop Worrying and Love the Bomb Stanley Kubrick's biting 1964 satire about an insane general (Sterling Hayden) who heats up the Cold War by launching a nuclear strike against Russia, bristles with great performances that include Peter Sellers in three roles and George C. Scott's as the high-strung Gen. 'Buck" Turgidson. 3:15 p.m. TCM

Mama Jessica Chastain plays the girlfriend of the uncle (Nikolaj Coster-Waldau) of two children (Megan Charpentier and Isabelle Nelisse) who vanished after their father killed their mother. 8 p.m. HBO

Missing at 17 Seventeen-year-old Candace runs away from home to search for her biological mother and meets a young man who offers to help her in this new thriller. 8 p.m. Lifetime

When Calls the Heart Based on Janette Oke's Canadian West book series, this new fish-out-of-water drama tells the story of a young teacher (Poppy Drayton) who accepts a position in a small coal town on the prairie. Lori Loughlin and Jean Smart play the two strong-willed widows who run the town. 9 p.m. Hallmark

WEEKEND TALK

SATURDAY

Good Morning America (N) 7 a.m. KABC

McLaughlin Group (N) 6:30 p.m. KCET

SUNDAY

Today David Gregory. (N) 6 a.m. KNBC

Good Morning America (N) 6 a.m. KABC

State of the Union With Candy Crowley The shutdown; Obamacare; the future of the GOP: Sen. John McCain (R-Ariz.). Panel: Donna Brazile; Alex Castellanos; Ryan Lizza. (N) 6 and 9 a.m. CNN

CBS News Sunday Morning Mary Steenburgen; Alan Greenspan; the work of artist Rene Magritte. (N) 6:30 a.m. KCBS

Fareed Zakaria GPS Political deadlock; future of the GOP; future of the Democratic party: Former Sec. of State James A. Baker. American politics seen from overseas: Zanny Minton Beddoes; Martin Wolf. (N) 7 and 10 a.m. CNN

Face the Nation Sen. Mitch McConnell (R-Ky.); Sen. Mark R. Warner (D-Va.); Sen. Lindsey Graham (R-S.C.). Mark Zandi Moody's; Stuart Rothenberg; Rana Foroohar; Gerald Seib; Michael Gerson. (N) 8 a.m. KCBS

Meet the Press Effect of the default scare: Treasury Secretary Jacob J. Lew. Budget battles: Sen. Charles E. Schumer (D-N.Y.); Sen. Tom Coburn (R-Okla.). Solving the fiscal stalemate: 2013 Nobel Prize winner for economics Robert Shiller, Yale. Panel: Chuck Todd; David Brooks; E.J. Dionne; Maria Bartiromo; Andrea Mitchell. (N) 8 a.m. KNBC

This Week With George Stephanopoulos Budget battles: Rep. Nancy Pelosi (D-San Francisco); Sen. Ted Cruz (R-Texas); Former Gov. Jeb Bush (R-Fla.). Actress Lupita Nyong'o ("12 Years a Slave"). Panel: Matthew Dowd; Peter Baker; Rep. Donna Edwards (D-Md.); Rep. Adam Kinzinger (R-Ill.). (N) 8 a.m. KABC