Penn State Milton S. Hershey Medical Center said Wednesday a new organization has been proposed to contain a merged Penn State-Hershey-PinnacleHealth System.

The proposed non-profit would contain entities including the medical center, its cancer institute and Penn State Hershey Children's Hospital, along with PinnacleHealth entities including Harrisburg Hospital and its two other hospitals. It could potentially include additional organizations that aren't presently part of Penn State Hershey or PinnacleHealth.

It requires approval from Penn State University trustees, who are expected to consider it later this week. The new organization is tentatively called "Penn State Health," but the joined entity might have a different name, Penn State-Hershey officials stressed.

"By creating Penn State Health, we can enable health care organizations of various size and clinical specialization to work together as one to increase access to care, enhance quality, and manage cost over a broader geographic and population base," said Dr. A. Craig Hillemeier, Penn State Hershey's CEO "It is another important step to effectively position us for the future of health care."

Hillemeier gave an update during the medical center's annual public board meeting on Wednesday afternoon.

In June, Penn State-Hershey and PinnacleHealth announced a planned affiliation that would include merging their financial assets and functioning as a single health care system. On Wednesday, Hillemeier said the transaction is moving forward as planned, with the two organizations expected to finalize a definitive agreement by late fall, when the agreement will be filed the Federal Trade Commission and the Pennsylvania Attorney General. The review is expected to take about a year, with the new organization fully formed by early 2016.

Hillemeier also gave a financial overview regarding the medical center, which he said had an 8.2 percent total margin during the fiscal year that ended in mid-2014. It means the medical center earned $8.20 in every $100 it received for providing medical care. He called the operating margin "incredibly strong" for an academic medical center.

Hillemeier said more than 29,000 people were hospitalized at Penn State-Hershey during the year, up 5.1 percent from the previous year. He cited similar increases in the number of people seeking surgery and outpatient care, saying the center logged 960,000 outpatient visits.

He further announced a partnership with the ALS Worldwide to raise $5 million toward research involving ALS, also known as Lou Gehrig's disease.

The $5 million would be used by Penn State Hershey's ALS clinic and its Institute for Personalized Medicine, which is building a repository of genetic information and decoding it in an effort to understand genetic- and environmental-related causes of diseases. The ALS effort would involve collecting and decoding genetic samples of people with ALS and their healthy relatives in an effort to understand things such as the cause of ALS, which is presently unknown. There is no cure for ALS.