ATLANTA — To borrow a phrase from former Colorado skipper Jim Tracy, it would “behoove” the Rockies if Carlos Gonzalez were to get hot. And soon. This current, testing road trip would be a good time to start.

After missing three games because of a sore and swollen left index finger, Gonzalez is back in the lineup for Sunday’s rubber match vs. the Braves. He’s hitting cleanup, while Troy Tulowitzki bats third.

“It’s good,” Gonzalez said. “Actually, yesterday I took batting practice, and it was feeling good. They just decided to give me an extra day, and I feel good to go.”

CarGo is hopeful that the finger issue clears up and doesn’t become a chronic problem. To that end, he will visit Dr. Thomas Graham, and orthopedic specialist, when the Rockies arrive in Cleveland on Friday.

“These injuries happen,” Gonzalez said. “It’s nothing major. It’s just one of those things that hurts, but it’s something that you have to deal (with) and try to fix it with treatment and stuff. But it’s nothing major, which is good.”

Gonzalez enters Sunday evening’s game hitting .276 with seven homers, 29 RBIs and an on-base percentage of just .321. Last year at this time, he was hitting .315 with 13 homers and a .397 OPB.

Manager Walt Weiss, who said Gonzalez’s finger is something the club will keep close tabs on, is waiting for his left fielder to start raking.

“This would be a great time for it, with Nolan (Arenado) going down,” Weiss said. “You know that Gonzalez is going to go crazy here at some point. That is just his track record. This would be a great time for it.”

Gonzalez has always been a streaky hitter. Although his bat has heated up a little bit of lately, he hasn’t hit a home run since May 7. He said a hot streak is around the corner.

“I haven’t gotten to the point where I get a lot of hits and do a lot of damage for that long of a period, but that’s how this game is,” Gonzalez said. “I just continue to work and I know that’s going to happen soon. I’m not worried about it.

“I don’t even really think about it because I haven’t (worried) in the past, so why should I do it now? That’s how baseball is. Sometimes, it treats you right. Sometimes, it treats you bad.”