Torturing the history of torture

Detroit: Re “A torture report for the dustbin” (op-ed, Dec. 9): John Yoo, author of the torture memos, says he gave the legal go-ahead for waterboarding and other barbaric interrogation methods based on information provided to him by the Bush administration. “If it turned out that the facts on which I based my advice were wrong, I would be willing to change my opinion of the interrogation methods,” he writes.

But Yoo’s infamous 2002 memo stated that an act is not torture unless it produces pain equivalent to that accompanying “death, organ failure or the permanent impairment of a significant body function.” How much worse would the administration’s description of its methods have to have been for Yoo to change his mind? Killing detainees, resurrecting them and then killing them again?

By suggesting this patently absurd alternative reality, Yoo is simply deflecting attention from real nature of his advice. As countless accounts have shown, the memos were not good-faith analyses of the law and facts but produced solely to provide legal cover for the interrogators if their actions were ever challenged. Their reasoning and factual basis were immaterial to that end. Gregory H. Fox, director, International Legal Studies, Wayne State University Law School

Whatever it takes

New Port Richey, Fla.: Re “Truth got tortured” (Dec. 10): Americans for the most part are a good, kind and moral people who don’t even want to see animals hurt. Torturing a human being under almost any circumstances is not acceptable. But when airplanes are flown into two New York buildings full of innocent people, all bets are off. To be blunt, who the hell cares that a few monsters were tortured to get information that potentially saved innocent lives? Augie Pazzo

Lessons of history

Lancaster, Pa.: So many people, including lawmakers, are upset over the CIA’s use of enhanced interrogation techniques on terrorists. Where was the outrage 50 years ago, when many of the same techniques were used on children in parochial schools? The only difference back then was, when you got home and told your parents what happened, you would get another slap. Walter Baisy

Asking for trouble

Yonkers: The purportedly objective CIA interrogation report is yet another attempt by President Obama and Senate Democrats to smear former President George W. Bush specifically, and the U.S. generally. These same hypocrites falsely condemned a video released prior to the Benghazi massacre for inciting violence but have no qualms about delivering a hyper-partisan treatise certain to imperil Americans worldwide. James McCaffrey

Loose lips . . .

Staten Island: The CIA has a dirty job to do. My view is, if torture helped save one or more American lives, or led us to someone like Osama Bin Laden, it was well worth it. For Congress to air our dirty laundry for the world to see is, to me, an act of treason. Jeffrey Karpen

Losing it

Valley Stream, L.I.: Nancy Pelosi cried about the spending bill in Congress and demanded changes before voting against it. Doesn’t she remember what she said about the Affordable Care Act — “We have to pass the bill so that we can find out what’s in it”? How does Pelosi feel now that the shoe is on the other foot? As a tax-paying citizen, I believe that she and her counterpart in the Senate, Harry Reid, are both reaching the senility stages of their lives, and they should really consider resigning. Mike Bassalay

Promises, promises

Bronx: I hope President Obama has no trouble sleeping at night. “If you want your doctor, you can keep your doctor” has hit our household. Yes, we have lost our doctor. Mary Caggiano

No words

Brooklyn: After I read about Queens Library director Thomas Galante using money meant to purchase books and other learning materials for his own expensive trips and meals (“Chapter & wor$e,” Dec. 11), I decided to visit the Queens Library and use the thesaurus to find words to describe such a person. Galante is a crook, thief, scoundrel, swindler, shark and cheat. He deserves one more trip at taxpayer expense — right to Rikers Island. Christine Manley

Watch your language

Fort Myers, Fla.: Re “Autopsy finds no drugs in dead hooker’s system, suggests she was frantically running from Long Island killer” (NYDailyNews.com, Dec. 11): A woman would not have written that headline, nor referred to her several times as a hooker. At this point, Shannan Gilbert is a woman and someone’s daughter — not someone to be referred to as a “dead hooker.” T hat is offensive to her and her family. Stephanie Hughes

Let’s go to the videotape

Brooklyn: In every recent police shooting, there have been cell-phone videos, sometimes from multiple angles. How is it that there is not one from Ferguson? Fifty-plus witnesses came forward, none with cell-phone footage. Could it be because the videos would show Michael Brown charging at the officer? With what has ensued nationwide, anyone with video would probably be afraid to come forward. Perhaps an incentive needs to be offered. Linda Calabrese

On the same side

East Brunswick, N.J.: Re “ ‘I’ll kill the Jews!’ ” (Dec. 10): Unlike the outcry over Michael Brown and Eric Garner, there will be no demonstrations protesting this evil act by a black man who was seemingly deranged. No one will be blocking bridges, tunnels or Macy’s. Instead, many fine black Americans, as well as members of the Lubavitch sect, stood together in Crown Heights to denounce this horrific act. These are the kinds of leaders that the black community needs — those who want to work together with the white community to find non-violent solutions, instead of leaders who seek to stir the pot of hate. Helen Borenstein

Selective enforcement

Manhattan: Back in the heyday of pro-life activism, protesters were demonized, fined and given jail sentences. Today’s anti-cop protesters are celebrated, encouraged and given slap-on-the-wrist desk appearances. Clearly, political correctness is why some protesters are more equal than others. Brenda Milliner

O, Tannenbaum

Bronx: As traditional as it is to have a real Christmas tree in Rockefeller Center, I am against it. I’m not being a Scrooge. I love Christmas. I just feel that when a majestic tree gets to that size after 50 years or so, it deserves to live on instead of being cut down for our superficial pleasure and, in the end, becoming a lot of mulch. If, with our technology, we were to build a life-like tree and put that up every year, I don’t think people would notice or care. Its time to start caring about our environment more than our selfish pleasures, and appreciate what we have before it’s gone. Guido Susi

Fueling profits

Bay Shore, L.I.: When the price of oil was was $147.27 per barrel, gas stations in North Merrick charged $4.299 per gallon of regular gas. If you remove the standard state tax of 31.9 cents per gallon, that would be $3.98 per gallon. The price of a barrel of oil on Dec. 10 settled at $60.94, less than half the previous price. Yet we are still paying around $2.80 per gallon of gasoline. That’s a bargain compared to what we have paying for the past few years . But based on my calculations, the price of gasoline, including tax, should be $1.969. Where is this excess profit of 83 cents per gallon going? Watch the various oil companies announce their fourth-quarter dividends for 2014. Gary Eisele

To each his own

West Milford, N.J.: To Voicer Ralph Rivera: Different customs for different people. In synagogues, men are required to cover their heads. A hat is fine, but it is usually a skullcap known as a kippah in Hebrew. Many Orthodox men wear them all the time as a constant reminder of their devotion and respect to G-d. Traditionally, married women wear hats or kerchiefs in synagogue. Betty E. Weisblum

Uncommon courtesy

Bronx: I must agree with Voicer Ralph Rivera about leaving hats on when inside buildings. In the Navy, we always removed hats while eating and usually when we were inside. My mother always made sure I removed my hat when I came home. I find it disrespectful for men to leave hats on in church. Marc Hohenstein