People Moves of the Week: Crowell & Moring, Harris Williams, Pine Brook

Harris Williams promotes 12 bankers; Pine Brook names new managing director; Crowell & Moring hires energy adviser Elliot Hinds

Crowell & Moring LLP — The Washington, D.C. law firm brought in Elliot Hinds as a partner. Hinds joins Crowell & Moring's energy practice from Akin Gump Strauss Hauer & Feld LLP. He has worked on projects to develop, finance, purchase and sell renewable energy, including wind, solar and natural gas.

First Reserve — The Greenwich, Connecticut private equity firm appointed Alex Krueger co-CEO and president. William Macaulay, who has been CEO of First Reserve since its founding in 1983, will lead alongside Krueger as co-CEO to ensure a smooth succession plan. Krueger has been with First Reserve for 16 years. First Reserve won the 2011 Mid-Market Award for Private Equity Firm of the Year.

Harris Williams & Co. — The Richmond, Virginia-based investment bank announced 12 promotions. Tech, media and telecom specialist Sam Hendler and health care adviser Geoff Smith have been promoted to managing directors. Jeff Burkett, Brant Cash, Lars Friemann, Paul Hepper, Jershon Jones and John Klim have been named directors. Jacques Fu, John Lautemann, Andy Warczak and Mike Williams are now vice presidents. Friemann, Lautemann and Williams are all in the Harris Williams industrials group, while Hepper and Fu join Smith in the health care segment. Burkett and Jones are expected to source deals in the transportation and logistics sector, while Cash and Warczak advise the consumer goods and retail sector. Klim is in Harris Williams' business services unit.

Houlihan Lokey — The New York investment bank called in Arik Rashkes as a managing director covering deals in the insurance sector. He joins from Blackstone Advisory Partners, where he was a managing director. Prior to that, he spent five years in Deutsche Bank’s financial institutions group, sourcing domestic and cross-border deals.

K&L Gates LLP— The Pittsburgh-based law firm has named 50 new partners in various offices across the U.S. and abroad. They include James Culverwell, Jason Drori, and Mackenzie Shea in Boston; Carty Bibee and Joshua Reeves in Charleston, North Carolina; John Blair and Emily Zimmer in Charlotte, North Carolina; Matthew Dicke, Rachel Guzowski, Christopher Hanba and Rita Rubin in Chicago; Alfred Cheng, Clayton Falls and Jordan Klein in Dallas; Elisa D’Amico, Karen Finesilver, and John Owens in Miami; Calvina Bostick and Sarah Kenney in New York; Marina Solo in Newark, New Jersey; Stan Lewandowski in Palo Alto, California; John Hagan, Jeffrey Meagher, Daniel Miller and Megan Wotherspoon in Phittsburg;Shiau Yen Chin-Dennis in Portland, Oregon; Susan Hackney, James Herriott and Mackenzie Morse in Raleigh, North Carolina; Irene Yang in San Francisco; Sarah Bowman, Rhys Hefta, and Ashley Miller in Seattle; Andrew Edwin Porter and Kristina Zanotti in Washington, D.C.; and Andrew Skouvakis in Wilmington, Delaware. In Brazil, Juliana Araujo was promoted in the São Paulo office. In the Middle East, Kirk Durrant joined the Doha, Qatar branch, while Nazanin Aleyaseen, Simon Mabin, and Rabih Tabbara were named partners in Dubai. In Asia, K&L Gates tapped Sacha Cheong in Hong Kong; Max Xin Gu in Shanghai;Sebastian Smith in Singapore; and Cheryl Hsieh in Taipei, Taiwan. In the U.K., James Spencer and Tom Wallace have joined the London office, while Filip Urbaniak comes aboard in Warsaw. In Austalia,Michaela Moloney will work out of Melbourne while Danielle Funston joins the office in Sydney.

Landmark Partners — James Clarke has joined the New York investment firm as director. Clarke will concentrate on investor relations initiatives following the recent closing of the firm's $3.25 billion fund, Landmark Equity Partners XV, in December. Prior to joining Landmark, Clarke was a managing director of business development for Golden Tree Asset Management and, before that, a senior vice president at Paulson and Co.

Milbank — David Kuo has joined the law firm's Hong Kong office where he will work in the capital markets, finance and corporate practice. Kuo joins Milbank from Allen & Overy, also in Hong Kong. Among the deals he has worked on are the pre-IPO financing of e-commerce company Ule Group Holdings and the $1.36 billion takeover of South African copper producer Metorex Ltd. by metal producer Jinchuan Group Ltd.

Sheppard Mullin Richter & Hampton LLP — The law firm has promoted 11 attorneys to partner. Three of those promotions were out of the firm's Los Angeles headquarters. They include Amy McEvoy, Marlene Nicolas, James Pugh and Zachary Turke. Three more were called up at the San Francisco office: Pankit Doshi, Morgan Forsey and Michael Lauter. The other five were William Ahmann in Palo Alto, California; Christopher Collins in New York; Kenneth Fox in Orange County, California; and Jeffrey Rector in Del Mar, California.

Riveron Consulting — The Dallas-based consulting group has hired Shahroukh Dastur as business development director to source new clients in the Mid-Atlantic region. He will be based in Riveron's Washington, D.C. office. Previously, he held leadership positions at a variety of firms, including Resources Global Professionals, Deloitte Consulting, BearingPoint and American Management Systems. Riveron serves private equity funds and lenders, as well as public and private companies. The group has offices in Houston, Atlanta, Chicago and Minneapolis.

Pine Brook Partners — The New York investment firm tapped Jim Rutherfurd as a managing director. Rutherfurd will lead Pine Brook’s investor relations efforts, a role previously held by managing director Joe Gantz, who will continue to serve on the firm’s investment committee. Rutherfurd will also serve on the firm’s investment eommittee and oversee the direction of the firm’s co-investments. Prior to joining Pine Brook, Rutherfurd oversaw fundraising and co-investments in North America and Latin America as a partner at private equity firm 3i Group.

Venable LLP— The Baltimore, Maryland law firm enlisted Peter Sternberg from Orrick Herrington & Sutcliffe, where he advised on mergers, acquisitions and joint ventures. Previously based in Paris and Milan, Sternberg specializes in cross-border deals involving U.S. and European companies.

Find out more information about people mentioned in this article from our People Database:

Elliot Hinds



For more information on related topics, visit the following: