Regarding the Amarillo Globe-News letter to the editor (Letter: What proof is needed not to vote for Hillary Clinton?, March 20, amarillo.com), letter writer Mary Chumbley starts with this joke, “Republicans, other than the snake oil salesman Donald Trump, (who cannot be trusted), finally have a reasonable group of candidates.”

First time I have heard that. Trump is a result of what Republicans have been peddling for years through “dog whistle” politics.

The “74 year-old angry socialist” Bernie Sanders has voiced more logical reasoning in one debate than all Republicans combined. He says the economy is against the working man and the electoral system is corrupted by money. A third-grader could prove both.

Chumbley said Hillary “promises to build on Obama’s successes,” and that he has done irreparable damage to the country. I would love to see this list submitted to a group of non-political professionals and get their evaluation. The only place I have heard that is from a highly-

partisan, biased and conservative source.

Chumbley writes about the mess Hillary has made during her political career.

I want to address a few things for which Republicans have been responsible. The Affordable Care Act has given millions of Americans insurance, which saves thousands of lives each year.

Several Republican-

controlled states refuse to go along. They will have hundreds of unnecessary deaths as a result. The deaths could be called human sacrifices to the god of ideology.

Talk about swallowing an elephant and choking on a gnat.

Republican economic plans hugely increase the deficit, and Trump’s is not the worst of the bunch. Their tax cuts benefit the rich and punish the poor — surprise. Republican states have put up road blocks to voting and want to eviscerate Planned Parenthood. The reasons for both would not pass an investigation by the aforementioned three year-old.

The clincher for not voting Republican is the anti-science state of Republican politicians, not the private citizen. If elected,

Republicans will eliminate or neutralize everything having to do with protecting the environment and addressing global warming. This will be catastrophic.

Republican candidates share radical ideas and ideology, not facts. The Republicans of old would turn over in their graves.

Leon Logan

Tucumcari, N.M.