The president finished answering this question by saying, "So, for everybody out there who's in a mixed family, there is no sharing of the data from the health care plan in to immigration services. You should feel confident that if somebody in your family is eligible, you should sign them up."

Obama blamed Congress for deportations. And he said he has already stretched his "administrative capacity very far" by taking immigration actions using "prosecutorial discretion," but that he was "very confident that was the right thing to do."

"It's true that the undocumented are not eligible [for Obamacare], that's how the law was written, but if you are a U.S. citizen or you have a legal presence in this country, you are eligible," he said. "And none of the information that is provided in order for you to obtain health insurance is in any way transferred to immigration services. So that's something we've been very clear about. If you live in a mixed status family, then the son who could potentially be eligible for the children's health insurance program or some other mechanism to get health insurance, he needs to be signed up. And the mother should not be fearful that in any way that's going to affect -- of course I understand the fear."

The Weekly Standard http://assets.weeklystandard.com.s3.amazonaws.com/tws15/images/logo-large.png

The Weekly Standard

2014

Washington, DC

Politics

http://www.weeklystandard.com/obama-promises-illegals-obamacare-sign-up-info-wont-be-used-for-deportation/article/784228

2014-03-06T12:34

2014-03-06T11:35

Obama Promises Illegals: Obamacare Sign Up Info Won't Be Used for Deportation

In a joint town hall with Telemundo and Univision, President Obama made a pledge that his administration will not use Obamacare sign up data to deport illegal aliens: Will we hear from you a pledge, a personal promise, that the information provided in the registration process will not be used for deportation purposes in this country? Absolutely, Obama said, putting his hand down for emphasis. It's true that the undocumented are not eligible [for Obamacare], that's how the law was written, but if you are a U.S. citizen or you have a legal presence in this country, you are eligible, he said. And none of the information that is provided in order for you to obtain health insurance is in any way transferred to immigration services. So that's something we've been very clear about. If you live in a mixed status family, then the son who could potentially be eligible for the children's health insurance program or some other mechanism to get health insurance, he needs to be signed up. And the mother should not be fearful that in any way that's going to affect -- of course I understand the fear.

Barack Obama, Daniel Halper, Illegal, Immigration

http://cdn.weeklystandard.biz/cache/280x280-.jpg