1

How did the My Dentist concept get started? How big is it now? My Dentist began as a small practice in Midwest City. Dr. Pat Steffen loved the idea of giving dentists who love to practice quality dentistry the opportunity to focus solely on that. From that, the My Dentist business model was born. It’s specifically structured to allow for a stronger relationship between care providers such as myself and our patients. In the past year, we have opened 15 locations across five states — Oklahoma, Kansas, Missouri, Texas and Arkansas, increasing our facility footprint by 20 percent. We are also continuously researching cutting-edge technology and training our staff in those disciplines. We offer first-class facilities, digital imaging technology, laser dentistry, sedation dentistry, electronic medical records and more.

Login required We have used your information to see if you have a subscription with us. So far we have not found one. If you feel you are currently subscribed please click on the button to attempt to find your account. Screen Name or Email Password Forgot? Remember me on this computer Login Screen Name or Email Now I remember! Need an account? Create one now. Back Thank you for reading and relying on TulsaWorld.com for your news and information. You have now viewed your allowance of free articles. Login

You must login to view the full content on this page. Screen Name or Email Password Forgot? Remember me on this computer Login Screen Name or Email Now I remember! Need an account? Create one now.

2

Why would a dentist choose to work with a chain instead of just starting a practice under his own name? I don’t consider My Dentist a chain in the traditional sense. Each dentist operates his own practice and is allowed to practice quality dentistry while the umbrella organization, My Dentist, focuses on the business aspects. Allowing practitioners to focus solely on good dentistry is what sets My Dentist apart from other practices. My Dentist also provides internal education to ensure that dentists at each location are trained in the most up-to-date technology. Because of the unique business model, My Dentist provides practitioners with the ability and means to put time into continuing education without our patients missing a beat. If I had my own practice, taking time off to learn new technologies may cause me to close my practice for the time that I’m doing so, but with My Dentist, we can support our sister practices when they need assistance. For example, Waterlase technology is cutting edge technology that combines laser energy and a gentle spray of water to gently cut teeth, gums and even bone without heat, vibration or pressure — things that may make the dental drill less comfortable. Because of My Dentist’s focus on continuing education, I along with other dental practitioners have become proficient in this technology, which helps reduce anxiety and pain in patients.

3

Where does dentistry intersect with the Affordable Care Act? Will Obamacare have much of an impact on your field? Yes, ACA will have an impact on how we serve our patients, specifically children. As of now, we do not know the exact impact of ACA. As we and other health-care providers learn more, we will continue to communicate with our current and potential patients. What will not change is our commitment to our patients. We will work with each and every customer to ensure change will not stand in the way of quality dental care.

4

Dentists have gotten a bad rap through the years. Do you have a favorite dentist joke? We understand that some of our patients may feel anxious before their appointment, so jokes can sometimes ease the tension. One joke that always gets a laugh from our younger patients is: Q: What did the dentist get for an award? A: A little plaque! But in all seriousness, we at My Dentist do everything we can to make our patients feel comfortable. From the décor of our offices to the demeanor of our staff, we strive to provide a welcoming atmosphere to everyone who walks in our doors. My Dentist began as a family business and we work to continue that same atmosphere in all of our offices.

5

We have heard about recent allegations regarding uncleanliness in a local dentist practice. What precautions do My Dentist staff take to ensure this doesn’t occur at their practices? The universal precautions of dentistry are ingrained into practitioners during dental school. However, one benefit of working with a company like My Dentist is their continuing education programs and the role the chief dental director, Jennifer Chambers, plays in running the business. She’s constantly on the road, training dentists at our 55 locations on the latest technology, also offering her expertise on procedures and dental practices. Dr. Steffen’s legacy is the My Dentist business model and through that model, My Dentist practitioners are allowed to focus on their expertise so that the health and comfort of our patients comes first.