By Robert Pollock - November 12, 2013

The rollout of Obamacare is going worse than even the law’s most ardent opponents imagined. Consumers are angry and anxious about the high-priced policies being offered on the state insurance exchanges. Congressional Democrats are panicked about facing voters. And the president’s approval rating is plummeting as it becomes clear that he wasn’t honest about people being able to keep insurance policies they liked.

Is there an out that could allow for cheaper insurance, allow Democrats to avoid voting for Obamacare “repeal,” and garner principled GOP support? Yes. It would involved creating what’s called an “optional federal charter” for health insurance.

One of the most fundamental problems with Obamacare is that it simply added new federally mandated insurance benefits to the long list of insurance mandates (2,000 or so) that exist in the 50 states. That’s right, health insurers are suddenly regulated at both the state and federal level. The the price of providing new nationally mandated benefits regarding things like prescription drugs and mental health has simply been added to state level mandates that might cover things like chiropractic or wigs for cancer patients. Add in the new federal mandate requiring guaranteed issue regardless of pre-existing conditions and the current sticker stock is entirely understandable.

But why respect all the state-level mandates? No, Congress doesn’t have the power to undo them. But it unquestionably has the power under the Constitution’s Commerce Clause to set up a national insurance chartering system that would allow consumers and insurers to bypass state mandates.

The inefficiency and expense of America’s fragmented, 50-state insurance market has long been recognized. Back when I was writing editorials for the Wall Street Journal we advocated federal recognition of the consumer’s right to buy insurance insurance across state lines--that is, regulated by any one of the 50 states. That position has garnered Congressional Republican support in the past, but has been criticized for allowing a “race to the bottom” in the direction of substandard insurance. Well, an optional federal insurance charter is another way to get at the problem, one that would allow Congress to build in safeguards against substandard plans.

So how is this an Obamacare solution? Congressional Democrats and the president can say that they’ve heard voter complaints about cost and complexity and intend to do something about the problem, not by repealing the health law but by adding in a simplified federal insurance charter. They’d do well cost-wise to remove some of the benefits Obamacare currently imposes imposes on the state level insurance exchanges. But even if the federally mandated benefits don’t change they’d be freeing consumers from costly state insurance mandates.

Republicans could support such a plan in good conscience since it would be cheaper and more market-friendly than the current system and do real good for panicked insurance consumers.

For too long the important issue of insurance mandates has been relegated to the relative obscurity of state capitals, where single-interest medical lobbies are strong and media sunshine is weak. One of the benefits of the Obamacare debate has been to shine national spotlight on the issue, and there’d be no shame for Democrats in saying they’ve heard voters and intend to address their concerns with a simpler, federal insurance charter. It would be a refinement of Obamacare, not a repeal.

Republicans might worry about going along with such a political out for the president, but worried consumers need help now. Besides, Republicans would be able to run against any costly federal mandates in future elections without having to say they want to tear down the whole system. And if Democrats really believe what they’re saying about the benefits of comprehensive mandated benefit packages, they shouldn’t be afraid of them as a political issue going forward. A federal charter would also allow them to bypass obstructionist Republican governors now and in the future. Both parties should be able to agree that the currently regulatory hodgepodge needs a quick fix.