You must enter the characters with black color that stand out from the other characters

— Just like everyone predicted, Notre Dame and North Carolina will meet for the ACC Tournament title on Saturday night. Or like almost no one predicted.

In a way, it’s a perfect summation of the year to date in ACC play. It’s been fun, crazy, head-scratching, maddening, even facepalm-inducing at times – but it’s been fun, and one of the best years in the league in recent memory. So just soak it in and enjoy it tonight, no matter what happens, as it ends.

As we say goodbye to Greensboro for awhile, I give you all….this, from the special, unique soul of my hometown:

They say the best part…is in the middle. See you on the flip side, 336.

NO. 3 NOTRE DAME (28-6) VS. NO. 5 NORTH CAROLINA (24-10)

Time: 8:30 p.m.

TV: WRAL/ESPN

Radio: Buzz Sports Radio

THE BASICS

This is a game that will probably come down to UNC’s bigs, as it did the first time around. Carolina didn’t shoot well back in that one-point January loss, but they rebounded over half of their misses. Still, Kennedy Meeks and Brice Johnson were a combined 6-of-19 from the field in 44 minutes and had nine rebounds between them.

Meeks fouled out in 17 minutes and Johnson had a lot of trouble guarding Notre Dame’s Pat Connaughton. That will be the matchup to watch, probably: Connaughton had 16 points in the first meeting on 5-of-11 shooting (4-of-7 from three) and nine rebounds, doing what he does as an undersized four and giving opponents fits, while Zach Auguste – the true big – had 18 points. Those two shot 11-of-21 and had 15 rebounds. If UNC’s bigs are outplayed by those two yet again – plus the newly-developed freshman Bonzie Colson – Notre Dame should win this one going away.

But a healthier Marcus Paige should help, too – he led the Tar Heels in scoring in the first meeting, but was just 6-of-17 shooting. Justin Jackson was a non-factor in the first meeting, too, and obviously he’s come a long way. North Carolina is going to have to find some energy reserves from somewhere for their fourth game in four days, and even though Notre Dame had one extra day, the Irish are a bit thinner and have lost two pretty big leads and had to hang on.

That can be mentally exhausting. As can North Carolina’s end to the last two games, by the way. But still. Both teams have played improved defense in this event, and that, plus how each team exploits its mismatches, will be big keys in this one.

NARRATIVES

Notre Dame Win: Oh wait! We weren’t supposed to win because this is in Greensboro or something. LOL.

Hellllloooooooo beautiful! Show me this new world where you are a postseason clutch team.

Notre Dame Loss: Well, um….you got past the semifinals of a conference tournament. So that’s…something. I guess.

You wound us, Notre Dame. We thought you were different. We thought you were special.

North Carolina Win: What’s that you called North Carolina? Was the word soft or disappointing or what was it weird? I don’t think they can hear you anymore.

You know what North Carolina, I didn’t even see you there for awhile, but oh my you’re starting to look prett-ay good.

North Carolina Loss: Guess it’s back to 'fire Roy,' amirite?

​

This is also applicable because why would you even and yet you attempted to even

PREDICTION

North Carolina, 79-72. Neither result would surprise me, by the way. Just feels like the Tar Heels have found….something. Which probably means they’ll lose, because any time we think we know an ACC team, they do something weird. Either way, hope it’s a final that lives up to the week that was in the Greensboro finale.

Last week: 10-4 (10-4 ACC)

Overall: 96-44 (95-44 ACC) (8-4 Postseason)