Vermillion, SD

Tre Burnette scored 19 points and grabbed 13 rebounds and Casey Kasperbauer chipped in 17 points in leading South Dakota to an 80-64 win against South Dakota State inside the DakotaDome Saturday in the season finale for both teams.



The Coyotes (16-15, 9-7 Summit) have beaten their rival five of the last six times on their home court. South Dakota will finish no lower than fourth place in the Summit League standings and could be seeded third, fourth or fifth at next weekend’s Summit League Tournament in Sioux Falls pending the outcomes of Saturday’s games.



Cody Larson had 25 points and 12 rebounds to lead the Jackrabbits (21-9, 12-4), which settled for a share of the Summit League regular season crown with North Dakota State. South Dakota State had clinched the tournament’s top seed on Thursday.



South Dakota made 10 three-pointers and shot 47 percent from the field (25 of 53) to win for the fifth time in its last six games. Kasperbauer made four triples and had 14 points in the first half. The Coyotes spotted the Jacks an 8-0 lead before rallying to take a 44-34 edge into halftime.



Coyote big man James Hunter hit two quick field goals in the second half and South Dakota extended its lead to 15 at 51-36. South Dakota State drew within seven points at 64-57 with two George Marshall free throws with 5:52 to go. Hunter got his third field goal and Brandon Bos hit a long jumper to push the lead back to 11 points. Hunter had eight second-half points.



South Dakota made eight straight free throws to take a 79-61 lead with 2:25 remaining before South Dakota State emptied its bench. The Coyotes made 20 of 24 from the stripe compared to 13 of 18 for the Jacks.



Burnette registered his third double-double in the last five games and his fifth of the season. He made 8 of 12 shots from the field including two from downtown.



Cory Jacobsen’s 3-pointer with a minute to go was South Dakota State’s only bench points. Jake Bittle had 12 points to join Larson in double figures. Reed Tellinghuisen (2-9 FG) had nine points, George Marshall (2-11 FG) had eight and Deondre Parks (2-10 FG) had seven points for the Jacks.



South Dakota beat every Summit League team during the regular season and earned a sweep against Western Illinois. The Coyotes will begin the Summit League Tournament Sunday, March 8, at either 6 p.m. or 8:30 p.m.

College {{Title}} Remove Change News General Courts Web Only Crime Outdoors Events Center Non-Homepage Boredom Busters Pipeline Positively KELOLAND Technology Hunger Affordable Care Act Shops Flooding Remembering 9/11 Drought JazzFest Spring Storm Honor Flight Spencer Anniversary

DoApp Health News Business News Sports

Agriculture Markets Livestock Crops Politics

HealthBeat Cancer Children's Health Heart Health Wellness & Nutrition General Health Beat Women's Health RX Resources What's Going Around OTC Diabetes Recalls Dental Health Men's Health

Politics South Dakota Legislature Budget Congress Taxes General Local Campaign President US Senate New Laws US House Iowa Ballot Issues Local Races Minnesota Gubernatorial

Education Funding College Elementary High School Pre K School Supplies Middle School

Sports Professional College High School Sports Zone Headlines Summit League Tournament Olympics

Business Industry Your Money Matters Development Gas & Energy Legislation Economy/Stocks Employment General Health Care Technology Education Funding Tourism Banking/Finance Housing Transportation Insurance Meetings & Events Retail & Restaurants All Industries On The Move Shops Agriculture

Featured Stories Eye on KELOLAND Inside KELOLAND

Weather Snow Forecast Records Rain Flooding Drought WX Corner General

World News

Investigates GEAR UP

Sponsored Done

© 2016 Associated Press. All Rights Reserved. Material may not be redistributed.