Assurant Health Insurance Reverses Controversial Policy on Truvada

This incident raises the question of how many other medications are quietly being denied by insurance companies?

A jolt of panic hit HIV/AIDS prevention advocates late Thursday as POZ reported that Assurant Health Insurance would no longer be covering the medication Truvada for pre-exposure prophylaxis (PrEP) to prevent the spread of HIV. Apparently the parent company of Assurant Health, which specializes in health insurance form individuals and small businesses, is selling off or shutting down its insurance arm because, the Associated Press reported last week, it has been losing money since the passage of the Affordable Care Act.

POZ reported that several Assurant customers had received a notice (like the one below) saying the insurer would stop coverage in July.

“Prophylactic treatment is not a covered benefit as listed in the Exclusion Section of your member contract,” read one customer’s notice. “As a courtesy we will allow two additional months of prescription coverage for your Truvada prescription. This means you will continue to receive prescription drug card benefits for Truvada at CVSC Specialty Pharmacy until July 1, 2015.”

“Assurant Health’s recent decision to now refuse coverage of Truvada if prescribed as PrEP—an FDA-approved, CDC-endorsed, highly effective and needed HIV prevention intervention—is unprecedented, unacceptable and dangerous,” said Jim Pickett, the director of prevention advocacy and gay men’s health at AIDS Foundation of Chicago. “It reeks of contempt for, and discrimination of, people vulnerable to HIV. It’s bad for the health of individuals, and it’s bad for the health of our communities. AIDS Foundation of Chicago, with fellow advocates and allies from across the country, is mobilizing now to take a strong stand against this action.”

That threat prompted a swift reversal by the company. In an email statement to Tracy Baim, publisher of The Windy City Times, Mary Hinderliter, Assurant Health’s Vice President of Communications, wrote: “We are reversing our decision and will be reaching out to policyholders who received the letter.”

While this policy change was swiftly addressed and corrected, the incident raises questions about how many medications are quietly being cut from coverage that may not come to the attention of the media.