Someone asked me what Trump said in a speech. Well, he said “very, very, very” several times, “disgusting” a few times, and “me,” “my” and “I” lots of times.

I had my fingers crossed that FAMU would go a month without a dispute between the president and members of the board. Oh well. So much for wishful thinking.

A happy Zing! for my mother’s Democrat carrier, who leaves her newspaper where it’s safe and easy for her to retrieve. Thank you!

The final proof that Donald Trump cares nothing for America is the fact that he is running for president.

I choose honesty, integrity and intelligence in a candidate. I haven’t had a viable candidate for eight years, and still have none now.

Taxation without representation? Our government is based on the two-party system. If you choose to opt out, that’s your business, but you still have to ante-up like the rest of us.

To all politicians: In the immortal words of Pat Paulson, “I have upped my standards. Now up yours.”

The most disappointed Jeb supporter had to be Dick Cheney because he lost his chance to be president again.

If Harry Truman hadn’t used the atomic bomb to end the war with Japan he would have been impeached.

On the up side, a Trump presidency would certainly make Obama look a hundred times better.

Au contraire, the people who tell you Donald Trump would be a bad president are the people who told you George W. Bush would be a good one.

To those in power who won’t support the people’s choice for the GOP: We will remember when your re-election comes up!

Interest rates of 300-700 percent on payday loans. Whatever happened to usury laws?

The Feds should make Zika aid contingent on Scott supporting expanded Medicaid under Obamacare in this state.

In the book “1984,” politicians controlled the masses by giving them their “15 minutes of hate” on their view screens each morning. Sound familiar?

Well, it was two minutes, but point taken. Visit www.Tallahassee.com/zing to submit your Zing! and check out the Zing! blog at Tallahassee.com.

Quote of the day

“Men are not against you; they are merely for themselves.” Gene Fowler

Read or Share this story: http://on.tdo.com/27kqUoZ