Community members participate in a forum about Insure Tennessee Thursday at the Baptist Memphis Education Center.

By Kevin McKenzie of The Commercial Appeal

Memphis leaders are preparing for a full-court press to revive Gov. Bill Haslam's Insure Tennessee plan, facing what could be a tough sell politically during a presidential election year.

Local leaders say Haslam's plan for using $1.7 billion a year in federal Medicaid expansion dollars to provide health coverage for Tennesseans should be a slam dunk. But University of Memphis Professor Cyril F. Chang, a health care economist, likened the relationship between the federal offer of Medicaid expansion and Tennessee as "two porcupines trying to make love."

"How do they do it?" Chang asked more than 100 people at a community forum Thursday on the campus of Baptist Memorial Hospital-Memphis.

"You do it slowly and you do it carefully and you do it torturously," he said. "And so far, we have not done it."

State Sen. Brian Kelsey, R-Germantown, who opposes Insure Tennessee, doubts it will find Republican support in the state Legislature during this presidential election year.

"I don't think any Republicans will be looking to expand Medicaid this year," Kelsey said by email. "The cuts to hospitals under Obamacare do not begin until next year, so most Republican legislators want to wait to elect a new president to repeal and replace Obamacare."

Hospitals have until 2017 before cuts in special federal payments for treating larger numbers of uninsured and low-income patients take hold, Kelsey said. The nation's hospitals accepted the gradual disappearance of those payments with the understanding that Medicaid expansion and more insured patients would replace the lost federal revenue.

Craig Becker, president of the Nashville-based Tennessee Hospital Association, agreed the election year will make it difficult for Insure Tennessee's reconsideration. To move the needle, the hospital association will focus on education.

"We're going to spend a good part of our time doing education of both the Legislature and the public in trying to get them to understand a whole lot better about what Insure Tennessee is, and more importantly I guess, what it isn't," he said. "And it isn't Obamacare."

A survey of Tennessee registered voters highlighted the power of education to sway opinions on the issue. The survey of 789 voters in January 2015 found that when first asked about Insure Tennessee, 44 percent of Republicans, 60 percent of Democrats and 46 percent of independent voters supported it.

After hearing arguments for and against the governor's plan, voter support rose to 60 percent of Republicans and 61 percent of Democrats and independents.

Insure Tennessee could cover more than 67,000 Shelby County adults, about 7 percent of the county population, who don't have enough income to qualify for the subsidized health coverage offered through the Healthcare.gov marketplace, Chang said.

"Most of these individuals, they are working and they are working food services, construction, cleaning, maintenance, sales and transportation and others," he said.

With Insure Tennessee from 2014-16, Shelby County could have brought in as much as $325 million "at no extra cost to us," Chang said. The economic impact could affect 35,000 hospital jobs and generate more than $2 billion.

Memphis' business community has supported Insure Tennessee, and Greater Memphis Chamber CEO Phil Trenary said he received criticism last year after telling legislators at a local restaurant gathering something similar to "that if you look at this, anyone who doesn't vote for this is a moron."

He said he found excuses from lawmakers last year in Nashville, out-of-state people lining the hallways and too few voices from Memphis and elsewhere in the state.

"We got there too late, we got there without enough force and we got our butts kicked," said Trenary. Chambers of commerce in Memphis, Nashville, Knoxville and Chattanooga have allied to speak with one voice this year, he said.

Shelby County Mayor Mark Luttrell considers Insure Tennessee a "no brainer," but said a Plan B involving education is needed with dim prospects for the bill this year. County government provides $28 million a year to Regional One Health as a safety net hospital.

Luttrell also said the difference is at the ballot box.

"We have not done a very good job at mobilizing for the long-term," he said. "The NRA does."

Said Chang: "My last word is that let's hope the porcupines will succeed."