Large sections of pipe are shown in Sumner, Texas. Associated Press

Dante Chinni writes Politics Counts as a regular Capital Journal feature. Mr. Chinni is the director of the American Communities Project at American University, which examines different types of communities across the U.S.

This week, the White House announced that President Barack Obama wouldn’t sign any legislation approving the construction of the Keystone XL pipeline.

The announcement comes as polls show a majority of Americans supporting construction of the pipeline and the new GOP-controlled Congress has made Keystone a top priority. So at first blush, the veto threat might look like a bold stand — or a way to pick a fight with the new congressional leadership.

But there are a list of reasons why Mr. Obama may feel little pressure to support the pipeline, or to accelerate its approval by an ongoing State Department review.

1. Falling Gas Prices

First, there are falling gas prices, which have become a dominant thread in economic news coverage. The latest data from AAA shows that a gallon of gasoline is going for about $2.20 on average in the U.S. That’s down from about $3.30 a year ago and the lowest that number has been since 2009.

Does that have an impact on how the public as a whole views the Keystone XL project? Looks like it.

In March 2013, a Pew Research Center Poll found that 66% of Americans favored the pipeline. By November 2014, that figured had fallen by seven points to 59%. In that time the monthly average cost for a gallon of gas went from about $3.77 to about $2.99.

And, of course, gas prices have fallen much further since November. That may mean less interest among the public in getting more oil to the market.

And beyond public opinion, falling prices could have an impact on how Congress sees the pipeline – or at least offer cover to Democrats who don’t want to overturn an Obama veto. This week, the price for light sweet oil crude fell to under $50 a barrel. A State Department study on the project said prices below $75 a barrel could present problems for it because of the higher costs of extracting oil from the sands in Canada.

2. Who Sees a Benefit?

Whether to approve Keystone XL is a complicated decision involving concerns about energy independence, the environment and the economy. One of the hoped-for benefits of its completion would be lower gasoline prices for consumers — but the anticipated benefit has played differently among Democrats and Republicans.

Amid the drop in gas prices, support for the pipeline has fallen noticeably among Democrats. In March 2013, 54% of Democrats favored Keystone XL in the Pew poll. By November 2014, only 43% did. Republican support remained constant — 82% favored it in March 2013 and 83% favored it in November 2014.

There also may be other factors at play. Democratic voters, who tend to cluster around urban areas, generally rely less on their cars. Data from the U.S. Census show that workers in Big City, Urban Suburb and College Town counties (Democratic-leaning county types in the American Communities Project at American University) tend to drive less than workers who live in Republican leaning types such as the Exurbs.

You can see where those counties are on the map below. The Big Cities are in pink, the Urban Suburbs in dark orange, the College Towns in light brown and the Exurbs in yellow.

According to 2012 Census American Community Survey data, 29% of workers in the Urban Suburbs spend at least 30 minutes a day alone in their cars or trucks commuting to work, one way. That number is 27% in the Big Cities and only 17% in the College Towns.

In the Exurbs, about 36% of workers spend at least a 30 minutes alone in their cars or trucks commuting to work one way.

In fact, going by this measure one night expect Exurbanites to be the most supportive of the pipeline. They spend more time in their cars than residents of any county other type in the American Communities Project.

3. Follow the Jobs

Third, there is the question of where the country’s oil and gas extraction jobs are located. Ultimately, the people most focused on the Keystone XL pipeline may be those involved in oil and gas extraction — and most of those people don’t live in Democratic-leaning states.

Look at this map from the Bureau of Labor Statistics showing employment of service unit operators in oil and gas extraction by metropolitan statistical area. You’ll see lots of jobs in Texas, Oklahoma, Arkansas, Louisiana, Kansas, Wyoming, Montana and North Dakota. Not a single one of those eight states voted for Mr. Obama in 2012 — and together they have only two Democratic senators.

Those communities wouldn’t necessarily all gain from Keystone XL. Indeed, areas like those in west Texas and Wyoming likely will see no direct benefit from the pipeline. But the veto threat is aimed at their industry and at what its executives see a major goal for 2015.

Any veto would be seen as the White House frowning on that industry and/or sending a signal that it is going to regulate it in a tougher fashion, particularly where environmental impacts are concerned.

But looking at that map you can see why, politically at least, that may not be a very big concern for the president. And despite polls and congressional interest in the pipeline, a veto threat for Mr. Obama may not be the high-risk move it seems.