A severe thunderstorm rumbled through the mountains southwest of Fort Collins Sunday afternoon, unleashing hail and torrential rains.

Hail damaged some vehicles in the Meeker Park area as the storm moved southeast at 15 mph, according to the National Weather service.

The storm produced quarter-size hail, at about 2:40 p.m., as it headed toward Estes Park and Lyons.

The weather service reported that the storm could cause flash flooding in some areas along the way. At about 3:45 p.m. the weather service issued a tornado warning, through 4:45, for central Weld County.

A tornado was spotted over Gill, about 10 miles east of Greeley, the weather service reported. The tornado was moving southeast at 15 mph.

A flash flood watch is in effect for several areas in eastern Colorado on Sunday afternoon.

Beginning at 3 p.m., the National Weather Service issued a flash flood watch for the following counties: Logan, Morgan, Phillips, Sedgwick, Washington, Kit Carson and Yuma. Eastern Elbert and Lincoln counties were also including in the watch area.

Slow-moving thunderstorms with heavy rainfall are likely to pass through those areas, leading to possible rainfall rates of 2 inches per hour or greater, the weather service said.

Small streams, larger creeks, streets, ditches and low lying areas are potential flash flood targets.

The watch is in effect through late Sunday night.

“Some storms could be severe, with large hail, damaging winds and heavy rain,” forecasters said.

Some areas on the eastern plains could get hit with “golf ball size” hail and winds up to 60 mph, the weather service warned.

Storms may possibly produce a “tornado or two,” the weather service said.

In Denver, the weather service expects isolated showers with a chance of afternoon thunderstorms.

Temperatures could reach a high of 90 degrees on this mostly cloudy day, the weather service said.

By Monday, Denver temperatures are expected to drop to a high of 81 degrees with patchy fog and a 40 percent chance of rainfall under mostly cloudy skies.

Elizabeth Hernandez: 303-954-1223, ehernandez@denverpost.com or twitter.com/ehernandez