MIKE JACOBS: Doug Burgum's expensive but strange campaign

Doug Burgum is serious about becoming governor of North Dakota. He's spending so much money that it is hard to miss his television advertising and his direct mail pieces.

But the campaign seems a little off target.

There are two things to understand here. One is that the winner of the Republican primary is likely to become governor. The second is that the primary is open to all voters. There's no party registration. The only relevant rule is that a voter can't split a ballot among candidates of more than one party.

Burgum presents himself as a visionary and a change agent, "a new leader," his latest mailing asserts.

Yet he is running a narrowly focused campaign.

He emphasizes his conservative credentials in his advertising. The word appears three times in big type in the 12-page glossy piece that landed in mailboxes last week.

He has chosen to attack his opponent for supporting "Obamacare," a questionable proposition on its face. Obamacare really isn't an issue for a state governor. Of course, it's fair to use it against federal candidates, as Rick Berg did so effectively in 2010, when he defeated the nine-term incumbent Rep. Earl Pomeroy.

But the issue has a whiff of yesterday about it. The country has pretty much moved on.

What's strange about its appearance is that using the issue drives away people who might otherwise be inclined to vote for Burgum. That would be Democrats who are eligible to vote in the primary and might be motivated to do so.

Especially since Burgum's attack on the Good Old Boys network resonates with them.

Except that Burgum has chosen to raise that issue in a strange way, too.

He's for term limits, he says.

That's another whiff of yesterday. North Dakota voters settled the issue 20 years ago, when they rejected a constitutional amendment limiting terms for state and federal officials.

Burgum's analysis of the state of North Dakota politics is on target, but his solution is not.

Maybe that's because today's cronyism isn't an accident. It's the result of carefully considered changes that essentially stacked the deck, protecting incumbency and establishing a risk-free path between political offices.

Burgum pointed this out in a meeting with the Herald's editorial board. Because the attorney general is elected in the "off-year," he can run for governor without jeopardizing his job. If he wins, he appoints his replacement and extends his influence on boards and commissions that govern so many aspects of state policy, crucially the three-member Industrial Commission, which oversees the oil and gas industry.

Still stranger, Burgum's campaign material gives no indication of how he'd accomplish his major goal: changing the economy. This has been a mantra of state politics as long as there's been a state. Burgum's appeal is that he's had business success, building a company on the cutting edge of the digital revolution.

Yet his rhetoric in his latest mailing is banal. "Doug has created high-paying jobs right here in North Dakota. He is the conservative business leader we need for our changing economy."

How's that?

It's a fair question. What's the path forward? And what is the governor's role?

Burgum has spent so much money on his campaign that his opponent, the incumbent attorney general, has accused him of trying to buy the office. "North Dakota's not for sale," Wayne Stenehjem's advertising says.

Maybe not. The voters will decide that.

But North Dakota is up for bids.

Last month, an audit of the department that manages state-owned lands and minerals found the most disturbing kind of cronyism, this time between land board officials and the companies they regulate.

The attorney general is a member of the land board.

But Burgum hasn't raised the issue. Maybe it's a matter of timing. Printing and broadcast production take time, of course.

Still, there are other ways to get a message across.

Unfortunately for his chances, Burgum seems to be stuck in a pothole, running an anti-insider campaign aimed at the insiders — Republicans who've governed the state for a quarter of a century.

The primary is June 14.

Canadian quandary: As expected, Manitobans turned out the New Democratic Party government, turning instead to the Conservatives. Earlier voters in Saskatchewan returned a Conservative government.

Two points here:

One is that politics in the provinces do not mirror Canadian national politics. The Liberal Party won a solid majority in the national election in October. Liberal candidates did poorly in both Manitoba and Saskatchewan.

The second is that Canada's multi-party system may be in jeopardy. The New Democrats seemed on the ascendant just before the national election. They finished third. Now they've been dumped in two of their historic strongholds.

Worse from the national party's point of view, a divisive leadership election looms as the party struggles to find its moorings. Should it strive to pull Canada to the left, its historic role? Or should it seek to govern, its more recent ambition?

Jacobs is retired as editor and publisher of the Herald. Readers can reach him at mjacobs@gfherald.com.