Light up Loveland celebration will take place at 4:30 p.m. at Benson Park Sculpture Garden Nov. 27; ornaments on sale now

Mike Edwards tightens the nuts and bolts on the Loveland archway and other Christmas decorations on display at Dwayne Webster Veteran's Park on Saturday in Loveland. Wade Hodges, supervisor of the installations, said he and his crew will spend the next few days getting the lights wired and bulbs replaced to have the display completed by Tuesday. ( Trevor L. Davis / Loveland Reporter-Herald )

Buy the Ornament Art of the Rockies: 440 N. Lincoln Ave. Columbine Drug: 2295 W. Eisenhower Blvd. Jax Mercantile: 950 E. Eisenhower Blvd. Loveland Visitor Center: 5400 Stone Creek Circle. Loveland Museum/Gallery: 503 N. Lincoln Ave. Mail Mart & Gift Shop: 117 E. 37th St. McKee Gift Shop: 2000 Boise Ave. Rowe's Flowers and Gifts: 863 Cleveland Ave. The UPS Store: 1473 N. Denver Ave. and 1151 Eagle Drive. Website: http://www.lovelandchristmasornament.org/ for details about the Winter Holiday Council and ordering information.

If you go What: Light Up Loveland decoration lighting ceremony When: Event starts at 4:30 p.m., decorations are lit at 5 p.m. Where: Benson Park Sculpture Garden, 1125 W. 29th St. More info: Enjoy a visit with Santa, music by the Original Dickens Carolers and light refreshments. Call 970-402-6525 for details or visit www.lovelandchristmasornament.org.

The Winter Holiday Council is excited to enter the holiday season this year with a new ornament and the third annual "Light Up Loveland" decoration ceremony at Benson Park Sculpture Garden on Friday.

The Friday celebration will unveil the lighted decorations at Benson Park and include visits with Santa and cookies and cocoa. The event starts at 4:30 p.m. with the lighting ceremony to commence at 5 p.m.

The Original Dickens Carolers will also perform.

The lighted decorations will include a Santa's train, snowflakes, ice skaters, polar bears and wire-framed deer.

"Brand new banners go in a week after Thanksgiving," said Kelly Ross with the Winter Holiday Council. "One is 'Season's Greetings' and the other is 'Welcome to Loveland.'"

She said those will go in on the south side of Lake Loveland, hanging from the light posts.

The walking path along the lake on the south side will also be decorated with flames atop the antique light posts, and several large decorations will be placed again at Dwayne Webster Veterans Park.

"Those will be up again for the first time in about three years," Ross said.

The Winter Holiday Council also has its holiday ornament on sale now at local stores.

Ryan Baisley, left, Zachary Davis and Mark Iler instal Christmas decorations at Dwayne Webster Veteran's Park on Saturday. (Trevor L. Davis / Loveland Reporter-Herald)

The design this year is called "Santa's Toyshop" by Ann Palmer Wood, and shows Santa Claus with a paint brush in hand, painting a toy train next to a teddy bear with a heart on its stomach. The toys are resting atop Santa's list.

Jax has been added to the list of vendors selling the ornament this year. The Visitor Center sells the ornament year-round.

"We're looking for new artists to submit designs," Ross said.

They're calling for Loveland artists, even new artists, to submit designs for the annual ornament. Designs must be submitted by January. Funds from ornament sales allow the Winter Holiday Council to purchase new decorations for Loveland and provide upkeep of the current ones.

"We really appreciate the community support," Ross said. "We couldn't do this without the city being behind this and the wonderful volunteers."

She said the council is always looking for volunteers to help out with year-round planning. Call 970-402-6525 for details.

Jessica Benes: 970-669-5050 ext. 530, jbenes@reporter-herald.com, Twitter.com/jessicabenes.