Topics: Christianity, Editor's Picks, Gay Rights, GOP, IRS, James O'Keefe, law, pastors, Religion, Republicans, Tea Party, The Right, The Tea Party, Voter Fraud, Politics News

This election season has been yet another right-wing “voter fraud” pageant ranging from hysterical accusations of “ballot-box stuffing” (which turned out to be perfectly legal delivery of early votes to the registrar’s office) to more silly high jinx from the James O’Keefe fraud squad, the hilariously named “Project Veritas” allegedly proving that elections are being stolen throughout the land by producing heavily edited videotapes of random people saying something that looks bad. But the blockbuster story of the cycle has to be the one that purported to prove that “illegals” are stealing our elections. This was based upon a study conducted by Old Dominion University political science professors Jesse Richman and David Earnest, in which they extrapolated from census figures and self-reported statistics on illegal immigration that 6.4 percent of the votes cast in 2008 (or 1.2 million people) were by undocumented immigrants and 2.2 percent in 2010.

The study’s methodology was immediately called into question by other political scientists, and the authors themselves played down the significance of their findings. Nonetheless this story sent a wave of excitement through right-wing circles we haven’t seen since the Tea Partyers donned tricorn hats and started storming town halls five years ago with the likes of Breitbart.com declaring that this study gave credence to Phyllis Schlafly’s Eagle Forum’s dire warnings about legal immigration destroying America by destroying the Republican Party:

The Eagle Forum report concluded that, though “Republican outreach to Asian and Latino voters” is “critical,” Republicans “can never turn liberal-leaning immigrants and their adult children into supporters of limited government faster than the current high level of legal immigration (one million a year) is bringing in new liberal voters.” The report found that new immigrants “and their adult children are significantly more liberal than the average American voter on a host of policy issues, including the size of government, Obamacare, affirmative action, gun control, greater environmental regulation, and other issues championed by the Left.”

This is one case where they are admitting outright that they want to suppress the vote:

The report found that new immigrants “and their adult children are significantly more liberal than the average American voter on a host of policy issues, including the size of government, Obamacare, affirmative action, gun control, greater environmental regulation, and other issues championed by the Left… Thus, if future immigration is not reduced, it will be virtually impossible for Republicans to remain nationally competitive as a conservative party.”

That’s refreshingly honest. They know immigrants are hostile to their agenda so they want to stop immigration. Good to know.

But in the midst of all this caterwauling about illegal immigrants stealing elections and vote fraud and ballot box stuffing, guess who’s simultaneously demanding that voting laws be broken so their people can vote against gay rights on Election Day? It would be unbelievable if it weren’t so common for the right wing to do exactly what it accuses the other side of doing.

In August, opponents of Houston’s recently enacted Equal Rights Ordinance (HERO) reportedly submitted more than the seventeen thousand signatures needed to qualify put the measure on the November ballot. However, upon review of the petition under the City Charter, City Attorney David Feldman determined that thousands of the signatures failed to meet the legal requirements set by local and state law for a voter referendum… On November 2, thousands of conservatives met in Houston at the “I Stand Sunday” rally to demand that the city government allow for a public vote on the ordinance, despite the failure of the repeal petition. The event, which was hosted by the anti-gay hate group Family Research Council (FRC), was widely promoted by Fox News and featured speeches from Fox’s Todd Starnes and Mike Huckabee. At the rally, speakers demanded that the city of Houston “let the people vote” on the ordinance, accusing openly gay Mayor Annise Parker of violating the religious liberty of HERO’s opponents by refusing to count their improperly collected signatures.