OLYMPIA, Wash. – Washington Healthplanfinder today announced that 165,436 Washingtonians have currently signed up for a Qualified Health Plan or renewed their health coverage through www.wahealthplanfinder.org.

The Exchange also released its second Healthplanfinder annual open enrollment report that includes data through early March, including county-by-county enrollments, enrollee demographic information, enrollments by insurance company and more.

“We are pleased to have gained nearly 67,000 new customers in the Qualified Health Plan market this year,” said Richard Onizuka, CEO for the Washington Health Benefit Exchange. “We’re looking forward to continuing to grow our competitive marketplace during the next open enrollment period.”

There’s still time to enroll through a special enrollment period for existing customers who experienced technical difficulties and were unable to complete their applications by the Feb. 15 deadline, as well as those who become aware of the tax penalty for not having health insurance under the Affordable Care Act when they file their annual tax return this year.

Customers may contact the Customer Support Center to request a special enrollment at 1-855-WA-FINDER. The special enrollment period ends on April 17, 2015.

“It’s important for qualified residents to know they still have time to get insured for 2015 coverage,” said Onizuka. “Otherwise, the next opportunity to sign up is Nov. 1, 2015 for coverage starting on Jan. 1 of next year.”

Other takeaways from the annual report include:

Residents are Qualifying for Financial Help: 77 percent of Qualified Health Plan enrollees were eligible for a tax credit to lower their health insurance premiums. The average amount of a health plan including a tax credit was $176.

Brokers Signed up New Enrollees: Brokers assisted 67 percent of new Qualified Health Plan customers during the second open enrollment period.

Young Adults Signed Up: Young adults ages 18-34 made up 24 percent of enrollments in Qualified Health Plans. Including Washington Apple Health, young adults made up 42 percent of total enrollments.

In addition, 530,000 new adults have accessed coverage through Washington Apple Health (Medicaid). Combined with Qualified Health Plan enrollment, nearly 700,000 residents have gained access to free or low cost coverage through Washington Healthplanfinder.

“More than half a million additional residents have accessed Apple Health through Washington Healthplanfinder since it opened, helping us reach our mission of a healthier Washington,” said MaryAnne Lindeblad, state Medicaid director at the Health Care Authority. “We have worked closely with our partners at the Health Benefit Exchange to help ensure Apple Health clients have an excellent experience choosing the health care that is right for them. We will continue that focus in 2015 and beyond.”

To view past data reports, please visit the Washington Health Benefit Exchange News Center at http://wahbexchange.org/news-resources/press-room/

Reminders: Enrollment in Washington Healthplanfinder Business and Washington Apple Health (Medicaid) is year-round. Apple Health customers will receive a notice 60 days before the month they enrolled in or renewed their coverage last year.

About Washington Healthplanfinder

Washington Healthplanfinder is a new online marketplace for individuals, families and small businesses in Washington to compare and enroll in health insurance coverage and gain access to tax credits, reduced cost sharing and public programs such as Medicaid. The next open enrollment period for Washington Healthplanfinder begins on Nov. 1, 2015 for health insurance coverage beginning on Jan. 1, 2016. The open enrollment period will extend through Jan. 31, 2016.

About the Washington Health Benefit Exchange

The Washington Health Benefit Exchange is a public-private partnership established in accordance with the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act of 2010 (ACA) to implement a new health insurance marketplace for individuals and small businesses. The Exchange is separate from the state and governed by an independent 11-member board. For more information, visit www.wahbexchange.org.

About Washington Apple Health

In Washington, Medicaid is called Washington Apple Health. Coverage is free for those who qualify. Find out more about Apple Health at www.hca.wa.gov/medicaid/Pages/index.aspx. Since the Affordable Care Act launched in October 2013, more people are able to get preventive care, like cancer screenings, treatment for diabetes and high blood pressure, and many other health care services they need to stay healthy. Apple Health clients enroll and renew online using Washington Healthplanfinder. Apple Health is administered by the Washington Health Care Authority: www.hca.wa.gov.