For the past 35 years, folks have flocked to county health department locations like the one on Ringling Boulevard in Sarasota.

They seek check-ups, baby care and the kind of stuff that keeps you from becoming unhealthy.

But a new state directive may mean that thousands of Sarasota County citizens won't have anywhere to turn for their primary health care as the County Health Department discusses getting out of the doctoring business.

"Sarasota is wonderful in offering a lot of services," said Tim Schroeder, standing alongside his wife, Ronni, on the steps of the William L. Little Health and Human Services Center. "And they would be remiss in not having that."

But in light of a directive from the Gov. Rick Scott administration that county officials not seek federal grants to operate such facilities – which would mean the loss of $1.9 million under the Affordable Care Act – county commissioners are crying crisis

Health honchos are a bit more cautious.

"Well, it is a crisis if it went away and just left 30,000 individuals without care," said Chuck Henry, the Florida Health/Sarasota administrator. "The department is working very diligently to seek out partners to look at various options because our primary goal as the Department of Health is to connect individuals to needed services."

If the county centers closed, places like the clinics of the Manatee County Rural Health Services, also accredited as a “federally qualified health center,” would ideally pick up the slack, but they're not sure they can handle the extra business.

"The only thing that I believe is known is that if there is not an adequate plan there are going to be a lot of residents of Sarasota County that won't have their primary and preventative health care needs met, " said Dr. William Colgate, the senior vice president of accreditation and quality for Manatee County Rural Health Services.

The current funding runs out in about a year.

The deadline to extend the funding or find a sensible surrogate is in the fall, but for now, patients shouldn't notice a big difference

"We're open, we're taking new appointments," said Henry, the administrator at Florida Health/Sarasota. "We're taking new clients and that will continue into the future."

Bottom line is that there is no crisis, yet. It's hoped that this early intervention and call to action now may just prevent that down the line.