A lot of smart people have accumulated quite a bit of data showing how many people, and who specifically, have benefited from the implementation of the Affordable Care Act, otherwise known as Obamacare.

But new questions abound about how many people could be hurt if the law were suddenly stripped away.

That’s the biggest of big-money questions as conservatives push a two-pronged offensive against the law in the Supreme Court and the now fully Republicanized Congress. And it’s an argument being raised—perhaps ironically—by groups that several years ago were some of the fiercest opponents of President Barack Obama’s signature policy achievement back when we were in the throes of a nasty legislative war that scarred relations between the White House and Congress for years to come.

Fast-forward to today, and we find the ACA becoming something of a boon for insurance companies and hospitals. When the threat of a disappearing ACA looms as a conservative Supreme Court deliberates the law’s fate in King v. Burwell, best believe those who stand to lose much will become the law’s loudest supporters.

Hence, arguing in defense of Obamacare, America’s Health Insurance Plans submits a friend of the court brief (pdf) that paints a medically apocalyptic picture should the Affordable Care Act collapse. Referencing Massachusetts’ example as the birthplace of then-Gov. Mitt Romney’s model that inspired the ACA, AHIP and others note that “for every 830 adults gaining insurance coverage there was one fewer death per year,” adding, “[nationally,] 8.2 million people can be expected to lose health insurance in the absence of subsidies on the federal marketplace … [which] equates to over 9,800 additional Americans dying each year.”

So far, 9.5 million people have enrolled in the health care exchanges, a number that’s fast making Obamacare too big to fail. That means if conservatives are successful, quite a few people of color will be on their own, including African Americans and Latinos who have seen their uninsured rates drop significantly by 8 and 10 percent, respectively, as a result of the ACA (though the drop could be even steeper for black folks if certain GOP-held states would accept Medicaid expansion).

We turned to a few noted health care policy experts for The Take on exactly what happens if the Affordable Care Act as we know it disappears … and who would suffer in the process.

Dr. Maya Rockeymoore, Center for Global Policy Solutions: At the end of the day, Obamacare has been responsible for [almost] 10 million people receiving health care coverage, many of whom represent particularly vulnerable populations—Latino, African American, low-income.

Many Americans will face real consequences: Fewer people will seek important preventive care, serious medical issues will go untreated and many families will be financially devastated by sky-high medical bills. Those shrugging their shoulders about the thousands who would likely die an early death or struggle with untreated conditions if Obamacare is repealed—and not replaced with an equivalent or better system—fail to consider the steep economic toll this would take on government and industry in the form of greater uncompensated care, lost productivity, and higher incidences of preventable and expensive chronic diseases.

Dr. Ellen Shaffer, EQUAL Health Network: With the implementation of the Affordable Care Act, we’ve witnessed premiums stabilize, and that leads to more healthy people. So in the event this law is repealed or drawn down, 99 percent of those who would otherwise face burdensome or cost-prohibitive premiums if the ACA were not in place will suddenly be back in the same situation. There will be a substantial increase in premiums for 31 percent of single-income households and more than 50 percent of family-income households.