Topics: 2014 elections, Affordable Care Act, cap-and-trade, Climate Change, Deficit, Economics, GOP, John Boehner, John McCain, midterm elections, Mitch McConnell, Obamacare, obstruction, Paul Krugman, R-Ariz., R-Ky., R-Ohio, Republicans, Stimulus, The New York Times, U.S. Economy, Politics News

How did the Republican Party — with a favorability rating significantly worse than the Democratic Party’s — manage to trounce the Democrats on Tuesday?

The obvious answer is that midterm elections witness a substantial dropoff in turnout by core Democratic voters; the dynamics of this year’s contest simply favored the GOP. But as New York Times columnist and economist Paul Krugman emphasizes this morning, voters awarded Senate control and an historic House majority to a party that has gotten every major policy question of the last several years woefully wrong.

Take the financial crisis and its aftermath. “According to conservative dogma, which denounces any regulation of the sacred pursuit of profit, the financial crisis of 2008 — brought on by runaway financial institutions — shouldn’t have been possible,” Krugman writes. But Republicans refused to rethink their reflexive opposition to robust regulation, he notes, and they badly bungled the response to the ensuing Great Recession. Denouncing deficit spending and championing austerity, GOPers like House Speaker John Boehner prescribed policies that actually exacerbate economic slumps. Though the GOP’s knee-jerk opposition to government spending didn’t stop the enactment of President Obama’s 2009 stimulus, the party did preside over a drastic cut in crucial investments like infrastructure after it captured control of the House of Representatives in 2010, and those spending cuts have held back the economic recovery.

On health care reform, meanwhile, the party’s predictions of peril haven’t panned out. Krugman notes that the GOP forecast “minimal enrollments, more people losing insurance than gaining it, [and] soaring costs.” The reality? More people than expected are enrolling in health care plans; the number of Americans without health insurance has substantially decreased; premiums are “well below expectations”; and the rate of health spending growth has slowed.