via Wikimedia Commons

Ben Carson is currently running second in the GOP polls behind Donald Trump. This means that the majority of Republican voters polled nationally want him to be president over people like Jeb Bush, Marco Rubio, and Ted Cruz. Carson, the West Palm Beach neurosurgeon who not only once left a sponge in somebody's skull but also a guy who literally has no idea how the Constitution works, is all these people's second choice to be the guy in charge.

But being in second also means having the spotlight on you. And things have turned a bit hot under the lights for Carson, who made headlines late last week when he said that the Holocaust could have been greatly diminished had the Jews living in Nazi Germany owned guns. This in the same week when the nation had not one but two school shootings.

Alas, it was not the first (nor will it be the last) time Carson has said some crazy stuff.

Below are the nine craziest things he's ever said (so far):

9. Obamacare Is Worst Thing Since Slavery

Carson hates Obamacare, which is par for the course with all GOP nominees. But where the others argue that the Affordable Care Act is making the country broke, Carson took it up a notch and said it's the worst thing since slavery.

He also went on to say it's "slavery in a way because it is making all of us subservient to the government.”

8. The President Can Ignore the Supreme Court

"President is required to carry out the laws of the land. The laws of the land comes from the legislative branch. So if the legislative branch creates a law or changes the law, the executive branch has a responsibility to carry it out. It doesn't say they have the responsibility to carry out a judicial law."

Um. No.

7. Prison Turns Nongay People Gay

This starts off as a sound debate about rights and marriage equality and the Constitution. But when Carson is asked why he believes being gay is a choice, he turns on the Carson and drops this gem:

"A lot of people who go into prison go into prison straight — and when they come out, they're gay. So, did something happen while they were in there? Ask yourself that question."

That's an ironclad point that cannot be debated.

6. Homosexuality Is Like Bestiality

"My thoughts are that marriage is between a man and a woman. It’s a well-established, fundamental pillar of society, and no group — be they gays, be they NAMBLA, be they people who believe in bestiality — it doesn’t matter what they are — they don’t get to change the definition."

Maybe if you hadn't gone to prison, you wouldn't want to do it with your cat so bad.

5. America Is Like Nazi Germany

Carson LOVES himself some Nazi Germany comparisons. And he wants you to love them too. Because history. So yes, he's done the whole America-is-like-Hitler thing more times than can be counted, but this one was particularly strong. Mainly because he's not just saying the powers that be are like the Nazis — he's saying we're all goose-stepping' along with the government.

4. Obama Is a Psychopath

"Like most psychopaths," Carson said in a GQ profile, referring to Obama looking sharp for a State of the Union Address, "that’s why they’re successful. That’s the way they look. They all look great."

3. Theory of Evolution Invented by the Devil

“I personally believe that this theory that Darwin came up with was something that was encouraged by the adversary, and it has become what is scientifically, politically correct,” Carson told an audience of Seventh Day Adventists in 2012.

Did the devil invent all the ancient fossils uncovered by scientists over the years to prove evolution too? That's dedication!

2. "I Believe You Want the Guy Behind the Counter"

Carson's been making the rounds for gun rights lately and, during one interview, recounted an incident where he was part of a holdup at a Popeyes Chicken restaurant. The gist of the story was that the gunman put the gun to Carson's ribs and, according to Carson's own take on the story, the presidential hopeful told the gunman, "I believe you want the guy behind the counter."

THIS IS THE TYPE OF BRAVERY AND GALLANT SPIRIT OBAMA'S PRESIDENCY HAS LACKED !

1. Holocaust Could Have Been Avoided if Jews Had Guns

Carson defended his comments by saying that Nazi Germany was not the only example he gave. There have been many tyrants throughout history who could have been thwarted had people had guns.