Cancer treatment. (Photo: Gerry Broome, AP)

Suppose that you found out your son or daughter was dying of an untreatable brain tumor. Suppose you also found out that a pharmaceutical company was working on a drug to treat that disease but that it had only been tested in 10 adults.

While all the patients came through unharmed, only two showed a little improvement. If your doctor said that drug was your child's only hope, but the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) might not let you get it, wouldn't you want something done?

That is exactly what state "right to try" laws seek to do. The problem is that the FDA is not the main obstacle standing between desperately ill people and experimental drugs.

OUR VIEW: FDA vs. right to try: Our view

The FDA does take a look at requests from physicians to use experimental drugs and approves them 99% of the time. True, getting access to the agency can sometimes be slow if doctors aren't sure how to do so. Things are even worse if families do not have access to savvy medical expertise to point them toward the latest drug research — something these laws don't fix.

The FDA is not the main problem. Money is. Right-to-try laws do nothing to pay for unapproved drugs.

Families need money to travel to where the new drugs are. And small companies need money to cover their costs.

Nothing in right-to-try laws compels a company to make a new drug available even to a dying child.

Why wouldn't they? Many companies that are working on the newest experimental drugs are tiny and have barely enough money to stay afloat. They often reason that it is better to use what supply of drug they have to get their product to market than to give it away and risk bankruptcy.

Right-to-try laws are basically "right to beg" laws. Begging is not what the dying and desperately ill should be asked to do. Legislators should stop enacting feel-good laws and show they care by finding the money to pay for experimental drugs and the travel and expenses involved in getting to them.

Arthur L. Caplan is a bioethicist and director of the division of medical ethics at New York University's Langone Medical Center.

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1oHyLss