photos by CAITIE MCMEKIN/NEWS SENTINEL Republican presidential candidate Ohio Gov. John Kasich speaks at the Knox County Republican Party’s annual Lincoln Day Dinner on Saturday.

SHARE Republican presidential candidate Ohio Gov. John Kasich, speaks at the Knox County Republican Party’s annual Lincoln Day Dinner on Saturday. (CAITIE MCMEKIN/NEWS SENTINEL) Ohio Gov. John Kasich speaks at the Knox County Republican Party’s annual Lincoln Day Dinner on Saturday. (CAITIE MCMEKIN/NEWS SENTINEL) Ohio Gov. John Kasich speaks at the Knox County Republican Party’s annual Lincoln Day Dinner on Saturday. (CAITIE MCMEKIN/NEWS SENTINEL) Dinner leftovers spread over a table as Republican presidential candidate Ohio Gov. John Kasich, speaks at the Knox County Republican Party’s annual Lincoln Day Dinner on Saturday. (CAITIE MCMEKIN/NEWS SENTINEL) Related Coverage Cruz campaign top TV ad buyer in Tenn.

By Georgiana Vines of the Knoxville News Sentinel

Ohio Gov. John Kasich told Knox County Republicans on Saturday night that if they want their presidential nominee to be someone who can balance a budget and create jobs, then he's their candidate.

Kasich, the keynote speaker for the county party's annual Lincoln Day dinner, said he balanced the federal budget four years in a row as budget committee chairman during the time he was in Congress from 1983-2000 and helped pay down the national debt. Capital-gains taxes were cut so business people were awarded for creating jobs, he said.

"Jobs were growing, and the economy was expanding," Kasich said.

He said then-President Bill Clinton "tried to take credit" for the surplus while being dragged into going along with Congress.

Kasich stopped short of criticizing his opponents for the GOP nomination in what has become one of the most contentious primary races in modern memory.

"I'm not going to smear anyone running for president," he said. "We're not electing a class president. We're selecting the leader of the free world."

It was no coincidence Kasich mentioned Clinton, since his wife, Hillary, is the front-runner in the Democratic campaign for president. But in his opening remarks, Kasich was not as critical as U.S. Sen. Lamar Alexander, R-Maryville,when Alexander spoke to the crowd of 550 people at Rothchild's Catering.

The dinner provided an opportunity to rouse the Republican base to vote in Tuesday's elections, in which Tennessee is among 10 states holding presidential and local primaries.

Alexander told the party faithful if Republicans don't win in November, "Hillary Clinton will appoint justices to the Supreme Court for 30 years and Obamacare will be around forever."

The recent death of Supreme Court Justice Antonin Scalia has become an issue in the presidential campaign, with most Republicans saying President Barack Obama should let the next president make the appointment to the court and Obama saying he will appoint a replacement. The U.S. Senate must approve any appointment.

Republicans also have been trying to scuttle the Affordable Care Act, known derisively as Obamacare, almost since it was passed by a Democratic-controlled Congress in 2010.

Kasich is running far behind other Republican presidential contenders, chiefly billionaire businessman Donald Trump, followed by Texas Sen. Ted Cruz and Florida Sen. Marco Rubio. At the latest GOP presidential debate Thursday night, Rubio and Cruz sparred repeatedly with Trump.

Alexander, who made unsuccessful runs for president in 1996 and 2000, said he felt like he was watching a "mud-wrestling match" during the debate. But running for president is "very humbling," he said.

Kasich arrived late from campaigning earlier in the day in Nashville and then attending a private fundraiser at the home of Knoxville benefactor Sherry Lee.

He previously was in the Knoxville area when he attended a fundraiser at the home of Steve West, former Maryville mayor. The remaining presidential candidates have been to Knoxville except for Rubio, who will be at TAC Air Knoxville on Alcoa Highway on Monday for a 9:30 a.m. rally.