Posted on March 15, 2015

Trey Gowdy: Hillary Clinton "Doesn't Get To Decide What Is Purely Personal And What Is Public"

CHRIS WALLACE, FOX NEWS SUNDAY: Now, you say your committee can't subpoena personal property. They can documents, papers, but not personal properties like a server. On the other hand, the House of Representatives, the full House, can. Should they?



REP. TREY GOWDY (R-SC): Well, we shouldn't have to. I hope it doesn't get to that point. It's an open legal question and any time you litigate something you're talking about years and years. I think an imminently reasonable alternative is for her to turn over that server to an independent, neutral third party.



She says she deleted personal e-mails. Chris, I have zero interest in looking at her personal e-mails. I don't care about her yoga practice. I don't care about bridesmaids dresses. I don't want to see that.



But who gets to decide what's personal and what's public? And if it's a mixed-use e-mail and lots of e-mails we get in life are both personal and some work, I just can't trust her lawyers to make the determination that the public is getting everything they're entitled to.



WALLACE: But she said in that news conference, because she was specifically asked about this idea, have an independent person, somebody neutrally agreeable come in and look at the server, and that's when she said it will remain private.



GOWDY: Well, there are lots of ways to motivate people in life, Chris. One is public pressure. If it becomes an issue for her, if the public believes it is reasonable for her to turn over that server which contains public information to a neutral, detached arbiter, not Congress but a retired judge or an archivist or an inspector general, then she'll be forced to do so. Otherwise, the House as an institution, may be forced to go to court to try to get access to that.



But again, the house has no business looking at purely personal e- mails, but by the same token, she doesn't get to decide what is purely personal and what is public.