Kentucky Sen. Rand Paul is keenly sensitive to the claim that he embodies an isolationism that would pare back U.S. involvement around the world.

But during a speech at the Heritage Foundation's Conservative Policy Summit on Tuesday morning, the Republican presidential aspirant made clear he would more often than not decline to send U.S. troops into enduring conflicts in the Middle East.

That's because, "the long war" as he dubs it -- between Sunnis and Shiites and barbaric religious extremists and mainstream Islam -- is "insolvable."

Two specific phrases jumped out from Paul's answer to a question about foreign policy:



"I don't want to be in the middle of the long war, because I don't think there really is an answer in this long war. Much of this war should be left to be fought by the Middle East."

[READ: What Pissed Off the Tea Party in 2014]

Paul made clear that the U.S. had the right and obligation to defend itself and its interests, such as its diplomatic ventures in the region, as well as its embassies and consulates. This was a prime opportunity to again pin direct blame on former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton for the 2012 security failure at the consulate in Benghazi, Libya, that cost the lives of four American diplomats. "I think she did a terrible job. It's inexcusable," he said.



"Some of these problems are insolvable. The only thing I think we have to know from our perspective is we should defend our country and our people."



The "insolvable" characterization, in addition to saying there isn't an answer to the combustible Middle East, will inevitably be used against Paul by his more hawkish rivals in a hypothetical GOP primary race. They will claim that to throw America's hands up in the air in exasperation is not an option, that detachment is an admission of defeat.

But Paul left himself some wiggle room when he noted he believed the U.S. should still defend itself and its security interests. The coming debate will center all around what exactly constitutes that vital U.S. interest.



[ALSO: Paul Ryan Not Running for President in 2016]