The healthcare sector has been rife with deal-making as companies continue to consolidate in the wake of pressure to reduce healthcare costs under Obamacare. The latest: medical equipment supplier Becton Dickinson, which is acquiring medical products manufacturer CareFusion. The $12.2 billion cash and stock deal values CareFusion at $58 a share.

News of the deal boosted Becton Dickson BDX 8% to $124.98 and CareFusion CFN 23% to $56.75 in heavy trading.

The deal “allows us to align our highly complementary technologies and products to address unmet needs in the growing $20 billion global medication management industry,” says Becton Dickson CEO Vincent Forlenza.

“It accelerates BD’s transition from a product-focused company to a customer-centric provider of innovative healthcare solutions with leading scale across the medication management value chain and expanded solutions for patient safety,” Forlenz said. “With the targeted cost savings we have identified and the growth opportunities we see in bringing CareFusion products to more patients and healthcare workers around the world, we expect this transaction to create meaningful value for our shareholders, customers, employees and other stakeholders.”

About 77% of San Diego-based CareFusion’s sales, including infusion pumps, automated dispensing systems, surgical instruments and medical surveillance software, are in the U.S., while more than 50% of Becton Dickson’s revenue comes from overseas sales.

Becton Dickson says the merger will provide double-digit earnings per share growth within the first full year of the merger and $250 million in synergy related cost savings by 2018. The companies expect the deal to be completed by mid-2015.

CareFusion was spun off from Cardinal Health in August 2009. In April, it paid out $40 million to settle Justice Department allegations over sales and marketing practices over alleged kickbacks to doctors for promoting products not approved by the Food & Drug Administration.

The Becton Dickinson merger could result in a $33.2 million change-of-control payout for CareFusion CEO Kieran Gallahue, according to the company’s annual proxy.

Gallahue, who joined CareFusion in 2011, received compensation valued at $10.8 million in the latest fiscal year and gained another $18.5 million from vested shares and exercising stock options.

Follow Strauss on Twitter @gstrauss_