At Tuesday's White House press briefing, Tommy Christopher, a blogger for a website that isn't acknowledged on the official White House briefing room seating chart, asked a disparaging question about the police while squatting in the assigned seat for the news organization The Washington Times.



"On this string of recent incidents of police violence against unarmed citizens that the president noted are showing up on video just about every week," the disheveled blogger said. "Something that I have heard him say and that I have heard you say on a number of occasions after the incidences is [...] the overwhelming majority of police officers act properly, act good and are honest."



"When police officers are committing violence against an unarmed citizen, why would anybody think the overwhelming majority of them are good when we've seen evidence that not a single one of them have?" Christopher asked.



While White House press secretary Josh Earnest kindly humored Christopher's anti-police soliloquy, he gave no credence to Christopher's accusation that the majority of police officers are indeed not "good and honest."



Christopher stood on his soapbox for about five minutes which prompted several reporters for real news organizations to either turn around or look in his direction to see who was asking multiple questions about how one could defend police officers.



You may recall Christopher once asked former White House press secretary Jay Carney if President Obama would agree to delay the implementation of the Affordable Care Act if Republicans agreed to "delay heart attacks."



Earlier this year, Christopher asked Earnest if gun shows were a larger threat than a potential attack on The Mall of America.



Christopher has a history of going on partisan rants rather than asking substantive and objective questions.



Editor's note: Tommy Christopher is not the blogger's real name, it's a pseudonym he uses for unknown reasons.





TOMMY CHRISTOPHER: On this string of recent incidents of police violence against unarmed citizens that the president noted are showing up on video just about every week. Something that I have heard him say and that I have heard you say on a number of occasions after the incidences is that -- in the context of those incidents -- the overwhelming majority of police officers act properly, act good and are honest. And I'm wondering, when we look at the Freddie Gray incident, Walter Scott, and incident after incident not a single officer intervenes on behalf on these citizens. We haven't seen a single incident where, you know, a police officer other than the ones participating in the event have acted properly and intervened on behalf of the citizen.



So, I'm wondering on what basis do you and the president make that statement in that context, not withstanding what happened in Texas. When they're put to this test -- when, when police officers are committing violence against an unarmed citizen, why would anybody think the overwhelming majority of them are good when we've seen evidence that not a single one of them have?