Tom ArceneauxGuest Columnist

Last year the criminal indigent defense system was broken. Today it is shattered.

When the Caddo Parish indigent defense system went into emergency operation last year, it was one of only a handful of parishes in that situation. Now, eight parishes are operating under emergency circumstances, and more likely will follow.

Courts are responding by appointing private lawyers to represent indigent persons accused of crime. Those include lawyers who have never tried a civil case, much less a criminal case.

Imagine that you are poor. You have been accused of a robbery you did not commit. You can’t afford a lawyer. When you appear in court, the court appoints a lawyer to represent you.

When you ask the lawyer about his experience, you learn he has never tried a case of any kind, never made an argument before a court, and has been a title examiner for 20 years. You also learn that the lawyer will not be paid for his services at all. What would you think about your chances of receiving adequate representation?

Suppose courts appointed doctors to render medical services to the poor. You need a heart transplant. The court appoints a radiologist to perform the transplant who has never performed an operation of any kind since medical school. The radiologist will not be paid for the operation, and neither will the nurses, hospital, and other staff. What do you think about your chances for survival?

Under the current system, hundreds, perhaps thousands, of indigent defendants will be represented by lawyers inexperienced in criminal law. Even if convicted, those convictions are subject to reversal due to inadequate lawyering. Despite lawyers’ ethical responsibility not to undertake matters in which they are incompetent, courts are appointing them to do just that.

Last Wednesday, Pete Adams, Louisiana District Attorneys Association executive director, spoke to the Shreveport Bar Association on the topic, “Funding for Indigent Defense – Who’s Responsible.” Rather than offer an effective solution, he repeated the mantra of prosecutors that there is plenty of money for indigent defense, but too much is spent defending death penalty cases. While I was not present, reports from members present indicate the discussion and questions that followed could be tactfully described as “testy.”

The remarks raise a significant question, but in a different context. From the standpoint of effectiveness, is the death penalty a good investment?

Does the death penalty deter murders? Studies suggest that it does not. In a comparison by the Death Penalty Information Center of murder rates in death penalty states versus states without the death penalty from 1991 through 2013, the collective murder rate for the death penalty states was higher the collective rate for states without the death penalty. For example, the murder rate in Louisiana, a death penalty state, has been the highest in the country in every year from 1996 through 2014.

How much extra does the death penalty cost? There are three basic components, the cost of prosecution, the cost of defense (because the public normally pays for indigent defense), and the additional cost of housing a death penalty defendant on death row. In addition, consider that a capital case almost always goes to trial, even if the defendant would be willing to plead guilty if a death sentence was not available, and there would be no trial cost at all.

The prosecution of a death penalty case runs into the hundreds of thousands of dollars. The defense costs the same or more. Because the penalty phase of the trial occurs immediately after the verdict, the prosecution and the defense must prepare for that phase, even if the defendant ultimately is acquitted. Often the greatest costs of defense are to develop “mitigation” evidence, or facts that might cause a jury to recommend life in prison rather than the death penalty. Mitigation cost is zero if there is no death penalty.

Society has a right to execute murderers. If it is to do so, it should ensure that persons who might lose their lives receive a competent and well-funded defense. If the death penalty is not an effective deterrent, is the satisfaction of society’s right worth its fiscal cost?

In 2015, Nebraska, a very “red” state, decided it was not. The Nebraska legislature repealed the death penalty there.

Shouldn’t Louisiana be asking the same question in its current fiscal crisis? Would scarce public monies better fund education rather than prosecutions that do not reduce the murder rate?

Tom Arceneaux has been involved in master planning for Shreveport as well as many civic organizations. He is a lawyer and vice president of practice development at Blanchard, Walker, O’Quin & Roberts. Follow him on Twitter @TomArceneaux.

Read or Share this story: http://www.shreveporttimes.com/story/opinion/2016/02/27/can-afford-death-penalty/81002434/