Organizers of the first joint Congressional Republican retreat since 2004 are being tight-lipped about the two-day event that is to be held in Hershey starting Thursday.

In addition to the rank and file members of both chambers of Congress, the retreat, which will be held at the Hershey Lodge, will bring to the midstate GOP members expected to launch a bid for the White House in 2016, including Senators Marco Rubio, Ted Cruz and Rand Paul.

A handful of headliners, including former British Prime Minister Tony Blair and former "Tonight Show" host Jay Leno, are on tap to address lawmakers. A spokeswoman for the House GOP Conference, speaking on background, said Leno would appear during one of the dinners, but would not specify which day. She said he will likely provide a "dose of humor."

Lawmakers are expected to board buses this morning around 11:30 to head for Hershey. Once across the Pennsylvania border, the contingency of buses will be given a state police escort. Security during the two-day event will be provided by U.S. Capitol Police. Members of Congress are not generally entitled to Secret Service protection. Security at the event is expected to be high.

Lawmakers are expected to attend "substantive joint policy" sessions. All sessions are closed off to the media and the public. A media staging center will be held across the Hershey Lodge at the Lebbie Lebkicher's restaurant, which is adjacent to the resort center. Only media members with credentials for the event will be admitted.

Lawmakers are also expected to discuss health care, immigration reform and the budget. They are also expected to discuss the reconciliation process, a controversial and generally partisan process that both Democrats and Republicans have used in the past to pass legislation by a simple Senate majority of 51 votes. Democrats used reconciliation to enact a portion of Obamacare in 2010, and Republicans used it to enact Bush-era tax cuts.

Republicans, for the first time since 2006, control both the House and the Senate, but need several votes from Democrats if they are to override a presidential veto. President Obama has already vowed to veto several GOP-favored bills, including the Keystone XL pipeline project and any dismantling of the Affordable Care Act.

Lawmakers will travel to Hershey with some staff and family members. Organizers remained tight-lipped about what types of excursions and activities were planned for those participating in the retreat. The Congressional Institute, a non-profit educational organization, is footing the bulk of the two-day event, and lawmakers are also ponying up to cover for added cost out-of-pocket.

Lawmakers are expected to be treated to lots of Hershey's chocolates, one organizer said.