Andy Van Slyke should know better. A three-time All-Star in a major league career from 1983-95 that included stops in St. Louis, Pittsburgh, Baltimore and Philadelphia, Van Slyke also has been a coach for the Tigers and Mariners — the latter until this season, when he was part of the purge following a disappointing campaign.

The idea of clubhouse omertà should not be unfamiliar to Van Slyke, but then, he's also shown in the past that he doesn't really care about it, having written "Tiger Confidential: The Untold Inside Story of the 2008 Season" during his time in Detroit.

MORE: Yasiel Puig's career in photos | Dodgers managerial search down to two

Van Slyke also has not shied away from controversy in the past, scraping the Canadian flag decal off his batting helmet when MLB showed international support for the Gulf War in 1991.

Those past controversies came before the rise of social media, which spread Van Slyke's radio interview in St. Louis into a bonanza of "he said WHAT?" across the baseball world, ripping Robinson Cano, Yasiel Puig and others. The episode raised some questions.

Q. What the hell was Van Slyke thinking?

At the very least, he thought he could be frank about his opinions on a radio show in a city that has remained friendly to him through the years, with Van Slyke's 1987 trade to Pittsburgh still a rankling subject for some fans. Why someone in professional baseball for so long would think that any media outlet represents a safe space for torching former associates, that's a mystery for which there can be no reasonable answer.

Q. Why go after Robinson Cano and call him "the most awful player I've ever seen," especially considering Cano played through a sports hernia for two months?

Van Slyke was the outfield and assistant hitting coach in Seattle, past tense. He flat-out said, "Robinson Cano cost the GM his job. The hitting coach got fired because of Cano. And the manager and coaches got fired because of Cano." There's some truth in that. Cano's first half of the season was horrific and emblematic of a season with playoff expectations that imploded almost immediately.

TOP FREE AGENTS: 25 best | C | 1B | 2B | SS | 3B | OF

We can safely assume that Van Slyke and Cano did not have the greatest working relationship. Ever hold a grudge against someone after you lost a job? It's not unusual to make that person out to be even worse than they were.

Q. OK, but if Van Slyke holds Cano responsible for losing his job, why blast Fernando Rodney?

Rodney was legitimately terrible and the image of him sitting alone in the trees next to the bullpen in Denver was emblematic of Seattle's season lost in the woods.

Q. Alright, so Van Slyke was ill advised to talk about his old team, especially if he wants to get another job in the majors, but where he's coming from is understandable. Why in the world would he imply that Clayton Kershaw wants the Dodgers to trade Yasiel Puig, only thinly veiling the pitcher's identity as "LA's highest-paid player?"

This was weird, especially considering that in no small part due to injuries, Puig stayed out of the headlines for most of the year, and had promised before the season to tone down his bat flips and other behavior that, rightly or wrongly, rubbed some people the wrong way.

Puig played only 79 games this year. Receiving a career high 253 plate appearances, partly as a result of that? Scott Van Slyke. Scott Van Slyke's father? Andy Van Slyke. Nothing like going on the radio and spinning your son's office gossip in a way that tries to advance his career.

Q. Puig is Cuban. Cano and Rodney are Dominican. Is there a racial or xenophobic element here?

Probably no more so than those elements pervade baseball and society to begin with.

On the one hand, Van Slyke did have some harsh words for a white player, calling Colby Rasmus "not the sharpest nail in the toolbox." On the other hand, he tied the University of Missouri race protests to Obamacare.

Only Van Slyke knows what's in his heart, but the case for an institutional problem in baseball gains some more evidence from this. It extends from minority stars receiving sharper criticism than white American counterparts, to Puig, Jose Bautista and countless others being scrutinized for bat flips, to the diversity problem that MLB admits exists (because it's so obvious) in front office hiring.