President Obama admitted Sunday that as the nation's top Democrat, he bears the blame for his party's historic losses in Tuesday's midterm congressional elections – but insisted moments later that his policies are sound, and signaled that he will double down on his most controversial plans.

'We got beat,' Obama said during a wide-ranging CBS News interview, acknowledging that his Jimmy Carter-like approval ratings – in the high 30s according to some polls – handed Republicans control of the U.S. Senate.

'Whenever, as the head of the party, it doesn't do well, I've got to take responsibility for it,' he told 'Face the Nation' anchor Bob Schieffer.

'The message that I took from this election, and we've seen this in a number of elections, successive elections, is people want to see this city work. And they feel as if it's not working.'

But in what seemed like the second half of the same breath, Obama took credit for handling the not-button Ebola crisis, pledged to double-down on his plan for an intensely unpopular immigration policy shift, claimed that Friday's mini-troop-surge in Iraq will put the ISIS terror army on its heels and insisted that America's economy would be a shambles without him.

Scroll down for video

President Barack Obama gave CBS anchor Bob Schieffer a rare sit-down interview on Sunday

Obama took responsibility for Democrats' historic election losses on Tuesday but paradoxically insisted on a my-way-or-the-highway approach to some of the domestic issues that got his party in trouble

'It was worse' in 2009, he said, 'because the economy – not just here in the United States but globally – was in a freefall.'

'I have great confidence in the American people and I have great confidence in this administration being able to work through and eventually solve problems. Sometimes we don't do it at the speed that keeps up with, you know, the press cycle.'.

He said his White House has 'handled Ebola well.' A MailOnline/YouGov poll published six days ago found that Americans disagree.

Just 34 per cent 'told pollsters that they have faith in the president to handle the Ebola crisis effectively,' compared to 49 per cent who don't.

A 55 per cent majority said the administration has been 'slow to react' to the crisis.

Obama addressed his Friday announcement that he gave the Pentagon permission to send an additional 1,500 ground troops into Iraq – officially as advisers. They will supplement 1,400 already in the war theatre, and bring the total deployment authorization number to 3,100.

That move, he said, 'signals a new phase' in the fight against the self-proclaimed Islamic State of Iraq and al-Sham, but he pledged that American servicemen and women won't find themselves taking or returning fire.

A former senior Pentagon official told MailOnline on Friday that such a claim is far-fetched, and noted that America's protracted and deadly war in Vietnam similarly began with promises that U.S. troops would only be inserted as 'advisers' to South Vietnamese military planners.

'No one really believes the president and his advisers – and they're some smart people – aren't already inserting Special Operators who are armed for combat, probably in both Iraq and Syria,' the former official said.

But Obama told Schieffer that 'what hasn't changed is our troops are not going to be engaged in combat.'

It's only 'Iraqi ground troops,' he said, 'that can start pushing them back.'

Overall, Obama described his latest battle chess move as an effort to put Iraq' forces and Jurdish Peshmerga fighters on the other side of the ball for a change.

'Rather than just try to halt ISIL's momentum,' he explained, using his own preferred acronym for ISIS, 'we're now in a position to start going on some offense.'

'The airstrikes have been very effective in degrading ISIL's capabilities and slowing the advance that they were making.'

With Democrats reeling and Republicans strutting after Tuesday's seismic power shift, Obama said Sunday that he still won't back down from his threat to steamroll the GOP with an executive order changing the status of millions of illegal immigrants.

On Thursday House Speaker John Boehner warned that if the president acts without the say-so of Congress, it would 'poison the well' for cooperation during Obama's last two years in office.

Obama, though, framed the confrontation as if he held all the cards.

FINALLY: 'Rather than just try to halt ISIL's momentum,' Obama said, 'we're now in a position to start going on some offense'

'Their time hasn't run out,' he said. 'The minute they pass a bill that addresses the problems with immigration reform, I will sign it and it supersedes whatever actions I take. And I'm encouraging them to do so.'

But 'we've got to sell it,' he said of Democrats. 'We've got to reach out to the other side and, where possible, persuade.'

Obama prefers a new 'comprehensive' immigration law styled after the so-called 'Gang of Eight' bill that passed last year in the Senate but was considered dead-on-arrival in the House.

If Obama somehow gets what he wants, he said, 'nobody's going to be happier than me to sign it, because that means it will be permanent rather than temporary.'

That's an acknowledgement that whatever he does unilaterally could disappear if a Republican president were to take power in 2017 and undo it.

Overall, the president sounded more like a middle-manager than the most powerful politician in the world.

'I think that what you'll see' in his last two years in office, he said, 'is a constant effort to improve the way we deliver service to customers.'

And he spoke generously of his own political acumen – and of his abilities in Washington's perpetual arm-twisting games.

'I love this job,' Obama said.

'If your name is Barack Hussein Obama, you had to have liked politics in order to get into this office. ... I got into politics because I believed I could make a difference, and I would not have been successful and would not be sitting at this desk every day if I didn't love politics.'

He pointed to the 2010 passage of the Affordable Care Act as an example, saying it required 'a whole bunch of arm twisting' to get passed.

Democrats pushed the Obamacare law through Congress without a single Republican vote.

AND HE'S OFF: Obama left for China on Sunday to attend the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) Summit, where he can expect a confrontation with Russian President Vladimir Putin

On his foreign policy, Obama discussed his outreach to Iran generally but wouldn't comment on reports that he had written a personal letter to the Islamic Republic's Supreme Leader Ayatollah Ali Khamenei.

'I tend not to comment on any communications that I have with various leaders,' he said.

But he claimed 'significant' progress negotiating with Iran over its dangerous nuclear ambitions that have already provoked alleged military responses from Israel.

Ever the negotiator, Obama said 'the question now is are we going to be able to close this final gap so that they can reenter the international community, sanctions can be slowly reduced and we have verifiable, lock-tight assurances that they can't develop a nuclear weapon.'

'But there's still a big gap,' he conceded, 'We may not be able to get there.'

He also acknowledged that Iran has troops stationed in and around Baghdad, inserting itself into the Iraqi conflict with ISIS.

The majority-Shiite Iran sees the terror army as an adversary because it is largely made up of Sunni Muslims.

'We let them know, "Don't mess with us. We're not here to mess with you. We're focused on our common enemy," Obama said.