Jon Stewart and President Obama sat down on Tuesday night for one final interview before Stewart signs off on August 6.

Obama first went on 'The Daily Show' in 2005, when he was a senator from Illinois. He has made seven appearances in all, three since he was elected president.

July 21, 2015: The Finale

The president's final appearance with Stewart was reflective, while also having its share of strong-willed discussions on the country's politics.

"If people are engaged, eventually the political system responds despite the money, despite the lobbyists," Obama said.

"After seven years is that the advice that you then bequeath to future President Trump?" Stewart said to laughter.

October 12, 2012: Weeks before 2012 election

Stewart played a game called "Still or No?" asking Obama in October 2012 if being president had changed his mind on big issues such as trading American ideals for security.

"One of the things we've got to do is put a legal architecture in place ... to make sure that not only am I reined in, but any president is reined in terms of some of the decisions we are making," Obama responded.

October 27, 2010: From Washington

Stewart took his show to Washington in 2010. The host gave up most of the broadcast for a somewhat contentious interview.

"You ran with such, if I may, audacity," Stewart said. "Yet, legislatively it has felt timid at times."

"Jon, I love your show, but this is something where I have a profound disagreement with you ... his notion that health care was timid," Obama stiffly responded, speaking about the Affordable Care Act.

October 29, 2008: Candidate Obama

Obama appeared on the show via satellite from the campaign trail in Florida prior to the 2008 election.

"Obviously your mother is from Kansas, she's a white woman, your father's African. Are you concerned that you may go into the voting booth and your white half will all of sudden decide 'I can't do this!'" Stewart said to laughter.

"It's a problem," Obama said smiling. "I've been going through therapy to make sure I vote properly."

April 21, 2008: "Hoping up"

Obama appeared on "The Daily Show" earlier in 2008 to talk about his campaign plans and opponents.

But Stewart had other plans. He asked Obama to read and "hope up" common phrases like "I'm calling to ask if you're happy with your cell phone service."

August 22, 2007: "You rock, Barack"

In the early stages of his campaign, Obama stepped on the "Daily Show" stage to cheers of "You rock, Barack."

"There is a certain inspirational quality to you," Stewart said. "My question is ... is that really something America is gonna go for?"

"We're going to find out!" a smiling Obama said.

November 7, 2005: First time

In his first appearance, then-Senator Obama was asked by Stewart if he felt pressure from the growing attention surrounding him.

"It is true that I worry about the hype," Obama answered. "The only person more overhyped than me is you."

Stewart broke into laughter: "That's about the best answer I think I've ever heard."