The Fiorentino Wong family will be particpating in Walk4Hearing Sunday. Shown are (from left) Alvin holding Sofia, Antonio, Gabriela, Mateo, Marlene, and Olivia (in front ). Antonio and Mateo were born with sensorineural hearing loss. View and purchase photos

HAVERFORD>> The Pennsylvania Walk4Hearing celebrates its 10th anniversary Sunday with an event intended to increase awareness about hearing loss, eradicate stigmas, and raise funds to provide information, support and services for individuals with hearing loss and their families.



Organized by the national non-profit Hearing Loss Association of America, the 5K walk takes place Sunday, Oct. 18, 11 a.m. at the Navy Yard, 4747 Broad St. in Philadelphia.



Walk4Hearing director Ronnie Adler said hearing loss does not get the attention it deserves, considering that 48 million, or 20 percent, of Americans have some degree of hearing loss. This makes it a public health issue third in line after heart disease and arthritis, Adler said.



And yet, "People don't talk about it," said Adler. "There is definitely a stigma." Although hearing loss is often considered a problem for the elderly, "It can happen to anyone," Adler noted. Hearing loss affects children and teens, and can result from many factors, such as congenital abnormalities, exposure to loud noises, head trauma, tumor, infection, use of tooxic medications, and more.



Estimates are two or three of every 1,000 children are born with some form of hearing impairment. Approximately 30 school-age children in 1,000 are deaf or hard of hearing.



What's more, 26 million people have noise induced hearing loss that could have been prevented. Young people are especially at risk because of exposure to loud noise from musical instruments, MP3 players, iPods and other personal listening devices inserted in the ear, Adler said.



Since its inception in 2006, the Walk4Hearing has raised over $9 million for programs and services that benefit people with hearing loss.



HLAA uses funds to provide timely and reliable information through its website, e-newsletter and Hearing Loss Magazine.



HLAA also advocates for equal access and opportunity for persons with hearing impairments in areas of telecommunications, employment, health care, education and community life. Continued... 1

2

3

4

See Full Story





HLAA also advocates for installation of hearing assistive technology in public places, including community rooms and public libraries, captioning of live theater productions and more.



Additionally, HLAA provides funding for hearing aids in cases where people who need them cannot afford them. A pair can cost $6,000.



And, HLAA conducts outreach to veterans returning from military service with hearing loss. A report from the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs estimated that more than 59,000 military members are on disability for hearing loss from Operation Iraqi Freedom and Operation Enduring Freedom.



About 2,000 people and 73 teams are expected to participate in the Pennsylvania Walk4Hearing on Sunday.



Marlene Fiorentino Wong of Upper Darby, her husband and five children will be among them.



Fiorentio Wong's sons, Antonio, 11, and Mateo, 6, were diagnosed with sensorineural hearing loss during infancy. Thanks to early diagnosis, early introduction of hearing aids, and support services from DCIU and Children's Hospital of Pennsylvania, both Antonio and Mateo are "happy, successful boys who enjoy school, music, sports, family and friends," Fiorentino Wong said.



"Although the diagnosis of a hearing loss was difficult at first, the education and support provided...enabled us to move beyond the diagnosis and help Antonio and Mateo listen, speak, and learn," Fiorentino Wong said.



She thinks the Walk4Hearing is important because it helps raise funds that go directly to organizations and programs that have benefited her sons. And, it's helpful to be with others who are impacted by hearing loss, she said.



"Thanks to HLAA, dedicated professionals, friends, and family, we know that we are not alone... We know that Antonio and Mateo are not limited by hearing loss, and that the possibilities are endless," Fiorentino Wong said. 1

2

3

4

See Full Story On its agenda is ensuring that hearing aids, cochlear implants and aural rehabilitation are affordable and accessible, covered by Medicare, the Affordable Care Act and third-party payers.HLAA also advocates for installation of hearing assistive technology in public places, including community rooms and public libraries, captioning of live theater productions and more.Additionally, HLAA provides funding for hearing aids in cases where people who need them cannot afford them. A pair can cost $6,000.And, HLAA conducts outreach to veterans returning from military service with hearing loss. A report from the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs estimated that more than 59,000 military members are on disability for hearing loss from Operation Iraqi Freedom and Operation Enduring Freedom.About 2,000 people and 73 teams are expected to participate in the Pennsylvania Walk4Hearing on Sunday.Marlene Fiorentino Wong of Upper Darby, her husband and five children will be among them.Fiorentio Wong's sons, Antonio, 11, and Mateo, 6, were diagnosed with sensorineural hearing loss during infancy. Thanks to early diagnosis, early introduction of hearing aids, and support services from DCIU and Children's Hospital of Pennsylvania, both Antonio and Mateo are "happy, successful boys who enjoy school, music, sports, family and friends," Fiorentino Wong said."Although the diagnosis of a hearing loss was difficult at first, the education and support provided...enabled us to move beyond the diagnosis and help Antonio and Mateo listen, speak, and learn," Fiorentino Wong said.She thinks the Walk4Hearing is important because it helps raise funds that go directly to organizations and programs that have benefited her sons. And, it's helpful to be with others who are impacted by hearing loss, she said."Thanks to HLAA, dedicated professionals, friends, and family, we know that we are not alone... We know that Antonio and Mateo are not limited by hearing loss, and that the possibilities are endless," Fiorentino Wong said. Continued...





Addie was born profoundly deaf. Her mother, Amanda, said she cried when she received the diagnosis, "thinking what a difficult life our daughter would live, unable to hear."



But thanks to two cochlear implants Addie received in 2011-12, as well as hearing support services from DCIU and Alfred I. DuPont Hospital for Children, Addie has made great progress with hearing and speech.



Addie has done so well, that she was able to begin kindergarten in September, attending a hearing support class in the morning and a typical kindergarten in the afternoon.



Amanda Quaile said her family attends the walk annually and has raised about $2,000 so far this year.



The Walk4Hearing is a family-friendly event. There will be plenty of entertainment, including music, a moon bounce, clowns, face painting, refreshments and a visit from the Phillies Phanatic, 10 a.m.-11 a.m.



Everyone can participate, either as an individual or part of a team. To register, make donations, or obtain more information, visit



The Pennsylvania Walk for Hearing



Sunday, Oct. 18



The Navy Yard, 4747 South Broad Street, Philadelphia. 1

2

3

4

See Full Story Also walking will be 6-year-old Addison Quaile of Glen Riddle, her family and supporters in Team Addie.Addie was born profoundly deaf. Her mother, Amanda, said she cried when she received the diagnosis, "thinking what a difficult life our daughter would live, unable to hear."But thanks to two cochlear implants Addie received in 2011-12, as well as hearing support services from DCIU and Alfred I. DuPont Hospital for Children, Addie has made great progress with hearing and speech.Addie has done so well, that she was able to begin kindergarten in September, attending a hearing support class in the morning and a typical kindergarten in the afternoon.Amanda Quaile said her family attends the walk annually and has raised about $2,000 so far this year.The Walk4Hearing is a family-friendly event. There will be plenty of entertainment, including music, a moon bounce, clowns, face painting, refreshments and a visit from the Phillies Phanatic, 10 a.m.-11 a.m.Everyone can participate, either as an individual or part of a team. To register, make donations, or obtain more information, visit www.walk4hearing.org and www.hearingloss.org The Pennsylvania Walk for HearingSunday, Oct. 18The Navy Yard, 4747 South Broad Street, Philadelphia. Continued...





Distance: 5K (3.1 miles)



Walk Chair:



Ronnie Adler :radler@hearingloss.org 1

2

3

4

See Full Story Schedule: 10am - Registration/Check-in; walk begins 11 a.m.Distance: 5K (3.1 miles)Walk Chair:Ronnie Adler :radler@hearingloss.org