Disclosure at iHeartRadio Fest 2015: British Duo Talks New Album 'Caracal,' Writing Process & More

Ahead of the Sept. 25 release of Disclosure’s second album, Caracal, the British electronic duo dished on the story behind the set’s title while backstage at the iHeartRadio Music Festival in Las Vegas.

iHeartRadio Music Festival Day 1: 41 Things You Have to See

“A caracal is a wild cat from Africa that’s always been my favorite animal,” said Disclosure’s Howard Lawrence, who plays in the group alongside his brother Guy. “When we write our music we write with a lot of different people and different artists who generally and rightfully want to talk about different things. So we couldn’t sum all of that up in one title, or it would be an incredibly long title. Instead, we picked an amazing picture for the artwork and named the album after the artwork.”

Disclosure took the stage at the iHeartRadio Music Festival on Friday, Sept. 18, following a magnificent set with Sam Smith, who introduced the act before their performance. "These guys completely changed my life when I met them,” said the British singer, who sang on Disclosure’s “Latch.” "Who knows this one?" the duo joked before playing the song.

Disclosure Take a Downbeat Turn From Their Dance Roots on All-Star ‘Caracal’: Album Review

Backstage, the Lawrence brothers also dished on the process behind writing and recording their sophomore album.

“A lot of people have got their whole lives to write their first record -- years and years -- and the second one is a bit rough,” Guy said. “We wrote the first one in a year as well, because we were already touring and doing what we’re doing now, just on a smaller scale. So it felt the same. we kept the process the same, we kept who we worked with similar -- it was basically round two and a natural evolution for us.”

Sam Smith & Disclosure Brilliantly Cover Drake's 'Hotline Bling'

The duo didn’t waste time getting back into the studio after finishing their last tour. “After about a week, we got back into the studio and started writing,” Howard said. His brother added, “You get home and it’s like, ‘I don’t want to watch TV; I want to make music. That’s what we love doing.’”

Watch the video above to see Billboard’s full interview with Disclosure.