Buffs cashing in on move to Pac-12

Colorado athletic director Rick George signs the last beam to be installed this spring at the new Champions Center. George said CU's move to the Pac-12 Conference four years ago has energized fundraising. ( Jeremy Papasso / Staff Photographer )

Fundraising totals from the West Coast have skyrocketed for the Colorado athletic department in the four years since the Buffaloes moved from the Big 12 Conference to the Pac-12.

CU reports a 320 percent increase in dollars raised within the five states that comprise the rest of the Pac-12 footprint outside Colorado in the years since the move. That is compared to what was raised in those states in the four years before the move.

From fiscal year 2007-08 through 2010-11, CU raised $3,157,868 in Arizona, California, Oregon, Utah and Washington. From fiscal 2011-12 - the school's first in the Pac-12 -- through April 2 of this year CU had raised $13,278,298 in those states.

The largest increase is in California, where CU has approximately 29,000 living alumni. CU has enjoyed a 903 percent increase in California in its first four years in the Pac-12, going from $842,278 raised there in the last four years in the Big 12 to $8,449,451 through April 2.

One of the biggest reasons University of Colorado officials used for selling a change in conference affiliation was being able to interact with a larger percentage of alumni on the West Coast. At the time of the move, CU had almost twice as many alumni in California than it had in the entire Big 12 footprint combined, not including Colorado.

Advertisement

"We've become a lot more externally focused, and I think a lot of it is our games and where we play is taking us to where our people are," athletic director Rick George said. "Beyond that, we have multiple scheduled trips out there that aren't game related, that just allow us to connect with our alumni."

Gains in Colorado

The move to the Pac-12 also seems to have energized efforts at home. In the years since Colorado moved west, the department has seen a 35 percent increase in fundraising efforts in-state. Colorado is still where the department raises much of its donor dollars.

Colorado athletics fundraising has skyrocketed in the Pac-12 states in the four years since CU moved to the conference. (Alexandra Sieh / Camera Staff)

CU raised more than $37 million in-state in its final four years in the Big 12 and has raised slightly more than $50 million in-state in its first four years in the Pac-12.

Kurt Gulbrand, associate athletic director for development, said those numbers are skewed somewhat by a large gift from the estate of a CU donor in 2009 or the in-state jump would be even more significant.

George and Gulbrand each said they believe the increases in fundraising could have been even larger if the Buffs would have entered the Pac-12 with a better product on the football field. In the first four seasons in the conference, CU has gone 4-32 in Pac-12 games, including a winless season in conference play last fall.

"There is no question that winning broadens your base," George said. "If we were winning, would we connect with more people? Yes, because more people would be coming back and attending games. I mean, let's face it, we've only averaged 36,000- 37,000 in a 50,000-seat stadium. If you put 15,000 more people in here and 5,000 of them are from the West Coast, it gives us a bigger touch point. People who are around successful programs are more energized to give money to invest in what you do."

Lack of formal plan

CU probably could have improved its fundraising numbers even more if it would have gone into the Pac-12 with a comprehensive plan for attacking that West Coast donor base. Gulbrand, who was hired at the defunct CU Foundation in 2011 when former athletic director Mike Bohn was still at CU, said he is not aware of any formal plan that was put in place for fundraising in the Pac-12 when the switch was made.

While there was never a three-year or five-year plan to execute, CU did conduct an outreach tour after the move to Pac-12. Gulbrand said it produced some new donors with stops in Seattle, San Francisco, Los Angeles and Phoenix in 2011.

"It was a great entree into what we can do, but you have to do it repeatedly," he said. "You can't just go one time and expect everybody to pull out their checkbook. That just doesn't happen, unless you're doing a telethon or something like that. If you want to really, really move the needle in a dramatic fashion, you better be willing to engage somebody at a different level and talk to them about making a philanthropic investment into your university or into your school or college."

"The answer is, should there have been a plan? Probably. Was there a plan? Don't know," George said. "If there has been, I didn't see it."

"We created our own plan," Gulbrand said.

While a change in conference affiliation and playing in front of more alumni more often is certainly a big reason for the fundraising increases, CU has also completely overhauled the way it goes about raising money in recent years.

The department has added two more people to its development team in the Pac-12 years. It also has adopted a more aggressive style. Members of the development team each play a role in raising money in-state and each is assigned regions outside the state. They used to visit those regions only two times a year. Now they visit them two times a month, with George, Gulbrand, Scott Scheifele, Ron Scott, Scott McMichael and Cindy Brumfiel combining to raise money within the Pac-12 footprint.

During one stretch earlier this year, Gulbrand was in five different cities in five different time zones in the span of five days.

Outreach in Texas

Obviously, the department's fundraising efforts aren't entirely focused on Colorado and the West Coast. George and his team are visiting New York, Chicago, Atlanta and Texas this summer to connect with alumni groups and donors in those areas.

George also has scheduled football games in the future with Texas A&M and TCU in hopes of boosting fundraising efforts with alumni in the Lone Star state, where CU has more than 10,000 living alumni.

"We wanted to put an emphasis on being more external instead of being a depository or receptacle for people to call in to," Gulbrand said. "We wanted to go out into their backyard and build relationships. It's the same model I've used at other places, that if you truly want to build a philanthropic culture of giving, you need to be able to relate to the people in their time, in their town and build that relationship. Otherwise it's just going to be a transactional relationship and that's not a very robust relationship. It doesn't have any depth and breadth to it."

The one piece of bad news in recent years has been a 16 percent decline in giving from the states that comprised the old Big 12 footprint, but the amount of money being raised in those areas never has been on par with in-state numbers or the West Coast.

CU raised $940,384 from donors in the states that comprised the old Big-12 in the final four years it was in the conference. In its first four years in the Pac-12, it has raised $789,758 there.

Meaningful thank you

CU also increased the effort it put into saying thank you to those who have donated money to the department in recent years. Gulbrand said donors used to receive a form letter thanking them for their investment. The department hired a strategic engagement coordinator, who is responsible for making sure donors are thanked in a meaningful way.

Earlier this spring, 60 CU student-athletes sat in a room together and made telephone calls to donors thanking them for their generosity. George and some of the department's head coaches have recorded videos personally directed at donors thanking them for their gifts.

The fundraising team has formed a consistent message. They ask donors to take three simple steps, described by Gulbrand.

• We need you to be involved at whatever that looks like for you financially.

• We need you to consider purchasing season tickets.

• And bring your friends with love and passion for CU who haven't been connected with us, so we can start engaging them, too.

While George and Gulbrand are happy with the successes they have had to this point, they believe they are only scratching the surface. Both are expecting dramatic gains to come over the next three to five years.

Gulbrand says there are approximately 250,000 living CU alumni. He believes at least 10 percent of them have been positively affected by athletics and would be willing to donate $1,000 or more annually to the department. That would give CU a solid annual donor base of $25 million.

George believes the money will come as he and his team connect with more and more alumni. He said the money being raised in California in recent years has come from less than 10 percent of those 29,000 alumni.

"What I'm really focused on is I want to grow our base significantly," George said. "Whether, that is 20-25 percent, that is kind of my thought. I think that is doable because I think there is a huge opportunity in front of us."

Kyle Ringo: ringok@dailycamera.com, on Twitter: @kyleringo