Topics: Batman, Comics, Death, resurrections, Entertainment News

If you’re not up on your comic plots, I have some bad news: Wolverine is dead. He was recently killed in the uncreatively named series “The Death of Wolverine.”

The question: When will he be brought back, and in how ridiculous a manner?

Death in comic books is notoriously silly, a stunt used to grab publicity and spike sales. Sure, some comic deaths are sacred—like Bruce Wayne’s parents and Peter Parker’s Uncle Ben—but they weren’t superheroes. Most superhero deaths are as temporary as a rash. Even if you’re dead for decades—like the Flash and Bucky—your return is assured. This is probably the best reason to be a superhero. If you don the spandex and sell enough comics, you’re pretty much guaranteed immortality.

In recognition of Wolverine’s inevitable return and the crass and goofy tradition of superhero deaths and resurrections, here’s a look at some of the most preposterous demises and returns ever, which include clones, magic guns, alternate realities and brain-swapping octobots.

Phoenix

After “X-Men 137,” this would have been the death least likely to be considered ridiculous. Jean Grey bravely sacrificed her life so the Phoenix force couldn’t possess her anymore. That was a reasonable, wise decision: during one possession, Jean wiped out an inhabited planet. If genocide and suicide sound a little heavy for superhero comics, you’re right, but back in the ’80s, Chris Claremont and John Byrne could do little wrong on this engrossing and popular series. The death of Jean Grey was one of the noblest things that ever happened in comics, and also one of the most tragic. So, of course, Marvel reversed it, coming up with a cockamamie explanation that the Jean Grey who died wasn’t the real Jean Grey, who had been napping in an undersea cocoon all this time. By the hammer of Thor, this was bad. To add insult to inanity, Jean has died again since then.

Robin

The death of the second Robin—Jason Todd—is unique to say the least. Though he was beaten with a crowbar, and then blown up, by the Joker in “Death in the Family,” the true perpetrators were fans. DC had phone lines set up where fans could decide whether or not to kill the unpopular character, and they voted for death. No elections were held regarding the inevitable return of Jason Todd, which occurred thanks to DC’s most commonly used resurrection McGuffin, the Lazarus Pit.

Bucky

Captain America’s World War II partner Bucky Barnes was long considered one of those deaths you couldn’t/shouldn’t reverse–until Ed Brubaker and Steve Epting’s remarkable run on Cap. Their revival story was elaborate, but not cheap. It turns out Bucky was found by the Russians after he plummeted from the exploding plane that also sent Captain America into the drink. Bucky was resuscitated, brainwashed, given a metal arm and used to carry out assassinations throughout the Cold War. Between missions, he went back on ice to preserve his youthful looks and girlish figure. This story was the basis of “Captain America: The Winter Soldier,” which I reckon is one of the three best superhero flicks ever. The return of Bucky is a rarity: a great story rather than a desperate stunt.

Invincible

Issue 99 of “Invincible” is an enormous brawl between the title character and his nemesis/partner Dinosaurus: an absurdly named lizard-type villain who just melted some glaciers in an attempt to flood the world and reduce the population to a number healthier for the planet. On page 1 of issue 100, Dinosaurus smushes Invincible’s head. On page 2, he rips Invincible’s body in half. (FYI, these gross acts are drawn in typically amazing, gory style by Ryan Ottley.) How did Invincible survive that? Through a time-worn gimmick: Dinosaurus actually killed a clone. When in doubt, break glass, use clone.