Even before the nation’s new health insurance marketplaces went into effect, the percentage of people who did not have insurance coverage in Erie County was one of the lowest in New York State.

Just 6 percent of Erie County residents lacked health insurance, the third-best showing among New York’s 39 largest counties, according to the Census Bureau’s 2013 American Community Survey released last week.

In Niagara County, 8.5 percent were without coverage.

Across New York, nearly 11 percent do not have health insurance, well below the national rate.

Why is Buffalo Niagara’s uninsured rate so low?

This area has a high level of employer-provided insurance, locally focused non-profit health insurers, easy access to Medicaid and a broad health-care network that gives consumers more chances to enroll in coverage when they see a doctor or specialist.

The strong level of insurance coverage here carries benefits. It means hospitals and physicians are left with fewer unpaid bills for treatment, organizations that collect medical data can draw from a larger pool of patient information and more people can get affordable preventive care.

“Because they have insurance, they’re accessing care, and getting the screening and tests that they need, to hopefully prevent a later, catastrophic health situation,” said Art Wingerter, president of Univera Healthcare.

The latest Census statistics are in line with insurance data released previously that shows Western New York and Upstate New York outperform the rest of the state and the nation when it comes to the uninsured rate.

For example, Western New York between 2010 and 2012 had an uninsured rate of 7.8 percent, the best of any upstate region over that time and lower even than the goal set by the Congressional Budget Office for the country for 2023.

“We’re 10 years ahead, where we are now,” Wingerter said.

The new Census statistics show Erie and Niagara counties have an uninsured rate of 6.45 percent, far below the 10.7 percent statewide rate and the 14.5 percent national rate. Adding Chautauqua and Cattaraugus counties puts the regional rate at 7 percent.

The only large New York counties that have lower uninsured rates than Erie are Saratoga, at 4.8 percent, and Madison, at 5.5 percent.

Drilling deeper into the new data, just 2.2 percent of people under 18 in Erie County were uninsured in 2013, better than the 4 percent rate for New York State.

Low-income residents of Erie County also are more likely to have insurance coverage than people living in the outlying counties. Nine percent of households in Erie County earning less than $25,000 were uninsured, compared to 12.3 percent in Chautauqua and 15.8 percent in Cattaraugus.