Lehigh Valley Health Network has found a new leader from within its own ranks.

LVHN's board of trustees has appointed Dr. Brian A. Nester chief executive and president, the network announced Thursday. Nester, who has served as LVHN's acting CEO since July when former CEO Dr. Ronald W. Swinfard retired, has worked for LVHN for nearly two decades.

"Dr. Nester displayed exceptional foresight and leadership, and instilled confidence in both the board and LVHN's senior management team over the past four months as acting president and CEO," Chairman William F. Hecht said. "Because of this, it became clear that he was the right person to serve as LVHN's president and CEO and to guide our organization through the ever-changing health care landscape."

LVHN is the Lehigh Valley's largest employer with a payroll of 13,000 workers. The network includes four hospitals — one in Allentown, one in Salisbury Township, one in Bethlehem and one in Hazleton; 12 health centers caring for communities in five counties; numerous primary and specialty care physician practices throughout the region; pharmacies, imaging, home health services and lab services; and preferred provider services through Valley Preferred.

Upon Swinfard's retirement and Nester's appointment as acting CEO, LVHN's board of trustees announced it would conduct a national search for a new top boss.

Nester came to LVHN in 1998 from an academic post in emergency medicine at Albert Einstein Medical Center in Philadelphia. As associate vice chairman of the department of emergency medicine, he served as both research director and director of the Lehigh Valley Hospital-Muhlenberg emergency department.

Prior to becoming acting president and CEO in July, Nester served as the health network's chief strategy officer since 2011, overseeing the development of LVHN's strategy to address the opportunities and challenges associated with the Affordable Care Act.

"It has been an honor to be part of the team caring for the Lehigh Valley community for the past 17 years," Nester said. "It's an even greater honor to serve our community and my colleagues as the new president and chief executive officer of Lehigh Valley Health Network.

"While the future of health care continues to evolve rapidly, I am absolutely confident that LVHN will continue to be well positioned to meet the health care needs and expectations of our community," he said. "We are up for the challenge."

In 2003, Nester was named senior vice president for physician practice network development. He was responsible for aligning the physician community and coordinating efforts to provide greater access to LVHN's services to the local community and the region.

In 2007 Nester's role expanded to include oversight of Health Network Laboratories and the formal cultivation of inter-hospital relationships. Those responsibilities included the formation of AllSpire Health Partners, a consortium of seven hospital systems in New Jersey and Pennsylvania aimed at addressing quality, population health and business efficiencies.

Nester received his DO and MS degrees from the Philadelphia College of Osteopathic Medicine and his MBA from Columbia University in New York. He speaks nationally on issues related to physician integration and business development, and is guest lecturer at Columbia University's Graduate School of Business and Mailman School of Public Health on issues related to health-care reform and strategy.

skennedy@mcall.com

610-820-6130