Jeb Bush wants the economy to grow, which is an idea that pretty much anyone would endorse.

The problem is he doesn't want it to grow through, say, capital investment in infrastructure or by giving the shrinking middle class more purchasing power with sustainable wages. He wants to get the economy growing by, to use the jockey's vernacular, going to the whip.

Regardless of the context, this agenda sounds familiar: "We have to be a lot more productive," the Governor told the New Hampshire Union Leader. "Workforce participation has to rise from its all-time modern lows, it means that people need to work longer hours and through their productivity gain more income for their families. That's the only way we'll get out of this rut that we're in."

He tried to rally by accurately noting that there are 6.5 million part-timers who seek to be full-time, but he could have said that in the first place. And by now it's clear that the deepest "rut" is the gorge from which Bush views economic policy.

Yes, workforce participation is 62.6 percent – its lowest since 1977 – but it's hard for the 6.5 million involuntary part-timers to find additional hours even with unemployment dropping, and Bush proposed nothing that would recover the 3.3 million "missing workers" who have dropped out of the labor force entirely.

He seems dismissive that Americans average 47.6 hours per week - more hours than any other wealthy nation, including Japan, Germany, and England. Indeed, the correlation to hours worked and economic growth is dubious at best – just ask the Mexicans or Greeks, who are first and fourth in longest workday.

And Bush seems oblivious that American productivity has soared over the last four decades while wages have flat-lined. Corporations are making record profits, but that isn't being shared with employees.

We know this much about his agenda: Bush opposes a federal minimum wage, and he wants to raise the Social Security age to 70, two things that would keep workers in the workforce longer.

He belongs to a party that wants to repeal the Affordable Care Act and gut both Medicaid and food stamps, actions that would result in people working later in life; and a party very wobbly on paid sick leave, which if passed would shorten the work year.

And his party is against the president's plan to expand overtime pay, and considers tax cuts for the rich the supply-side holy grail.

So regardless of context, Bush's perspective is so familiar it is stale.

Indeed, he was making a larger point about how he will grow the economy annually at 4 percent of GDP, which any reputable economist considers ludicrous.

Even the George W. Bush Foundation, which put that bug in his ear, admits it chose that figure because it was a round number – and why anyone would take direction from a crew that hemorrhaged 3.5 million jobs in six months is a riddle.

He also announced it just days after Layabout America learned that his last six tax returns showed $29 million in personal earnings (much of it "consulting" for Barclays and the defunct Lehman Bros.), and the same week his campaign raised $114 million from big donors.

So as Bush's party attempts to vilify Hillary Clinton as an out-of-touch elitist with this strategy, it still hasn't addressed the income disparity that will likely dominate the coming debate.

To wit: CEO compensation, according to the Economic Policy Institute, has increased 1,000 percent since 1978, while a typical worker's pay has risen by 10.9 percent. Put another way, that CEO now makes 300 times more than the average worker; in 1978, the ratio was 30-to-1.

Maybe Bush sees these numbers and concludes the average American isn't working hard enough. But it's likely that the winning candidate in 16 months will see it as a reason to fix the system.

Follow The Star-Ledger on Twitter @StarLedger and find us on Facebook.