Melanie Cohen

Just more than a year since his 11th-hour move to resurrect Crumbs Bake Shop Inc., investor and television personality Marcus Lemonis announced that he’s selling his stake in the bakery.

Fischer Enterprises LLC, which owns Dippin’ Dots and which currently holds the majority stake in the business, has purchased his piece of the company, Mr. Lemonis said Tuesday. The investor and television personality added that he’s taking a “sizable loss” in the deal that was brokered during Crumbs’ bankruptcy case last year but didn’t name a purchase price.

Mr. Lemonis said he made the decision to sell after realizing that he had underestimated his opportunities to grow the business as a minority owner of the company.

“When I got into the deal, I was looking to grow the business. I’m in business to be able to affect change,” Mr. Lemonis said Tuesday. “I have a lot of respect for the Fischers, but I miscalculated my ability as a minority stakeholder to affect change.”

Fischer Enterprises confirmed the transaction to Bankruptcy Beat and said the operations of the company won’t be affected.

Although the deal does means that Mr. Lemonis won’t have any involvement in the company going forward, he is retaining the rights to the Crumbs name for cookies, ice cream and candy products.

He plans to sell these products at grocery stores mainly through companies he already owns, including Mr. Green Tea and Sweet Pete’s Candy, two brands that Mr. Lemonis featured on his television show CNBC’s “The Profit.”

Crumbs Bake Shop, facing a default on its debt, last summer shut the doors on its 49 stores overnight, laid off nearly 450 employees and filed for chapter 11 bankruptcy. In the days that followed, Mr. Lemonis announced his interest in the company.

He teamed up with Fischer Enterprises. Together, they submitted a $6.5 million no-cash, debt forgiveness bid to take ownership of the company. The new owners also agreed to pump $600,000 into the business to cover two months of rent. The bankruptcy court approved the offer last August, which ultimately allowed Crumbs to reopen 24 locations in the Northeast, Chicago and Los Angeles.

-Sara Randazzo contributed to this article.

Write to Stephanie Gleason at stephanie.gleason@wsj.com. Follow her on Twitter at @stephgleason