King vs. Burwell was a long-odds case to try to limit premium subsidies to only those getting their health insurance through a state-based exchange. Since North Dakota, along with most other states, utilizes the federal exchange, if this suit had been successful, it would have meant that nearly 16,000 lower-income and young North Dakota policyholders would have lost their insurance premium subsidies. Obamacare requires that everyone purchase insurance, and this suit would have taken away the subsidies. Though Stenehjem is opposed to Obamacare, he recognized the hardship that this lawsuit would place on many North Dakotans and he fought to prevent it from happening. The Supreme Court agreed with this reasoning and ruled that subsidies should be available to all citizens, regardless of whether they were getting their insurance through a state-based exchange or the federal exchange. Using Burgum’s ad logic, then it can be said that Burgum is against North Dakota residents getting the same insurance premium subsidies that other states’ residents get.

Burgum’s casual approach to facts in this situation is only exceeded by his lack of information and understanding of many issues, particularly in the area of health and human services. To say that one way to cut “runaway spending” is to cut the Human Services budget only shows how little he knows about who is served by it.

Perhaps rather than generalities, he can identify what he proposes to cut. Would his preferences be to cut programs for vulnerable adults and children, those in nursing homes and basic care facilities, homes for persons with developmental disabilities, those receiving care in their own homes to prevent their moving into institutional care, families of children with autism or special medical needs, those receiving counseling for behavioral health and substance abuse at regional human service centers, or children receiving health care? There are six large hospitals in the four biggest North Dakota cities. In addition, there are 36 critical access hospitals throughout the state that ensure that care is available in the rural areas. Without reimbursement for those facilities, they could not survive.

The Human Services budget is all about serving people. That is not the same as postponing the start of a new building. Only 4 percent of the Human Services budget is spent on administration, 2 percent on system maintenance and operations, and 1 percent on capital projects. The rest goes to help our neighbors. In addition to that, North Dakota receives a smaller amount of federal matching funds for all of these programs than many states do. It is easy to make a sweeping statement about cutting a budget, but it is a lot harder to do it after learning the facts.

Don’t be fooled by the slick and expensive 30-second ads providing misleading information. The truth is Stenehjem does not support Obamacare as the way to provide health care for citizens. He is a staunch advocate for states’ rights and he understands the services provided by the Department of Human Services as a result of his years in the state Senate. That kind of expertise takes more than a lunch appointment to learn.

Join me in supporting the facts and voting for Wayne Stenehjem for governor.

Sen. Judy Lee, R-West Fargo