K-12 students can try out for the 54th annual Stars of Tomorrow Youth Talent Show Saturday, Feb. 21

Loveland's own Oksana Schuppan and Jeremy Kreuts play "Passacaglia," by Handel/Halverson, during the 2013 Rocky Mountain District Stars of Tomorrow Show. The event will return Feb. 21. ( Timothy Hurst / Loveland Reporter-Herald file photo )

If you go What: 54th Annual Stars of Tomorrow Youth Talent Show. When: Applications are due Sunday, Jan. 25, and auditions are Saturday, Feb. 7. Where: First United Methodist Church, 533 Grant Ave. Mail to: Kiwanis Stars of Tomorrow, P.O. Box 1495, Loveland, CO 80539.

After few high school students tried out for the annual youth talent show last March, the Kiwanis Club moved this year's Stars of Tomorrow to February to try to generate more interest.

The 54th annual Stars of Tomorrow Youth Talent Show will be Saturday, Feb. 21, at Mountain View High School. The acts in any given show include singing, dancing, playing instruments and the demonstration of other talents.

Last year's show was March 22, around the same time period of two high school plays, said John Nuttall, chairman of Stars of Tomorrow, which is hosted by the Loveland, Big Thompson Kiwanis Club

"We were short in high school students last year," Nuttall said.

Usually, there are 18 participants in the show, six for each age division for elementary, middle and high school, but last year, there were 16 participants. More than 20 Loveland and Berthoud area students in grades K-12 — they are required to live in the boundaries for Thompson School District — tried out for the show, compared with an average of 50 to 60.

Advertisement

Applications to try out for the 2015 show are due Jan. 25, and auditions will be Saturday, Feb. 7, at First United Methodist Church, 533 Grant Ave. Candidates in each age group will try out in front of three judges and are limited to five performers in a group and a time of five minutes.

The judges will select the top performers based on their presentation, talent and technique, selection of material and the overall general impression.

"The kids really enjoy it, and the parents really enjoy it. It's a a fun show," Nuttall said.

Stars of Tomorrow will be at 7 p.m. Feb. 21, at the Mountain View High School auditorium. The cost will be $5, which, along with donations, offsets the costs of the show that serves as service project for youth.

An average of 300 to 400 people attend the show.

Three judges will judge all of the acts and award first to third place at the middle and high school levels and prizes for the elementary students, including showstopper, most original, best stage presence, most promising, most enthusiastic and best audience appeal.

The high school winners also receive scholarships up to $1,000. The first-place winner will move on to the Rocky Mountain district show, which covers clubs in Colorado and Wyoming and parts of Nebraska.

The Loveland, Big Thompson Kiwanis will host the district show at the same location on April 26.

Shelley Widhalm: 970-669-5050, swidhalm@reporter-herald.com, twitter.com/ShelleyWidhalm