Still going to pot

The Republicans won big last Tuesday. But so did marijuana. Here’s a summary, from Conor Friedersdorf at The Atlantic:

“Oregon and Alaska just became the third and fourth states to legalize the drug. Washington, D.C., voted for legalization, as did the city of South Portland, Maine. The island territory of Guam chose to allow medicinal marijuana. And while Florida voters defeated a constitutional amendment legalizing medicinal weed, it required 60 percent support to pass and received roughly 58 percent of the vote. A healthy majority in the state want medical cannabis to be legal.”

I have said here before that the push to legalize is one of the most consequential social developments around–especially in light of how little is known about marijuana’s effects, therapeutic and otherwise. This should be a very big research priority, but I’ve seen few signs of that happening.

The National Institutes of Health is in a tough position here. It can’t easily launch a lot more pot research when federal laws are agin it. As a result of new state laws around the country, the pot industry will get richer and mount even more serious lobbying efforts. The federal government will grow even less enthusiastic about enforcing the laws against marijuana, as a practical matter ceding decisions about law enforcement (if any) to the states. And if the federal laws are not enforced, there won’t be much pressure to get rid of them.

It looks to me as if it will be many years before we have a handle on what marijuana is good for and where its bodily dangers lie. Meanwhile, a vast experiment has been launched by the citizenry on the citizenry. Life being what it is, some bad things are going to happen that might have been prevented if we knew more.

The environment, climate change, and money

Environmental issues figured big in this election and enormous amounts of money were invested in attempts to influence the outcomes. Advocates of doing something about climate change spent, at a minimum, an estimated $85 million, according to John Light at Grist. Most of that ($50 million plus) came from Tom Steyer. Light doesn’t think green groups got much for their money. That’s partly because, although voters in general care about the environment, it’s not at the top of their priorities as a pocketbook issue. Yet.

Dot Earth’s Andy Revkin argues that to compare the efforts of one side against the other is to set up a false equivalence. “The Koch brothers and their allies want to maintain the status quo, while Steyer and others seeking a political path to a post-carbon economy have an epic challenge in trying to prod Americans out of a fossil-fueled comfort zone that took a century to form.”

More bad news for the environment is likely to come from Congress. The Keystone Pipeline has lots of friends there. At Observations, the SciAm editors’ blog, Joshua A. Krisch notes that the new chairman of the Senate Environment and Public Works Committee, which oversees the Environmental Protection Agency’s budget, will be the notable climate-change denier James Inhofe.

Because the Republicans gained a majority in the US Senate in the election, come January they will occupy the chairs of each Senate committee. ScienceInsider has a complete list of likely incoming chairs of committees that affect science.

Also at ScienceInsider, David Shultz summarized the results from other science-related initiatives on state ballots. In Michigan, for example, they voted down permission to hunt wolves.

Health matters in the 2014 mid-term elections

At Kaiser Health News, Phil Galewitz says that wins for Republican governors in Florida, Georgia, Wisconsin, Maine and Kansas is bad news for Medicaid expansion in those states.

Here’s the Kaiser summary (with links to other pieces) of what might possibly perhaps maybe happen to Obamacare (aka ACA). The calls for repeal have grown fainter, but changes (so far not firmly delineated) seem likely. And here’s the Kaiser summary (with links to other pieces) on other health-related election results.

Also at Kaiser, Julie Rovner summarized results on an assortment of health matters in various states. Voters in North Dakota and Colorado “rejected so-called ‘personhood’ amendments that would have recognized rights for unborn fetuses.” In Tennessee, however, voters essentially overturned a state court decision loosening restrictions on abortion.

Department of somewhat fuzzy extended election metaphors

At Out There, Corey Powell takes off from Stephen Hawking’s ideas about the eventual collapse of the universe to conclude that the biggest challenge of American politics is not, as so many would have it, entrenched ideology. Instead, he says, the problem is the opposite of ideology. It is “excessive volatility, as voters change their minds too quickly in response to shifting circumstances, and in response to inputs that are too small or inconclusive. Great insights do not emerge that way.”

Greg Laden has a long, peculiar post-election analysis using one of the Harry Potter books as an extended metaphor for describing US political parties. It wasn’t worth my time to figure out what he was getting at, but if you have nothing else on today, you may want to pursue it.

Food matters in the 2014 mid-term elections

Some of those election results were about food, and optimist Marion Nestle tells us at Food Politics that there was plenty of good news for the food movement. (Food movement? Given what happens to food after it’s eaten, that’s a curious and somewhat off-putting name choice for diverse political aims. But never mind.)

In Berkeley, 75% of voters agreed to tax soda. In San Francisco a soda tax was not passed even though a majority of voters approved it; passage required two-thirds of them. Initiatives to require foods containing genetically modified ingredients to be labeled as such were voted down in Oregon and Colorado. Nestle says industry spent $60 million in these campaigns.

Grist’s Nathanael Johnson also analyzed election results related to food and farming and promises more detailed analyses in the weeks to come. He has followed up with a meditation on why the GMO labeling efforts keep failing. There are a number of reasons, definitely including the amount of money industry spent fighting labeling. But “The main problem with the anti-GMO crusade is that it picks one very limited issue out of the whole constellation of agricultural practices. And when clear-eyed people see the big picture, they often conclude that there are much more important issues to address.”

Johnson says a big change could come with mandatory labeling, which he thinks may happen in Vermont. People will see the labeling so much that they’ll just ignore it. I agree, and wrote a SciAm blog post last year urging the industry to embrace labeling voluntarily for exactly that reason.

Here’s my plan: Get people used to the idea of GM ingredients by first labeling a beloved and ubiquitous food. A perfect choice is corn chips, which is pretty much 100% GM. And don’t be shy. Make a virtue of necessity. We’re turning a lemon into lemonade here. Slap a great big proud label on the chips. Make the label convey something like this message, maybe in red letters: GM [BRAND NAME HERE] CORN CHIPS—MADE WITH DELICIOUS NUTRITIOUS GENETICALLY MODIFIED CORN!!!

A prospective boutique corn chip maker who sees this as an opportunity to get rich selling non-GM corn chips will likely be frustrated. First, finding corn that hasn’t been genetically modified is going to be really really hard. Nearly all of today’s corn is a GMO. Also, non-GM chips will inevitably cost more.

Meantime, millions of corn chip devotees are not going to deprive themselves, and they’re not going to want to pay a lot more either. Before long, I foresee, they will sink happily back into their couches with their family-size bags of crunchy, salty, tasty, less expensive GM-labeled corn chips. Yum.