Topics: Congress, Farm Bill, GlobalPost, Gun Control, Immigration Reform, Minimum wage, U.S. Politics, Politics News

This article originally appeared on GlobalPost

Don’t be fooled by the recent lovefest on Capitol Hill.

US lawmakers may have come together to pass bipartisan budget and spending bills in recent weeks, but this year’s Congress is actually expected to be even less productive than last year’s.

(In 2013, Congress passed the fewest bills since the institution began counting in the 1940s.)

Think that’s not possible?

When you run down the list of this year’s major issues, the cause for pessimism is clear:

1. Immigration reform

Senate Democrats were able to pass comprehensive immigration reform with the help of Republicans last year, establishing a 13-year pathway to citizenship for millions of undocumented immigrants in America.

But the measure remains stuck in the GOP-controlled House.

And while Republicans do plan to release a set of principles on the issue sometime this year, don’t expect it to include any concrete proposal, according to the National Journal.

2. Gun control

This issue has been dead in the water for months now, and it’s unlikely to be resurrected with any success in 2014.

Public support for stricter gun laws has dipped from 57 percent to 49 percent since the immediate aftermath of the Newtown massacre in December 2012, according to a recent CBS News poll.

Congress isn’t likely to act on an issue that remains low on the public agenda during an election year.

The best chance for any real action on gun reform was a bipartisan compromise to strengthen background checks, but it failed in the Democrat-controlled Senate last April.

3. Minimum wage hike

Buoyed by worker protests across the country, Democrats plan to push for an increase in the federal minimum wage this year.

But don’t expect it to get anywhere.

Most Republicans are expected to oppose any such legislation, claiming it would hurt job creation by increasing costs for business owners.