About the Arby's commercial where actor Ving Rhames says people should call the pope because the loaded Italian sandwich could be on the Italian flag: Does anybody have respect at all? Why mention the pope in a TV commercial for Arby's sandwiches? How low can they go? The pope is the highest you can go, but how low can you sink? I don't believe this. God have mercy on your souls. You really showed him disrespect, mentioning the pope in commercials. God, forgive you guys. I worked for a company that packed the meat for Arby's. I like the meat and know all about Arby's and everything like that. To put the pope in a commercial like this is disrespectful.

I read the letter to the editor from Ned L. McCray from Tinley Park about qualities that put President Obama above the crowd. I am completely in agreement with Ned. That is the basic reason why Obama got in as president because he has all those qualities. I think he's a great man and he'll go down as one of the best presidents in future years. Never have so many people, 90 percent, had insurance, and hospitals are doing well. My husband's a hospital administrator. They're very happy with Obamacare. Everybody I know is happy with it, so if you say you hate Obama and you hate his wife, Michelle, it's all because of racism.

Jackie, Palos Park

Do you ever see the new Weight Watchers commercial with media mogul Oprah Winfrey on it? Guess what? She bought a 10-percent stake in Weight Watchers, and guess what happened after that? The stock fell 30 percent. Ha. What did she ever do for Chicago? Nothing. Not a thing did she do for Chicago.

After listening to talk shows, I hear Republican presidential candidate Donald Trump saying he wants to create jobs. When he built the Trump Tower, he brought in immigrant Polish workers and paid them poorly for long days. He sells Trump neckties. They aren't cheap, except they're made in China. I heard him say, "They don't really believe I'm going to build a wall, do they?" In his Florida hotel, he hired almost all non-Americans. Every time someone asks him what his plan is, he changes the subject. He's made more enemies in the shortest time. He refuses to produce financial information. What about his $6 million program to raise money for Wounded Warriors? Is he a con man? You decide.

Orland Park

I saw the Jet.com commercial again where they show the tops of people's heads exploding. I was in the military service. I had to pull a guy out of a minefield. His brains came out. Is that entertaining to watch on TV? It's taking you back to bad memories. How many guys in the service saw this happen? You put that on TV and everybody can reminisce about it. Gee, it's one of our most cherished moments, watching somebody's brains spill out on the street, sidewalk or ground. It's horrible. All the garbage you put in the world, I don't believe this. It's a thing to watch people's heads blow off? Come on. Give me a break, will you?

People keep making claims that MSNBC is biased toward Democrats and Fox News Channel isn't. But I noticed while watching both that MSNBC usually has a Republican viewpoint person sitting on the program. They get to have their say. But if you watch Fox News, Bill O'Reilly won't allow anybody with a Democratic viewpoint to get through with a statement. When Bill's through talking, they get three words out and that's the end of their statement because he chimes in over them. So I really don't understand how they can accuse MSNBC of being more biased when they actually have Republican strategists on staff like Michael Steele and Rick Tyler, whom Republican presidential candidate Ted Cruz fired as campaign spokesman.

I think President Obama is wrong on trying to close the prison in Guantanamo Bay and bringing these people to the United States. It's wrong. The president is totally wrong. It's unbelievable.

What's Speak Out?

Speak Out allows readers to comment on the issues of the day. Email Speak Out at speakout@southtownstar.com or call 312-222-2427. Please limit comments to 30 seconds or about 120 words and give your first name and your hometown.