American actor George Clooney recently announced his endorsement for Democratic presidential candidate Hillary Clinton in a letter sent to her supporters.

Along with the endorsement was a swing at Donald Trump, as well as the announcement that Clinton supporters could win a funded trip with accommodations to have dinner at the Clooney house in Los Angeles on April 11.

POLITICO provides a collection of other endorsers for Clinton, which was published on March 11 most of who are politicians.

But George Clooney has not shied away from his political views, as he’s made them very public since 2005, around the time he released Syriana. Very recently, he and his wife, Amal Alamuddin, sat with Syrian refugees in Germany and the International Rescue Committee to talk about the partisan divide between rejecting and accepting them into Western nations.

The Inquisitr recently covered George Clooney’s response to Donald Trump from the same letter, giving more details along with the ticket prices for the fundraiser and his views on Bernie Sanders.

His attack on Trump is just one of many since he’s taken a liberal political stance, as when the Las Vegas Review-Journal reported in 2014 that there was an exchange between him and casino owner Steve Wynn, who was being critical about the Affordable Care Act during dinner at a promotional event for Clooney’s tequila, Casamigos.

When George Clooney was asked about the incident then, he said it was less about politics and more about character, and it’s been reported that some expletives were exchanged.

Much like Donald Trump however, Steve Wynn fired back, and the article appears to make it seem as if he’s continued to attack George Clooney for having too much to drink. Wynn has made statements saying that when only when he’s drunk does Clooney say that the president is his “friend.” He’s made other comments such as, “If you drink with George Clooney, make sure you get there early and don’t stay too late.”

In that same year, prior to getting married to human rights lawyer Amal Alamuddin, The Daily Mail wrote that the marriage was probably part of his plan to become more involved with politics and hinted that he might run for office.

But The Independent reported that those were just rumors, as he said he was not interested and added that Obama is “smarter than anybody,” with no need for anyone like Clooney to take his place.

The United Nations made George Clooney a messenger of peace in 2008, as his central cause has been around the situation in Darfur, but The Independent also mentions that he stepped down from his role as a United Nations peace messenger because he was too busy.

His new “rival,” Donald Trump, recently referred to the United Nations during his speech at AIPAC, where he said that if he were elected president, he would remove the United Nations from the negotiation process between Israel and the Palestinians, which is mentioned in an article about Hillary Clinton’s views of the conflict by The Inquisitr.

Clearly, George Clooney’s life is loaded with political responsibilities, with his wife Amal having been working vigorously on getting an overthrown president out of prison in the Maldives, an area which reportedly has a growing ISIS presence.

As the first guest on The Late Show With Stephen Colbert last year, George Clooney spoke on his activism and her work.

While doing promotion for his new film Hail Caesar! at the Berlin Film Festival, George Clooney was asked by a reporter what else he did other than make movies and hang out with politicians.

This caused the award-winning actor to snap back at the reporter, asking him what he was doing to try to make the world a better place, according to Contact Music:

“I spend a lot of time working on these things, and it’s an odd thing to have someone stand up and say, ‘What do you do?’ That’s fine, knock yourself out,” he bristled visibly when the Mexican journalist grilled him. “I have gone to places that are very dangerous and I work a lot on these things. I’d like to know what you are doing to help the situation?” he finished his outburst.

Even closer to George Clooney is that, as an actor, he’s a member of the Screen Actor’s Guild (SAG) and recently remembered the SAG-AFTRA president Ken Howard, who died Wednesday at the age of 71 according to People.

SAG offers protection for actors who are considered union, which George Clooney no doubt supports.

The Wrap goes into more details about George Clooney’s dinner event for Hillary Clinton, saying that other events will take place in San Francisco and name drops the presence of other heavy-hitters like Steven Spielberg.

[Featured image by Pablo Martinez Monsivais | AP Photo]