Expecting a shakeout in the health-care space, Apollo Global Management is diving into private equity investment in the sector.

“In the last couple of years, the receptiveness on the credit market and the low interest rates meant that some mistakes were made,” said Matthew Nord, a private equity partner who leads investments in health care and business services at the New York firm. “It happened in 2006 and 2007 when people started to pay up for assets and put on a lot of debt, instead of thinking of what’s inherently the fair value of the assets.”

T​he firm’s private equity business previously had looked at opportunities in health care, ​but hadn’t invested in the area​, a practice that is atypical for a multibillion-dollar generalist firm, given the nation’s health-care spending ​accounts for about 17% of gross domestic product​.

“We are value investors that take a contrarian approach,” ​Mr. Nord​ said. “Health care typically trades at high valuations, not always for reasons you can defend.”

Valuation for ​​health-care ​assets have scaled new heights, with deals made in the past 12 months trading at an average multiple of 14.3 times the earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization​, i​​​​Investment bank Harris Williams & Co. said in a December note​.​

Taking advantage of market volatility in the second half of the year and private equity peer’s conservative stance toward hospital investments, Apollo agreed in November to buy community hospital operator RegionalCare Hospital Partners Inc. from Warburg Pincus in its first private equity deal in health care. Currently, RegionalCare owns and operates eight hospitals in Alabama, Arizona, Connecticut, Iowa, Montana, Ohio and Texas.​

​​Armed with fresh capital from Apollo Investment Fund VIII LP, an $18.4 billion vehicle raised in 2014, the firm is looking at further opportunities in the field, leveraging on the firm’s deep experience in the credit side of health-care investing. The firm, which also makes real estate and distressed investments, has about $10 billion of health care-focused credit holdings in its $115 billion credit portfolio.

“The growth of health care in our credit business has allowed us to benefit from their insights and focus on areas that fit with our value-oriented strategy,” said Mr. Nord. “It is interesting to see, with the correction in the equity and debt markets, whether there [are] going to be more opportunities.”

Write to Amy Or at amy.or@wsj.com