The two armchairs were on their way to the island of orphaned furniture. This gave me a little sick feeling. I tried to be clearheaded as I edited which furniture from my home and DC’s would make the cut in our new blended home. Many items landed on the exit ramp, which felt healthy and right, like a vegetable-juice cleanse.

But I was having a hard time parting with the chairs. I liked them. They were well-made, in good condition, and solidly comfortable. The only sin they had committed was that they no longer went with the new home’s décor.

The look DC and I had agreed on for the happy yellow house was transitional, a tricky décor style that bridges traditional with contemporary. Some traditional items, just like people, move forward better than others. And these gold and blue upholstered chairs looked, well, I had to be honest, when I sized them up critically, fusty.

Their overtly traditional lines and old-world European-style fabric looked passé. Keeping them would be like playing Beethoven at a jazz festival.

So the chairs sat in my garage awaiting the next bus to the Sharing Center. And that nagged at me. I had a strong case of furniture guilt. I know how I would feel if someone showed me the curb just because I didn’t fit in.

Maybe it’s my Scottish heritage, but I am frugal at my core. I’m philosophically opposed to replacing something inherently good, with something likely to be inferior — even if it is more stylish. I believe in reusing, repurposing and rehabilitating when possible, in taking care of what’s mine, not just ejecting it for a newer model tempting as it can be. So I took my own advice for a change.

“I thought we were getting rid of those,” DC said when he saw the chairs back in the house with swatches of fabric samples spread on them.

“I decided we should recover them not replace them.”

“I thought you said they wouldn’t work.”

“I changed my mind,” I said, exercising my female prerogative. “Besides, putting a contemporary fabric on a traditional chair is a perfect transitional statement.” I tried to sound convincing, so my ambivalence wouldn’t seep through.

“Is it worth it?”

“We’ll see.”

DC adjusted his eyebrows, which had been perpetually raised since we started the process.

“We live in such a throw-away society,” said Dean Stills, co-owner of Stills Upholstery, a family business in Longwood, FLa., which has been resurrecting and transforming furniture for 36 years. “People give away a high quality sofa that their grandparents paid $3,500 for in 1975, and buy something that isn’t real wood from IKEA because they think it’s cooler.”

As Stills and I talked, I felt better about recovering, not replacing these good old chairs. And then we hashed over all the considerations folks should make before showing a piece of upholstered furniture the door:

Quality: “Not every piece is worth recovering,” Stills said. Much depends on the quality of the frame, and the piece’s condition. “If it’s a cheap piece from Costco, throw it away and start over. If you aren’t sure how well made a piece is, pick it up. Heavier usually means better made. Also sit in it and scooch. If it’s rickety, it’s not well made. Better made pieces feel stable, and are made of hard wood like oak, ash or maple, not soft material like pine, plastic or composite. Pieces put together with doweled joints hold up better than butted joints. Also note age. In this case, older is better. “Anything made before 1985 usually has a high-end wooden frame,” he said. “Wood gets harder as it gets older.”

Connection: Do you have a family attachment? If grandma’s sofa or the chair you sat in with dad isn’t a decorative fit anymore or it’s worn, new upholstery can give it a new life for another generation.

Comfort: If it’s your favorite chair, and no other chair feels quite like it, it might be worth a chairlift.

Cost: If a piece was expensive, recovering it will be cheaper than replacing it with something equally well made. Reupholstering is often 50 to 60 percent of the cost of replacing, said Stills. My armchairs would cost around $800 to $1,000 each to replace. Recovering cost $500 per chair ($320 for labor, $180 for fabric).

Configuration: If the lines are good and the item is integral to your décor and only the color or fabric pattern are wrong, recover.

Customization: If you like choice, you will have more if you reupholster. When buying a chair from a furniture store, fabric selection is limited. Reupholstering lets you choose from literally a million options, and lets you mix fabrics to customize pieces to fit your décor. (This much choice is a mixed blessing, as you’ll see in next week’s column.)

Convenience: Shopping for new furniture is time consuming. If you have a piece you know works but needs a refresh, recovering lets you avoid the hassle of starting from scratch.

Conscience: Repurposing just feels better than replacing, and is better for the planet.

Syndicated columnist Marni Jameson is the author of two home and lifestyle books, and the forthcoming “Downsizing the Family Home: What to Keep, What to Let Go” (Sterling Press). Contact her through www.marnijameson.com.