Maine residents Ethan Prichard, 9, bottom front, Brian Prichard, left, and Liam Prichard, 11, look at a mixed-media kinetic glass sculpture titled "Loupe" by Greg Reiche during the Sculpture in the Park event Saturday at Benson Park Sculpture Garden. ( Steve Stoner / Loveland Reporter-Herald )

Loveland resident Kennedy Starr-Gray, 8, carves a piece of butternut wood as Don Woodard, a woodcarving artist from Denver, looks on Saturady at the Loveland Sculpture Invitational. (Luke Whittaker/ Loveland Reporter-Herald)

The red electric guitar explodes from some hard-core playing, scattering the body, bridge, posts and pegs across a black canvas.

A saxophone is broken under one of the keys as the bell blows out into shooting pieces of metal.

And a baseball smashed into a now shattered bat has parts flying as it spins off the edge of the black.

These are some of the works of art Stefan Begej of Littleton had on display Saturday at the 31st annual Sculpture in the Park show at Benson Park Sculpture Garden. They are part of his 16-piece Exuberance series with musical instruments and sporting equipment breaking apart from excessive, excited play.

"It does take awhile to arrange these pieces to get it the way I want it,"said Begej, a first-year participant in the show, hosted by Loveland High Plains Arts Council and presenting 2,000 pieces by 170 sculptors.

If you go Art in the Park: 10 a.m.-4 p.m. Sunday, North Lake Park, 2800 N. Taft Ave. Free to attend. The event offers art and food items for purchase. Call the Lincoln Gallery at 970-663-2407 for details. Sculpture in the Park: 9:30 a.m.-4:30 p.m. Sunday, Benson Park Sculpture Garden, off Aspen Drive and Taft Avenue. General admission is $7. Call the Loveland High Plains Arts Council office at 970-663-2940 for details. Advertisement Loveland Sculpture Invitational Show and Sale: 9:30 a.m.-4:30 p.m. Sunday, south of Loveland High School. General admission is $7. Call 970-663-7467 for details. Parking and transportation: Handicapped-parking areas available near the entrances to the shows with a valid handicapped-parking permit. There is a free shuttle bus service 8:30 a.m.-3:30 p.m. Sunday. Shuttles will stop at King of Glory Lutheran Church, city of Loveland Service Center, Thompson Valley Towne Center, Orchards Shopping Center and Buffalo Wild Wings at Centerra.

To create his art, Begej doesn't smash the instrument and simply throw the pieces on the canvas, something he crafts out of plywood covered over with black canvas. The red guitar took him 3 ½ weeks, a process that involved leaving enough of the instrument intact to keep it recognizable, he said.

"The message is to try to visually portray what we all know as exuberance," Begej said. "In the process, I'm using exaggerated physics."

In the same display tent, one of four at the show, Jay Eighmy of Loveland showed his more serene, abstract birds, animals and human figures made of stone, resin and bronze.

"I always loved birds," said Eighmy, a sculptor of 40 years. "I've always been fascinated by their attitude ... kind of standoffish, but they're also majestic."

Eighmy likes working with "heavy textures," he said, such as in the tail and feather patterns when he creates images of birds.

"I just try to make a nice design with the textures playing off each other," he said.

Diane Mason of Berthoud also likes working with animal imagery and does realistic bronze pieces, using her ethology degree to help with her understanding of animal behavior.

"You get in your studio, and it's the fun of creating and designing your own stuff, just coming up with new concepts," Mason said.

Claudia Roulier, a steampunk mixed media artist from Idledale, uses animals in her work, but gives them machinery and gadgets mixed with flesh, such as a series of three urban decay pieces that include the heads of dogs.

Annaliese Pulliam, 7, of Loveland, takes a closer look at an air plant Saturday during the Art in the Park event in Loveland. (Luke Whittaker / Loveland Reporter-Herald)

"It's the idea of decaying urban landscapes and the combination of man, beast and machine," Roulier said. "At the end times, will this be where we'll be?"

Roulier and the other artists at Sculpture in the Park showed slightly different artwork than the two other sculpture and art shows in the same area of Loveland over the weekend.

The 23rd annual Loveland Sculpture Invitational Show and Sale Friday to Sunday is across the street from Benson Park south of Loveland High School on 29th Street. The show features 160 artists and includes life-size sculptures in a sculpture garden in the middle of tent rows with smaller pieces.

Bruce Stillman of Minnetrista, Minn., showed two of his pieces, "Halley's Comet" he created with Heidi Hoy and a kinetic sculpture with four steel double-barrel shapes that move back-and-forth in the wind.

"It's simple physics, a kind of weights and balance," Stillman said. "The wind catches the surface and swings these pendulums back and forth. I balance it so it's a nice slow, tranquil motion and kind of hypnotic and mesmerizing for the viewer."

A grassy field away, Art in the Park on Saturday and Sunday at North Lake Park features 170 to 180 booths of arts and crafts and a beer garden, food and music.

Jerran Peery of Loveland displayed some of his woodworking pieces, including toy boxes, wishing wells and windmills, along with a few birdhouses and caddies.

Peery uses rough sawn cedar for the outdoor items, he said.

"It just seems to look better," he said.

Peery never does the same project twice.

"None of them are the same," he said. "They all are uniquely built."

Contact Reporter-Herald Staff Writer Shelley Widhalm at 970-669-5050 or swidhalm@reporter-herald.com. Follow her at twitter.com/ShelleyWidhalm.