Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share Gov. Matt Bevin says Saturday's caucus is "democracy in action" as he cast his ballot in Kentucky's Republican caucus at Seneca High School in Louisville. Marty Pearl/The Courier-Journal

Buy Photo People walk towards the GOP presidential polling site at Seneca High School. (Photo: Matt Stone/The Courier-Journal)Buy Photo

Republican voters lined up to vote in the GOP presidential caucus Saturday at more than 100 locations across Kentucky.

At Seneca High School, one of nine caucus locations in Jefferson County, traffic was backed up Saturday morning as the lines steadily grew longer.

Surrounded by cameras, reporters and supporters, Gov. Matt Bevin visited the Seneca location to cast his ballot around 10:30 a.m. in the race to win Kentucky's delegates. He said that Kentucky's move to hold the early caucus kept the state from being an "afterthought" and helped draw candidates such as Donald Trump to campaign.

"Look at this – there are lines of people waiting to vote," said Bevin, who declined to say which candidate he voted for. "For everybody who thinks that having a caucus in Kentucky was not a good thing, have you ever seen this kind of enthusiasm for a primary in the state of Kentucky? You never have."

But at Trinity Family Life Center in west Louisville, crowds were noticeably thinner. Caucus chair Dereck Barber said he didn't expect a huge turnout but he did see more than 200 people in the first 90 minutes. At Greenwood Elementary in southwest Louisville, traffic backed up and streams of people turned out to vote.

The Courier-Journal has reported that turnout is expected to be light because Kentucky voters aren't used to voting in March or on Saturdays. Furthermore, some voters likely aren't even aware of the caucus.

Even though all 11 candidates who signed up for the caucus are on the ballot, only Donald Trump, Ted Cruz, Marco Rubio and John Kasich remain in the race and are eligible for Kentucky's 46 delegates.

This will be the first time a presidential nominee has been selected in Kentucky by caucus since 1984 when the Kentucky General Assembly did away with the presidential primary and Democrats chose former Vice President Walter Mondale by caucus. Republicans, that year, used a convention system to renominate President Ronald Reagan.

"I know there's been some confusion – anytime you do something for the very first time there are questions," said Linda Huber, a caucus chair at Seneca High.

Kentucky caucuses will close at 4 p.m.

Some voters said they came out to specifically to vote for or against front-runner Donald Trump, who has created a rift in the Republican party and the voting public at large.

"We're desperate for a change in the country – we feel Donald Trump can change the country," said Susan Mudd, who wasn't swayed by party leaders such as Mitt Romney in recent days coming out strongly against Trump. "I think he's a savior for America."

Her husband, Ron Mudd, a Marine veteran, said Trump checked off two boxes: He was a "non-politician" and would "make America great again."

In the West End, Abi John, a registered Republican of Indian descent who became a U.S. citizen last month, said he wanted to cast a vote against Trump.

"The whole idea of the wall, I don't know what's going through his mind – no reasonable individual can support that," he said. "I don't think the leader of a free nation needs to be like that."

Carol Paris, who wore a Ben Carson hat and a sweatshirt that read, "Love like Jesus Does," said he was voting for Ted Cruz and hoped Trump wouldn't be the nominee. "It takes more to be the president than being rude and putting everybody down," she said, adding however that she will support Trump if he becomes the nominee because he could defeat Hillary Clinton.

Voter Doris Deskins said she chose John Kasich. While some candidates are "saying everything everybody wants," she said, "John can do it."

Here's what's happening around the state:

RandPaul: At my #kycaucus location! Great crowd and great to meet new caucus goers! Get out to vote: … pic.twitter.com/zxIig0hs3Z — Mile High Company (@milehighcompany) March 5, 2016

At #kycaucus voter Ron Mudd & wife back @realDonaldTrump. "He'll make America great again" pic.twitter.com/0Tj4UlFtsY — Chris Kenning (@ckenning_cj) March 5, 2016

At Seneca High, @GovMattBevin won't say who he will vote for but pleased w turnout for #kycaucuspic.twitter.com/8gQoYb15hq — Chris Kenning (@ckenning_cj) March 5, 2016

Scott Co. caucus official says turnout "overwhelming" at First United Methodist Church in Georgetown #kycaucuspic.twitter.com/BTRBthj3GD — Michele Chamberland (@MicheleWKYT) March 5, 2016

Long lines in front of the Knicely Center in Warren Co. #kycaucuspic.twitter.com/GihTt3jhgE — Magical Aaron (@MagicalAaron) March 5, 2016

The GOP is alive and well in Bowling Green KY. @GOP@joeimel#kycaucuspic.twitter.com/QxXYtuYleo — Tony Whitmer (@twhitt45) March 5, 2016

What a great turnout in Scott Co. Hopefully this is a preview for Tuesday's Special Election. #kycaucushttps://t.co/KgsCcb0fwS — Phillip Pratt (@PrattforKY) March 5, 2016

Heavy traffic in NKY today with people headed to the caucus. This photo is from SB 71/75 near Florence. #KyCaucuspic.twitter.com/RvEYN4UpLP — WCPO (@WCPO) March 5, 2016

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1oXUy10