In the pantheon of dumbest ideas in modern American history, there was New Coke, Microsoft Bob, the 1987 Yugo GV, the vibrating ab belt and the Snuggie for dogs. But not one of those would rival President Barack Obama’s current dare to congressional Republicans to impeach him.

If Republicans take up the dare, it would cost them the Senate in 2014, the presidency in 2016 and relevance for perhaps a decade or more. And that includes if Obama takes out his pen and phone and signs an executive order legalizing millions of undocumented immigrants. Even if a Republican could get elected president in, say, 2020, Democrats then would be in position to impeach with political impunity 20 minutes after the inauguration ended.

This is bad governance, bad politics and bad strategy. It would be political suicide even to contemplate it seriously.

[SEE: Cartoons about the Republican Party]

And it’s not being contemplated by serious people. But mere discussion of impeachment by fringe players, such as Sarah Palin and Rep. Steve Stockman, R-Texas, has enabled Democrats to raise millions of dollars with desperate email appeals to “have Barack’s back.”

It’s not the fringe of the Democratic Party that talks about impeachment. It’s the marquee names — Obama, Harry Reid, Nancy Pelosi, Joe Biden — who push the I word. And it’s not hard to figure out why. Democrats face a turnout debacle in 2014. Their younger voters are less enthusiastic. The independents who twice made Obama president are not on board. Current polling gives Republicans a 14-point engagement advantage. And this time around, it’s been Democratic candidates — Bruce Braley, running for Senate in Iowa, for example — whose missteps have dominated campaign coverage.

[COMMENTARY: Boehner's Lawsuit Gets the OK]

The Democrats also want to talk impeachment because they don’t want to talk about the lawsuit House Republicans are considering filing. Jonathan Turley, the George Washington University law professor and most-of-the-time Obama supporter, says Congress must press this case to restore our nation’s checks and balances. He and others believe Republicans could well win the case on its merits.

That explains the “fact sheet," duly lapped up by the administration’s sycophants in the press, that says no Congress has ever sued a sitting president. In fact, members of Congress have sued a sitting president 14 times since Watergate. It’s why President Obama attempts to conflate the two when he can — to make the low-information voters who form his base think the lawsuit equals impeachment. It’s why he says “stop just hatin’ all the time,” because he knows questions of executive power relative to Congress have been bubbling to the surface for decades and are now ripe for a court challenge. Whether it’s immigration or the environment or unilateral changes to the Affordable Care Act, there is a growing sense the Supreme Court needs to create a bright line that defines the limits of presidential power.

[MORE: Cartoons about Congress]

There is some risk for Republicans in taking this on. But at least they can say they are fighting for important principles, addressing concerns that have been building over several administrations and not playing for the crowd. Democrats can’t say any of that, but given who their crowd is, it may not matter.