By of the

When a doctor takes a call or responds to an email from a patient, or when a medical assistant reminds a patient about an overdue exam or unfilled prescription, the medical practice typically doesn't get paid for its time.

Anthem Blue Cross and Blue Shield in Wisconsin is taking a small step to change that.

The health insurer is creating contracts that will pay primary care physicians a monthly fee to help cover the time-consuming tasks that keep people healthy.

"Care coordination doesn't just happen," said John Foley, a regional vice president who oversees contracting for Anthem Blue Cross.

The contracts also will reward physicians who meet certain quality and performance goals and who provide care at a lower cost.

That's not the way health care works now. Being good stewards of health care generally costs doctors and health systems time and money.

When a nurse tells a worried parent that she can wait a day or two before a child with a bad cold needs to see a physician or nurse practitioner, the practice loses money. And when a doctor decides against ordering an unnecessary test, the health system loses money.

The same holds true when a physician works to keep a patient with high blood pressure or diabetes out of the hospital.

"The better you do, the worst off you are financially," said Dave Krueger, executive director and medical director of Bellin-ThedaCare Healthcare Partners, a partnership of the health systems in Appleton and Green Bay.

Medicare experiment

The partnership was created to participate in a Medicare experiment that rewards physician practices and health systems when they provide care for Medicare patients at a lower cost while meeting targets for quality care.

That experiment and Anthem Blue Cross' new contracts are examples of the small steps being taken to realign economic incentives in health care. Health economists across the political spectrum agree that changing the way hospitals, doctors and other health care providers are paid will be essential for the U.S. health care system to become more efficient.

Aurora Health Care and Anthem Blue Cross signed a new contract last week. ProHealth Care and Bellin-ThedaCare Healthcare Partners have similar contracts with the health insurer. Anthem Blue Cross plans to reach similar agreements with all of the health systems where it sells health plans in Wisconsin.

In other states, such contracts have reduced emergency room visits and hospital admissions and readmissions, Foley said. They also have led to more primary care visits and better compliance with treatment plans, including more patients taking medications as prescribed.

"The outreach really helps," Foley said. "The amount of avoided cost is significant."

Contacting a patient with high blood pressure who hasn't filled a prescription, for example, or working with a patient with diabetes who is indifferent about controlling his or her blood sugar can prevent a costly emergency room visit or hospital stay.

"The more catastrophic events we can avoid," Foley said, "the better it is for the patient and the better it is for the underlying costs."

Quality standards

The new contracts build on an earlier pilot project with Froedtert Health.

The quality standards are based on measures established by organizations such as the National Committee on Quality Assurance, the American Diabetes Association and the American Academy of Pediatrics.

The new contracts encourage doctors and health systems to redesign the way care is delivered. Examples are whether a clinic has extended hours or uses so-called team-based care, in which a physician oversees a team that includes a nurse practitioner or physician assistant, registered nurse or social worker and other staff.

Other experiments to change the way doctors, hospitals and other health care providers are paid are taking place.

"We are migrating from volume to value," said Rick Klein, an Aurora executive vice president whose responsibilities include business development and strategy.

Anthem Blue Cross also offers a health plan that guarantees savings for employers if workers and their families use Aurora's network of hospitals and doctors for nearly all their care.

Aurora has a similar agreement with Aetna Inc.

And last week, the Business Health Care Group, an employer coalition, announced an agreement with UnitedHealthcare, that will enable employers to offer a health plan that gives employees and their families a financial incentive, such as lower out-of-pocket costs, to get care from doctors the insurance company says provide quality care at a lower cost.

Other experiments include paying doctors and hospitals a bundled, or fixed, rate for an episode of care, such as a knee replacement, and paying health systems a set amount to provide care for a specific group of patients.

The overall goal is to find ways to reward physicians and health systems that make better use of health care dollars.

A 2013 study by the Institute of Medicine, the health arm of the National Academy of Sciences, estimated that 31%, or $765 billion, of the $2.5 trillion in total health care spending in 2009 was excess cost.

Two categories — unnecessary services and inefficiently delivered care — accounted for an estimated $340 billion of inefficiencies.

All this is going to take time, and it will require changes in the way the health care system is structured and how care is delivered.

"We are happy with the experiments taking place," said Krueger of Bellin-ThedaCare Healthcare Partners. "We all wish it was moving faster."