The two are already working together on some residencies and would like to expand more, but the two could also help each other respond to shrinking reimbursements now and in the future, University CEO Jim Davis said.

Neil Pruitt, the chairman of the university system’s Board of Re­gents, and past chairman Philip Wil­heit had lunch at University Hos­pital to begin those talks, he said.

“They were good discussions, the tone was very good and it’s the kind of discussion we are going to have to have going forward if we are all going to thrive,” Davis said.

In a statement, the regents said they wanted to “explore strategic opportunities to potentially create a partnership to expand health services and better serve Georgians.”

Davis said that Gov. Nathan Deal wants GRU to have a top-50 medical school and that it might need help to do that.

“To do that, they really need a larger, deeper clinical platform to get there,” Davis said. “To do that on their own is going to be very difficult. They’re broaching ideas on how we might collaborate more deeply to provide that medical education experience here.”

University Hospital already has six residency slots where residents from the Medical College of Georgia rotate through. Three are in OB/GYN, two are in general surgery and one is in internal medicine. Because multiple residents can rotate through those slots, last year 36 residents rotated through University-based residencies and saw more than 1,400 cases.

University Hospital has the ability to add 11 more residency slots and would like to get help from a state fund to expand residencies in the state, Davis said. The hospital is trying to create a family medicine program in conjunction with MCG, for instance, he said.

But there could be even larger collaborations, Davis said.

“They are also, just like every other hospital, dealing with the effects of the Affordable Care Act and the reimbursement challenges that it brings to every hospital in the country,” he said.

The talks are similar to those Uni­versity has had with other health systems and providers “looking for ways to collaborate, to reduce the impact of that by reducing our fixed costs and how we can work closer together to do that,” Davis said.

The regents said “an exploratory discussion is underway,” and Davis said the parties have agreed to meet again soon.