Cruz makes case against farm subsidies

By Frank Holdmeyer

© Copyright Agri-Pulse Communications, Inc.

WEST DES MOINES, IOWA, Oct. 1, 2015 - Texas Sen. Ted Cruz believes the federal government has a legitimate role in providing crop insurance, but he says the federal government shouldn't be providing major subsidies to large conglomerate operations.

“I think we should get the federal government out of the business of setting the price and let the market operate. That will expand competition and drive down prices,” the GOP presidential candidate said in an interview that aired Thursday on RFD-TV.

He also said that there should be reforms in the crop insurance program to help smaller and lower income farmers.

Agri-Pulse is working with RFD-TV to capture presidential candidate's positions on agriculture, food and rural issues, as part of its Rural Route to the White House series. All presidential candidates have been invited to participate in the Rural Town Hall series. The program address issues affecting rural America and is the first of its kind in a presidential election.

The Texas senator said he voted against the 2014 farm bill because it included a reauthorization of the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program, also known as food stamps.

“The central idea of food stamps should be to get people off food stamps and put in a position where they can provide for their own families,” Cruz said. “That was a big part of the reason I voted against it. Under Barack Obama, one in seven Americans are now on food stamps.

“That is a tragedy. One in seven Americans caught in dependency on the federal government. We need to reform the food stamp program. We need to reform all federal welfare programs so that they do a far better job of getting people off of dependence.”

While he said he supported the concept of crop insurance, he also compared it to the Affordable Care Act.

“Whether it is ObamaCare or crop insurance, when you have the federal government stepping in it ends up limiting choices and driving up prices,” he said. “I'd like to see farmers have more options, more choices, be able to buy insurance on a national market. I believe social safety nets should be a trampoline and not hemp,” he added.

Cruz also reiterated his opposition to biofuel mandates. He introduced legislation earlier this year (S 791) to phase out the Renewable Fuel Standard over five years.

“There was a time when those were nascent technologies,” Cruz said of biofuels “This is now a mature energy source. There is real demand in the marketplace for ethanol and biofuels that will continue without a government mandate.

Cruz tackled other questions such as reducing federal regulations, export market access, helping young people get started in agriculture, and challenges facing rural schools.

He said American values are slipping. “We are getting away from common sense values and self-reliance. What we are doing as a nation right now doesn't make any sense, people want to get back to the free market principles of constitutional liberty that made America great. I am profoundly optimistic. People are waking up at incredible levels. That is what is going to take to turn the country around.”

#30

Produced in conjunction with Mediacom Connections Channel and Gannett, RURAL TOWN HALL is a series of one-hour prime-time specials focusing on rural American issues in advance of the 2016 presidential election.