Bush says Florida years show he's no moderate

PALM BEACH, Fla. — Jeb Bush complained Thursday night that “the narratives” about his time as governor of Florida make him sound like a moderate when he was, in fact, very conservative.

Speaking to 200 of the right’s top donors at the Club for Growth’s annual meeting here, Bush bragged about ending affirmative action for in-state colleges, praised supply-side economics and declared that he would like to phase out the Export-Import Bank.

He also went out of his way to address two issues that he knows are big problems for him with the GOP base: his support for Common Core and of legal status for undocumented immigrants.

Bush stressed that states should set their own educational standards, even calling on Congress to include language in the reauthorization of the No Child Left Behind Act that bans the federal government from ever setting curriculums or standards. In what seemed like a shift in tone, he also said he is “all ears” if “someone comes up with a better plan” than Common Core.

The former governor suggested that one of his biggest challenges as he moves toward formally announcing a presidential campaign is public speaking. He is the first of half-a-dozen potential presidential candidates who will address the Club’s three-day conference at The Breakers Resort. Texas Sen. Ted Cruz has the Friday night dinnertime slot.

“There are going to be during your time here … a lot better speakers than me,” Bush said. “If I could get better at, I’d be all-in on that. Trust me. But the simple fact is: I got to be governor of this purple state – this wacky, wonderful state – for eight years. I ran as a conservative … and I had a chance to do it.”

“Part of my job is to be able to tell the full story,” he added.

Bush, out of office for eight years now, presented himself as a movement conservative during his time leading Florida.

“In my second year, we actually by executive order got rid of affirmative action,” the Republican said. “This was not an easy thing to do, but we eliminated race as a criteria for admissions in our university system. And we eliminated procurement policies that had set-asides and higher prices for minority-owned businesses.”

He added that he enacted policies to help minority students and businesses succeed without handouts. “They don’t need to have a lower standard to get in the university,” he said. “They need to have higher achievement to be able to go to universities.”

Bush noted that he cut the size of Florida’s state workforce by 13,000 as governor. He said he “took on the trial lawyers” and governed “frugally.” He trashed successor Charlie Crist—then a Republican, now a Democrat—as “a complete disaster” who undid some of his best accomplishments.

“In Florida, we cut taxes every year I was governor,” Bush said. “Every year!”

In what could have been an implicit knock at New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie, who has seen his state’s credit rating cut six times since he took office, Bush notes that Florida was the only state that went up to a AAA bond rating during his two terms.

He boasted of 2,500 separate line item vetoes, including programs proposed by Republicans. “They called me Veto Corleone,” he said. “It was so much fun to do.”

After his speech, he answered questions for half an hour.

Club for Growth President David McIntosh posed questions that had been submitted by the audience, many of whom max out personally to whichever candidates the group endorses. In his introduction, the former Indiana congressman praised Bush’s tenure as governor and fondly remembered working with the Floridian when he was an aide in George H.W. Bush’s administration.

But after Bush’s defense of his record in Florida, McIntosh declared at the start of his first question: “Many of us, we’ve watched you over the last several years where it seems some of your federal policy provisions seem to be more pro-government than what you did as governor.”

During the ensuing questions, Bush heaped praise on the Club and tried to give the impression that he is with the group on its biggest issues.

The Club is focused on economic freedom – opposing corporate welfare, promoting free markets and supporting low taxes — and at times it has been at odds with Republican leadership. The group has backed many insurgent conservative challengers against establishment favorites, including throwing early support behind Marco Rubio over Crist in the 2010 Senate race in Florida.

One of the Club’s top priorities is killing the Export-Import Bank, which manages to survive in part because the U.S. Chamber of Commerce backs it.

“I think most of these things should be phased out,” Bush said. “Ex-Im is a smaller one … We should find ways to lessen the contingent liability of the federal government.”

He said the powers of Freddie Mac and Fannie Mae to issue government-backed loans also “need to be reviewed.” Bush also complained that both parties have wrongly used the tax code to advance their social agendas.

“Stop using the tax code to be able to create social policy,” he said to applause.

This position could potentially be in conflict with Bush’s previously espoused support for so-called “reform conservatism.” Many of the scholars in that movement advocate various tax breaks and incentives to encourage family cohesion and other social policies.

Asked if he would consider eliminating the Internal Revenue Service to put in place a national flat tax, Bush was noncommittal – promising to outline a detailed tax policy should he become a candidate.

“I don’t know,” he said. “I don’t know that yet.”

Bush’s father famously dismissed supply-side theory as “voodoo economics” in the 1980 GOP primaries. Bush presented himself as more in the mold of Ronald Reagan. “Supply side initiatives have been successful in the past,” the younger Bush professed Thursday.

After delivering his answer about Common Core, Bush interjected: “Can we do immigration? Because I’m all-in on that too!”

“The system we have today is broken because we don’t enforce the law,” Bush declared, not answering any specific question. “For the people that are already here … my belief is that we need to give people a path to legal status. You pay your fines. You get a traditional work permit. You come out from the shadows. You pay taxes. You don’t receive government assistance. You learn English. You don’t commit crimes. Any of those things that you don’t do would be a deportable offense. And since you’re out of the shadows, it would be easier to do.”

Bush then declared that he will not recant his position to win the nomination.

“We need to get beyond this political fighting that creates a wedge issue that makes it harder for conservatives to win,” he said. “I’m not backing down from something that is a core belief. Are we all supposed to just cower because at the moment people are all upset about something? No way. No how.”

Asked about Obamacare, Bush said that he thinks the Supreme Court will rule against the government in King vs. Burwell this June, potentially invalidating health care subsidies for as many as 7 million Americans.

“If they do, that creates an opportunity for Republicans to offer an alternative,” he said. “We need to be for something. We need to be as focused on the replacement as we are for the repeal.”

He doesn’t have a specific plan yet, but he said it would give people more choices and lower premiums. “Republicans should have this ready to go if this happens in the summer,” he said.

From here, Bush heads to Washington. He will address the Conservative Political Action Conference on Friday.

Wisconsin Gov. Scott Walker, Indiana Gov. Mike Pence, Louisiana Gov. Bobby Jindal and Florida Sen. Marco Rubio – who are also addressing CPAC – come before the Club for Growth’s meeting on Saturday.

At CPAC, Bush will spend all 20 minutes of his allotted time taking questions from Fox News host Sean Hannity. He not only expects, but wants, to again field the questions on immigration and Common Core. His team believes he must clear the air.

As part of his immigration monologue, Bush ripped Obama for his executive action to defer deportations and for fighting a federal court ruling that stayed its implementation.

“My head explodes every time I watch the news,” he said. “It’s easy to get all upset about that because this president has trampled all over the Constitution on a regular basis.”