Topics: Ben Carson, Bernie Sanders, Carly Fiorina, Chris Christie, Editor's Picks, Elections 2016, Hillary Clinton, Mike Huckabee, Politics News

If you like politics, it was one heck of a week. Three Republicans kicked off presidential campaigns, a record, I’ll bet. Adding to the excitement, New York state Senate president Dean Skelos got indicted for extortion just three months after New York House Speaker Sheldon Silver got indicted for the very same thing. Skelos is the fifth Senate leader in four years to be nailed for corruption. I bet that’s a record too.

As the 2016 presidential race heats up, the Republican field continues to mystify and alarm. We can now safely say this batch is crazier than the last. On Monday, Ben Carson kicked things off with a gospel choir singing a chorus of Eminem’s “Lose Yourself. ” One assumes Carson read the original lyrics, which include this gem: This world is mine for the taking. Make me king, as we move toward a new world order. Yikes.

Carson’s mind is, to rob from Tom Stoppard, a cabinet of vulgar curios. He calls Obamacare “The worst thing that has happened… since slavery” and says America is “very much like Nazi Germany.” Save for a biographical bit about his mom, his speech was a long rant against “elites,” “socialists,” “political correctness,” “thought police” and the national debt. Even listening closely one couldn’t tell if he was just exploiting the paranoia of his audience or had actually succumbed to it himself.

On Tuesday, Carly Fiorina and Mike Huckabee joined the fray. Fiorina announced in a one-minute video that opened with shots of — and at — Hillary Clinton. Listening to her one got a sense of what Sarah Palin would sound like had she gone to Stanford, as when she said the Founders didn’t want a permanent political class when in fact they were all members of one. She vows to run government like a business, by which we assume she means one other than Hewlett Packard. She’s clearly in the running for the award for most pointless campaign, unless of course Trump gets in.

Huckabee threw the biggest shindig, a shrewd move for a guy looking to seem like a bigger threat than he is. When he came on the scene in ’08 he struck me as a nice man with whom I happened to disagree. But there’s nothing quite like the pursuit of a GOP presidential nod to corrode a man’s character. His execrable campaign book, “Gods, Guns, Grits and Gravy,” picked raw every cultural scab on the body politic he could reach. More interestingly, he’s running as an economic populist of the Ross Perot and Pat Buchanan school. He could conceivably reassemble his Iowa evangelical base, marshal Buchanan’s old New Hampshire crowd and surprise us all. But he’s probably developed too much of the wrong kind of transparency to pull off such a delicate trick.

In New Jersey, Chris Christie made news by not getting indicted. You can do that in New Jersey, make news by not getting indicted. Three people close to him were indicted this week over Bridgegate, though, and one pled guilty. Christie called it a”‘vindication” and fled to New Hampshire where he said, without apparent irony, that people were making too much of Tom Brady deflating all those footballs.

On the Democratic side, Hillary Clinton had another really good/bad week. On the plus side she went to Nevada, where sitting behind what looked like the children’s table at a public library, she made some crisp points on immigration that in regard to parents of “Dreamers” went farther than Obama’s executive orders go. It was her second major policy speech, coming just a week after one in which she endorsed sentencing reform and pinning cameras on cops.

It was a welcome surprise, but not what many reporters made of it. In an article headlined “Hillary Clinton Shows New Willingness to Tackle Risky Issues,” the New York Times’ Patrick Healy wrote that “…barreling ahead with her agenda” a Hillary “unafraid to court controversy on an issue dear to her” had shown “a new willingness to take stands that turn off some voters or interest groups.” If only.

The problem is that none of Clinton’s positions are in the least bit bold. She got out ahead of Obama on immigration, but only on his executive order, not his policy. The immigration positions she took are standard Democratic fare and public support for them hovers around 60 percent. Sentencing reform is the first bipartisan idea in ages to show any legs. Support for cop cameras polls at about 70 percent. Hillary has now made news by supposedly breaking with Barack on immigration and Bill on crime. I’ll pay attention when she breaks with both on the economy.

Clinton’s bad week took the form of Bill Clinton saying he’ll go right on raking in half-million dollar speaking fees because, after earning upward of $125 million since leaving office, “I gotta pay the bills.” The Times piece further commended Hillary for her “bullish decision” to “court donors” for a super PAC, but that was bad too. Our campaign finance laws are a sickening sham, but we still have a few left on the books. One states that a declared candidate can’t raise money for an “independent” super PAC. Hillary’s “bullish decision” is to attend the PAC’s fundraisers, but leave just before the pitch. This is a problem.

Only one candidate had a really good week. In his first day in the race, Bernie Sanders raised $1.5 million, more than any Republican did on day one. Better yet, it came from 35,000 donors in amounts averaging $43. Best of all, by early this week 175,000 volunteers had signed on to help.

Later in the week an Iowa Q poll showed Sanders polling 15 percent, putting him four points ahead of Vice President Biden and 12 points ahead of every other Clinton challenger. Democrats know Clinton as well as you can know a politician. Forty percent of them want another candidate. Taken together, these numbers say Sanders may clear out the second tier early. If he does, he’ll frame an extraordinary debate and bring with him to the convention a mighty force of delegates, the first in a generation to care about what’s in the Democratic platform.