It was Oscar Wilde, Ireland’s peerless playwright and essayist, who suffered imprisonment for his homosexuality but wryly advised, “The proper basis for marriage is mutual misunderstanding.”

His aphorism came to mind last week as the disconnect became clear between the Republic of Ireland, which celebrated its first legal same-sex marriages amid a joyous citizenry, and Northern Ireland, where, just across the border, a shoddy parliamentary tactic blocked that freedom from being allowed.

The celebratory rites by gay couples and clans in Ireland were hardly a surprise; the republic had put the issue to a referendum in May, and 62 percent of voters approved legalization of same-sex marriage. In the more polarized Northern Ireland, popular sentiment, as found in opinion polls, was likewise positive, and the legislative assembly, after heated opposition, gave way to gradually shifting positions and voted earlier this month to approve gay marriage equality by a single vote.

Instantly, the Democratic Unionist Party in the Northern Ireland Assembly scuttled marriage equality through a mean-spirited abuse of the power-sharing agreement that had achieved peace in the North after the violent struggles between unionist and nationalist communities. The party, which has strong Protestant roots and a significant number of evangelical members, invoked the peace agreement’s “petition of concern” clause, which can be used to block legislative measures during political emergencies to protect community and minority rights.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Of course, there is no emergency, and the abuse here is the Unionist Party’s devious subversion of legislatively approved rights for gay, lesbian and transgender minorities. Amnesty International condemned the move as contrary to the peace agreement.

Unionist political leaders chose to obstruct an advancement of human rights that was championed by the rival Sinn Fein and Social Democratic and Labor parties. Court challenges are underway, with Northern Ireland remaining the only part of the United Kingdom that does not allow civil marriages for all citizens.

Photo

It seems inevitable that the Unionists will ultimately fade or be overcome by the popular will on this issue. Meanwhile, the people in the North, ever resourceful, are heading south to obtain civil unions. One of the first same-sex marriages last week in the Irish Republic was for a Northern Irish couple who crossed the border to go down the aisle — Tony Day and his husband, Darren Day. “As far as we’re concerned, we’re married — we got married on this island,” Darren Day said, proclaiming Irish unification in his heart at least.