Ben Garland despises excuses. He embodies dedication, his rolled-up sleeves creating a story that strains the imagination.

Five years after the Broncos signed Garland as an undrafted defensive tackle, three years after he served his Air Force Academy military commitment and one season after a position switch, Garland will open training camp at Dove Valley this month as a starting left guard in the NFL.

“I have to fight for it, and earn it,” Garland said. “You work so hard in the offseason, when I get back to training camp that first day I want (first-year Broncos coach Gary Kubiak) to know he made the right decision.”

Garland, 27, faces a challenge from Shelley Smith to keep his position on a revamped offensive line that creates consternation because of its inexperience. Right tackle Chris Clark insists the group will “shock the world,” proving cynics wrong. Garland, who has only 47 snaps in his NFL career, symbolizes both the challenge and the optimism.

By all accounts, he shouldn’t be in this position. NFL players don’t often move to the other side of the ball. It’s the baseball equivalent of turning a struggling pitcher into a side-armer before deciding whether to cut ties.

Garland’s military background has helped his transition. Kubiak said he’s never been in the office at 5:15 a.m. without seeing Garland at team headquarters.

“He works harder than anybody. He’s the first one here, last one to leave,” Kubiak said.

But this goes beyond rigid discipline. A lot of people get up early. Rising before the sun and raising performance requires a special set of skills. Which brings us back to the darkness of the meeting room before the rooster even thinks of clearing its throat.

What does Garland do at 5 a.m.?

“A lot of times I am watching film, studying. If I can get just one last second in about the thought process of the plays before I go out to the practice field, it helps a lot. And I do the same thing after practice,” Garland said. “I love left guard. It is intellectually and physically challenging, but when all 11 guys are in sync and you run a good play, it’s an awesome feeling.”

Considered raw in his technique last season, Garland has benefited from the schematic change to Kubiak’s zone-blocking offense. It calls for mobile linemen who are skilled at reaching the second level of the defense and executing combo blocks. Garland moves like a small man in a big man’s body — because he is. His natural weight is 240 pounds, 70 lighter than he is now.

“I have to eat 10,000 calories a day to keep it on,” Garland said. “I have to force myself to eat. I know a lot of people would love to have that problem.”

Garland’s appetite for information has accelerated his development. Even he was surprised at the startling differences between defensive and offensive lines when he crossed over.

“The defense doesn’t stay still. Often times you memorize an (opponent’s) technique, then he shifts over into a shade. You can’t be like, ‘Oh, wait. What do I do?’ It has to be instantaneous,” Garland said. “You have to know the nuances. When I was on the D-line, it looked easy. Those big guys were just waddling around. Now I have a huge respect for them.”

The Broncos appreciate Garland. He provides model preparation. He aced the quizzes April through June. Now the test arrives in training camp.

“Once you put the pads on and you get beat down a little bit and the wear and tear takes over,” Kubiak said, “how do you continue to play? How consistent are you? Everybody is very impressed with Ben. It’s time for Ben to become a player, but we’ve got to find out when the lights come on.”

Troy E. Renck: trenck@denverpost.com or twitter.com/troyrenck

Ben and journey

Ben Garland has made a remarkable transfor- mation from Air Force Academy defensive tackle to starting left guard on the Broncos’ offensive line. NFL reporter Troy E. Renck highlights Garland’s journey:

Graduated from Air Force in 2010, and signed with the Broncos as an undrafted rookie

Spent two years serving his military commitment

Returned to the Broncos, spending 2012 at defensive tackle and 2013 at left guard on the practice squad

Made his NFL debut last year as a backup guard; played a total of 47 snaps, including 36 in the regular-season finale

At age 27, will enter training camp this month as Denver’s starter at left guard