Happy Monday, the 363rd day of 2014, the second day of an international search for a missing AirAsia jet that vanished over the Java Sea over the weekend -- the second time a jetliner mysteriously disappeared from the skies without a trace in that part of the world. And just seven days left until Republicans stampede back into Washington to take control of Congress and face something they probably didn’t expect: a newly energized, lame-duck president publicly daring them to govern, and waving a veto pen at them when they don’t do it to his liking. Here’s today’s Three-Minute Briefing, a package of News You Can Use in 180 seconds or less:

[MORE: Obama Warns GOP He Plans to Use Veto Pen in 2015]

With Friends Like These: As we’ve mentioned, Obama has a lot of problems heading into the home stretch of his administration. He has Republicans right where he wants them, but one of his first fights with Congress seems to be coming from within his own party. On Sunday, Sen. Al Franken, a Minnesota Democrat, joined progressive hero Sen. Elizabeth Warren to oppose Antonio Weiss, the Wall Street financier whom the president has nominate for a top job at the Treasury Department.

Power Couple: Gallup released a poll yesterday that shows Hillary Clinton and Obama as the most admired woman and man in the world. That makes the 18th year in a row for Clinton, who at 12 percent beat out The Oprah and children’s advocate/activist Malala Yousefi, and the seventh consecutive year for Obama, whose 19 percentage points trounced Pope Francis (6 percent) and Bill Clinton (3 percent).

MVS: For his work expanding the Freedom of Information Act, his stealth mission to help Obama open up relations with Cuba and his progressive cred, The Nation has named Sen. Patrick Leahy, a Vermont Democrat, its Most Valuable Senator on its 2014 best-of list.

MPC: Erick Erickson -- the founder and editor-in-chief of Redstate.com, has been dubbed America’s most powerful conservative by The Atlantic, who goes on to describe him as “a right-wing pundit whom Democrats loathe and Republicans fear.” But the Atlantic also suggests Erickson’s losing his edge, having declared the conservative anger he helped stoke -- like the Tea Party -- is now toxic and self-defeating. Erickson’s only major criticism with the piece? “I do wish there’d been something about my life goal of a cooking show on Fox News,” he wrote in a blog post on Sunday. “I’m convinced if Huckabee runs for President, I need his time slot to bring people in to cook, drink, and talk.”

[ALSO: Chris Christie: The Biggest Loser After Jeb Bush's Decision]

Paging Sun Tzu: One of the most difficult combat environments the Pentagon now faces isn’t in the Middle East theater or in the skies over Syria -- it’s between the ears of the Islamic State group, the Taliban, Boko Haram and other militant extremists, trying to figure out what makes them tick.

Speak of the Devil: Just after the NATO- and U.S.-led coalition lowered the flag in Afghanistan, officially ending the combat mission there, the Taliban issued a statement declaring it has defeated the international force which invaded their country 13 years ago.

Endangered: Because it’s never too early to start thinking about the next midterm election, even a full year before the next one, The Hill has rounded up a list of incumbent senators who are at risk of losing their seats in 2016. They include Harry Reid, the Senate’s top Democrat, Kelly Ayotte of New Hampshire, once thought to be a rising Republican star, and Ohio’s Rob Portman, who is among the contenders for the GOP’s 2016 presidential nomination.

Je Ne Regrette Rien!: In an interview with Politico, former Health and Human Services Secretary Kathleen Sebelius stands by Obamacare, even though the botched rollout of the program probably cost her her job. Despite the Affordable Care Act and the low popularity (and Republican hateration), “I think it was not only well worth it, but a battle worth fighting,” she says. “Millions and millions of people are the beneficiaries of this policy.”

Gloves Off: Watching the verbal slap-fights that erupt on Twitter are kind of like eating your favorite junk food: best avoided yet easily consume and oddly satisfying, even though you don’t necessarily feel good about it afterwards. Bloomberg Politics has served up the best political Tweet fights of the year, with Rand Paul squaring off against Marco Rubio topping the list.

[MORE: Rand Paul's Rapid Response]

Talk Soup: Undeterred by the four Pinocchios the Washington Post gave him for suggesting Obama spread anti-police “propaganda” that spurred the NYPD shootings, former New York mayor and one-time GOP presidential candidate Rudy Giuliani doubled down on the assertion in his appearance on CBS’s “Face the Nation” Sunday:

Stat of the Day: Estimated average amount Louisiana hospitals bill patients for compiling rape kits : $2,000 (courtesy Harper’s Index).

Duly Noted: On this date in 1845, Texas was admitted as the 28th state. In 1940, during World War II, Germany dropped incendiary bombs on London, setting off what came to be known as "The Second Great Fire of London." A bomb exploded in the main terminal of New York's LaGuardia Airport in 1975, killing 11 people; the case remains unsolved. And in 2013, a suicide bombing attack that ultimately killed 32 people in the southern Russian city of Volgograd began in a train station; the second blast occurred on a bus the next day.