Topics: AlterNet, Bernie Sanders, Hillary Clinton, Middlebury College, pulitzer prize, Politics News

How long will the Bernie bubble last?

Right now, Bernie Sanders is drawing bigger crowds than any other presidential candidate. His economic populism is bringing in millions in contributions that will carry him into next year’s opening caucuses and primaries. In short, Bernie has been campaigning in a way that has served him well for years—as a blunt retail politician whose calls for economic fairness and a people-centered uprising have endeared him to working people across the political spectrum.

There are many surprising facets to Sanders’ appeal that are not widely known outside of Vermont that account for his campaign’s better-than-expected opening and likely staying power. But while some longtime Vermont Sanders watchers are not surprised by his success—they know his emphatic, intense, almost-explosive demeanor and his reputation as a resilient campaigner, they’re also acutely aware of the challenges he faces as the race transitions from its heady start-up phase to a very competitive contest.

“I think Bernie can do well,” said Eric Davis, Middlebury College political science professor specializing in Vermont politics. “I told someone, half-jokingly, if the presidential election were held in Vermont, Massachusetts, northern California and New York City, Bernie could win. But there are 46 other states that vote too… That’s Bernie’s challenge.”

“Part of Bernie’s appeal is his unvarnished language and his willingness to just come across as a straight shooter taking on the big guys,” said David Moats, the Rutland Herald’s editorial writer, who won a 2001 Pulitzer Prize for backing civil unions for same-sex couples. “If pickup-driving guys in the South heard that language recalibrated a bit, they might respond… It is anti-big guy rhetoric that rural people can respond to.”

Sanders has created a career of championing people and causes that confound political boundaries. In 1972, he started running for state office as a candidate for the fringe Liberty Union Party. He railed against big business much like he does today, but never got more than a small protest vote. That changed in 1981 when he became mayor of Burlington, the state’s largest city and home to many colleges and universities, winning by a mere 10 votes.

During his four terms as mayor, he became the politician that he is today—taking on entrenched interests and helping to elect others to the city council to support his reforms. He ran for governor and the House as mayor, but lost. He was elected to the House in 1990, in the same election that a conservative Republican became governor in a fiscal crisis. That voters wanted a businessman at home while sending a socialist populist to Congress is consistent with Vermont’s self-reliant, anti-establishment political character.

Sanders has drawn on these twin themes for years to craft a populist message that is attractive across party lines. Today, he hits these notes when calling for expanding Social Security—emphasizing that this is what decent people need to live independently, while slamming GOP opponents who don’t want wealthy people paying more fairly into the system.

During his successful House run in 1990, Sanders won the support of Vermont’s rural Republicans, whose family roots can go back centuries. One reason was he opposed gun control, which Vermont Democrats still do. Another is Vermonters knew where he was coming from. But mostly, like today, he was an economic populist who understood and championed the plight of cash-poor people.

“One of the reasons he won that 1990 race was among lower-income rural Vermonters… Bernie was seen as speaking more effectively to the concerns of rural people that the traditional Vermont Republican [incumbent Rep. Peter] Smith,” Davis said.

The rural Republicans who looked at a candidate before their political party have mostly “passed out of the electorate,” Davis said, saying that era is over. What has not changed in Vermont, however, but worsened like the rest of the country, are its economic divides. As Sanders has long noted, “the rich are getting richer and the poor are getting poorer.”

“In past ten to 15 years in Vermont, there’s been a real disconnect between the more prosperous parts of the state and the more struggling parts,” Davis said. “A lot of low-income people see Bernie as speaking to issues that concern them and standing up for their interest in ways that others have not.”

“Also, he’s always made a point of championing the interests of veterans,” Moats said, identifying another slice of his base and oratory. “That always has a kind of working class appeal, because a lot of people in the armed services are working-class people… He’s also protected himself by not being anti-gun, which most Vermont politicians do.”

Sanders’ electoral success in Vermont also has been because he has not held true levers of power affecting people’s lives, apart from being Burlington mayor in the 1980s. Indeed, many Vermont voters were happy to sent him to Congress—instead of the state capital—where his outspokenness is seen as more appropriate.

“That’s true,” Moats said. “In Washington, he can go down there and raise hell and that’s fine. As governor in Montpelier, I’m not sure they’ would have taken so well to that.”

Bernie Then and Now

The factors that have made Bernie attractive to Vermonters—only one-third of the state is urban or suburban—will translate in Iowa, where presidential caucus goers typically vote for people who are outside the party mainstream, and New Hampshire, where mavericks have done well.