On Monday, Advocate Health Care and NorthShore University HealthSystem will square off against the federal government in a closely watched legal fight over health care competition.

This could appear to be an arcane battle over complicated issues such as market concentration, managed care, reimbursement rates and relevant geographic markets. But it has real-world consequences for the affordability of health care for Chicago-area consumers.

The trial comes at a time of rapid change in health care delivery as a result of the 2010 Affordable Care Act, whose aim is to lower costs, increase access to care and improve quality by fostering competition. Hospitals are merging and buying up physician practices to achieve some of the same goals, but regulators have cast a wary eye on recent deals. If the Federal Trade Commission prevails against Advocate and NorthShore, it could slow the march toward consolidation.

"The merger is one of the biggest hospital deals that FTC has challenged, so all eyes are on it," said Lisl Dunlop, an antitrust lawyer at Manatt, Phelps & Phillips in New York.

Who's involved in the lawsuit?

Downers Grove-based Advocate is one of the largest health systems in Illinois, with 11 hospitals and a two-campus children's hospital. Five of its hospitals are in Cook County and two are in Lake County. The health system employs about 1,375 physicians and contracts with an additional 3,825 independent physicians.

NorthShore owns four hospitals in Cook and Lake counties. It has about 2,100 employed and affiliated physicians.

The FTC is one of the nation's antitrust-enforcement agencies. It is using a 102-year-old law, the Clayton Antitrust Act of 1914, to try to block the merger. The commission is familiar with the Chicago market, having challenged a hospital transaction involving NorthShore, formerly Evanston Northwestern Healthcare, in 2004.

The FTC has had a lot of success in recent years challenging hospital consolidation, including a deal in Rockford between OSF Healthcare System and Rockford Health System.

Why is the FTC suing to stop the deal?

The commission is concerned that the merger, announced in September 2014, would reduce competition in the northern suburbs. The agency argues that Advocate and NorthShore are close, if not each other's closest, competitors. The merged entity would own six of the 11 hospitals in northern Cook and southern Lake counties, the geographic area the agency has defined as the relevant market.

Eliminating competition between the two chains would result in increased bargaining power with insurance companies and higher reimbursement rates, the agency said. Why should you care? The FTC said insurers would pass along their increased costs for medical care to consumers in the form of higher insurance premiums and out-of-pocket costs.

What do the hospitals say?

Hospital executives argue the FTC has manipulated the boundaries of the competitive Chicago market to favor the agency's position that Advocate and NorthShore would have too much market power. They say their combined market share would be 22 percent of beds in the six-county Chicago market.

They also contend that the agency is looking at the competitive market for hospital beds at a time when more patients are being treated outside hospitals, in places like ambulatory surgery centers, doctors' offices and even pharmacies.

In evaluating the merger, the FTC didn't consider the power of the state's dominant health insurer, Blue Cross and Blue Shield of Illinois, in setting pricing, the hospitals said. To ease pricing concerns, the hospitals have offered to cap post-merger prices but said the agency rejected the idea.

The merger, the hospitals contend, can benefit consumers by allowing the combined institution to create a new health insurance plan whose price would be 10 percent below the region's lowest-priced HMO.

Trial basics

The FTC seeks a preliminary injunction to temporarily halt the merger so it could pursue its antitrust claims in an administrative court in Washington, D.C. But the hospitals have said that if the trial judge grants the injunction, they will abandon the merger. The trial judge has allotted 34 1/2 hours for the hearing, with each side having an equal amount of time to present its arguments. The FTC is expected to call several witnesses, including insurance executives, managers from other hospitals and industry experts.

asachdev@tribpub.com

Twitter @ameetsachdev