Lynne Baur offers watercolor classes at The Phipps

Artist and educator Lynne Baur, of Hudson, will offer watercolor classes for adults of all skill levels this winter and spring at The Phipps. (Submitted photo)

This painting by Lynne Baur had big fingerprints in the sky from someone handling it with oily fingers. In “Watercolor Rescue,” she will show participants how to fix accidents and other commons problems so no one will ever know. (Submitted image)

Several adult watercolor classes are being offered, starting Feb. 4 with “Watercolor Jumpstart” for beginning level students, at The Phipps Center for the Arts in Hudson.

Hudson artist and art instructor Lynne Baur will teach this class and three others on the schedule, “Prayer/Meditation Mandala Mini Retreat” for students of all skill levels; “Watercolor Skill-Builders I” for beginning to intermediate students; and “Watercolor Rescue” for advanced beginners to advanced intermediate students.

For those who have always wanted to try watercolor, but have been put off by its reputation for difficulty, or tried it and gave up in frustration, “Watercolor Jumpstart” is a good place to start again.

Through demonstrations, skill-building activities, and one-on-one coaching, students will learn how to use the natural action of water, pigment, and paper to produce a wealth of beautiful effects.

The class will be held on six Wednesdays, Feb. 4 through March 11, from 9 a.m. to noon for a fee of $195. Those enrolled should request a recommended supply list and instructor contact information for questions.

Making a mandala (circular drawing or painting) has long been considered an act of devotion in many cultures all over the world.

During the “Prayer/Meditation Mandala Mini-Retreat” on Saturday, March 14, from 1 to 4:30 p.m., participants will create a “visible prayer”/active meditation in the form of a beautiful stained-glass-effect mandala on watercolor board, which can easily be displayed without framing.

The mandala can be used as a focus for prayer or meditation, or as a gift to comfort or uplift a friend.

The instructor will provide a basic template and demonstrate simple watercolor technique that can be learned in minutes. No prior art experience is needed.

Each participant chooses colors, symbols, and words to make their mandala unique and personal. All materials are provided for a class fee of $45. Participants may bring pictures of a simple shape they wish to incorporate, and/or significant phrases, poems, or quotes they might want to add.

“Watercolor Skill-Builder I” will be offered on six Wednesdays, April 1 through May 6, from 9 a.m. to 12 noon.

Students should have taken “Watercolor Jumpstart” or have enough prior experience with watercolor to paint on their own projects, even if they don’t always turn out the way they hope.

The instructor will demonstrate techniques and offer skill-building activities which can be applied to students’ own projects over the course of the class. She also will provide one-on-one coaching appropriate to the student’s skill level and project.

The class fee is $195. Students are asked to bring their own painting supplies from a suggested supply list.

“Watercolor Rescue” is scheduled for Saturday, April 4, from 1 to 5 p.m., for a fee of $60.

Participants are asked to bring their watercolor supplies and at least one watercolor painting with which they are not satisfied and are willing to experiment on during the workshop.

The instructor will teach students how to identify what is not working in a “failed” watercolor, and how to rescue it. She will also show techniques for avoiding some common problems, so participants won’t have to rescue many paintings in the future.

Baur left her career as a math professor in 2001 and began painting in watercolor. She has never looked back.

Baur paints in watercolor, acrylic, and other watermedia, and offers art instruction and creativity coaching in her home studio and at other locations in the Twin Cities area.

She is known for paintings filled with vibrant light and color, as well as her broad knowledge of the technical aspects of the water media paints, papers and materials.

Having started painting in midlife, Baur understands the challenges and advantages of taking up creative endeavors as an adult, and she has tips to share on how to quickly take artists’ paintings to the next level of success.

Samples of her work may be seen online at www.dragonflyspiritstudio.com/gallery.

For more information or to register, go to www.ThePhipps.org, call (715) 386-2305, or stop by the center.