Pin this on Pinterest Email this story

Some might say this news is outrageous. Others might say calculating. Some just think it’s good news. But billionaire industrialists the Koch brothers, who have been working overtime trying to tear down Obamacare and spending millions to support conservative causes and candidates, have given a $25 million grant to the United Negro College Fund. And the organization has accepted the gift, which will come from Koch Industries Inc. and the Charles Koch Foundation. The Koch brothers are very supportive of right-wing issues and groups, many of which might not supporting of the UNCF.

In case you aren’t familiar, the latest story about the Koch Brothers is this one from Rolling Stone: “Three Ways the Koch Brothers Are Screwing America.” They are the fourth richest men in the country, and are blamed in the story for working to keep the minimum wage low, union busting and using shady tactics to intimidate minority voters.

A majority of the money donated to UNCF, $18.5 million to be exact, is earmarked for a scholarship program. Another $6.5 million is used for general support to historically black colleges and universities and the UNCF. And $4 million will be set aside for loan assistance. Two Koch reps will sit on the advisory board (alongside two UNCF reps and a faculty member at a selected college) to determine who gets the scholarship money.

“Increasing well-being by helping people improve their lives has long been our focus,” Charles Koch said in a statement. And UNCF president and chief executive Michael Lomax said, “UNCF is proud to announce this new scholarship program that will help motivated and deserving students not just get to and through school, but to become our next generation of innovators and entrepreneurs We are enormously grateful to Koch Industries and the Charles Koch Foundation for their long-standing support of UNCF and for helping to create new opportunities for earned success and a better future for our students.”

While the Koch brothers routinely give to charity, it is the timing of this gift that makes it odd. “The donation comes as Democrats have been actively seeking to vilify Charles and David Koch’s influence within the Republican Party in hopes of turning them into midterm electoral bogeymen,” reports The Washington Post.

When questioned about the donation, Lomax continued, “UNCF has one principle that we hold on to — and it’s one that I looked at throughout this process, and that I’ve held firm to: that is that we believe and have believed for 70 years that our cause should be supported by all Americans, and therefore we urge all Americans to support UNCF.” He has shied away from talking about the politics of the Koch brothers. Right now, Democrats are taking aim at the Koch brothers and their outsize influence on Republican politics. And Inside Higher Ed notes that some of the policies the brothers support actually squeeze the HBCUs that are meant to benefit from this gift.

Since last August, Americans for Prosperity, a group backed by the Koch brothers, has spent at least $44 million on 2014 congressional races, reports The Post.