Broomfield-based Sisters of Charity of Leavenworth Health System and one of its Colorado hospitals were part of a $23 million federal settlement related to improper Medicare billing for cardiac devices implanted in patients.

Five hospitals affiliated with SCL, including Saint Mary’s Hospital & Regional Medical Center in Grand Junction, were part of the settlement. SCL agreed to pay $1.95 million to settle its portion of the claims.

The $23 million in settlements announced Wednesday by the U.S. Department of Justice were the final stage of a nationwide investigation into whistle-blower claims that hospitals improperly billed Medicare for cardiac procedures that did not qualify for coverage.

The settlements announced Friday involved 51 hospitals in 15 states. In October, nearly 500 hospitals agreed to settle similar claims for a total of about $258 million.

“It is important to note that the safety and well-being of SCL Health patients was never an issue and that hundreds of hospitals and health systems across the nation have settled with the DOJ over this billing interpretation issue,” said Brian Newsome, spokesman for SCL Health. “In the settlement, SCL Health made no admission of wrongdoing, and we will continue to work diligently to comply with all billing requirements.”

Englewood-based Catholic Health Initiatives and two Colorado hospitals were involved in the October settlement. Catholic Health agreed to pay $7.8 million for improper billing at 17 hospitals including Mercy Medical Center in Durango. Phoenix-based Banner Health settled for $6 million for incorrect billing at nine hospitals including McKee Medical Center in Loveland and North Colorado Medical Center in Greeley.

The initial claims were brought seven years ago by a registered cardiovascular nurse and a Medicare-compliance consultant in Louisville, Ky.

The two alleged that hospitals were billing Medicare for implantable cardioverter defibrillator, or ICD, procedures that did not meet National Coverage Determination guidelines. Under those rules patients that had coronary bypass surgery or angioplasty within 90 days or a heart attack within 40 days were not eligible for the procedure, Justice Department officials said.

Christopher N. Osher: 303-954-1747, cosher@denverpost.com or @chrisosher