Topics: cultural criticism, irony, literature, Music, Innovation News, Life News, Entertainment News

Irony has, in the past two decades or so, become a hot object of scrutiny. Yet, in hilarious and ironic fashion, despite this scrutiny, irony seems only to have become more deeply ensconced in our everyday mode of being — ensconced to such a point that Christy Wampole called irony “the ethos of our age” and went on to instruct that prior attempts at sincerity had failed — that we have now entered a nearly hopeless phase of Deep Irony.

Whether we have actually entered a state of Deep Irony or not is somewhat irrelevant. Importantly, though, there is something attached to the present stage of irony which seems to catalyze it: technology.

In a Salon article last year, Philip Burnett explicated this coupling as follows. We tend to cower behind cell phones and social media in the same way we hide behind ironic catchphrases, t-shirts, and Taylor Swift fandom: to escape the anxieties of social rejection. It is much easier to don a Bush 2004 campaign hat and insulate yourself behind a constantly scrolling smartphone than it is to present a sincere personal taste or opinion to the greater public. This is because — both with irony and technological presence — rejection is no longer a possibility. “I am doing this ironically,” as an insulating statement, is impenetrable; an iPhone in your hand will quickly cut the head off of a conversation you don’t want to have and will protect you handsomely from the teeth of social awkwardness. When submerged like this, your actual self is miles away, perfectly cocooned and well clear of anything which might resemble judgement.

Burnett claims that the problems of irony will be alleviated if attention is placed on consciously reducing ironic behaviors and technological dependencies. Such a method, to Burnett, entails “putting away the technology, coming out of our ironic shells, and trying to have some genuine and unselfconscious fun.” Without question, this change of attention would work: The problems of irony and technology will go away if we were to rid ourselves of irony and technology, if only temporarily. The mechanics of this change-of-attention, though, are not as smooth as the one-step process Burnett alludes to. In other words, the removal of these issues cannot be accomplished so directly, otherwise it would have occurred by now.

Part of the issue is that irony and technology are seductive. It is intensely satisfying when something you post is “liked,” or when someone attractive laughs at your ironic jab. This constant allure (remember that this gratification, thanks to technology, is now available 24/7) makes any attempt at avoiding technology or irony incredibly, almost impossibly, difficult. Becoming sincere thus requires a strong enough catalyst: something external which can suck up our attention to the fullest and, if only for a few moments, allow us to forget what others are thinking of us.