In the midst of this government shutdown, imminent debt default, mess, there’s a lesson for Republicans from the 1983 movie “War Games”:

The Republican party has been playing with fire since at least the 1980s. As I’ve written before, the GOP thought that if it could just harness the righteous anger of the religious right, and the zealous bitterness of the Tea Party, they could ride both movements to repeated electoral victory.

But, to mix my metaphors, if you’re going to ride a tiger, you’d better kill it. At some point, the tiger’s gonna turn on you. Especially if you keep feeding it.

The GOP has been taken over at the local level by the religious right, and at the national level by the Tea Party (who are basically ultra-conservative Republicans). Both movements may have helped Republicans electorally for a while, but now they’ve poisoned the party and are putting the entire country at risk.

It’s beyond abominable that, by threatening to default on the national debt, the Republicans have taken the nation hostage, and are now threatening to send us into a depression far worse than what happened in September of 2008 when Lehman Brothers collapsed.

It was bad enough, in the early years of the Obama administration, when the GOP was content with holding the unemployed, the poor and the elderly hostage by threatening unemployment insurance, Medicaid, Medicare and Social Security. Now they’re looking to take down the entire world economy in a move that far too many experts, including Republicans themselves, have labeled “catastrophic.”

I don’t care how bad the Republicans think Obamacare, aka the Affordable Care Act is, how does a politician – how does any American – get away with taking the entire nation hostage, for any reason?

In less democratic countries, such a move would be treated as sedition, and they’d all be under arrest, or worse.

The GOP has become what it has long claimed of Democrats: un-American bullies who don’t like our system of government, and don’t particularly care for most of our people either.

What kind of person would threaten our retirement accounts AGAIN by threatening to crash the stock market?

What kind of person would threaten to poison up our mortgage market AGAIN by sending interest rates skyrocketing?

All of that, and more, is going to happen if the Republicans force a default on the national debt.

The economy has been bad enough since September of 2008 – I’m still only at 40% to 50% of the annual income I made in 2008. Neither I, nor the country, can afford another economic crash.

And that’s exactly what the Republicans are threatening.

To crash our economy into a building.

Enough.

And here’s the longer 5 minute video of that segment: