The condo tower at 432 Park Ave is set to reach its peak 1,396-foot height Tuesday Eliot Brown / The Wall Street Journal

In Midtown Manhattan, the extra-slim 432 Park Ave. condo tower is scheduled Tuesday to reach its peak 1,396-foot height and become the tallest residential building in the western hemisphere, 146-feet taller than the roof of the Empire State Building.

But the crowning of the 104-unit tower—which hosts a $95 million penthouse—marks more than just the latest of the super-tall condos for the ultra-rich.

It’s a sign of an inversion going on in the real estate world: The wealthy are clamoring to buy glassy apartments that soar high in the skyline, while the fastest growing companies are demanding spacious low-slung buildings and eschewing tall towers.

For most of their history, skyscrapers in major cities like New York were first and foremost office buildings. From the Woolworth Building to the Sears Tower, they held top corporations wishing to express their success and ambitions to clients and investors in the form of sweeping views on high floors of iconic edifices.

But times are changing for the office sector.

Take Facebook The company is in the midst of building a new 430,000-square-foot headquarters in Silicon Valley.

While an office tower of that size could rise higher than 20 floors, Facebook’s building is merely a single floor, stretched out over one-third of a mile, the size of seven football fields.

Built on stilts over parking, It could be likened it to a giant Home Depot, but one with a roof garden pockmarked with skylights that allow light to stream to workers below. The theory is that workers collaborate better when in close proximity, and aren’t separated by stairs or elevators that inhabit interaction—a focus on the employee, rather than impressing outsiders with grandeur.

Tech companies across the world are building or occupying similar style buildings.

Twitter’s headquarters is in a sprawling former wholesale furniture mart on San Francisco’s Market Street. Google last year unveiled plans for a so-called “ground-scraper” in London, a 1 million square foot building that is longer than London’s Shard tower is tall. In New York, the search giant occupies one of the largest buildings in the city that is just 18 floors high.

Meanwhile, the high-end residential market has flipped. The toniest addresses in New York were long brick co-ops and townhouses on the Upper East Side, like the 17-story 740 Park Ave.

But a strange phenomenon has played out in Manhattan – and to some extent London and San Francisco and Miami—since the economic downturn. Prices for the highest-end new condominiums have skyrocketed, particularly for those that rise above than anything else in the sky. While $10 million was once a big number for a residential sale, now pricey apartments with in skyscrapers go for $40 million, while the upper crust nears $100 million. Even wire mesh storage bins in such towers list for $200,000.

Eliot Brown / The Wall Street Journal

Just what’s driving this geyser of demand is a matter of debate. But whatever one attributes this to—be it a bubble created by a flood of international investor speculation or a hunger for real estate by the growing super-affluent class–it is spurring many a developer to start building slim and tall towers.

Of course, older preferences haven’t gone away. There is still demand for office towers – new ones are sprouting around San Francisco and Manhattan – and Park Avenue co-ops are hardly a bargain.

But if nothing else, the trend is dramatically changing what it takes to leave a mark on the skyline of Manhattan.

In the past, a skyline-altering building would hold more than 5,000 employees.

Today? It just takes dozens of wealthy families to make up one of the tallest buildings in the world.