Buy Photo Artur Davis, right, speaks to the Executive Board of the Alabama Democratic Conference in Hoover, Ala. on Friday October 16, 2015. Davis is asking to be accepted back into the Democratic Party. (Photo: Mickey Welsh / Advertiser)Buy Photo

Artur Davis will not be running for the Montgomery County Commission seat – at least not as a Democrat.

Davis, the former Democratic Congressman turned Republican, went before the Executive Board of the State Democratic Executive Committee Friday to convince the 24 board members present to allow him to run for office as a Democratic candidate.

Following the show cause hearing and private discussion, former Alabama Democratic Party Chairman Redding Pitt motioned for Davis to become a Democratic candidate.

The motion was flatly denied.

Pitt may not have been the only “yes” in the room, but if there was another, it could not be heard audibly.

Board chairwoman Nancy Worley said official roll call is not kept, and she couldn’t hear if there was another vote in favor.

“I was next to Redding and heard him vote ‘Yes,’ but I can’t tell you whether someone else voted softly or not,” Worley said.

In short, Davis was seeking an exception to the Radney Rule.

The Radney Rule was implemented to prevent Republicans from easily switching parties. It states that a candidate can’t have supported an opposing party in the past four years.

However, Davis had never seen the board not approve a Republican so long as they came before the board for a hearing.

“The board has to consider its history,” Davis said. “You have never denied any other candidate under this rule. That is a very powerful precedent.”

A former lawyer, his argument was based on precedent. Namely, Parker Griffith, Greg Griffin and William Shashy among numerous others.

Ultimately, however, Davis was found to have supported the Republican Party in 2012 and 2013.

Board members also said he spoke too much about previous candidates instead of himself.

When the floor opened for questions, Grover Dunn said exactly that.

“You have done a great job of telling us what other Democrats have done,” Dunn said. “Why don’t you personalize it?”

Davis’ well-publicized comments at the 2012 Republican National Convention were the primary source of mistrust among the board members.

His inability to speak about himself and take accountability was another factor, according to Tuskegee Mayor Johnny Ford.

“You have opened your door time after time to people who have opposed Democrats and people who have left the party,” Davis said.

Davis also said he turned down “easier and better” political opportunities to be at the hearing.

“He was not sincere,” Ford said. “He was arrogant. He was trying to embarrass us into saying that we were treating him differently but in this business you have to stand on your own.”

Ford took exception to Davis’ documented attacks on President Barack Obama and Davis’ record of voting against the Affordable Care Act.

“He indicated that he criticized the Democratic Party and acknowledged that he criticized President Obama and voted against the Affordable Care Act,” Ford said. “All of these kinds of things he admitted.”

Ford went on to say that the decision was not personal, but politically, Davis cannot be trusted yet.

“We will always be personal friends, but we are not political friends,” Ford said. “As far as I’m concerned his politics are not friendly. I wish him well in his future endeavors. You have to earn the trust of the people in the Democratic Party.”

The ruling does not mean Davis cannot be a Democrat.

Barring a special election, however, he can’t run for office as a Democrat until 2017, four years after his 2013 transgressions against the party.

In the meantime, Worley encouraged Davis to earn the trust of the party.

This vote does not mean Davis cannot be a Democrat if he so chooses. It just means he can’t run as a Democrat.

“He can be a Democrat. He can attend Democratic meetings. He can’t run as a Democrat,” Worley said. “Democrats would love to hear his voice on issues. I think he is extremely intelligent. He would certainly add much to the Democratic discussions.”

Montgomery County Democratic Chairwoman Dr. Tyna Davis agreed that the board needed time.

The Montgomery County Democratic Conference even unanimously voted to oppose Davis at the October 5 meeting, although Dr. Davis was not present.

Artur Davis spoke well about the Democratic platform. He spoke of expanding Medicaid and reopening driver’s license offices and raising the minimum wage.

“I have been with you on the issues that define the Democratic Party,” Davis said.

Overall, however, many board members – including Dr. Davis – said he needs to earn the trust of the party.

“I certainly hope that he does support our Democratic nominees and our Democratic causes,” Dr. Davis said. “We want that kind of support, but it would be more evidence of his support for the party and it would be good for the Democrats to see him in action.”

Correction: A previous version of this article said Davis was a Republican candidate for governor in Alabama in 2010. He was a Democrat and became Republican after losing to Democrat Ron Sparks in the primary.

Read or Share this story: http://on.mgmadv.com/1LyPDMe