Kyle, SD

In a story July 30 about the arrest of a Kyle woman, The Associated Press, relying on information from the U.S. attorney's office, reported erroneously that Jeannie Janis was charged with abusing or neglecting her infant son, causing his death. Assistant U.S. Attorney Sarah Collins said the child was injured, but he did not die.

A South Dakota woman who authorities accuse of causing the death of her five-week old baby has been arrested for an apparent violation of her pretrial release conditions.



Federal court records show Jeannie Janis was arrested and charged with driving while intoxicated in July on the Pine Ridge Indian Reservation.



Authorities say her blood alcohol level when she was arrested was .106 even though her pretrial release conditions banned her from consuming alcohol.



The Kyle woman was indicted in February for felony child abuse and neglect. She pleaded not guilty to the charge and was allowed to remain free on a personal recognizance bond.



The indictment charges that Janis abused the boy in June 2014.



Janis's attorney didn't immediately return a call seeking comment on her arrest.

News

Courts {{Title}} Remove Change News General Courts Web Only Crime Outdoors Events Center Non-Homepage Boredom Busters Pipeline Positively KELOLAND Technology Hunger Affordable Care Act Shops Flooding Remembering 9/11 Drought JazzFest Spring Storm Honor Flight Spencer Anniversary

DoApp Health News Business News Sports

Agriculture Markets Livestock Crops Politics

HealthBeat Cancer Children's Health Heart Health Wellness & Nutrition General Health Beat Women's Health RX Resources What's Going Around OTC Diabetes Recalls Dental Health Men's Health

Politics South Dakota Legislature Budget Congress Taxes General Local Campaign President US Senate New Laws US House Iowa Ballot Issues Local Races Minnesota Gubernatorial

Education Funding College Elementary High School Pre K School Supplies Middle School

Sports Professional College High School Sports Zone Headlines Summit League Tournament Olympics

Business Industry Your Money Matters Development Gas & Energy Legislation Economy/Stocks Employment General Health Care Technology Education Funding Tourism Banking/Finance Housing Transportation Insurance Meetings & Events Retail & Restaurants All Industries On The Move Shops Agriculture

Featured Stories Eye on KELOLAND Inside KELOLAND

Weather Snow Forecast Records Rain Flooding Drought WX Corner General

World News

Investigates GEAR UP

Sponsored Done

This article has been revised to reflect the following correction:

In a story July 30 about the arrest of a Kyle woman, The Associated Press, relying on information from the U.S. attorney's office, reported erroneously that Jeannie Janis was charged with abusing or neglecting her infant son, causing his death. Assistant U.S. Attorney Sarah Collins said the child was injured, but he did not die.

© 2016 Associated Press. All Rights Reserved. Material may not be redistributed.