Quarterback recalls AFC title game loss

Eight years later, the 2005 season's AFC championship game remains a love-hate memory for Jake Plummer, the last quarterback to lead the Broncos into that contest.

The love stems from the camaraderie he shared with his teammates, and from the experience of almost summiting the NFL mountaintop.

The hate comes from a bitter defeat, the aftermath and the bad taste it left.

"To get that close and not get to the Super Bowl was tough," said Plummer, who now lives just east of Boulder with his wife, Kollette, and their two children. "We were confident going into that game. We really were."

A week before their title shot, Plummer and a bunch of his teammates gathered to watch the Pittsburgh Steelers upset Peyton Manning's top-seeded Colts 21-18 at Indianapolis, giving the Broncos home-field advantage in the championship game.

"After we beat the Patriots (in the divisional round), we were hanging out watching the Steelers play the Colts," Plummer recalled. "When the Steelers upset them, it saved us from going to Indy, where the Colts had hammered us in the playoffs the previous two years. We were pumped."

Advertisement

But the Broncos were quickly deflated on championship Sunday. With an estimated 8,000 Steelers fans waving their black-and-gold "Terrible Towels" at Invesco Field at Mile High, Pittsburgh destroyed the Broncos 34-17. Plummer, who had played so well as the Broncos rolled to a 13-3 regular-season record, could not rally his team after it fell behind 24-3 by halftime. The freewheeling, fun-loving Plummer was smothered by Pittsburgh's defense. He went 18-for-30 for 223 yards with two lost fumbles and two interceptions. He threw one pass underhanded.

"Shocked? I think a little bit, to some degree," Plummer said. "I look back on it, and I think that we really didn't play in many close games and didn't have to make comebacks. I think those close games can build character for a team. That might have helped us."

The loss, and Plummer's erratic performance, pushed his precarious relationship with coach Mike Shanahan over the edge. In the spring, Shanahan chose Vanderbilt quarterback Jay Cutler with the Broncos' first pick in the draft. During the 2006 season, Shanahan benched Plummer in favor of the rookie.

"The 2005 season was a fun season, but it was also a high-stress season," recalled Plummer. "I thought the winning would make everything a bit easier, but it seemed like there was more stress every time we won."

Plummer was not fond of the hype that came with the NFL, and with the championship game week in particular.

"I just liked to play the game of football," Plummer said. "There was all of this stuff that you don't like to deal with. On that Thursday before the game, we had to get dressed up and go downtown for a press conference where we answered the same dumb questions. Me? I just wanted to get it over with and go out and play football."

After being traded to Tampa Bay, Plummer retired in March 2007 before ever playing a down for the Buccaneers. He turned down the $5.3 million he would have made playing in 2007.

Eight years after the love-hate game, football is still in his blood. He worked eight games as a college football analyst for the Pac-12 Network this fall. He will be watching Sunday when Manning's Broncos host New England and quarterback Tom Brady in the AFC championship game.

"It's going to be a fun game to watch," Plummer said. "We have two traditional drop-back quarterbacks who can chuck it around with as much accuracy as anybody who's ever played."

Plummer was only 32 when he retired, so he marvels that Manning, at age 37, is shooting for another Super Bowl.

"It's remarkable," Plummer said. "I can't fathom some of the things he does. He approaches the game so that he's always prepared; he always plays to the best of his ability and puts his best effort forward. It's really remarkable, and it's fun to watch."