2016 Jeb's Uber economy He promises to re-craft Washington in the mold of Silicon Valley.

SAN FRANCISCO — When Jeb Bush finally stepped out of a black Toyota Camry and into the horde of reporters and photographers awaiting his arrival by Uber at a tech startup here, he wasn’t simply staging a photo op.

Everything about his appearance here Thursday morning, from the specific points of emphasis to the setting, sought to present Bush as a candidate who not only understands the 21st century on-demand economy but, if elected president, would re-craft Washington and the nation’s economy in the mold of Silicon Valley.

Story Continued Below

It’s not a new approach. President Barack Obama was the original tech president, snapping up hot tech talent for his White House, hobnobbing with the likes of Eric Schmidt and Mark Zuckerberg, and pledging to create a Web 2.0 Washington.

But Silicon Valley fell out of love after Edward Snowden lifted the veil on Big Brother Obama, and after pledges to create a tech-savvy, modern government fell short (see Healthcare.gov, followed by OPM hack).

Now, Bush is putting the Republican spin on how Washington and the West Coast can meet minds. More than any of his rivals — even more than Rand Paul — Bush is embracing the sharing-oriented economy as a symbol of free-market, anti-regulation ideology.

“Fewer rules will create more prosperity, more innovation, more benefits than the command-and-control old approach of hierarchical regulations and large government trying to solve problems for us,” Bush told the crowd of jeans-clad audience of employees, comparing the federal government today to “General Motors in 1975.”

“The government of the future needs to look more like Thumbtack, to be honest with you: lower cost, higher quality, focused on outcomes, really focused on citizens, or in your case, the customers,” Bush said to the workers at Thumbtack, an online company that links local service providers such as house painters with customers.

On a political level, Bush’s choice to emphasize his affinity for Uber and other innovation companies is an answer to the implicit critique of younger rivals portraying him as a relic of yesterday.

It’s an effort to draw out a sharper contrast with Hillary Clinton, the Democratic front-runner who has voiced concerns about the impact of these disruptive companies on wages and organized labor.

And it’s an obvious overture to millenials.

“I don’t think people really want to get in line anymore, I think they want to customize their own dreams,” Bush said during an hour-long town hall with employees at Thumbtack. “I think the economy we’re moving towards has to be customized in that fashion.”

Bush’s outreach to 20- and 30-somethings is still that of a 62-year-old: he referred to his Apple watch as an “iWatch” and informed a BuzzFeed reporter he’s unfamiliar with the term “on fleek.”

But as he told reporters before being whisked away in another Uber, he’s having encounters that are shaping his views everyday, referring to a college student in Los Angeles who gave him a ride.

“Because of Uber, he’s going to go to medical school debt-free,” Bush said. “We have $1.2 billon of student loan debt; we have people who are stuck because we haven’t reformed our higher education system. Uber’s giving that person a chance to start out and fulfill his dream.”

But Bush encountered some reality checks to his soaring rhetoric.

As Thumbtack’s CEO himself pointed out, disturbing the old economic order “can also be disempowering” to certain people and industries.

Beyond lip service, Bush had no answers for the taxi cab drivers now struggling economically or other remnants of the old economic order now adrift. “There’s going to be a big tension between companies that are disrupting the old order, but it’s a pretty vital service,” Bush said of Uber. “I learn a lot when I go on these share car services. You meet people that are customizing their lives; this should be time for celebration.”

And conservative values often clash with Silicon Valley sensibilities.

During the town hall meeting, Bush spoke, as he often does, about his desire to repeal Obamacare. Uber’s CEO, meanwhile, has praised the law for enabling drivers to purchase affordable coverage on the open market. When asked about that contention, Bush shrugged it off.

“That may be true,” he said to reporters afterward, but continued to argue that a “consumer-driven” model would work better.

Bush didn’t play to his audience at all when he dismissed the Federal Communications Commission’s new net neutrality rules, heralded by Silicon Valley, as unnecessary.

While coming to San Francisco allows Bush to follow through on his oft-repeated promise to carry the Republican message to traditionally Democratic locales, the questions young workers threw his way highlighted how his views on a range of issues are out of step with millenials.

Standing in front of 50 young people inside the company’s hip, loft-like space in the SoMa district, Bush faced questions about his state’s Stand Your Ground law, anti-discrimination statutes and women’s pay.

“What qualities of Barack Obama would you like to emphasize?” one young woman asked Bush, who said he admires the president’s ability to communicate and inspire.

“If I could speak like Barack Obama, if I could light up a room like he does. Charisma is not a bad thing.”

While Bush told a Florida native who criticized the Stand Your Ground law he signed that they’d just have to agree to disagree on the matter, he found more common ground in response to a gay man who asked about another Florida law protecting businesses that refuse to hire people based on their sexual orientation.

“I don’t think you should be discriminated against for your sexual orientation. Period, over and out,” said Bush, who went on to say that anti-discrimination measures don’t have to diminish people’s religious liberties and that balancing the two should be left to states.