U.S. Sen. Mark Udall toured Rocky Mountain National Park Monday to observe progress on Old Fall River Road, which was damaged during 2013’s devastating floods and is being repaired with federal funds.

The Colorado Democrat, who faces a tough re-election challenge from Republican Congressman Cory Gardner, met with the park superintendent, Vaughn Baker, and the road project manager from the Federal Highway Administration, Dennis Black, to get an update. Several reporters trailed along on what was the first day of a three-day trip that combined campaign activities and official Senate business.

“I wanted to get an update on what progress has been made in rebuilding this road in particular,” Udall said. “I also want to get an update on the park’s economic activity this year. This is a really important economic engine, not just for Estes, not just for Loveland, but for the entire state.”

The area suffered two double whammies last year — a federal government shutdown and massive flooding that destroyed roads. Rocky Mountain National Park alone lost nearly $11 million in revenues, an issue that’s already been raised on the campaign trail. In campaign events Monday in Estes Park and Granby before and after the Rocky Mountain National Park tour, residents praised Udall for his efforts in securing federal money to aid Colorado with the flood.

Baker said the community feared there might be sentiment to leave the Old Fall River Road in disrepair after the flooding, which was so massive hundreds of huge boulders now sit on what was once a meadow near Old Fall. The road opened in 1920 and was the first auto route in Rocky Mountain National Park offering access to the park’s high country, according to a park website. There was plenty of relief at the decision to repair the unpaved road, Baker said.

The park has special meaning for Udall: his grandfather, Roe Emery, billed as the “father of Colorado tourism,” operated the RMNP concession in the 1920s and 1930s. Udall’s mother, Patricia, told her children of spending summers at the Stanley Hotel in Estes Park, which her father co-owned.