New ob/gyn likes patient care at GMH

Written by Elizabeth Barrett

Not only does one physician think the Gothenburg Medical Clinic is one of the nicest facilities in western Nebraska, Dr. Michael Trierweiler also appreciates the level of patient care.

Trierweiler will join the Gothenburg Memorial Hospital staff full-time on Thursday.

The physician said employees at both the clinic and hospital have not forgotten how to serve patients and work in a friendly place.

“And that’s not true everywhere,” Trierweiler said. “I’m impressed by the employees in every department and the friendliness.”

Although 64-year-old Trierweiler and hs wife, Deanna, bought a home in Gothenburg, he will continue seeing patients once a week at the Platte Valley Women’s HealthCare in North Platte.

“I feel GMH gives patient care similar to what we provide,” he said.

His partner, a nurse practitioner who specializes in women’s and preventitive health care, still has her practice there.

Trierweiler has performed surgeries and been a visiting ob/gyn at GMH since April.

He noted that he has patients all over western Nebraska, from Imperial to Gordon and parts inbetween,

What he likes most about his practice is that it’s upbeat.

“Ob/gyn is different from other specialities because 80% of it is good things happening to people. They have babies,” Trierweiler explained, noting that he cares for patients with cancer and the practice is overwhelmingly positive.

Perhaps what’s not so pleasant about his business, he said, is dealing with all the paperwork.

Trierweiler noted that it’s difficult to know how the Affordable Care Act will work and he hopes that medicine won’t be destroyed by government interference.

“The most satisfying thing about practicing medicine is being able to make a difference in people’s lives,” he said.

Generally he said people in rural areas better understand the threat of too much interference, perhaps more than those in large cities where medical care is not as personalized.

The biggest change Trierweiler said he’s witnessed while practicing medicine is how efficiency has increased.

For example, patients who used to be hospitalized two to three days now return home as outpatients because of different, less painful procedures and medicine.

“Recovery time is quicker,” Trierweiler said.

Trierweiler said the most important preventative action people can take to stay healthy is to stop smoking. Eating healthy food and exercising follow close behind, he said.

After receiving a biology degree from the University of California at San Diego, Trierweiler completed a degree in medicine from the University of Southern California School of Medicine.

He interned in ob/gyn at the University of Colorado and worked for the U.S. Public Health Service for the Navajo Nation in Arizona.

He has taught at universities in Texas, Colorado and South Dakota and started a practice in North Platte in 1992 after working at a hospital and clinic in Colorado and having a private practice in Texas.

Trierweiler is an avid cyclist. He’s completed the Bike Ride Across Nebraska six times and two years ago biked solo from Canada to Mexico along the Pacific Highway.

“It was breathtaking,” he said.

Closer to home, Trierweiler often bikes from North Platte to Gothenburg or to Ogallala or even Scottsbluff.

He also enjoys hunting ducks and deer with his sons.

The Trierweilers have two grown sons and twins who are juniors at St. Pat’s High School in North Platte.

This e-mail address is being protected from spambots. You need JavaScript enabled to view it

308-537-3636