Area high school graduates celebrate with loved ones

Frederick High School Principal Pete Vargas announced the class of 2015 and the square caps of newly minted graduates immediately spiraled upward into the momentarily sunny sky Saturday.

As graduates met up with family members and friends around the side of the school's football field, there were bursts of silly-string showers and joyous hugs.

Frederick High graduated 219 of roughly 2,300 students to emerge from St. Vrain Valley District schools with diplomas Saturday.

At Erie High School, the graduating class had the highest number of graduates with of 4.0 GPAs in the school's history. The Mead High graduating class had a similar landmark with 19 co-valedictorians, the most in that school's history.

Senior Slesha Shrestha, left, and Seth Thomas, right, look at the selfie taken by Amber Montante, center, before commencement ceremonies on Saturday at Skyline High School in Longmont, (Eric Bellamy / For the Times-Call)

Five Niwot High graduating seniors were National Merit Semifinalists and one student achieved a perfect score on the ACT exam. The Lyons Middle/ Senior graduating class is the first in school history to obtain college credit while still in high school via a partnership with Colorado State University.

In Longmont, the Longmont High graduating class received more college credit while still in high school than any other previous class. Students graduating from Silver Creek High on Saturday received more than $3.2 million in total scholarship monies while the Skyline High graduating class received the most scholarships in school history.

In Frederick, the graduating class was the last class to have attended school in the old campus.

Advertisement

For Claudia Hernandez, 17, of Dacono, the day marked another first. She is the first in her immediate family to receive a high school diploma.

"I'm really proud of myself and I'm glad I can set a good example for my three little brothers," said Hernandez, who plans to pursue a career in music.

Her father, Juan Hernandez of Chihuahua, Mexico, said he had high hopes for his daughter's future.

"I hope she makes a good place for herself in this country," Juan Hernandez said.

Ten feet away, 17-year-old Kenny Lee of Firestone received hugs and congratulations from a circle of family and friends. His mother, Jolee Thao, said the moment was bittersweet.

"It's a big relief and I'm excited for him," Thao said about her eldest of four children "There were happy and sad tears as I watched him begin a new step in his life."

Karen Antonacci: 303-684-5226, antonaccik@times-call.com or twitter.com/ktonacci