'There is not a quick fix for a roadway'

Evan Russack with his son Trevor, 6, on Saturday look over Pennsylvania Avenue on University Hill, which was cut in two by flooding. ( Paul Aiken )

The flood waters that made much of Boulder County and the Front Range impassable Thursday night have left behind scoured embankments, undercut bridges and buckled pavement that will take days to assess and longer to repair.

City, county and state transportation officials asked people to drive only when absolutely necessary and to respect road closures even in areas that appear dry and passable.

"Even though a road may look safe and dry, there are a variety of things that can be going on underneath the road, whether it's the structure of the road, utilities, water, wastewater, gas," said city spokesman Mike Banuelos. "There are a lot of things we are still assessing, and the event is still ongoing."

The capacity to get crews out to assess and repair road damage has been limited by the extent of damage and the ongoing rescue effort, which made it difficult to get around the county.

There was also the knowledge that yet more rain was expected to fall during the weekend on already sodden ground.

"We are just as vulnerable today as we were yesterday," Banuelos said Friday afternoon.

Boulder County spokeswoman Barb Halpin said one of the helicopters that went up Friday was dedicated to assessing the damage and taking detailed notes for crews to use in targeting resources at the hardest hit areas.

The county will do everything it can to keep Sunshine Canyon open, as it sustained the least damage and is currently the only east-west route connecting Peak-to-Peak Highway with Foothills Parkway, Halpin said.

"I can say there are a lot of infrastructure problems," Halpin said. "It will take some time to assess it all. But most of these roads are closed because somewhere along the line, the road is washed away. It's not a matter of 'we could clear this rubble and make it okay.'"

Colin Haggerty, immediate past president of the American Society of Civil Engineers and a Denver-based water resources engineer with Parsons Brinckerhoff, said the damage from a rain event of this massive scale could have been even worse without the last half-century of flood control and drainage improvements throughout the Denver area Urban Drainage and Flood Control District.

Boulder lies within that district and has benefited from its infrastructure investments, while hard-hit mountain towns like Lyons lie outside it.

Roads turned into rivers

Flood waters can damage a road in a variety of ways, Haggerty said.

Running water over a road surface can soak into the porous asphalt. Then it can carry away the sand and fine material that lie under the road. That leaves the larger material with nothing to hold it in place and it gets carried away too.

That process creates the conditions for sinkholes and buckling, and that's what happened in three areas that Boulder officials are most concerned about: 7th Street near University Avenue, Table Mesa near Broadway and the 200 block of Arapahoe. All those roads turned into rivers during the flooding.

As can be seen in many pictures of flood damaged roads, running flood waters can also scour the sides of embankments, destabilizing bridges and roads that run alongside creeks, Haggerty said.

Colorado Department of Transportation spokeswoman Amy Ford said assessing hundreds of bridges on flood-damaged or adjacent roadways is a top priority for the state. Hundreds of workers are spreading across the affected area to assess the safety of bridges over the next several days.

Ford warned that the process will "not be quick" and asked for patience and caution from drivers.

"The roadway may look okay but there could be scour under bridges or other structural issues," Ford said. "We are going to be out for several days assessing the quality and stability of those roads. Some of these road closures will remain in place until we are absolutely sure

"The road might appear passable," she added, "but if it has been near a water source or runoff, please be very careful."

Banuelos said that as of Friday afternoon, the city does not believe any bridges are compromised.

At least two bridges in Louisville -- one on County Road near Louisville Community Park and one in the county on Empire Road are completely washed away.

The Dillon Road bridge over Coal Creek in Louisville suffered damage, but a structural engineer said it was safe to use.

Louisville suffered other infrastructure damage, including extensive damage to the Coal Creek Trail, to the golf course and to several water lines, though they have been isolated and city water is safe to drink.

Most roads are designed for 10-- or 20-year rain events because it's simply too expensive to design every road for a 50-- or 100-year rain event, Haggerty said.

He said the extent of the damage from this week's storms dwarfs anything in Colorado history.

Some roads needing to be completely rebuilt

"I don't know that we've seen an event like this in this region before," he said. "The Big Thompson Flood (of 1976) is considered the flood of record, but that was concentrated in a single area. That this has hit the entire region, it's going to be a huge undertaking not just for CDOT but for all the jurisdictions. Where do you even start?"

Many roads will have to be completely rebuilt, and that will take time, he said.

"There is not a quick fix for a roadway," he said. "It is a full system that needs to be reconstructed. You can't just put down pavement."

Along with the road reconstruction, Haggerty said weaknesses and potential improvements to regional flood control systems need to be identified.

In addition, much of the infrastructure dates from the 1950s through the 1970s and needs to be repaired or even replaced.

"If we want to live in a society that is safe, we need to invest in our infrastructure and our services," he said.

Contact Camera Staff Writer Erica Meltzer at 303-473-1355 or meltzere@dailycamera.com.