The Rockies sent down struggling rookie starter Eddie Butler to Triple-A Albuquerque on Friday and placed hampered left-handed reliever Boone Logan on the disabled list.

Butler threw just four innings in a loss at New York against the Mets on Thursday. He has a 3-10 record and a 5.90 ERA. He was demoted for a second time this season. In five starts since he was recalled in early July, Butler has an 8.28 ERA.

“He’s not commanding much,” Colorado manager Walt Weiss said. “His pitches are either running out of the zone or back up over the plate.”

Logan — in the second year of a three year, $16.5-million contract — went back to the DL with recurring left-elbow inflammation. That injury also sidelined him for significant time last season. This move to the DL dates retroactively to Wednesday (Aug. 12).

Logan’s elbow started flaring up a few weeks ago, he said, at the site of where he had bone spurs surgically removed last year.

“We knew exactly where it was,” he said. “They convinced me to go to the DL. I fought them.”

Logan — who has a 4.75 ERA in 48 appearances for the Rockies — said the team noticed his injury because he wasn’t finishing pitches.

“I was backing up sliders,” Logan said. But the 31-year-old wasn’t blaming his struggles on an injury. “I take all the credit for my numbers this year,” he said.

Colorado called up minor-league relievers Gonzalez Germen and Ken Roberts to fill out the 25-man roster.

Right-handed starter David Hale returned to the Rockies’ clubhouse Friday after he went on the DL July 10 with a groin injury.

Hale likely will replace Butler in the Rockies rotation on Wednesday at Coors Field, Weiss said.

Hale has been with Albuquerque on a rehab assignment.

“It gave me some time to work on mechanical stuff too,” Hale said.

Nick Groke: ngroke@denverpost.com or twitter.com/nickgroke

Looking ahead

Padres’ Andrew Cashner (4-12, 4.09 ERA) at Rockies’ Jon Gray (0-0, 2.70), 6:10 p.m. Saturday, ROOT; 850 AM

Fresh off his breakout performance against the Mets at Citi Field in New York, Gray has an opportunity to give Rockies fans an encore performance at Coors Field. In the second start of his big-league career, Gray held the Mets to one hit (a solo home run) in six innings. The former University of Oklahoma star struck out five and issued two walks before he was removed from the game because of the Rockies’ strict 75-pitch limit. Cashner, a veteran right-hander, lost to the Philadelphia Phillies in his last start, giving up three runs and eight hits and striking out four in 6 innings. He has a 4.50 ERA in five starts against the Rockies. Second baseman DJ LeMahieu has hit Cashner hard (going 5-for-10, including a double).

Sunday: Padres’ Ian Kennedy (7-10, 4.37 ERA) at Rockies’ Chris Rusin (3-5, 4.43), 2:10 p.m., ROOT

Monday: Off

Tuesday: Nationals’ Jordan Zimmermann (8-8, 3.34) at Rockies’ Jorge De La Rosa (7-5, 4.75), 6:40 p.m., ROOT

Patrick Saunders, The Denver Post