ColaDaily.com is your source for free news and information in Columbia and the Midlands.

Richland County resident Ed Greenleaf told supporters at a Tuesday campaign launch event that U.S. House District 2 deserves a congressman who would create jobs and put constituents first.

“We can vote for the same person who’s held the office for 13 years. And we can get the same kind of results with the same kind of Congress,” he said.

Greenleaf criticized U.S. House Rep. Joe Wilson for voting against the Violence Against Women Act, for not supporting veterans and for standing lock-step with fellow Republicans in “shutting down the federal government than sit down and hammer out a budget agreement.”

“We have a congressman who wraps himself in conservative cloth, and yet has let our nation’s debt grow from $5.8 trillion to $17.2 trillion under his watchful eye,” Greenleaf said.

Greenleaf told those gathered that he would not vote on a budget that would increase the annual deficit from the previous year and that he would put focus on taking care of veterans and soldiers.

The 51-year-old is running against Wilson, a Republican who has held the District 2 seat for the past 13 years. The district includes Richland, Lexington, Aiken, Barnwell and Orangeburg counties.

Greenleaf comes on the scene as a relative unknown, but he possesses a significant fiscal pedigree. He graduated from the University of South Carolina with a bachelor’s degree in economics and a master’s degree in public administration. He has spent the past 27 years working for Blue Cross Blue Shield.

Greenleaf retired last week from Blue Cross Blue Shield of South Carolina where he focused on outreach education and communication to focus on campaigning full time.

He said he was led to run for political office for the first time after watching how Congress has handled the budget process in the last session.

“This past government shutdown struck me as troublesome,” he said.

He described the cohort on Capitol Hill that refuses to fund the budget as “middle aged white men” who have used the Affordable Care Act to shutdown the government.

“Our country’s being held hostage,” he said.

Greenleaf said Washington needs someone who can sit down and work out issues with others to develop solutions.

“I’m not a ramrod kind of guy,” he said.

Greenleaf, who is openly gay, said his orientation would not factor into how he would approach issues important to constituents. He said it might be “a novelty to some” but that residents are more concerned about what he plans to do with jobs, the economy and the gridlock in Washington.

“I’m not into labels,” he said. “The fact that I’m gay is just as important as me being right-handed.”

Comments