Vote Now:

Do You Approve or Disapprove of President Obama's Job Performance?

Urgent:

What Do You Think of President Obama's Job Performance? Vote Now

Vote Now:

How Do You Rate Obama Compared to Other Presidents?

Barack Obama's presidency has been fraught with scandals that have affected the moral of all Americans and frustrated his political base. Clearly, Obama would prefer to leave a legacy of "change you can believe in," however it is more likely his legacy will be tainted by disappointment and mistrust.Here are eight politicians who have turned on Obama during his presidency:1. Rep. Luis Gutierrez (D-IL) took President Obama to task for delaying his executive action on immigration until after the 2014 midterm elections. While Obama's circumventing of Congress has been called an amnesty scandal, Gutierrez wanted the action implemented sooner. "It’s clear that playing it safe is what is going on at the White House and among Democratic circles. Playing it safe means walking away from our values and our principles."2. Former President Jimmy Carter, who is more dove than hawk on foreign policy, has recently criticized President Obama's response to the radical Islamic terror group ISIS. "President Obama, it’s been hard to figure out exactly what his policy is. It changes from time to time. He’s been delayed. Sometimes he draws red lines in the sand on the Mideast and then when the time comes, he doesn’t go through with it."3. Former secretary of state and Democrat frontrunner for the 2016 presidential election, Hillary Clinton criticized President Obama when she ran against him in 2008. However, she has since taken him to task many times including his stance on foreign policy. "Great nations need organizing principles, and 'Don't do stupid stuff' is not an organizing principle."4. Senator Elizabeth Warren (D-Mass) is considered a potential 2016 presidential candidate and she has criticized President Obama for siding with Wall Street. In an interview with Salon, Warren stated that Obama and his economic team "protected Wall Street. Not families who were losing their homes. Not people who lost their jobs. And it happened over and over and over."5. Texas Congressman Henry Cuellar (D-Laredo) questioned President Obama's priorities when Obama found time to play pool and engage in a beer drinking photo op but did not visit the Texas border during an immigration crisis. "It just floored me because if he’s saying he's too busy to go down to the border, but you have time to drink a beer, play pool – the optics and the appearance just mean he's not paying attention to this humanitarian crisis."6. Sen. Chuck Schumer (D-NY) was rebuked by Democrats for taking a sharp stab at President Obama's signature piece of legislation, Obamacare. "After passing the stimulus, Democrats should have continued to propose middle-class-oriented programs and built on the partial success of the stimulus, but unfortunately Democrats blew the opportunity the American people gave them. We took their mandate and put all of our focus on the wrong problem—health care reform."7. Independent Senator Angus King (I-ME) caucuses with the Democrats and questioned the constitutionality of President Obama's executive action on immigration. "I worry that his taking unilateral action could in fact inflame public opinion, change the subject from immigration to the president. I also have constitutional concerns about where prosecutorial discretion ends and unconstitutional executive authority begins."8. Sen. Dianne Feinstein (D-CA) was very critical of President Obama's decision to bypass Congress before exchanging Sgt. Bowe Bergdahl for five Taliban officials. The Senate Intelligence Chairwoman said, "I strongly believe that we should have been consulted, that the law should have been followed, and I very much regret that that was not the case. It comes with some surprise and dismay that the transfers went ahead with no consultation, totally not following the law, and in an issue of this kind of concern to a committee that bears the oversight responsibility, I think you can see that we’re very dismayed about it."