Last night on Fox News' The Kelly File, Maureen Faulker, the widow of murdered Philadelphia Police Officer Daniel Faulkner, reacted to President Obama's nomination of Debo Adegbile to head up the Civil Rights Division of the Department of Justice. Adegbile has worked as an advocate for cop killer Mumia-Abu-Jamal, the man who was convicted of killing Faulkner in 1982. During his time as a leader at the NAACP Legal Defense Fund and years after the conviction was repeatedly upheld, Adegbile voluntarily took on Abu-Jamal's case and eventually was successful in getting the death penalty overturned.

"I was absolutely outraged by President Obama to make this decision to have a man who defended a murderer, someone who murdered a police officer with pre-meditation and malice, is a radical, is a Black Panther and to give him an appointment, to nominate him to the Department of Justice, it's a disgrace," Faulkner said. "It's a disgrace. I feel police officers throughout this country are out there to protect the public and they should be respected and by President Obama nominating him, it's like spitting on all of our officers and our federal agents throughout America."

Former DOJ Civil Rights Attorney and whistleblower J. Christian Adams, who wrote a book exposing Obama's race obsessed Justice Department, told viewers that Adegbile's race baiting history is no accident and is exactly what President Obama wants.

"Don't forget, the NAACP Legal Defense Fund Chose to get involved in this because Mumia Abu-Jamal is a celebrity. He is a celebrity on the Left, the murderer, strangely enough among groups on the Left, is a celebrity because he's perceived as a symptom of America's oppression of people in Philadelphia who look this way. So, this is a guy who on the Left has been a hero and to get within 100 feet of this cop killer, to defend him by choice, disqualified you from a position at the Justice Department in my view," Adams said. "This is a man with a radical racial background and that's exactly why this President nominated him."



As mentioning in the clip, the Fraternal Order of Police is vehemently opposed to Adegbile's nomination and has vowed to do everything possible to stop it. You can read more about that, here.