Topics: Daniel Craig, GlobalPost, james bond, Miss Bala, spectre, Entertainment News

This article originally appeared on GlobalPost

MEXICO CITY — The combination of James Bond espionage and Mexico’s crime and chaos always promised to be a sizzling cocktail. But the stories emerging out of the filming of “Spectre” in the Mexican capital have dramas worthy of a spy flick themselves.

The real-life plots spin from corporate hacking to dictators to government bribes to narco police.

But it is not all scandal. The iconic British agent has also brought his trademark glamorous women and explosive action scenes to Mexico City’s historical center.

Filming began here March 19 and runs all this week. The movie might struggle to be as outlandish as reality when it hits the screens in November. GlobalPost looks at the highlights.

1) “Spectre” gets hacked

In December, before James Bond got anywhere near Mexico, Sony Pictures was hit by what its CEO called “the worst cyber attack in US history.” (Which is pretty hard to verify.)

US intelligence agents say North Korea was behind the hack in reaction to the Sony comedy “The Interview,” about TV reporters trying to assassinate Kim Jong Un. Pyongyang denies involvement.

The hackers ripped a plethora of embarrassing emails and data from Sony. They stole and leaked a “Spectre” script, including major plot spoilers. And they exposed dealings over the movie that spilled controversial details about the Mexico shoot.

2) Mexican government accused of bribery

On March 3, the website Tax Analysis broke a story, based on one of the hacked Sony emails, that Mexican officials were giving the filmmakers between $14 million and $20 million in tax cuts on “Spectre.” In return they wanted significant changes to the script to help Mexico’s image, which has been tarnished by drug violence, the story said.

These alleged tweaks included changing the nationality of an assassin from Mexican, showing shots of Mexico City’s modern skyline rather than slum streets, and switching a cage fight to a traditional Day of the Dead parade.

While tax incentives are normal for movies, Tax Analysts said the tradeoffs went “well beyond that, with the studio permitting Mexican authorities to make casting decisions, dictate characters’ ethnicities.”

Mexican newspapers ran headlines like “Mexico Bribes James Bond.”

In response, film producer Michael G. Wilson gave a news conference in Mexico City last week. He denied some of the changes and said the Bond films always receive tax incentives.

“There is nothing in the script that we hadn’t had before,” Wilson said. “Everywhere we go we have incentives. Sometimes they’re taxes; sometimes they’re other kind of incentives. You can get co-operation, you can get things you would usually pay for free and all that.”