Employers filing over 250 Form 1095's to the IRS AIR Program have only one choice, electronic filing. For those lacking this capability, BenefitScape, an authorized IRS e-file provider, will provide e-filing and transmit their data to the IRS.

Natick, Massachusetts (PRWEB) May 09, 2016

Natick, Massachusetts BenefitScape®, a cloud-based outsourcing platform for ACA compliance, has announced a special service to assist those employers that need to transmit their Form 1095 data via e-filing to the new Affordable Care Act Information Returns (AIR) Program.

Employers who thought they were all set for 2015 ACA compliance were caught off guard by two surprises: first, many vendors who printed their 1095 forms are not e-filing for them; and second, the process of e-filing to the new IRS AIR Program is much more complex than they had anticipated. In other words, there is still a lot of difficult work to successfully e-file and time is short.

BenefitScape® is prepared to step in to help all organizations e-file to meet the IRS deadline

BenefitScape® is an authorized e-file provider and has completed all of the IRS requirements to transmit Form 1095 data to the IRS Air Program. BenefitScape is e-filing to AIR for hundreds of customers after preparing and distributing their Form 1095 to their employees.

BenefitScape is now extending this e-filing and data management service to all employers, no matter how they produced their Form 1095. BenefitScape will e-file any Form 1095 data that employers may have, regardless of the software they used, the data format or how the forms were produced! The BenefitScape intake specialists have the tools, training and experience to take "any data, any format", extract it and load it into the data warehouse. From there it is transmitted to the IRS AIR Program, completing the last step in ACA compliance for 2015.

IRS AIR filing for ACA requires a new technology and operating model

The BenefitScape software does both auditing and handling corrections to the data before e-filing to the IRS. The new IRS AIR system is very robust and will detect all forms of data errors from validation of Social Security numbers to compliance with the ACA business rules. IRS AIR is a new breed of IRS technology designed to support compliance with the Affordable Care Act and provide the IRS with a highly automated tool to examine submitted data.

"E-filing to IRS AIR is not just a simple file upload" said Ken Phillips, President of BenefitScape. "The real challenge is make sure the data transmitted, the content, satisfies the IRS criteria for a successful filing. To e-file successfully requires following the IRS guidelines precisely and diligently in order to avoid or survive an audit" Phillips continued. "From our experience e-filing to IRS AIR is also not a "one and done" proposition; many employers will find out that e-filing requires several submissions before it is correct and accepted."

To find out more about ACA e-filing visit http://www.benefitscape.com

For the original version on PRWeb visit: http://www.prweb.com/releases/2016/05/prweb13398962.htm