Patients at Capitol Hill’s Country Doctor are in need of dental care, and the clinic has a plan to give it to them, said Linda McVeigh, the clinic’s executive director. In 2016, they’re going to tear down their old office space north of the 19th Ave E clinic building and put up a new structure with space for a dental clinic.

Country Doctor, a nonprofit serving lower-income people, is located at 19th Ave. E. and East Republican Street. The main clinic offers health care where clients pay on a sliding scale. But McVeigh said the clinic’s board has recognized a desperate need for dental care for the people it serves. Dental insurance is not included in most health plans, including those purchased on the state exchange (Obamacare). The clinic is the only one in King County which does not offer a dental service, McVeigh said.

Beyond that, existing dental centers are overwhelmed. Patients can wait on a four-month waiting list, McVeigh said, or get up very, very early and go to one of the clinics, hoping to get a walk-in spot. Similar to going to an emergency room, staffers triage the people who show up that morning. Those with the most acute problems get to go first, while others might wait for hours and not be seen at all.

“The lack of dental care is an incredibly serious problem,” she said.

Busy corner

The clinic’s neighboring building has also been busy. Four different health practices opened under one roof over the summer at 19th and E Republican, expanding on the neighborhood-based healing already happening at the Country Doctor next door.

After 17 years of serving Capitol Hill’s acupuncture needs from co-practices and healing centers, Eric Hartmann opened his own five-element acupuncture practice after purchasing the house-turned-office earlier this year. Down the hall, Hartman’s husband, Jeremy Steward runs JStewardBodywork which focuses on deep tissue and relaxation massage. Hypnotherapist Kris Weaver and psychologist Glenn Maarse have also opened independent practices inside the newly created clinic space. “I see the Hill as a nice blend of things, and I think we’ll be a wonderful addition to that blend,” Hartmann said. Renovation of the house included dividing up the first floor into four treatment room and space for the two other practices. Hartmann, who had been running his acupuncture practice from the Sacred Garden Healing Center at 10th Ave and E Boston, said he was happy to return to central Capitol Hill and closer to home. “My focus is getting results for my patients. I would like people to recognize that it’s a neighborhood clinic,” he said.

2016 construction

Meanwhile, Country Doctor also owns the two-story Betty Lee building, just to the north of the clinic itself, which will not be altered. The Betty Lee houses a WIC program and HIV support center on the first floor. WIC is a federal program providing basic food needs to women who are pregnant or with young children. In addition to the money for food distributed on what looks like a bank card, there are components such as meeting with a nutritionist to help the recipients make better food choices.

“It doesn’t just include handing people these little cards,” she said.

Country Doctor has secured $1 million from the federal government, and was applying for more funds from the state and city. A bank loan, guaranteed by the rent from the apartments planned in the project, could also be part of the plan. The City Council even helped clear the way for the expansion with a small bit of legislation. Country Doctor hopes to start construction later this year and the project should take about 18 months.

For more information about Country Doctor, or to donate, visit countrydoctor.org.

Share: Twitter

Facebook

Reddit

Email