Supreme Court weighs auto service advisers overtime pay at dealerships, discussing whether service advisers at car dealerships should be exempt from overtime pay under federal labor laws.

The case resides in whether these employees, who greet car owners, suggest repairs and services and evaluate complaints, are exempt under the Fair Labor Standards Act from earning overtime. Encino Motorcars, a Mercedes-Benz dealership in Encino, Calif., claims they are similar to sales personnel, employees and mechanics who handle parts.

It was inquired by Justice Stephen Breyer to know why service advisers are not treated like traditional employees like secretaries.

“I mean, apparently Congress thought that the mechanics themselves were special because they go out into agricultural areas or something in the middle of the night and fix a tractor, so they work irregular hours,” he said. “But these people don’t work irregular hours and they’re not paid on commission.”

Paul Clement, Encino’s attorney, said advisers are paid in commission partially, which is shared with other dealership employees.

“So as a practical matter, it makes an awful lot of sense to exempt all of these people from the overtime rules,” he said. “They’re all paid well. They’re all paid above the minimum wage, which is, the exemption doesn’t apply to anyways, and they all have a reason to work about 46 hours a week instead of 40 hours a week.”

In 2011 the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals upheld a interpretation from the Department of Labor that separated dealership employees from separated service advisers.

Justice Samuel Alito questioned why employees who handle parts are included if service advisers are not.

Arguing on behalf of the service advisers that sued Encino Motorcars, Stephanos Bibas said part handlers are expressly named in the statute, serving as the mechanic’s right-hand man or woman.

But it was Alito’s concern as to why employees handling parts are covered though they are not engaging in any manual labor.

“You have to explain why the line is drawn between that activity and the activity of the employees who are at issue here,” said Alito.

Bilbas said service advisors are still an integral part of the process even though they are not repairing vehicles.

Source: Justice weigh overtime pay for auto service advisers at dealerships

Photo credit: www.autotrainingcentre.com

Join the Discussion