A YOUNG boy making hundreds of toys for sick children, teachers who inspire the next generation of Tasmanians, tireless charity volunteers and dedicated fire officers with years of selfless service to their communities.

These are some of the inspiring people who are Tasmanian finalists in the 2015 Pride of Australia Medal.

For more than a decade, the Pride of Australia Medal has been recognising ordinary Tasmanians who have done extraordinary things.

And after a five-week period of nominations through June and July, the panel of judges has settled on this year’s finalists.

Executive general manager of the Mercury and Sunday Tasmanian, Tom Salom, said the Pride of Australia Medal 2015 was a celebration of Tasmania’s unsung heroes.

“These are people who have done extraordinary things for others in many different ways,” Mr Salom said.

“People whose actions and deeds inspire us and make our community a better place to live. People who contribute to our community, not for personal gain, but for the good of all of us. These people are truly, the pride of Australia.”

Readers of the Mercury and Sunday Tasmanian can now vote for their most deserving medallist across all categories in the People’s Choice Medal.

Votes can be made in each category, with voting open now at themercury.com.au/prideofaustralia.

The Pride of Australia Medal 2015 ceremony will be held on October 5.

Tasmanian finalists for the Pride of Australia Medal 2015.

INSPIRATION

To recognise a member of our teaching professions from early childhood to university education or a role model whose compassion and wisdom while teaching, coaching and mentoring our youth has been truly inspiring.

SARAH ADAMS

Single mum Sarah is a much-loved Prep/Year 1 teacher, Girl Guides leader, netball coach and soccer official. She became a guide leader to ensure the unit in her home town did not close. When the Longford Netball Club was a coach down, Sarah took on the role and when her son wanted to play soccer, she chipped in as the team manager.

BRENT ARMITSTEAD

Latrobe High School principal Brent has been nominated for the role he plays in the Reconnect program, helping youth who are, or are at risk of, homelessness. Brent provides a role model for youth with challenging behaviours and provides a nurturing environment. He teaches them to respond rather than react and to maintain their composure in times of conflict.

DEBBIE LANGIANO

Teachers’ aide Debbie has helped many children with special needs over the years, but her work with one little girl stands out. Debbie has offered encouragement and determination to a 10-year-old, who needs to be assisted with therapy on three different types of equipment every day. This young girl has blossomed over the years because of Debbie’s care and commitment.

YOUNG LEADER MEDAL

A person under 25 years who has advanced a community, or will advance a community, through academic or personal endeavours.

STEPHANIE CESILE

Stephanie was diagnosed with Type-1 diabetes when she was 10 years old and has since worked tirelessly to make a difference for other sufferers. In 2013, she represented Australia at the World Diabetes Congress and will do so again in Canada later this year. She has worked with young children for a number of years and is a member of Australia’s youth diabetes reference group.

CAMPBELL REMESS

Young Campbell decided to make teddies and toys for sick children – 365 toys in fact, one for each day of the year. He succeeded in his goal last year, but has continued to make the toys under the name Project 365. He has donated his own pocket money to the cause and is determined to double that number of toys this year.

LUKE WILLIAMS

After his nephew was diagnosed with autism, Luke decided he couldn’t sit back without helping. He started his own charity, Lend a Hand to Hugo, and encouraged cricketers of all ages to place a sticker promoting Autism Awareness on their bats. He has garnered support from well-known players and organised a cricket charity match with old legends playing young guns. Luke is now working on a documentary for the charity.

CARE AND COMPASSION MEDAL

To recognise a professional or volunteer carer or group, or a member of the health professions who has made improvement to the lives of those around them.

KAREN BELBIN

Karen is a foster parent to eight children from backgrounds ranging from mental health issues to drug and alcohol abuse. Karen is determined to provide equal opportunities to all young people by sending five of the children to private school. Her door is always open to children in need.

KAYE FOX

Kaye has been offering free help to those in trouble for nearly 30 years. Working as a volunteer for Ambulance Tasmania since 1989, Kaye gives 72 hours a week to the service. She is also involved with Learn to Swim, the Lions Club and the Nubeena RSL. She has lived on the Tasman Peninsula for many years and was part of the first response team during the 1996 Port Arthur massacre.

DONNA WHELDON

Donna is the primary carer for three members of her family including her 11-year-old granddaughter who has Huntington’s and Parkinson’s disease, and her 13-year-old grandson who suffers from mental health issues and Type-1 diabetes. During this time, despite her own declining health, Donna has made a home for another family member expecting a child.

ENVIRONMENT MEDAL

For an Australian or group of Australians whose actions have demonstrated leadership, raising awareness and/or teaching others about environmental issues.

News_Image_File: Jaycobb, left, and Greg Bygraves.News_Image_File: Greta Kerschbaum.

JAYCOBB AND GREG BYGRAVES

Greg and Jaycobb are dedicated to conserving the environment of their Bridgewater community. For six years the father and son have helped improve the condition of the banks of the Jordan River through their landscaping and litter collection scheme. Jaycobb, 11, takes every opportunity to head down to the river and help transform it into a popular spot for recreational activities and fishing.

GRETA KERSCHBAUM

Tasmanian teacher Greta initially wrote her book The Lost Cave of Corinna to help her young children understand complex issues such as the impact of humans on the environment. Now sold in book stores across Australia, Greta’s story tells the story of a boy named Tom who magically transforms into a pygmy possum and must find the mythical Lost Cave in order to be turned back in to a human. Also featuring a Tasmanian devil suffering from facial tumour disease as a primary character, a portion of the profits from the book are donated to the Save the Tasmanian Devil Appeal.

CHILD OF COURAGE MEDAL

A child 16 years or under who has helped save, or attempted to save, the life of another or overcome personal adversity through determination and strength of character, allowing them to improve the quality of not only their lives, but also those around them.

PAIGE HOLLAND

Paige was born with a hole in her heart that wasn’t discovered until she suffered a bout of gastroenteritis at the age of four. Now 11, Paige has overcome her health issues and enjoys dancing, going to school and raising funds for the Heart Foundation. Paige’s ability to dance through the difficult times shows adults that they can do the same.

BRAYDEN LYNCH

Fourteen-year-old Brayden’s quick-thinking action saved the lives of three other people trapped in car after a single vehicle accident. He pulled the unconscious driver out of the car before smashing the back window to save those trapped in the back seat. Tragically, a four-year-old passenger was stuck under the vehicle and despite Brayden’s best efforts trying to lift the vehicle, she died in his arms.

HAMISH WILLIS

Little Hamish was born with an incurable heart condition that left him with only half the usual capacity of the vital organ. Having his first operation at just one day old, Hamish is now a happy seven-year-old, although his struggle with Hypoplastic Left Heart Syndrome continues. While Hamish’s condition has improved thanks to innovative Fontan surgery, more operations are ahead for Hamish, who has shown incredibly resilience and bravery.

COURAGE MEDAL

For an Australian, who through his or her act/s of courage have overcome personal adversity through determination and strength of character.

NELLY JAEHNE

At the time she was diagnosed with Multiple Sclerosis, 20-year-old Nelly was modelling, milking cows and working at the local tip shop. She also rode horses in her spare time and as her condition deteriorated, Nelly taught her horses to lie down to mount. As she approached her 30s, Nelly became confined to a wheelchair. She now instructs, trains and helps others to break-in horses from the sidelines.

NATALIE REES

Ten years ago, Natalie suffered a permanent brain injury which ended her teaching career. Since then she has volunteered at Lansdowne Crescent Primary School in the Kindergarten class. During her time there she has inspired more than 500 children with her encouragement and many teachers with her sense of humour.

KELLIE SHEPHERD

Kellie, a 40-year-old mother of three, was kicked in the head by a horse and suffered paralysis to the left side of her body in 2013. The accident had a huge impact on her life, but she was determined to regain mobility and autonomy. After undergoing multiple surgeries and spending nine months in rehabilitation, Kellie’s condition improved significantly. Just 12 months after the accident, she joined friends and family in a walk for charity.

COMMUNITY SPIRIT MEDAL

To recognise an individual or a group whose selfless, tireless and largely unacknowledged actions have enriched the lives of those around them in their community.

MITCH MCPHERSON

After losing his brother Ty to suicide in 2013, Mitch recognised the importance of talking about feelings instead of staying silent. He started the not-for-profit organisation SPEAK UP! Stay ChatTY, and is determined to prevent other families from suffering the heartbreak his family feels every day. Mitch organises community events, fundraisers and motivational talks aimed at reinforcing the message that it’s OK to talk about how you are really feeling.

TONI MUIR

For more than 25 years, Devonport resident Toni has been committed to the work of the St Vincent de Paul Society. Toni has managed five Vinnies charity stores in her local area for the past 18 years and she recently took on the volunteer role of state president of St Vincent de Paul Society Tasmania and is also part of the St. Joseph Conference, the welfare arm of St Vincent de Paul.

JESS TABART

As the mother of a child with special needs and the wife of a partner that has a heart condition, Jess started The Fairy Godmothers charity after noticing a need for greater awareness and support for those living with disabilities and illness on Tasmania’s North-West Coast. Working with a group of like-minded friends, The Fairy Godmothers have fundraised for an all-abilities playground at Somerset’s Anzac Park, developed a music class for special needs children and have helped many families organise and pay for medical-related travel.

HEROISM MEDAL

To recognise a member or members (professional or volunteer) of the SES, police, fire, ambulance, coastguard, defence forces, air rescue service who have gone beyond the call of duty to protect the community.

STEVE BARTELS

Steve has been a volunteer with the Grove Fire Brigade for more than 30 years and Brigade Chief for the past 10. During the Dunalley fires in 2013, he led his members through 700 hours of work to fight fires and save property and homes. During the Derwent Valley fires that same year, Steve and his brigade also fought to stop the flames spreading to neighbouring communities. He is also a volunteer on the Huon Show committee.

KELVIN JONES

Many locals believe Kelvin is the heart and soul of the East Coast town of Swansea. A volunteer for the State Emergency Service and the Tasmania Fire Service, Kelvin has helped the lives of many people over the years from car accidents to helicopter rescues. A father of two, Kelvin is also president of the Swansea Police and Community Youth Club.

BILL TIDDY

Bill will retire at the end of this year after 50 years of giving to the Tasmanian Fire Service and the West Coast community. Many lives have been saved over the years because of Bill’s service including recently when a service station caught fire and destroyed four businesses. Bill has spent thousands of hours away from his family attending to the needs of the brigade.

FAIR GO MEDAL

For an Australian permanent resident or citizen, born overseas, who has enriched Australia through their community involvement, hard work and willingness to embrace their new home.

WAQAS DURRANI

Believing that every individual has a story to tell, Waqas and other culturally and linguistically diverse Tasmanians visit schools to educate students as part of the Human Library project. Waqas has also been instrumental in the wider acceptance of Muslim students at the University of Tasmania and is founder of the university’s Pakistani Society. In his spare time Waqas acts as an interpreter for refugees and asylum seekers.

ANSUMANA KOROMA

Ansumana spent years living in refugee camps in Guinea and West Africa where he assisted the Red Cross. Since moving to Tasmania he has promoted understanding between African communities and residents. He is a founder member of the Sierra Leonean and Liberian Association. In 2014, Ansumana campaigned to raise $600,000 in support of the people of Sierra Leone during the Ebola outbreak.

AMELIA PERALES

Amelia’s strength and attitude comes from her childhood, when she remembers having to survive on one meal a day and didn’t even own a pair of shoes. Born in the Philippines, Amelia then lived in South Korea for six years before moving to Australia in 2012 with her family. She later fled to emergency accommodation in Tasmania. Amelia has since found work in this state and founded the Filipino Cultural Dance Group.

OUTSTANDING BRAVERY MEDAL

For an Australian, or group of Australians, who, through their act/s of bravery, helped save or attempted to save a life/lives.

JOSH NEHLS

The cool head of Josh, 19, saved the life of his stepmother Elke after an accident in which she was trapped under her runaway car and dragged for 10m on their Legana property. Josh and his father rushed to her aid and, removing her from under the car, began CPR. Elke was not breathing but Josh persisted with the CPR until paramedics arrived. Elke is now recovering thanks to Josh.

MICHAEL PAXTON

Surfer Michael was heading to the carpark and home from a morning surf when he heard a girl scream. He rushed back to Pirates Bay Beach at Eaglehawk Neck to see three children struggling in the water after they were caught in a rip. Michael dived in with his board and paddled about 50m out to the children and he was able to get all three to link arms and swim to safety with him.

JADD WALSH AND DAVE BARR

In July, Dave rushed to help his 92-year-old neighbour who had accidently reversed his car from his driveway into the river. As the car began to sink, and with the help of Jadd, the pair managed to open the driver’s door and release the elderly man’s seatbelt and remove him from the car before he was helped safely ashore.

Originally published as Heroes who inspire us all