Sioux Falls, SD

Last year was the summer of Van Eps Park, and for all the wrong reasons. The small park was causing big problems, which lead the city of Sioux Falls to ban alcohol at the park. Now after that decision the issues at Van Eps have dried up.

Empty tables are what most people see at Van Eps Park. Since October 3rd, alcohol is banned at the park located off Minnesota Avenue, as well as Tower Park.

Last summer it was a different story - the park was a hotspot for controversy. According to Sioux Falls Police records, there were 345 calls to Van Eps last year. So far this year, police have had just seven calls, and only one arrest.

"A little bit of what we were seeing before. There was some liquor problems, disorderly calls, intoxicated subjects but really nothing to the extreme we saw last year," Clemens said.

According to police, the most common call was disorderly subjects. There were also reports of assaults, stabbings, and narcotics violations. Officer Sam Clemens says a combination of issues at that park lead to problems police don't normally see.

"It wasn't just a little bit of drinking. People that were drinking were drinking excessive amounts so when that happens people can get upset by a small slight and that can lead to a fight," Clemens said.

Now Van Eps is a ghost town, but that doesn't mean the problem is gone.

Some Sioux Falls residents say the issue has move east from Van Eps Park here to Heritage Park.

Heritage Park is on the list of city parks where alcohol is banned, but its neighbors say the increase of police in the area is disheartening.

"We want to head over there but no I'm heading over to Whitter Park now instead. I just feel more safe," Wilma Barrett said.

According to police, calls to Heritage Park averaged between 10 to 15 over the past few years. This year, the calls have reached 61. Clemens isn't ready to say the issues are similar to what was happening at Van Eps last year. He says most of the calls aren't alcohol-related, just problems where officers are needed.

Clemens says that warmer weather leads to a lot more public drinking.

"In the summertime we see a lot more people that are drinking and a lot more people that are drinking alcohol outside. For the most part those people are doing it in places where they can. It may be their front porch. It may be some parks where alcohol is legal," Clemens said.

No matter what is bringing people there, neighbors says Heritage Park is a dangerous place right now.

"Parks should be a safe place where you can take your kids and be there as a family but at the same time you don't want to take your kids there and have them surrounded by all the cops and whatever else is going on over there," neighbor Desaray Schnoor said.

An issue that might have a new home this summer.

Featured Stories

Eye on KELOLAND {{Title}} Remove Change News General Courts Web Only Crime Outdoors Events Center Non-Homepage Boredom Busters Pipeline Positively KELOLAND Technology Hunger Affordable Care Act Shops Flooding Remembering 9/11 Drought JazzFest Spring Storm Honor Flight Spencer Anniversary

DoApp Health News Business News Sports

Agriculture Markets Livestock Crops Politics

HealthBeat Cancer Children's Health Heart Health Wellness & Nutrition General Health Beat Women's Health RX Resources What's Going Around OTC Diabetes Recalls Dental Health Men's Health

Politics South Dakota Legislature Budget Congress Taxes General Local Campaign President US Senate New Laws US House Iowa Ballot Issues Local Races Minnesota Gubernatorial

Education Funding College Elementary High School Pre K School Supplies Middle School

Sports Professional College High School Sports Zone Headlines Summit League Tournament Olympics

Business Industry Your Money Matters Development Gas & Energy Legislation Economy/Stocks Employment General Health Care Technology Education Funding Tourism Banking/Finance Housing Transportation Insurance Meetings & Events Retail & Restaurants All Industries On The Move Shops Agriculture

Featured Stories Eye on KELOLAND Inside KELOLAND

Weather Snow Forecast Records Rain Flooding Drought WX Corner General

World News

Investigates GEAR UP

Sponsored Done

© 2016 KELOLAND TV. All Rights Reserved.