BIRMINGHAM, Alabama - The comedy news show 'The Daily Show with Jon Stewart' took aim at an ad for Alabama District 6 Republican candidate Will Brooke on Thursday evening. Host Jon Stewart called the ad "bat[expletive]" because Brooke, a Harbert Management executive vice president, shoots various guns at a copy of the Affordable Care Act, commonly called Obamacare.

The Brooke ad, "Let's Do Some Damage," has drawn attention from many websites and news outlets, racked up more than 140,000 views, and even been parodied by late night host Chelsea Handler. But, as Stewart pointed out, the idea of shooting up a bill or a law in a political ad is hardly new.

During the Thursday night segment, Stewart shows several older ads featuring candidates shooting up bills or laws, before asking, "I wonder if we'll see any new bill-shooting ads that somehow out-bat[expletive] the previous ones?"

Tape of the Will Brooke ad immediately rolls. After Brooke is shown shooting a handgun at the law, Stewart mocks it.

"Oh, scary, a handgun?" Stewart says, waving his hands. "Come on, are you trying to kill Obamacare or give it a flesh wound?"

When Brooke pulls out a rifle, Stewart says, "I, uh, I didn't know you weren't done yet." When he pulls out another rifle, Stewart says "Holy [expletive], when did opposing healthcare reform become the Sonny death scene from 'The Godfather'?"

Brooke campaign spokesperson Mark McNulty took the ribbing as a sign of the ad's effectiveness.

"Anytime Jon Stewart hits a Republican, it can only mean that their message is pointed and effective," McNulty said when asked for comment Friday.

Brooke is one of seven Republican candidates vying to fill the seat that U.S. Rep. Spencer Bachus, R-Vestavia Hills, is vacating at the end of this term. The other Republican candidates are Scott Beason, Paul DeMarco, Chad Mathis, Gary Palmer, Robert Shattuck, and Tom Vigneulle. Avery Vise is running uncontested for the Democratic nomination.

The primary is Tuesday, June 3.

More info on the AL-06 race here.