The NASCAR Toyota/Save Mart 350 runs today starting at 3 P.M. Eastern Time at the Sonoma Raceway in California and you can watch the race online via live stream by following the link at the end of this article.

Sonoma is always a bit of a wild card on the NASCAR Sprint Cup series. As one of the two road races on the Sprint Cup circuit, it calls for a different set of skills and a different strategy than most NASCAR tracks. The NASCAR Toyota/Save Mart 350 promises to provide an exciting race this year.

Jamie McMurray is starting at the pole position for this year’s Toyota/Save Mart 350, beside A.J. Allmendinger in the two spot. Kyle Larson and Carl Edwards start behind them in the three and four spots, with Kurt Busch and Kevin Harvick rounding out the first three rows.

Other notables and their starting positions include points leader Jeff Gordon starting in the 15th position, Jimmie Johnson – Sprint Cup’s only three race winner this year and second in the points standings – in the 22nd position, fan favorite Dale Earnhardt Jr. in the 17th position and Danica Patrick in the 11th position.

Jeff Gordon has enjoyed considerable success at Sonoma in the past, leading all drivers with five wins (1998, 1999, 2000, 2004, 2006) at the NASCAR Toyota/Save Mart 350 (previously called by other names). The only other driver in the field with multiple wins at the Toyota/Save Mart 350 is Tony Stewart, with wins in 2001 and 2005. Stewart is starting in the 21st position at today’s Toyota/Save Mart 350. Other recent winners include Martin Truex Jr.(last year, starting in the 18th position this year), Clint Bowyer (2012, starting in the 25th position this year) and Kurt Busch.

Michael Waltrip Racing has won the Toyota/Save Mart 350 the past two years. This year, Waltrip Racing’s Brian Vickers starts in the eighth position, while teammate Clint Bowyer starts in the 25th position.

Pole setter Jamie McMurray is still looking for his first win of the 2014 Sprint Cup series. His best finish to date this year is fifth in the Coca-Cola 600. Allemdinger and Larson, racing from the two and three positions, are also going for their first checkered flag of the year at Sonoma today.

Don’t miss any of the action in today’s race from Sonoma. You can catch everything from “drivers start your engines” to the burn outs in the winner’s circle streaming online vie live. To watch the NASCAR Toyota/Save Mart 350, follow this link.

[Image via Shutterstock]