FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE

INDIANAPOLIS -- National Institutes of Health administrator Sally Rockey and Indianapolis Director of Public Safety Director Troy Riggs are among the featured speakers for the 2015 Indiana University-Purdue University Indianapolis Research Day. The open-house event runs from 9 a.m. to 3 p.m. Friday, April 17, in the IUPUI Campus Center, 420 University Blvd.

The annual IUPUI Research Day provides the greater Indianapolis community, as well as IUPUI faculty, staff and students, an opportunity to learn more about the on-going, cutting-edge and multifacted research and scholarly activities at IUPUI.

"Research Day has become an important part of our campus culture," Vice Chancellor for Research Kody Varahramyan said in a campus publication announcing this year's event. "It has become a great way for faculty, staff, students and their academic, industry and government partners, along with the broader community, to learn about the research enterprise at IUPUI, explore new collaborations and lay the foundation for new partnerships. This is truly an exciting time for research at IUPUI."

Rockey, NIH deputy director for extramural research, oversees the development and implementation of policies and guidelines for NIH-supported biomedical research. She will deliver the Research Day keynote address from 10:05 to 10:55 a.m. in Room 405.

Riggs will deliver one of four JagTalks -- short but dynamic presentations -- on research and creative activities from 11:10 a.m. to noon. Riggs will discuss "Homicide and Shooting Comparisons -- being more sophisticated in the way we understand data," a call for the use of data other than murder statistics to determine whether a neighborhood is safe.

Other JagTalks presenters and their topics are:

Eric R. Dannenmaier, professor of law, IU Robert H. Kinney School of Law, "Seeing Down River," a presentation on the complex and vital relationship between rivers and their human communities, and the managing of conflicting demands regarding rivers and their conservation.

Meredith Setser, assistant professor of printmaking, Herron School of Art and Design, "Terra Felted: The Art of Fabriculture," a discussion on the use of traditional and contemporary developments in printmaking and textile media, particularly the historical and social relevance of felt.

David Craig, associate professor of religious studies, "Making Health Care a Social Good: Obamacare and HIP 2.0," a snapshot of Craig's research on the ethics of health care reform based on interviews with subjects working for religious health care nonprofits.

Research Day activities also include poster sessions highlighting research of IUPUI staff, faculty and student researchers and the announcement of the 2015 Trailblazer Award winners.

The event is free and open to the general public. Registration is required and can be done online.