"I see this as a reflection of what has been happening in the rest of the economy for decades finally catching up to health care" - Dr. Harold Paz

Big-box retailers have proven bigger is better in terms of lowering prices.

That would seem to bode well for health care costs in the Harrisburg area, which is in the midst of a seismic shift toward big.



Unfortunately, studies have shown that medical care often becomes more expensive after hospitals merge. That has also been the case after hospitals absorb doctors’ offices and other medical services, as has happened on a large scale in the Harrisburg area.

“Interestingly enough, it rarely works … Usually the outcome is not as favorable as anticipated,” says David Sarcone, a Dickinson College professor and former health care administrator.



Sarcone’s view is shared by many experts. It's based on studies that followed a surge of hospital mergers around the country in the 1990s.

But the hospital industry and others argue this wave of consolidation will be different. It’s being driven by new forces, including Obamacare, also known as the Affordable Care Act. There’s a major push for better coordination of medical care, and for paying for quality and value. Hospitals that don’t deliver will be penalized.

Dr. Harold Paz, the CEO of Penn State Milton S. Hershey Medical Center, points out that health care has been highly fragmented compared to other industries. This has led to mistakes, duplication and inefficiencies. He believes integration and size can overcome those.



“I see this as a reflection of what has been happening in the rest of the economy for decades finally catching up to health care,” he says. “We are going to see more and more opportunities to partner with other organizations and I really believe that will have an impact on lowering the cost of health care.”

For now, only these are certain: The central Pennsylvania healthcare landscape is undergoing a seismic shift toward big. It’s not over. And, good or bad, it will affect just about everyone.

It began several years ago, when all of the area’s hospitals began positioning themselves to provide the full range of medical services — from the intensive care unit to the family doctor to the cancer center to the blood lab.

In 2013, it took on new magnitude. Each of the Harrisburg region’s five health systems took steps that could make them far bigger.

In June, Good Samaritan Health System in Lebanon announced it’s too small to stand alone in the new health care landscape and must find a larger partner.

Similarly, Holy Spirit Health System in September announced it has entered formal talks with giant Geisinger Health System, based in Montour County about 70 miles to the north.



Meanwhile, the Florida-based chain that owns Carlisle Regional Medical Center is being bought by a Tennessee-based chain in a transaction that will make Carlisle Regional part of the nation’s largest hospital chain.

Finally, the area’s two giants, PinnacleHealth System and Penn State Milton S. Hershey Medical Center, announced they are looking at collaborating more closely.



Some outside observers say that, given all the consolidation occurring around the country, it’s possible the two might become one. However, they also cite other logical possibilities for collaboration in which the two would remain separate.

Penn State Hershey’s Paz in a recent interview said no one knows the likely outcome. An independent consultant, he said, will spend several months studying both organizations and then make a recommendation. The outcome is expected to be known by June 30.

The hospital merger wave is happening all over the country. In 2012, there were 105 mergers, up from 50 in 2009. Experts expect the trend to accelerate.

It’s driven by a confluence of new and old forces.

One is Obamacare, which encourages better coordination of medical care and emphasizes prevention and keeping patients healthier.

There’s also a shift toward paying hospital systems to care for populations of patients rather than sick individuals. This is in contrast to the traditional method of paying for volume of things such as hospital admissions, doctor visits and MRIs.

The old, volume-based payment system provided little incentive for keeping patients out of the hospital. In fact, hospitals earned more when patients had to come back, even if it was the hospital's fault.

Now, Medicaid is penalizing hospitals for patients who are readmitted unnecessarily. Medicaid will eventually penalize hospitals for additional things, such as infections that strike hospitalized patients.



All the while, businesses have been shifting more health insurance costs to employees, causing them to cut back on things like elective surgeries and medical tests.

On top of that, there’s been a long-running push to keep people out of the hospital and care for them in less expensive settings. New technology makes this increasingly possible.

All of those things have caused hospital admissions, and profits, to decline.

Meanwhile, Obamacare is expected to enable millions more people to access the health care system. With the high level of government debt, and the lackluster economic outlook, the financial pressures on hospitals are expected to continue and probably intensify.

“The health systems realize the dollar is tight and they are going to have to operate differently,” says Mike Fiaschetti, president for health markets for health insurer Highmark Inc.

Becoming bigger can enable hospitals to better spread the new financial risks, impose quality controls, invest in technological improvements and gain economies of scale that can lower costs.

“If we have a fragmented system, the model doesn’t work,” says Penn State Hershey’s Paz, referring to the new payment model.

It sounds good in theory. But consolidation doesn’t have a good track record.





Assorted studies have looked at the wave of mergers during the 1990s, which saw nearly 200 mergers in 1997.

A widely cited study by the Robert Woods Johnson Foundation concluded costs typically rose by 20 percent or more after hospitals merged.

Even now, larger hospitals typically receive higher payments from health insurers, because of bargaining power and the fact that insurers can’t afford to exclude them from networks.

Stephen Foreman, an associate professor of health care administration at Robert Morris University, contends the new wave of mergers is driven mostly by the desire of hospitals to increase negotiating clout and gain larger reimbursements from insurers.

He also argues that size itself can become a negative for a health system.



“The thing I worry about most is something called dis-economies of scale. You get so large you become inefficient. These merged entities become very difficult to manage,” he says.

However, PinnacleHealth says it has proof that merger produces lower costs. A spokeswoman pointed to the 1995 merger of Harrisburg Hospital and the former Polyclinic Hospital. She said an independent economist concluded it produced $212 million in savings during the first five years. That was well in excess of the $70 million in savings needed to satisfy an agreement with a the Pennsylvania Attorney General, which approved the transaction.

She also said, “As to the question of decreased competition and increased bargaining power with insurers, we suggest that that question be directed to the insurance companies and ask them to compare rates paid in Harrisburg vs. other similar cities in Pennsylvania over the past 10 years.”

She’s right. Executives of health insurers including Highmark acknowledge the Harrisburg region market has long been more competitive than many other markets, including York and Lancaster, and costs have been lower.

On the other hand, Highmark also has publicly pointed at Geisinger, saying prices have risen after Geisinger acquired smaller hospitals in northcentral Pennsylvania.

Geisinger has hasn’t disputed this. But it has countered that it cares for the sickest patients, conducts research, trains doctors, and improves quality at acquired hospitals, which were struggling financially. As a result, Geisinger must negotiate “more reasonable payer contract rates, so reasonable operating costs and needed margin for reinvestment is achieved,” a Geisinger executive said.

The executive further said health insurers focus on lower per-unit costs, creating an incentive for hospitals to perform more procedures. He said Geisinger believes it's better to focus on removing excess care and costs that add no value, which he said account for 35 percent of present costs.

But Harrisburg area health insurance executives such as Fiaschetti say there’s great promise the new forces, and resulting consolidation, will bend the cost curve downward.

Their main fear is that the area will be become dominated by one player, and the lack of competition will have negative consequences.

Still, there’s general agreement that with Geisinger now in the picture, and the other Harrisburg-area systems all taking steps to gain size and integration-related efficiencies, the Harrisburg area might remain unusually competitive.

Paula Bussard, a senior vice president with the Hospital & Health System Association of Pennsylvania, doesn’t dismiss the studies that associate consolidation with higher costs.

But she argues the new forces give plenty of reason to expect that bigger will lead to better, more affordable medical care.

“Is the past always the prologue to the future? A lot of things are different now,” she says.