Kyrill Slavin watches the trains move around a Lego city on Sunday. Broomfield's Mamie Doud Eisenhower Public Library hosted the Youth in Model Railroading in the Children's Library over the weekend. ( Cliff Grassmick / Staff Photographer )

Multiple Lego trains were on display over the weekend at Broomfield's Mamie Doud Eisenhower Public Library, showcasing the work of the local Youth in Model Railroading club.

Club members brought their creations to add to the layout and took turns keeping the trains running and talking to visitors.

"I really like trains and Legos," said club member Adrian Nagle, who's 13 and lives in Northglenn. I like building and running the trains. Sometimes, you get a big crash, and it's like how does that happen."

His contributions included a Lego plane, a truck he modified from a set and a locomotive he built from scratch.

Along with more traditional trains, the club also brought a black "ghost" train decked out with bones and other ghoulish embellishments and a military-themed train. All are run on metal tracks and powered by nine volt motors.

To go with the trains, there was a Lego city complete with minifigure trick-or-treaters and a car crash, an amusement park with rides and a haunted house and graveyard with a pop-up skeleton. Moving parts, created with gears, included a spinning jack-o-lantern, a ferris wheel and a flying witch.

Sandra Hein, who coordinates the Lego group for the club, said shows teach kids about public speaking and give them a chance to be the experts.

"They learn how to talk to people and can show off what they've done," she said.

Advertisement

The club also gives its members opportunities work with various non-Lego model trains, from designing layouts to building to-scale dioramas. But the Lego trains, Hein said, are "pure kids toys."

"They're bright, they're colorful," she said. "You can take them apart and put them back together."

Her son, 16-year-old Boulder High student Brandy Hein, said he likes to volunteer at shows because he can show people what's he's built. He's currently working on a train station for Disney's Magic Kingdom.

"It's pretty cool to get all the oohs and aahs," he said.

Sunday, library visitors stopped in to check out the display, with several parents asking for more information about the club and about buying Lego train kits of their own.

Payton Lindeman, a Broomfield 10-year-old, said the display combined his two loves, trains and Legos. At home, he has a Lionel train set and builds layouts on a pool table in his basement.

"I've always loved stuff that moves," he said. "This train show is amazing. It's what I dream of having in my basement."

Amy Bounds: 303-473-1341, boundsa@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/boundsa