By Andy Hoffman, The Hawk Eye, Burlington, Iowa McClatchy-Tribune Information Services

April 12 -- Des Moines County Attorney Patrick Jackson is taking an indefinite, paid medical leave of absence.

Amy Beavers , an assistant county attorney, has been selected to act as county attorney while Jackson remains on medical leave.

Details surrounding Jackson's decision are not being revealed by county officials, who cite the federal Health Insurance Portability Act as their reason for not providing details concerning his leave.

Jackson answered his cell phone Friday morning, but when a reporter from The Hawk Eye identified himself, Jackson hung up without commenting. Additional messages left on his answering machine seeking comment about his health and decision to take a leave of absence were not returned.

However, Carol Copeland , Des Moines County auditor, confirmed Jackson's doctor had submitted a letter to her office confirming the county attorney's intention to take a medical leave.

"The letter says he is going to be under the doctor's care for an undetermined amount of time," Copeland said. "The doctor said in the letter Pat will be on medical leave until further notice."

Jackson had announced his decision to retire as county attorney a few months ago following 18 years as the chief law enforcement officer in the county.

Although Ty Rogers is the senior assistant in the county attorney's office, Beavers will oversee the day-to-day operations in Jackson's absence. Beavers is running for county attorney as a Democrat against Trent Henkelvig , a Danville attorney who is running on the Republican ticket.

Rogers said the decision was made earlier this week concerning who will run the office in Jackson's absence. He did not say if Jackson had input into that decision. After Jackson announced his retirement at the end of this term, it was speculated Rogers would run for the office. After he decided against it, Jackson then encouraged Beavers to run for the office, and she agreed.

"Yes, Pat is taking an indefinite leave of absence," Rogers confirmed Friday. "I will remain as the first assistant, and Amy is going to act as the acting county attorney at this time."

Beavers said she will ensure the office continues to operate smoothly, even though Jennifer Bailey , a seven-year prosecutor in the office, announced Friday she is taking a new job with the Iowa Public Defender's Office in Burlington .

According to Beavers, Jackson can remain on paid leave for two months before the Des Moines County Board of Supervisors steps in.

"I don't know how long Pat will be gone," she said. "After 60 days, it's up to the board of supervisors to decide his office is vacant. At that point, they can appoint someone to fill his term."

Beavers said she believes the office will continue to operate smoothly in Jackson's absence.

"We are going to move forward to meeting our statutory duties," she said. "I'm going to take on additional duties during Pat's absence to make the office run more efficiently."

Henkelvig said he was surprised by Jackson's decision.

"I pray for Pat's health," he said. "I don't know what is wrong with him, but hopefully, everything will turn out all right for him. I am surprised he picked Amy over Ty, but that's his decision to choose who he wants to run the office in his place. And in November, it will be the voters' choice to decide who they want to be county attorney."

___

(c)2014 The Hawk Eye (Burlington, Iowa)

Visit The Hawk Eye (Burlington, Iowa) at www.thehawkeye.com

Distributed by MCT Information Services

Wordcount: 576

[jetpack-related-posts]