The Eye

'Basketball Wives' LA Season 4 Reunion: Shaunie Says Brandi 'Follows Malaysia Too Much' [POLL]

SIGN UP TO RECEIVE THE LATEST NEWS FROM FASHION&STYLE

(Photo : Facebook/Basketball Wives LA) "Basketball Wives LA" cast mates reveal their true feelings about Brandi Maxiell. Is she boring? [VOTE]

All throughout season four of "Basketball Wives LA" season four Brandi Maxiell was constantly bashed for agreeing with everything her bestie Malaysia Pargo said and did, and she was often crucified for her seemingly boring storyline by her cast mates.



Despite suffering from her NBA star husband Jason Maxiell's recent infidelity while crusading for cancer awareness, Brandi also had to put up with her new cast mates Shaunie O'Neal and Tami Roman's constant condescending demeanor. On top of all that, she had a huge falling out with former friend Draya Michele, who first implied that Brandi was a snoozefest after claiming that her cancer-focused storyline was boring.



We definitely don't think there's anything boring about cancer, and with all the drama going on in Brandi's life as of late we're not too sure how anyone could think that there was anything lackluster about her story.



But do her BBWLA cast mates agree with Draya?



In a newly released behind-the-scenes clip of the season four reunion, the ladies give dished their thoughts about the sophomore reality star. Although her gal pal Malaysia said that "Brandi is definitely the turn up," her other cast mates had fairly different opinions.



"I think in the contents of the show since Brandi has been on it, she has talked about cancer. And I think Draya was basically trying to say -- not as eloquently as she could have -- what else do you have going on," Tami explained. "So is she boring? She may be. Cancer is not.



As for executive producer Shaunie, who Brandi had a huge argument with during the season finale, she doesn't think Brandi's boring but says she needs to do a bit more self discovery.



"I just think Brandi has to find Brandi. She tends to kind of feed off of Malaysia all the time. How Malaysia feels. What Malaysia says. Where Malaysia goes," Shaunie said.



Shaunie isn't the only one who thinks Brandi's conforms to Malaysia's ideas too much. Jackie Christie, who admitted that "Brandi never was an interesting person at first to me," also agreed that Brandi struggles to do her own thing.



"I think that she follows Malaysia a little bit too much, so that's interesting to me 'cause I'm a leader," Jackie said.



We think Brandi's definitely been coming out of her shell a whole lot more than when she first joined the show back on season three.



Do you think Brandi follows Malaysia too much? Is it because she really is boring? Tell us your thoughts by voting in the poll below!



Check out what the BBWLA cast had to say about Brandi in the behind-the-scenes clip HERE.



Don't miss the "Basketball Wives LA" season four reunion on Sunday at 8 p.m. on VH1.



SIGN UP TO RECEIVE THE LATEST NEWS FROM FASHION&STYLE

© 2015 Fashion & Style.com All rights reserved. Do not reproduce without permission.