Editorial

The recent passage of H.R. 2, the Medicare Access and CHIP Reauthorization Act of 2015, gives the health care community much to celebrate. Children’s advocates in particular are very pleased that funding for the Children’s Health Insurance Program was reauthorized for 2 years, through September 2017.

The program remains intact and unchanged from current law, including the increase in federal matching funds to the states included in the Affordable Care Act. Particularly astounding was the overwhelming bipartisan support for H.R. 2, which garnered a vote of 392-37 in the House and 92-8 in the Senate.

Since its inception in 1997, the Children’s Health Insurance Program (CHIP) has provided comprehensive, low-cost health insurance to children in low-income families that earn too much to qualify for Medicaid. Each state has the flexibility to design its own program, working closely with the state Medicaid program. Together, Medicaid and CHIP have been successful in reducing the rate of uninsurance among low-income children from 25% in 1997 to slightly more than 7% in 2014. The recent reauthorization provides needed financial certainty to states as they finalize their budgets, and it ensures stability in coverage for children currently covered by CHIP.

Laura Searcy

However, there is still much uncertainty about the long-term prospects for the continuation of CHIP in its current form. The options that will be available to provide access and care to America’s children in the future are likely to change due to a variety of dynamics at play in a rapidly evolving health care system.

Current eligibility criteria for CHIP vary from state to state, ranging from family income levels of 175% of the federal poverty level to greater than 300%. According to the Kaiser Commission on Medicaid and the Uninsured, Medicaid and CHIP serve more than 45 million children, or more than 33% of American children. Some interpret this dependence on Medicaid and CHIP as a reflection of the burden of poverty on American families, while others question whether CHIP is becoming an entitlement program for middle-class families at great cost to taxpayers.

There still is no solution to the “kid glitch” that resulted from a ruling that an employee is able to qualify for subsidized coverage through the state and federal insurance marketplaces if the employer-provided insurance plan’s premium exceeds 9.5% of the employee’s income. But this 9.5% limit applies only to the cost of individual coverage, not higher cost-dependent coverage. The kid glitch locks out about 500,000 children and their families from eligibility for subsidized marketplace plans, leaving many families struggling to find affordable coverage that provides the benefits that their children need. Federal law must be modified to address this issue.

Despite the outcome of the King v. Burwell Supreme Court Case, which upheld the legality of both state and federally administered insurance marketplaces, a great deal of uncertainty remains about their future structure. Currently, private insurers do not offer products that are a feasible alternative to CHIP. A recent Government Accountability Office report compared CHIP plans and private qualified health plans in a number of states. They found that the private plans had less coverage for services such as dental, vision and transportation, more caps on days, visits or dollars for covered services and always higher deductibles, copays and total out-of-pocket costs than CHIP coverage.

Having insurance coverage — whether private, Medicaid or CHIP — does not in and of itself guarantee access to appropriate care. Provider network adequacy for children is of great concern to the pediatric community. The current trend in the insurance marketplace is to utilize limited-provider networks as a cost-containment measure. Access to children’s hospitals and primary and subspecialty providers has become restricted or nonexistent in some geographic areas. Seattle Children’s Hospital’s lawsuit over its lack of inclusion in many networks in Washington state, for example, reflects the gravity of this issue.

All children, especially those with complex and chronic health care needs, deserve access to the full range of pediatric-trained providers of primary, acute and specialty care and the facilities where these providers work. In addition, payments to providers need to be sufficient to enable them to care for children with either public or private coverage.

Finally, the issue of quality has to be addressed. The development and utilization of pediatric-specific quality measures has lagged behind the development of adult-quality measures. Greater capacity is needed to be able to measure and compare quality and outcomes for children whether they are insured by private or public plans.

While we celebrate the reauthorization of the Children’s Health Insurance Program, let us not forget that 2 years is a relatively short time to address the complex issues that affect children’s access to insurance coverage and high-quality, cost-effective care. Consumers, providers, institutions and payers need to work together during this time of rapid change in our health care delivery system. We, as pediatric health care professionals, were trained to understand that children cannot be treated as little adults. We all need to be engaged to ensure the continued availability of affordable coverage specifically designed to provide the benefits and services that all of our nation’s children need to grow and thrive.

For more information:

Laura Searcy, MN, APRN, PPCNP-BC, is a pediatric nurse practitioner and chair of the Health Policy Committee of the National Association of Pediatric Nurse Practitioners.

Disclosure: Searcy reports no relevant financial disclosures.