Editor,

On March 23, a man who is running for president tells his story. His father flees Cuba at age 18 for America and washes dishes for 50 cents an hour as a Cuban immigrant. His mother came from a working-class, Irish Catholic family where her mother was the second youngest of 17 children. She became the first in her family to attend college.

From this unlikely yet typically American union their son was born. Liberal Harvard professor Alan Dershowitz calls him, “Without a doubt ... among the smartest students I’ve ever had ....” He worked two jobs, graduated from Harvard Law School, and repaid $100,000 in student loans. He argued 43 cases before the U.S. Supreme Court. His wife, raised by African missionaries in Kenya and Nigeria, returns to America, starts a small business baking bread, and later becomes a Goldman Sachs managing director.

He asks Americans what life would be like without Barack Obama’s polcies. “Imagine,” he says, “... instead of economic stagnation, booming economic growth ... Imagine young people coming out of school with four, five, six job offers... Imagine ... a president ... repealing every word of Obamacare ... Imagine abolishing the IRS ... Imagine a president that finally, finally secures the borders ... Imagine repealing every word of Common Core ... Imagine embracing school choice ... Imagine a president who stands unapologetically with ... Israel ... Imagine a president saying ‘We will stand up and defeat radical Islamic terrorism.’” Imagine.

He says what separates America from the world, is “... our rights don’t come from man, they come from God Almighty.” The Declaration of Independence states “all Men ... are endowed by their Creator with certain unalienable rights ...” America was founded on Godly principles. John Adams, our second president, said, “The general principles on which the fathers achieved independence were the general principles of Christianity.” Yet our government and judiciary have done everything to extinguish God. God has not left America; America has left God.

And, just six years into Obama’s “transformation of America” chaos reigns, here and abroad, with the greatest levels of worldwide Christian genocide and terrorism in 1,000 years. America is now mostly governed by un-Godly principles. Yet the man running for president, Republican Sen. Ted Cruz, proclaims, “God’s blessing has been on America from the very beginning of this nation, and I believe God isn’t done with America yet.” Let’s hope Ted Cruz is right. Let’s hope America chooses Ted Cruz.

Bill Skuba,

Drums