Move-in day, cardboard dogs and YOU magazine in this week's editorial roundup.

Buy Photo First-year University of Wisconsin-Stevens Point student Dennis Larson of Loyal gets a hand from his father, Don Larson, on move-in day Thursday. (Photo: Joe Tamborello/Stevens Point Journal Media )Buy Photo

Welcome back, students! We know this means we need to admit that summer is really over — not that it's felt a whole lot like summer around here lately — but we are still always glad for move-in day at the University of Wisconsin-Stevens Point.

Well, maybe not for the day, when things tend to get a bit congested around the campus. But certainly for the return of Stevens Point's student population, and for the thousands of families who entrust their children's education to our city's university.

Anyone who went away to college can remember the bittersweet emotions of move-in day; and more than a few parents here on Thursday fought back tears when confronted with the fact that their kids had become young adults. So it is every year — and every year it's touching.

Story: UWSP welcomes students to tobacco-free campus

Story: Locals offer advice to UWSP freshmen

Stevens Point Journal Media captured some great images of students and families moving in; we talked with those who are returning and those just starting college; and we heard from residents about their tips and advice for grads. Move-in day is a big day for a lot of people, and a big day for Stevens Point.

A new goose problem

Buy Photo The cardboard dogs set up in Pfiffner Pioneer Park in Stevens Point are intended to deter geese away from the grass, but these ducks did not mind approaching them. (Photo: Sari Lesk/Stevens Point Journal Media)

It seemed like a foolproof plan.

Pfiffner Pioneer Park had a goose problem. Geese don't like dogs. The city decided to fashion dog cutouts whose silhouettes would guard the park. The geese, not known as the keenest observers in the animal kingdom, would see the dog cutouts, mistake them for real dogs and proceed to do their business elsewhere. Pfiffner Park would be safe again for humans and for animals not prone to be scared off by cardboard cutouts.

The plan came crashing down, unfortunately, when some scofflaw, presumed to be human but possibly in league with goose elements, absconded with the silhouettes.

Story:Police on hunt for hot dogs

This is a problem, but we at Stevens Point Journal Media believe we have the solution. The city should create a cardboard cutout of a police officer, which it can perch next to the dogs. Anyone who would want to steal a dog-cutout will see the police-cutout and fear they'll be arrested, and the park will once again be safe for all.

Have you seen YOU?

Our latest YOU magazine is available both in print and online. The free publication is aimed at women of all ages in the Wood County area. The magazine is tailored to both the Marshfield and Wisconsin Rapids areas with stories featuring women from each community.

Our latest YOU magazine is available both in print and online. The free publication is aimed at women of all ages in the Portage County area, and we've tailored the content for people like, well, you. We think you'll enjoy some of the tips, stories and the women we've interviewed.

You Magazine Fall (Photo: You Magazine Fall)

If you've never picked up a copy of YOU, look for it at local businesses. Or, log on to stevenspointjournal.com/ic/issuu/you.shtml to read the issue online. We have recommendations for fall fun in Portage County and a profile of an awesome local athletic trainer, Traci Smet. You hope you enjoy this fall's new issue, and the magazine's makeover.

Read YOU magazine: YOU magazine Fall 2014

Read or Share this story: http://spjour.nl/1tU5JWq