Topics: Ben Strauss, College Sports, Editor's Picks, Indentured, Joe Nocera, NCAA, NCAA Tournament, O'Bannon case, Sports, Business News, Life News

On Saturday evening, the University of North Carolina and Syracuse University will face off in the Final Four of the NCAA Men’s Basketball Tournament in front of tens of thousands of fans at NRG Stadium in Houston, Texas. The game will be televised on TBS, which along with CBS signed a 14-year, $10.8 billion contract with the NCAA for the rights to the tournament in 2010. The Atlantic Coast Conference, to which both schools belong, will earn a record $40 million from the tournament. Syracuse coach Jim Boeheim and North Carolina coach Roy Williams each reportedly earn about $2 million annually. Aside from scholarships, none of the players on either team will receive financial compensation.

Both Syracuse and North Carolina are emerging from NCAA compliance scandals. A 2015 NCAA investigation of the Syracuse men’s basketball program revealed “academic misconduct, extra benefits, the failure to follow its drug testing policy and impermissible booster activity.” The university voluntarily sat out last year’s tournament in an effort to avoid harsher NCAA sanctions; Boeheim was suspended for nine games earlier this season. North Carolina is awaiting the announcement of NCAA sanctions — which, conveniently, has been delayed until after the lucrative tournament — stemming from a decades-long pattern of academic fraud involving a “shadow curriculum” of fake classes taken by student-athletes.

The injustice, corruption and exploitation at the heart of college athletics are dissected in the new book “Indentured: The Inside Story of the Rebellion Against the NCAA,” by New York Times columnist Joe Nocera and New York Times contributing writer Ben Strauss. “Indentured” explores the history of big money in college athletics and the ongoing fight to reform the NCAA, an organization that Nocera and Strauss believe acts against the interests of the very student-athletes it sanctimoniously claims to protect.

Joe Nocera joined Salon for a conversation about “Indentured” and the state of college sports:

Do you see Saturday’s Final Four game between Syracuse and the University of North Carolina as an embodiment of some of the larger problems in college sports?

What it embodies is the extent to which the bargain between the university and the student is a corrupt bargain for the student. Because in both cases, but especially the UNC case, at the heart of it was what they call academic fraud. Basically, the athletes at UNC were not getting a legitimate education. They were taking these fake classes to stay eligible — they were majoring in eligibility. At Syracuse, for all the time they spent investigating, ultimately the main bad thing that happened was that an academic counselor took a test for Fab Melo, which is also a form of academic fraud. They embody the way the system deprives athletes — especially football and men’s basketball players — of the education that they’re promised.

Has the NCAA’s handling of the punishments relating to these cases exposed its underlying profit motive?

Well, of course. Take the example down in Louisville, where they self-imposed a penalty to try and lighten the load. Or at Ohio State, where they basically said players got impermissible benefits, but they weren’t going to get penalized until the following season because they had to play in the Sugar Bowl where there was a lot of money at stake. UNC is sort of the same thing. It’s hard to believe that the NCAA doesn’t already know what it’s going to do, what the problem is, but here we are in the Final Four, and everybody’s going to try to ignore it until they get through it and all they money is made. The ACC is getting somewhere around $40 million because of their success in this tournament.

Why do you think indentured servitude is an apt metaphor for the current state of college sports?

Indentured servants were people who basically worked for someone else for years, for no money, with restrictions on their movement and a limited ability to leave until a prearranged point. They were indentured to these other people, and college athletes are in many ways indentured. They have limited movement, they are deprived of many rights that every other American and every other student on campus has, and basically, they’re in a system where everyone is getting rich off their labors and they get nothing of monetary value whatsoever. In fact, the NCAA is setting limits on their compensation, which you would think would be against the law.

And it’s also restricting athletes’ ability to profit from the use of their own image, which is maybe even more egregious.

They don’t have the right to use their name, image and likeness; they don’t have the right to endorse; they don’t have the right to get money from their autograph. In high school, if their mother takes money to go on a recruiting trip with them, that’s a violation — they don’t have the right to do that. The NCAA’s definition of amateurism is really quite all-encompassing and incredibly onerous.

The NCAA holds up amateurism as the be-all and end-all in college athletics. Does that idea hold up under scrutiny?

They say a couple of things. First, they say, “They can’t be paid because they’re students.” And then they say, “Well, they’re students, so they can’t be paid.” The truth is that any other student on campus can be paid. And, in fact, they can be paid by the university and they’re still students. So that’s really a pretty bogus rationale.

The other rationale they have is that amateurism is kind of the special sauce of college sports. If you took amateurism away and you started to pay the players, you would wreck what was special about college sports. The fans would be turned off, the alumni would be turned off, the student body would be turned off, and they would lose what makes it special. I don’t believe that’s true. I think what’s true is that they want to have some knowledge that the players are actually students at the university. Although in cases like the University of Kentucky men’s basketball team, you sort of have to wonder if even that is something people care about, given that most of those players just spend one semester in school and then basically don’t go to class for the second semester and then go pro.

A classic defense that you hear from supporters of the NCAA is that the scholarship athletes are getting a free education and thus don’t deserve additional compensation. How do you respond to that line of thinking?

I think it’s off-base for two reasons. The first is that athletes should have rights. Part of those rights are economic rights. They should get what their value is. Most of them won’t go pro. They have this tiny window to make some money on their athletic ability and they’re deprived of that.

So you could say, “OK, they’re getting a scholarship that’s going to be worth a couple hundred thousand dollars, and more importantly, they’re going to get an education.” But the truth is that when you’re a college athlete — especially if you’re a football or men’s basketball player — you are on the campus to generate revenue for the university. That’s your job, and that comes before academics every time. You don’t get to pick the majors that you want, you don’t get to pick the classes that you want, you miss tons of classes because you’re traveling. That’s what you’re there for. So the idea that they’re supposed to be satisfied with an education, which is basically substandard at best, is kind of a fraudulent argument.

One of the things that I’m arguing, aside from all the pay stuff, is that there should be lifetime scholarships. Athletes should not have to take a full course load. They should be able to get by with one or two classes a semester and then finish their education when their eligibility is done. I think it would be harder for people like me to argue that they were getting a substandard education if they had lifetime scholarships and if they had the ability to go back to school and get that education after their playing days were over.

Why has this conversation only become mainstream in the last five years or so? I suspect the explanation goes beyond simply the attention the issue has received because of the O’Bannon case and coverage like your 2011 piece in the New York Times Magazine and the 2011 cover story in The Atlantic.

Jay Bilas, who is a huge advocate for paying the players, told me that when he was a college athlete he thought a lot about things players were deprived of, like health care and so on. But he didn’t really think about money, because his coach, Mike Krzyzewski, only made $100,000. Today, Mike Krzyzewski makes $10 million.

College sports has gone from a business that was hundreds of millions of dollars to being a business that’s literally billions of dollars. It’s a giant entertainment industry. I think one of the reasons people have latched onto this, why more sports writers and columnists are writing about it, why the average fan is thinking about it, is just because college sports is so saturated in money.

It’s also because everything else about college sports is so blatantly commercialized. You have the NCAA sponsors, the bowl games all have corporate names, the players wear logos for Nike and other corporations. So to have all of that and to say, “Well, the players shouldn’t get any of this,” is so blatantly hypocritical that more and more people are looking up from the game itself and saying, “Gee, there’s something really screwy with this system.”