Follow @ayetalian



You’ve undoubtedly heard the news that Death and Taxes has (unofficially) become a piss blog. We conducted our own unscientific poll about drinking that golden goodness with your favorite presidential candidate, and now here I am writing about Hillary Clinton’s bladder on account of her delayed return to the Democratic debate stage on Saturday.

Now, apparently, a reason has been given for Clinton’s brief disappearance. The Boston Globe reports that the former secretary was stuck waiting on a caffeine-addled Martin O’Malley staffer to rid her body of coffee and thus made her late to the stage:

What viewers didn’t know was the sole women’s bathroom was a little further than the men’s room from the stage. And when the debate went to a long commercial break Clinton lost out to Lis Smith, the caffeine-guzzling deputy campaign manager for former Maryland Governor Martin O’Malley, who beat her to the restroom. Smith declined to comment for the story. A top Clinton staffer who was strategically posted outside the bathroom (presumably to avoid these kinds of situations) gave Smith a verbal OK to make a quick pit stop, according to one person familiar with the ladies’ line.

It should be noted, however, that the ladies bathroom did have multiple stalls and that a Clinton spokesperson said there was no security issue concerns related to a potential group piss event during a commercial break.

Previously, Clinton had some urinary tact issues during the first Democratic debate in October and told Anderson Cooper that “it does take me a little longer, and that’s all I’ll say.” Girl. Either this is a brilliant strategy to shift the focus back to the former Obama cabinet member or Clinton should seriously consider just wearing a diaper.

Other politicians have undoubtedly gone the diaper route and not just David Vitter in his off time. Ted Cruz must’ve been working with a fat stack of Depends during his infamous bullshit Obamacare filibuster where he read Green Eggs and Ham and ruined even more of what America holds dear.

If the next debate isn’t sponsored by either an adult diaper or an overactive bladder medication, I’ll know this country has truly failed. Don’t let us down, Hillz.

[Boston Globe | NYDN | YouTube mirror via YouGotNews]