Buy Photo The Asbury Park and Neptune NAACP chapter holds its annual Community Block Party in honor of Tamara Wilson-Seidle who was killed June 16 in Asbury Park. Normandy Beach, NJ Saturday, August 15, 2015 @dhoodhood (Photo: Doug Hood/Staff Photographer)Buy Photo

NEPTUNE – You name it, and Tamara Wilson-Seidle was involved in it.

Her nine children’s lives. Her church. Her community. Coaching her soccer team.

“She was like an angel on Earth,” said Adrienne Sanders, president of the Asbury Park-Neptune NAACP, which honored Wilson-Seidle Saturday at its annual Community Pride Block Party.

Friends said they were devastated when Wilson-Seidle — whose beautiful smile could only be topped by her personality — was shot and killed on June 16 by her ex-husband, Neptune police Sgt. Philip Seidle.

The local NAACP hosts the community block party every year as a way to give back to the community, Sanders said. The event provides a free, fun event for the community while also supporting local businesses who attended as vendors, including Meridian, the Visiting Nurses Association and the Asbury Park Press.

Sanders, who grew up on the same street a block away as Wilson-Seidle, said the local chapter decided to honor Wilson-Seidle because she was so giving to everyone around her.

“We are just really making it well known the heart and passion that Tami had,” Sanders said. “Anyone who knew her knew she was a kind and giving person.”

Sanders said it also draws attention to domestic violence and what the community can do to help prevent it.

Wilson-Seidle’s oldest daughter Kirsten Seidle thanked the community for all of the support they’ve given the family over the past two months.

Doreen Bagner, of Patterson said she intends to honor Wilson-Seidle, her friend since childhood, by helping other women escape domestic violence.

“I can’t rest until we find answers,” she said. “My goal in life is to build more places where women can reach out for help.”

Read or Share this story: http://on.app.com/1Nxorw3