Medical students and candidates in other health disciplines at Thomas Jefferson University in Philadelphia meet in teams with a health mentor to get experience working together.

Early immersion in patient-centered care, in which doctors consider life circumstances and personal preferences along with symptoms and vital signs, is just one of the trends changing the face of medical education these days.

Calls for reform have been issued loud and clear given the monumental shifts taking place in medicine, by groups from the Institute of Medicine to the Carnegie Foundation.

And medical schools are responding with innovations at a rapid pace, as well as aiming to admit a more diverse set of students armed with both people skills and smarts.

"The next generation is going to transform the practice of medicine. They need the tools and skills to do it right," says Sherine Gabriel, dean of the Mayo Medical School at the Rochester, Minnesota-based Mayo Clinic.

Here are some of the most significant emerging trends.

[Learn about three top reasons medical school applications are rejected.]

1. Face time from the start: Traditionally, the first two years of med school have been spent in the classroom studying basic medical science. But "people learn much better if they learn a body of knowledge in the context in which it’s going to be used," says Bonnie Miller, senior associate dean for health sciences education at Vanderbilt University School of Medicine.

So first-year Vanderbilt students are "part of the care team," she says, conducting interviews with patients in clinics and helping them understand any new drug prescriptions. Second-year students engage in the transition from hospital to home, helping with discharge arrangements and in some cases following up with house calls.

Through such programs, trainees see how putting the focus on the patient prevents costly readmissions and leads to better health outcomes.

2. Training in multidisciplinary teams: Putting that early training into real-world settings also gives doctors-to-be experience working with other health professionals, a taste of the high-powered team medicine they are expected to practice.

"In every other industry – business, aviation, whatever – in order to be more efficient and get good outcomes, you need to take a team approach," says Stephen Klasko, president and CEO of Thomas Jefferson University and Jefferson Health System in Philadelphia. "The only way for that to happen in medicine is to start from the beginning, in school."

Medical students at Jefferson, with students of nursing, pharmacy, physical therapy and other health professions, are assigned to a "health mentor," a patient in the community. The team meets with the person periodically to take histories and create wellness plans. They aren't delivering care per se, but might focus on fixing a safety hazard in a mentor's home or check for drug interactions, all while beginning to understand what the other experts bring to the table.

At other schools, groups from different disciplines use training exercises to learn how to interact effectively. New York University, for example, pairs medical and nursing students to provide care for “virtual” patients with conditions ranging from hip fractures to chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, using electronic health records and email to communicate.

[Get a peek into the evolution of medical school education.]

3. Developing a sense of social mission: More medical colleges are creating opportunities to help their communities, particularly underserved populations. The strategy: to let students see the health consequences of social and economic inequality, an urgent concern among public health experts.

The University of North Texas Health Science Center in Fort Worth dispatches students with doctors, nurses and social workers to disadvantaged neighborhoods in a new mobile pediatric unit to administer screenings and vaccines.

In tiny Eastland, Texas, meanwhile, fourth-year UNT student William Griffin, 28, is completing a rotation in a Rural Osteopathic Medical Education program that has also included stints in several other towns since his first year. "I’m in a unique position to see the whole spectrum of health care," says Griffin, who has helped deliver babies and scrubbed in for surgeries.