The Daughters of the American Revolution Good Citizen winners were honored at a patriotic reception Feb. 8. From left are Avalon Stutzman (Sterling High School), Mya Briseno (Prairie High School), Megan Pierce (Caliche High School) with the Good Citizen Chairman, Linda Griess. Not pictured are Kix Conger (Merino High School), Corbin Heller (Peetz High School), and Maria Fraire (Julesburg High School). (Courtesy photo)

The Elbridge Gerry Chapter of the National Society of the Daughters of the American Revolution honored winners from two essay contests at a reception at the Sterling Public Library on Saturday, Feb. 8. Area students competed in an American History essay contest for fifth through eighth grade, and the Good Citizen essay contest for high school seniors.

For the American History contest, students are eligible to submit essays through their school. They are sent to the Elbridge Gerry chapter and judged by non-DAR member judges. One student is selected from each grade level for the chapter winners. These essays are submitted to Colorado State DAR for state level judging. They are judged on historical accuracy, originality, adherence to topic, organization of material, interest, spelling, grammar, punctuation and neatness.

The American History Daughters of the American Revolution essays winners were honored at a patriotic reception. From left: William Clowdis, Kenton Bogan, Sarah-Kate Splichal, and American History chairman Loretta Maxwell. (Courtesy photo / Sterling Journal-Advocate)

The title of the essay this year was: "The Lives of Children During the American Revolution." Each winner presented their essay at the reception and received a certificate, a small U.S. flag, an American History medal and a monetary award.

Winners of the American History contest were William Clowdis, an eighth grader at Peetz School; Kenton Bogan, sixth grade winner from Julesburg School; and Sarah-Kate Splichal, seventh grade winner from Peetz School.

Advertisement

In the Good Citizen contest, senior students selected by their school write an essay on a specific topic chosen by DAR. The DAR Good Citizens program encourages and rewards the qualities of good citizenship among high school seniors: dependability, service, leadership, and patriotism. The student selected is given two hours to write their essay on the chosen topic; it is then submitted to the Elbridge Gerry Chapter. The essays submitted are judged by non-DAR members and one is then sent to the Colorado State DAR for judging at the state level.

This year's student that was selected to have her essay sent to state was Megan Pierce from Caliche High School.

Each student attending presented their essay at the reception. The title was "Our American Heritage and Our Responsibility for Preserving It," answering the theme question: "How does one's heritage affect one's duties to our nation?" Each winner received a certificate, a membership card, a small U.S. flag, a Good Citizen pin and monetary award.