Nurse practitioners ask state about role in Obamacare































Photo: Skip Dickstein Image 1 of / 9 Caption Close Image 1 of 9 Donna Frescatore, assistant deputy secretary for Health and deputy director for Health Care Redesign in the Cuomo administration, speaks to members of the Nurse Practitioner Association of NYS Friday morning, Oct. 25, 2013, at the Saratoga City Center in Saratoga Springs, N.Y. With Frescatore is Stephen Ferrara, president of the Nurse Practitioner Association of NYS. (Skip Dickstein / Times Union) less Donna Frescatore, assistant deputy secretary for Health and deputy director for Health Care Redesign in the Cuomo administration, speaks to members of the Nurse Practitioner Association of NYS Friday morning, ... more Photo: Skip Dickstein Image 2 of 9 Donna Frescatore, assistant deputy secretary for Health and deputy director for Health Care Redesign in the Cuomo administration, speaks to members of the Nurse Practitioner Association of NYS Friday morning, Oct. 25, 2013, at the Saratoga City Center in Saratoga Springs, N.Y. (Skip Dickstein / Times Union) less Donna Frescatore, assistant deputy secretary for Health and deputy director for Health Care Redesign in the Cuomo administration, speaks to members of the Nurse Practitioner Association of NYS Friday morning, ... more Photo: Skip Dickstein Image 3 of 9 Donna Frescatore, assistant deputy secretary for Health and deputy director for Health Care Redesign in the Cuomo administration, speaks to members of the Nurse Practitioner Association of NYS Friday morning, Oct. 25, 2013, at the Saratoga City Center in Saratoga Springs, N.Y. With Frescatore is Stephen Ferrara, president of the Nurse Practitioner Association of NYS. (Skip Dickstein / Times Union) less Donna Frescatore, assistant deputy secretary for Health and deputy director for Health Care Redesign in the Cuomo administration, speaks to members of the Nurse Practitioner Association of NYS Friday morning, ... more Photo: Skip Dickstein Image 4 of 9 Donna Frescatore, assistant deputy secretary for Health and deputy director for Health Care Redesign in the Cuomo administration, speaks to members of the Nurse Practitioner Association of NYS Friday morning, Oct. 25, 2013, at the Saratoga City Center in Saratoga Springs, N.Y. (Skip Dickstein / Times Union) less Donna Frescatore, assistant deputy secretary for Health and deputy director for Health Care Redesign in the Cuomo administration, speaks to members of the Nurse Practitioner Association of NYS Friday morning, ... more Photo: Skip Dickstein Image 5 of 9 Mazzone Hospitality opened its new 14,000 square foot venue called 90 State Street Events Friday afternoon, Oct. 25, 2013, during a press event in Albany, N.Y. (Skip Dickstein / Times Union) Mazzone Hospitality opened its new 14,000 square foot venue called 90 State Street Events Friday afternoon, Oct. 25, 2013, during a press event in Albany, N.Y. (Skip Dickstein / Times Union) Photo: Skip Dickstein Image 6 of 9 Mazzone Hospitality opened its new 14,000 square foot venue called 90 State Street Events Friday afternoon, Oct. 25, 2013, during a press event in Albany, N.Y. (Skip Dickstein / Times Union) Mazzone Hospitality opened its new 14,000 square foot venue called 90 State Street Events Friday afternoon, Oct. 25, 2013, during a press event in Albany, N.Y. (Skip Dickstein / Times Union) Photo: Skip Dickstein Image 7 of 9 Matthew Mazzone announces the official opening of a new 14,000 square foot venue in Albany called 90 State Street Events Friday afternoon, Oct. 25, 2013, during a press event in Albany, N.Y. (Skip Dickstein / Times Union) less Matthew Mazzone announces the official opening of a new 14,000 square foot venue in Albany called 90 State Street Events Friday afternoon, Oct. 25, 2013, during a press event in Albany, N.Y. (Skip Dickstein / ... more Photo: Skip Dickstein Image 8 of 9 Albany Mayor Jerry Jennings, second from right, is presented with an official black vest and tie from Matthew Mazzone of Mazzone Hospitality, right, Friday afternoon Oct. 25, 2013 in Albany, N.Y. The vest was given to Jennings incase he chooses to work in the new Mazzone Albany venue called 90 State Street Events. (Skip Dickstein / Times Union) less Albany Mayor Jerry Jennings, second from right, is presented with an official black vest and tie from Matthew Mazzone of Mazzone Hospitality, right, Friday afternoon Oct. 25, 2013 in Albany, N.Y. The vest was ... more Photo: Skip Dickstein Image 9 of 9 Nurse practitioners ask state about role in Obamacare 1 / 9 Back to Gallery

Saratoga Springs

Nurse practitioners want to know their role in health reform.

At the Nurse Practitioner Association's annual conference Friday at the Saratoga Hilton and City Center, their questions to speaker Donna Frescatore, the state's assistant deputy secretary for health, revealed concerns over their position in an industry undergoing profound change.

Were state officials considering, one asked, how an increased number of people who get health insurance through the Affordable Care Act (a.k.a. Obamacare) would receive medical treatment, when there is a shortage of primary care providers, including nurse practitioners?

The state is working with the Urban Institute, a Washington, D.C.-based think tank, to understand the impact more insured New Yorkers will have on the demand for medical services, Frescatore said. People who previously lacked health insurance did not go entirely without medical care, she told the hundreds in the audience Friday morning — though they may choose to access services differently once they have coverage. The state expects 1.1 million New Yorkers, most of them currently uninsured, to enroll in new health insurance plans within the next three years.

Are nurse practitioners included among primary care providers, another attendee wanted to know, through the new state-run health insurance market?

More Information

The insurance plans offered through the market, called NY State of Health, are through private companies, Frescatore said. They must meet requirements to have an adequate network of health providers, but how they do that is up to the companies, not the state.

Frescatore, who serves as executive director of NY State of Health, provided the nurse practitioners with an overview of the online market, which launched Oct. 1. The market, also called a health exchange, was established to meet requirements of Obamacare, including that most Americans get insurance coverage or pay a penalty.

Some questions posed to Frescatore revealed that even those in medical professions continue to have basic questions about the 2010 law and its implementation in New York.

One asked whether her patients should try to use the federal health exchange, Healthcare.gov, that was the subject of a national address Monday by President Barack Obama, responding to criticism over technical problems that continue to plague that site. Frescatore explained that NY State of Health is the exchange that New York residents who do not have insurance should use. Healthcare.gov is meant for residents of 34 other states that did not establish their own exchange.

NY State of Health is operating smoothly now, after some technical problems following its launch, Frescatore said. There continue to be what she termed "isolated incidents" of trouble verifying users' identity.

As of midweek, 174,000 New Yorkers had been deemed eligible to enroll in insurance plans through the site, according to the state Health Department. More than 37,000 of them had actually enrolled, representing more than a third of all Americans who have used exchanges nationwide to do so.

Technicians continue to work on improvements to the site each night, Frescatore said.

chughes@timesunion.com • 518-454-5417 • @hughesclaire