Topics: Books, chronic city, Editor's Picks, Jonathan Lethem, Lucky Alan, The Fortress of Solitude, Entertainment News

I started reading Jonathan Lethem with “Amnesia Moon,” maybe five or six years after it first came out. A teacher had suggested the book, after seeing me struggle with the more realist selections of the typical undergrad creative writing syllabus of the early 2000s, and almost immediately I was hooked, on both that book and Lethem’s writing in general. “Amnesia Moon” is an intoxicating but very strange novel — perhaps Lethem’s strangest, at least for me — and so I was surprised, in 2003, to find myself reading “The Fortress of Solitude,” with its much more grounded period setting beginning in 1970s Brooklyn.

I would soon immerse myself in the rest of Lethem’s books, and this range became one of the most exciting aspects of reading his novels and stories and essays: His interests are broad, his obsessions deep and his influences both announced and fully explored, engaged, built upon. If Lethem has topics or time periods or genres he returns to frequently, it feels to me less like a tic or a limitation and more like an indication that something is not yet finished, that his unshed obsessions return often to further provoke his imagination into new stories.

Jonathan Lethem’s “Lucky Alan” is his first short story collection since 2004’s “Men and Cartoons,” collecting the stories written in the decade that followed. In the years between, he’s published three novels, including 2013’s “Dissident Gardens,” and a slew of other projects in other genres, including penning a reboot of the comic book “Omega the Unknown”; collecting two books of essays, including “The Ecstasy of Influence,” titled after his provocative Harper’s essay of the same name; editing a volume of selections of Philip K. Dick’s journals; and another nonfiction book on The Talking Heads album “Fear of Music” for the popular 33 1/3 series. Our conversation with Lethem discusses how stories in “Lucky Alan” were written, as well as what changed (and what stayed the same) throughout this busy and productive decade.

Once I was a few stories into “Lucky Alan,” I started thinking about the book’s ordering, wondering if you’d consciously decided to start with two of the more realist stories — the title story and “The King of Sentences” — before moving on to stranger fare, like “Traveler Home,” where the protagonist is given a baby by a pack of wolves, or “Procedure in Plain Air,” with its surreal “installation” involving a man left in a hole outside a coffee shop, “an inverted phone booth of dirt and rubble.” But then a friend mentioned seeing you read “Procedure in Plain Air” at Skylight Books in Los Angeles a few weeks ago, where he reported that you’d said the stories appear here in the order they were written.

That answers one question but begs another: How do you chart the progress of your interests in the short story over that time? Does “Pending Vegan,” the last story, complete some line of artistic thought that began with the first, “Lucky Alan,” or is the book simply a method of collecting all the short work of a certain period in one place?

I’ve got at least 12 answers to this question, depending on whether I grab it by trunk or tail or some other appendage. Somewhere I once read a pragmatic assertion that the way to order a story collection is to put the best story first and the second-best last and the rest anywhere you like. I do think “Lucky Alan” and “Pending Vegan” are the two most satisfying and complete stories I’ve written, or at least that were uncollected. When I threw them into those positions, just to see what that looked like, I noticed immediately that one was the earliest piece in the book, and the other the most recent. Putting them in chronological sequence made for a quick solution to what probably wasn’t an important question in the first place: Does anybody typically read a story collection from beginning to end? (Of course many would say I could quit that rhetorical question sooner: Does anybody typically read a story collection?)

Of course, I may have forgotten or been mistaken or be lying about the order of writing of some of the stories between those two. I jiggered the sequence at some point to make for what I thought would be a better alternation of the “more realist” with the “stranger fare” — though we might differ on what’s strange. In the experience of their maker, “The King of Sentences,” for instance, is stranger than “Procedure in Plain Air.” The first is an unrepeatable language pratfall, the second a pretty methodological fiction, putting two incommensurate things together and playing out the result. That one feels traditional to me. But that’s just the experience of the maker.

To answer your last question, both. What’s great about short stories is the opportunity to play at reinvention; all those new departures, all those new landings to try to stick. It makes me happy to think of the book as a window into the last decade’s worth of tiny revolutions and self-overthrowings, and as a laboratory for what I might still become as a writer. For instance “Lucky Alan” was the last thing I wrote before starting “Chronic City,” and it looks to me like I was testing my confidence for that milieu and tone. What if “Pending Vegan” will tell me as much about what I’m capable of, looking back later?

On the other hand, hey, I’m 50. This is the third time I’ve gathered a decade’s stories. Let’s be clear about how much such introspection matters to the reader who’s either aboard or not aboard my “project” by now: likely, not bloody much. Somerset Maugham once adopted the title of a next collection of his stories from a weary reviewer’s description of his previous one: “The Mixture as Before.” The secret title of this book is “The Mixture as Before.”

The idea of stories as a laboratory for what might come next feels true to me too: I can go back and look at my first book of stories and see proto-versions of elements I’d use later in longer work, as well as kinds of fiction I’ve never returned to. A reviewer once wrote that she wished my first novel was more like a certain story in my first book, and I remember thinking: Give me time to get to that novel — I’d like to write it too! It takes so much longer to change at the novel scale, compared to how fast you might reinvent yourself as a story writer. Are there stories of your that haunt you in this way, styles or subjects you haven’t had the chance to scale up?

The relationship between the two forms is permanently charged and strange — it seems simple, but it’s not. They seem so obviously related, they’re typically done by the same writers, and yet there’s a kind of abyss between them. There’s a lot you can do in short fiction that you can’t in a novel, and the reverse is true as well, and yet as you say they can be testing grounds. I never mistake an idea or a plan or character from one form for the other; they seem absolutely clear to me when they declare themselves. I’ve published chapters from books as short stories, but it always feels like a trick. The characters know they live in a larger space, and so they keep glancing out of the frame. So, I wouldn’t think of it in terms of “scaling up,” no.

Yet faced with your question, I feel a fundamental and terrifying recognition. I’m haunted, yes, all the time, and increasingly, by the kinds of writer I’ll never get to turn out to have been. I’ve been digging in my own buried archives recently and discovered bunches of notebooks with jottings for stories and novels I never got around to writing (as well as jottings indicating some of those I did — I was amazed to find that I’d basically already conceived the intention to write The “Fortress of Solitude,” my sixth novel, when I was 19). Crime novels, autobiographical novels about parts of my life untouched by the autobiographical novels I’ve actually managed, surrealist stories, plays even! Every one of those notes feels alive to me, waiting to be picked up and realized. Probably none of them ever will be.

When I’m writing short stories I feel closer to this laboratory-self, the kid with all those notebooks so sure he’d get to be all those different kinds of writer. Simply because the situation of story-writing — brisk, fleeting, beginning-middle-end accomplished in a few weeks — encourages the crazy optimism, the sensation of being modular and capable of anything. When I’m writing a novel, which is most of the time, I’m simply inside the project, managing its potentialities and necessities, living with its people, for a period of years. There is no outside, then. Each novel I write feels like my last, not for some morbid feeling that I’ll quit or die after I write “the end,” but simply because I lose sight of the imaginative zone beyond its horizon. To write a novel is to be merely (and fulfillingly) the writer of that novel. The task of trying to answer that novel’s requirements is more than enough.

To loop back to an earlier answer: Is there a freedom that comes with this point in the career, where “The Mixture as Before” feels like an honest way to title a book? Does knowing that many readers already know whether they’re into your “project” or not free you to do work you might not otherwise have done? I think that sounds a little like I’m trying to trap you into saying that caring too much about what people thought restrained you in the past, but I’m really wondering if there’s a point in the career where your relationship with the bulk of your readers stabilizes and becomes something new and perhaps better than what came before.

To the extent that I can detect “my relationship with my readers,” it never stabilizes, thank god. I don’t think “Readers,” despite the illusion created by the Amazon or Goodreads star-systems, stabilize into some monolithic and lucid voice that you can listen to. Instead, when I come out of my house — I do, sometimes — I’ll meet people who’ve declared one or another of my books to be their favorite; after reminding myself how lucky it is that I’m read at all, I add a second blessing that each of my willful and divergent artifacts seems to find some individual constituency. Of course this has to do with the different purposes readers bring to things, to their age, leaning, what they had for dinner, and so forth. When I meet one of the “Girl in Landscape” people I’m extra happy. I like the books better as they age out of their initial publicity, which is a kind of fever or toxic shock that the book is temporarily ill with, and instead become part of the backdrop of what’s out there, the literary environment. It usually happens four or five years after publication.

Needless to say, if I’d been super-obedient to broadband expectations beaming my way (more from journalists than from readers — and not, I’d emphasize, from my editors) I’d have written loads of books about weird private detectives and/or 1970s Brooklyn. It might have been simpler, except I couldn’t. I don’t say that in a bragging-about-my-perversity sort of way. I say it in a confessing-an-incapacity sort of way. I just… couldn’t have.

I’ve been a big fan of “The King of Sentences” since it first appeared in The New Yorker, and rereading it I was stuck between shaking my head at the absurd fandom of the two protagonists, while also knowing that whatever shames them is something I shared. I’ve also thought the two young writers were the primary target of the story’s satire, but now I wonder if it’s not the King of Sentences that bears the brunt of the story’s blow. After all, your own fandom for writers and musicians and comics is such an integral part of the way you’ve charted your development as a writer and a person that it seems somewhat hard for me to believe you’re really being too harsh on the two writers here, caught in the “time when all [they] could talk about was sentences, sentences.” Was there a specific writer or literary movement you were intent on skewering here, either with the young writers or the King? Is there, as it seems to me, just as much celebration here as there is takedown?

There’s definitely no specific writer or literary movement I was intent on skewering. In fact, my intent to skewer is practically nonexistent. If I could make just one general statement here it would be that I am almost always already never skewering anything when I set out to write. One of the sad-strangest things I experience is when I’m taken for skewering characters I adore and cherish, identify with, and am abiding with out of fascination and yearning.

The kids in that story obviously come from a kind of appalled and delighted fascination with my own aspirant self. Shelley Jackson and I, when we were still bookstore clerks, once read a Don DeLillo book aloud to each other, slowly over weeks. So there’s a grain there, blown into a kind of balloon and sent sailing. At the same time, I’m hugely identified with that poor old grouse who just wants to be left alone to do his work, concealed from view, unconfronted with his limitations, forgiven his trespasses. Each day that passes puts me nearer to the title character in the story, not for my achievement in sentences, which is not for me to judge, but for my hermetic reluctance, and my distrust of people with excessively smooth skin. So: I locate my “self” between the two poles in the story — the kids, the King. I pray I’ll always float somewhere in the space between them, able to make contact with both.