DUBLIN--(BUSINESS WIRE)--Research and Markets (http://www.researchandmarkets.com/research/cbjh2b/personal_accident) has announced the addition of the "Personal Accident and Health Insurance in the US, Key Trends and Opportunities to 2018" report to their offering.

The US personal accident and health insurance segment was the second largest in the country, accounting for 35.3% of the industry's gross written premium in 2013. The segment recorded a compound annual growth rate (CAGR) of 3.5% during the review period (2009-2013), the highest growth of all the industry's segments.

This growth can be attributed to rising per capita healthcare expenditure, a rapidly growing aging population, and growing domestic demand for healthcare products. It was further supported by the country's insufficient public healthcare programs, including Medicare and Medicaid. Such factors, coupled with new healthcare reforms, are projected to enable the segment to record a CAGR of 2.3% over the forecast period (2013-2018).

Key Highlights

Personal accident and health insurance accounted for 35.3% of the industry's gross written premium in 2013.

The US personal accident and health segment registered the industry's highest review-period CAGR of 3.5% in terms of gross written premiums.

The segment is highly competitive, and firms face competition from other insurance companies, health maintenance organizations (HMOs) and third-party administrators (TPAs).

Health insurance dominated the segment in 2013, with 97.9% of the gross written premium.

Healthcare expenditure accounted for around 16.9% of the country's GDP in 2012, higher than the OECD average of 9.3% (OECD health insurance statistics 2014).

The growth in the personal accident and health insurance segment can be attributed to various factors such as rising healthcare expenditure, decreasing unemployment, the growing aging population and the implementation of ObamaCare reforms.

The Healthcare and Education Reconciliation Act of 2010 - an amendment of The Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (PPACA) - came into force in January 2014.

The country's personal accident and health insurance segment is expected to grow at a CAGR of 2.3% over the forecast period.

Key Topics Covered:

1 Key Facts and Events

2 Executive Summary

3 Introduction

4 US Insurance Industry Attractiveness

5 Personal Accident and Health Insurance Outlook

6 Analysis by Distribution Channel

7 Regulatory Policies

8 Competitive Landscape and Strategic Insights

9 Appendix

Companies Mentioned

UnitedHealth Group

Aetna Inc.

WellPoint Inc.

Healthcare Service Corporation

Humana Inc.

Highmark Inc.

Aflac Inc.

Cigna Corporation

MetLife Inc.

For more information visit http://www.researchandmarkets.com/research/cbjh2b/personal_accident