Yesterday, Fox’s Outnumbered co-hosts actively worked to blame President Obama for the results of a study showing that Americans feel less free and safe than those living in other countries. When #OneLuckyGuy Tommy Chong failed to go along with the script, co-host Kennedy came up with a novel pretext to malign Obama: He knows too much about the threats against our country.

Chong had earlier nicely foiled the co-hosts efforts to get him to go along with their Gruber-gate attacks on ObamaCare. He thwarted their efforts again in this segment.

But it wasn’t for lack of the hosts trying.

Co-host Harris Faulkner “asked” Chong about the freedom study, “I’m wondering, is there anything that you sense in the last 4-6 years that are changing?” and when Chong said things have gotten worse, Faulkner pressed: “If you could talk to the president, what would you tell him?”

“I’d tell him he’s doing as good (a) job… as he could do,” Chong replied.

Oops, not what they wanted to hear. Faulkner pressed again: “But on this particular issue you think?”

Again, Chong scotched their plans: “Well, you know it’s tough to second guess – they know more than we do. The national security advisors and everything else. We just get third-hand information. …And so we don’t know what threats and everything else…”

So Kennedy interrupted: “And maybe that’s the problem, is they know too much. And you know, we sort of allow them to limit our freedom in order to feel more safe but it doesn’t necessarily make us more safe.”

Now I agree that it’s possible there has been an over-reaction to threats (though Fox is a prime suspect in the over-reaction department) but accusing our president of knowing too much?

I can just imagine what she and her Fox co-hosts would say if, God forbid, a terror attack should occur and President Obama said, “Oh, I only spend a certain amount of time learning about threats. Otherwise, I might overreact and over-limit our freedoms.”

By the way, this is far from the first preposterous thing Kennedy has said on Outnumbered. We also noted how she previously accused Obama of “strategizing on behalf of” ISIS. She has also plumbed the depths of her music and talk radio resumé to diagnose Obama as having as-yet undiagnosed mental problems.

Watch it below, from yesterday’s Outnumbered.