LOS ANGELES (MarketWatch) — Shares of Medicaid insurer Centene Corp. reached a new all-time high Friday after the company said it expects revenue to grow by nearly a third in 2015 and an earnings hike of 17%.

But Medicaid expansions under the Affordable Care Act have little to do with Centene’s optimistic outlook, said Michael Neidorff, the St. Louis-based company’s chairman and chief executive in a phone interview with MarketWatch. Instead, the improved outlook is mostly because of new business in states such as Louisiana and Indiana, two regions which have yet to adopt the Medicaid expansion that is part of Obamacare.

There’s also a considerable amount of new business coming from what are known as “dual eligibles” — elderly patients who are eligible for Medicaid as well as Medicare. Right now, the added business Centene is seeing has very little to do with Obamacare, though that could change, Neidorff said.

“We’re going to have to wait and see,” he said. “I think we’ll see some more expansion.”

With only a mild contribution from Obamacare, Centene said Friday it expects 2015 revenue to come in between $20.3 billion and $20.8 billion, up 32% from the $15.3 billion to $15.8 billion it expects to report at the end of fiscal 2014.

Centene said it expects 2015 earnings to reach $5.05 to $5.35 a share, compared with its current projection of $4.35 to $4.50 a share for 2014. Analysts polled by FactSet had projected earnings of $4.92 a share on sales of just under $20 billion for 2015.

One concern is that Centene’s so-called “medical-loss ratio,” which measures the amount of money spent on providing medical care for 2014, is rising to a range of 89.2% to 89.6%, up from its earlier projection of 88.9% to 89.4%. But analysts said that’s of little concern.

“Given the higher-than-expected revenue target is likely from higher acuity populations/new markets, the higher [medical-loss] guidance appears to be a function of mix shift and thus not of concern,” analyst Brian Wright of Sterne, Agee & Leach said in a note to clients. Wright raised his price target on Centene to $122.

Centene shares were up recently by 3.5% to $102.38, a new record.

Neidorff said more business could come his company’s way should more states adopt the Medicaid expansion. Twenty-three states have yet to do so, but he said some more might be planning to make the move.

“As that comes along we’ll take advantage of it,” he said.

Yet there remains a number of other opportunities. Centene currently operates in 18 states, and the Medicaid market is formidable. Neidorff sees a potential $138 billion market over the next several years, and he expects organic prosperity on the horizon.

“I continue to see us being a growth company,” he said.

More from MarketWatch