Newly married couple Jillian Levy, left, and Andrea Wright of Asheville were among those learning about insurance options under the Affordable Care Act on Nov. 15, 2014, at the U.S. Cellular Center in Asheville, North Carolina. Jon Ostendorff/jostendo@gannett.com (Photo: Jon Ostendorff)

Advocates said insurance enrollment under the federal Affordable Care Act started smoothly on Saturday.

Enrollment last year had a rocky start after problems with the federal government's website.

The site seemed to be working fine on Saturday, said Kellan Moore, executive director of Care Share Health Alliance, who was among the advocates helping people enroll at the U.S. Cellular Center downtown.

North Carolina does not have a state-run exchange so nonprofits are helping people enroll.

Moore said more than 90 percent of those eligible don't know enrollment has started. It ends in February.

"Ultimately we want to have a healthy state and we want people to get access to the care and the help that they need," she said.

Newly married couple Jillian Levy and Andrea Wright of Asheville were among those learning about options in Saturday.

They had hoped to get Levy covered under the public exchange but learned since they were married, and Wright has affordable insurance through her work, Levy was not eligible for coverage with a subsidy.

They got married last week after a federal judge in October struck down the state's ban on same-sex marriage.

Levy, 27, had been on had been on COBRA insurance for a year and a half since leaving her job and she's being treated for an eating disorder. She had been paying $489 a month and using her inheritance to afford the coverage. That was on top of $4,000 a month in co-pays for her treatment, she said.

"I feel really guilty about it because I always feel like I am spending the money our kids would need for college but at the same time we won't have kids if I don't get better," she said.

Wright, 26, who works at Babies R Us, also felt bad on Saturday that they had spent so long fighting for the right to get married only to have it mean Levy could not get a subsidy under the Affordable Care Act.

But that soon faded when they learned the good news.

Her insurance will increase from about $90 a month for her to $180 for both of them, she said. The deductible is $3,000 for two people, which Levy says they will meet immediately because of her treatment costs.

That meant a big savings compared to the $600 a month for their combined insurance payments previously.

"It feels good," Wright said. "I feel like I am providing a service because she cannot be uninsured. That's not a thing. Nobody can. But she specifically cannot be uninsured so it feels good to know I am helping with that."

Jaclyn Kiger, a managing attorney with Pisgah Legal Services who specializes in public benefits law, was among those helping at the U.S. Cellular Center.

She was working as part of the North Carolina Navigator Consortium. This year marked the first big public enrollment event in the city.

In the first 24 minutes on Saturday about 10 people walked in asking for help, she said.

She said enrollment ends Feb. 15, 2015, which is three fewer months than last year.

"And the tax penalties are looming," she said. "They are coming."

People could get fines ranging from $95 per adult or 1 percent of household income, whichever is greater, she said. In 2015 the fines go to $325 per adult or 2 percent of household income, she said.

"We know that will hurt people so we want them to know now what is available and that help is free."

Pisgah Legal, private insurance brokers and enrollamerica.org or getcoveredamerica.org are places to seek help.

Read or Share this story: http://avlne.ws/1qKFuP1