Between 2005 and 2010, annual premiums for company-sponsored health insurance increased by 4.8 percent. One million Americans lost their plans because their insurance companies dropped them, knowing that these people would find less-expensive plans. Their reliance upon their physician did not change, because government bureaucrats had always decided on what treatment they would receive through Medicare and Medicaid.

Obamacare, officially called the Affordable Care Act, did not cut benefits, although it lowered the funding for Medicare by $716 billion over 10 years. These cuts were affecting the crucial healthcare providers such as hospitals, Medicare Advantage insurance and home health care, skilled nursing services and hospices. Yet the ACA is also offering free preventive care and is expanding Medicaid to middle-income families which, however, mostly affects private insurance.

Although the law prohibits undocumented immigrants from getting Obamacare, they may obtain preventive care at community health centers and thus avoid expensive emergency treatment. In any health insurance plan, someone has to pay for services never needed. Obamacare, for example, pays for childbirth coverage, thus lowers the cost of overall healthcare and prevents inadequate prenatal care and botched home deliveries. By providing free coverage of childbirths for illegal immigrants, the system creates incentives for them to have their babies born on American soil so that these “anchor babies” can more easily become citizens.

U.S. hospitals have to treat anyone, including undocumented immigrants, showing up in an emergency room. So Medicaid has to refund about $2 million to hospitals if they treat at least 100,000 illegal immigrants annually. Some businesses are probably not hiring to avoid the cost of Obamacare. Yet more than 95 percent of companies with more than 50 employees already offer health insurance. To avoid this option, a few businesses are reducing their workforce and are hiring workers only on temporary contracts.

Obamacare did not cause massive tax increases. When it is fully implemented, the new law is estimated to take in no more than $76.8 billion annually. That will be the largest amount in history, compared to the $65.9 million in 1993. It seems that the new system will ask for more personal data than ever before, including the patient’s income. The ACA will also require healthcare providers to computerize their records.

When in 2010, Congress and the president signed Obamacare into law, they wanted to make certain that all Americans were able to get health insurance. More importantly, they also wanted to lower the cost of healthcare, specifically to reduce the growing cost of Medicare and Medicaid, which was threatening to take over much of the federal budget. Merely one visit to the emergency room tends to cost an average of $1,265. In an article explaining Obamacare to children, the author (Kimberly Amadeo) said that in the U.S. nowadays, a broken foot may cost about $16,000 and treatment for cancer roughly $30,000.

Families with health insurance tend to pay only a small fee for every visit to a physician. Most people get health insurance as a benefit from their employer, who splits the monthly cost, known as a premium, with the employee. Those beyond age 65 tend to go on Medicare, which is paid mostly by the federal government. People making too much money to get Medicaid or are young for Medicare, self-employed or do not get insurance from their employer have to pay the often high expense of their own insurance.

There are between 35 million to 50 million Americans who do not have health insurance. If they have to go to the hospital, they often just do not pay the cost and then the hospital takes the loss and may increase the bills for those who pay. Ironically, the full legal title of Obamacare is Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act of 2010.

It actually is so complex that it had to be phased in over five years.

http://myjournalcourier.com/wp-content/uploads/2016/05/web1_rotator-health071712.jpg

By Wolf D. Fuhrig

Wolf D. Fuhrig, a professor emeritus of political science and criminal justice, has been a columnist since 1981. This and other articles by him can be found online at www.independentcritic.com.

Wolf D. Fuhrig, a professor emeritus of political science and criminal justice, has been a columnist since 1981. This and other articles by him can be found online at www.independentcritic.com.

Please enable JavaScript to view the comments powered by Disqus.

Disqus