Stan Myers/Canton Rep

TimkenSteel Co. shares rose slightly on their first day of trading ahead of their formal split approaching on June 30, showing that some investors believe an American steel company with niche businesses in oil and gas and automotive can make money.

The shares in the Canton, OH-based firm closed Thursday up 2.44% at $37.74 in preliminary “when issued” trading.

TimkenSteel was spun off from Timken Co., a century-old maker of bearings, drill bits and transmission parts, after activist investor fund Relational Investors LLC built up a stake and last year lobbied aggressively for a split on grounds that profitable bearings business was being hurt by the steel-focused part of the company.

“Timken shareholders will receive one TimkenSteel common share for every two common shares of Timken held at the close of business on the record date of June 23,” the company said.

In an interview before making his case to analysts and investors in New York on Thursday, Tim Timken, whose family still controls 10% of both companies, said the process of splitting up the firms into totally separate entities was completed at a cost of $95 million, below the $120 million that had been forecast. “It’s been a long year,” he said.

TimkenSteel executives say they’re betting the new company can prosper thanks to two trends, even if the industry is wracked by global oversupply and high costs.

One is spending on the oil and gas industry, driven in the U.S. by investment in Gulf of Mexico oil and gas in shale formations in places like Ohio, Pennsylvania and New York. Unrest in the Middle East will help investment in U.S. energy, said Mr. Timken, who is chairman and chief executive of TimkenSteel.

U.S. energy companies are investing $200 billion in drilling and production equipment, compared to $150 billion for the rest of the world, says CFO Shawn Seanor.

A second is the auto industry. TimkenSteel makes parts like crank shafts that can’t be replicated by aluminum, says Mr. Timken. A recent report by Ducker Worldwide forecast that 18% of car bodies will be all-aluminum by 2025, compared to 1% today.

Analysts say Timken’s automotive bet is a sound one. “They make mechanical stuff that aluminum can’t replicate,” says Charles Bradford, an analyst with Bradford Research Inc. “They’re not in the sheet parts or casting part of a car, they’re in bearings, and there’s no way you’ll have aluminum bearings.”

This week, Timken Co., the bearings company, where Mr. Timken is still a board member, raised its full-year earnings estimate to $2.40-$2.60 per share from $2.20-$2.50 per share.

Mr. Timken said he didn’t believe TimkenSteel was for sale. “It’s a consolidating industry with hungry players and a lot of cash,” he said. “But our intent is to run the business.”

See also:

Detroit’s Appetite for Aluminum Keeps Growing – WSJ