Americans for Prosperity Utah announced Monday it has launched a "thank you" mail campaign to support state lawmakers who opposed Gov. Gary Herbert's Healthy Utah alternative to Medicaid expansion.

SALT LAKE CITY — Americans for Prosperity Utah announced Monday it has launched a "thank you" mail campaign to support state lawmakers who opposed Gov. Gary Herbert's Healthy Utah alternative to Medicaid expansion.

The campaign is the first action by the new Utah chapter of the main political advocacy group for the Koch brothers, the billionaire industrialists pouring millions of dollars into conservative and libertarian causes.

The mailer is going out in the districts of 11 GOP House members, who last session helped defeat the governor's plan to provide health care to low-income Utahns using $258 million available under President Barack Obama's health care law.

Included on the list are two members of a team Herbert assembled to come up with a plan for Medicaid expansion by the end of July: House Speaker Greg Hughes, R-Draper, and Rep. Jim Dunnigan, R-Taylorsville.

"What better way to start than by thanking legislators for their important work protecting Utah from Obamacare," Evelyn Everton, director of the Utah chapter, said in a statement.

Everton said any form of Medicaid expansion "is a risky proposal based on fuzzy math, shaky promises and a false hope that Congress will hold up their end of the deal" that could force tax increases.

The mailers sent out Monday are "just kind of the beginning of the conversation we would like to have about Medicaid expansion and the risks that go along with it," she told the Deseret News, declining to disclose the cost of the campaign.

The governor's spokesman, Marty Carpenter, said Healthy Utah "has won the strong support of the health care industry, the business community and people across the state."

Carpenter said Utahns "prefer to determine our own path forward without the interference of outside groups."

The mailer sent in Hughes' district states, "When some legislators wanted to give in, Representative Greg Hughes stood up to fight," and warns that millions could be spent "on taxpayer-funded health care for able-bodied working adults."

Healthy Utah would cover more than 100,000 Utahns earning less than 138 percent of the federal poverty level, including those in the so-called coverage gap below the poverty line who don't receive any health care subsidies without Medicaid expansion.

The governor and members of the team working on Medicaid expansion, including Hughes and Dunnigan, recently traveled to Washington, D.C., to meet with U.S. Health and Human Services Secretary Sylvia Burwell about Healthy Utah.

A Florida-based group, the Foundation for Government Accountability, has also targeted Healthy Utah.

Email: lisa@deseretnews.com

Twitter: DNewsPolitics