Once upon a time, conservatives liked decentralization and liberals liked centralization. This was when the federal government was responsible for most social progress, from women's rights to civil rights for African-Americans. So George Wallace and Lester Maddox, governors of Alabama and Georgia at the time, invoked states' rights, local control, as the principle behind their defense of racial segregation.

More recently, it is a principle that states governed by Republicans have used to resist the Affordable Care Act, President Obama's health care reform legislation. Liberals, on the other hand, have supported the right of the federal government to supersede local objections in order to achieve Obamacare's objectives.

But a funny thing has happened lately to these ideological battle lines around local control. In Colorado, six county sheriffs who object to the citizen initiative legalizing marijuana have filed suit claiming the federal pot prohibition should take precedence. The liberals who support legalized pot back states' rights in this case, and the conservatives who oppose it are for federal control.

On a local level, this role reversal has occurred over the issue of fracking. Because support for oil and gas exploration is embedded in state law, fracking opponents have relied on local verdicts by voters or elected officials in Boulder County, Broomfield, Lafayette, Longmont and Fort Collins to support their position. Conversely, the oil and gas industry and its supporters argue for state control, the more centralized level of government.

Advertisement

"It seems people might want to vocalize about local control all the time, but when we don't agree with voters, we go back to federal control," observed Boulder County Sheriff Joe Pelle, referring to the pot lawsuit by six of his colleagues. "I would venture to say a lot of those people demand local control in other situations."

Then there was this quote from Boulder County District Attorney Stan Garnett: "The last thing we need is activist judges interfering with the evolution of modern regulation and management of marijuana use."

Not so long ago, it was conservatives railing against "activist judges" interfering with the status quo when courts were overturning laws deemed discriminatory. Now it's liberals decrying activist judges, from the U.S. Supreme Court, whose conservative majority is poised to render an important verdict on Obamacare, to those Garnett imagines interfering with Colorado's administration of its new pot law.

Perhaps it is time for ideologues on both ends of the political spectrum to acknowledge that it is not so much centralization or decentralization they favor as it is people in government who agree with them. That would leave the argument over local control to those who actually want to debate the appropriate level of government for certain kinds of regulation, as we do with respect to fracking.

—Dave Krieger, for the editorial board. Email kriegerd@dailycamera.com. Twitter @DaveKrieger