Jersey Roots is a look at the history of Monmouth and Ocean counties. Have a local historical topic you would like more information about? Contact Erik Larsen at elarsen@app.com.

Martin Luther King, Jr. addresses a crowded gymnasium at what was then-Monmouth College in West Long Branch on on Oct. 6, 1966. (Photo: Ralph Binder, courtesy Monmouth University )

Forty-eight years ago this Monday, the Rev. Martin Luther King Jr. touched down at a small airport outside Red Bank on a chartered flight from New York and made the 15-minute trek by car to what was then-Monmouth College in West Long Branch.

King, 37, who would be martyred in Memphis, Tennessee, just 18 months later, had accepted an invitation to address the school as part of its student union lecture series.

Longtime Asbury Park Press columnist Bill Handleman, who died in 2010, reflected on the famous civil rights leader’s visit in 2007. Handleman recalled then that Monmouth College was then a small liberal arts school, not particularly known for being all that liberal.

“In the autumn of 1966, Monmouth County was a safe place, out of range,” Handleman wrote. “(Seemingly) stuck in the happy days of the Eisenhower administration” a decade earlier.

Boylan Gymnasium, which at the time was called Alumni Memorial Gymnasium, was packed that morning with what Handleman described as “a sea of white faces.”

“Now, it’s a fact that we’ve come a long, long way but it doesn’t hold truth,” King sermonized. “And I’m afraid if I stop at this point, I will leave you the victims of a dangerous optimism. If I stop here, I will send us away the victims of an illusion wrapped in superficiality. So, in order to tell the truth, it is necessary to move on and not only talk about the fact that we’ve come a long, long way but to make it powerfully clear that we still have a long, long way to go before the ideal of integration is a reality.”

In 1966, the violence and murder against blacks and white civil rights workers was still a “popular pastime” in some parts of the country, he said. A year earlier, more than 40 people were killed in Alabama and Mississippi and not a single one had been convicted.

“In the last 18 months, some 57 churches, Negro churches, have been burned to the ground in the state of Mississippi,” King said. “Nothing has been done about it. It seems that they have a new motto in Mississippi, not attend the church of your choice, but burn the church of your choice.”

There was progress, King said. At that moment in Grenada, Mississippi, the civil rights leader explained, his organization was working to complete the desegregation of previously all-white schools. However, it was not a job for the timid.

“And on the first day of going to the previously all white school, what do they confront? They find grown men beating little children with chains, with clubs, with sticks. All of this reminds us that we still have a long, long way to go.”

The Asbury Park Press covered King’s speech on Oct. 6, 1966. The newspaper reported in its evening edition that there were about 2,600 students and faculty members in attendance.

While King had received an enthusiastic reception, the article observed that some students later stormed out of the gymnasium and others, including a sitting Monmouth County freeholder and college trustee who was seated in the third row, began heckling King when his remarks turned to his opposition of the Vietnam War.

“It seems to me that if a nation can spend that much money on a war in Vietnam and it can spend $20 billion to put a man on the moon, it can spend billions of dollars to place God’s children on their own two feet here on earth,” King said. “The challenge is the question of whether we have the will. It seems, at times, that we are more concerned about the size of the national gross product rather than about how many people benefit from it. It seems at times that we are more concerned about winning the war in Vietnam than we are about winning the war against poverty here at home.”

Read or Share this story: http://on.app.com/1vDDugD