Announcing Our Exclusive Healthcare Summit Feb. 21: Request an Invite

Xconomy Texas —

Advances in genomics, mobile technology, and data collection and analysis are poised to transform healthcare from drug development to patient care and hospital management. But what will it take to realize their promise in the age of the Affordable Care Act, and what does this require of payers, providers, and patients? How can we utilize new innovations to hold the line on medical costs while also improving care and promoting health rather than just treating illness?

Our “From Precision Medicine to Precision Management” Healthcare Summit—held in partnership with BioHouston following its annual meeting—will take place the morning of Friday, February 21, 2014, at Rice University’s BioScience Research Collaborative in Houston.

This invitation-only gathering will convene around 75 leaders in healthcare, personalized medicine and genomics, health IT, big data, venture capital, and more as we consider the future of medicine and health and look for entrepreneurial solutions to the challenges facing our healthcare system.

We are bringing together leaders from renowned Texas institutions—including Robert Robbins, CEO of the Texas Medical Center, and MD Anderson chief Ronald DePinho—as well as entrepreneurs and investors from outside the state who are pushing the kind of innovation that will reinvent the way healthcare is funded and delivered. Among them: Kevin Kinsella, founder at Avalon Ventures, Michael Greeley, partner at Foundation Medical Partners, aTyr Pharma’s John Mendlein, Pokitdok founder Lisa Maki, and healthcare leaders from General Electric and Xerox.

Early-bird registration, which ends January 23, is $395. But this is an invitation-only event, so please apply for one by emailing a request to hcsummit14@xconomy.com. (The registration fee goes up to $495 after the 23rd.) We also have a limited number of startup tickets at $295 for companies that are less than three years old, with 20 or fewer employees. Please email hcsummit14@xconomy.com to qualify for the startup rate.

As always, we are convening an elite group of healthcare leaders, entrepreneurs, and investors from Texas and beyond for a morning of networking and discussion.

To register for the event—and for more information, including the full list of speakers to date—please visit our Healthcare Summit event page.

We look forward to seeing you next month.