Former University of Tennessee football coach Phil Fulmer was keynote speaker for the InterFaith Health Clinic 25th Anniversary luncheon Friday at Calhoun's on the River. "These are people in desperate situations, and you're their lifeline," Fulmer said, describing the people he encountered in the clinic's waiting room on his recent tour of the facility. MICHAEL PATRICK/ NEWS SENTINEL

SHARE Former University of Tennessee football coach Phil Fulmer talks to Connie and Clyde Holmes after speaking at the Interfaith Health Clinic 25th Anniversary luncheon Friday at Calhoun's on the River. (MICHAEL PATRICK/NEWS SENTINEL)

By Kristi L. Nelson of the Knoxville News Sentinel

The Rev. George Dobler stood in front of a roomful of volunteers, staff and supporters for InterFaith Health Clinic and remembered its beginning in March 1991.

"I thought, this can't work; it will never work," he said. "Now, after sitting on the board for 20 years, I think it might work."

InterFaith celebrates its 25th anniversary this year. The clinic, which charges the working poor for medical care on an income-based sliding scale, has seen nearly 25,000 patients for more than 400,000 medical, dental and mental-health visits.

Shelia Kiser, a patient since 2009, told her story at a luncheon celebrating the clinic Friday afternoon.

Kiser, who was working but couldn't afford regular medical care, visited the clinic for a high-blood pressure check. Within a short period, she broke her foot and another bone, then suffered a heart attack, injuries from a car crash, a stroke and two brain surgeries. InterFaith helped her coordinate surgeries and specialists' visits from a network of 400 doctors who see its patients on a sliding scale. She also learned to manage her medical conditions there, she said.

"For certain, I would be dead today" without InterFaith, she said. Patients of the clinic "pay taxes, just like you do. We work, just like you do. We just don't have insurance."

Keynote speaker former University of Tennessee head football coach Phil Fulmer told of recently touring the clinic for the first time. He drew a parallel between supporting InterFaith's work and his decision to quit pursuing coaching jobs in favor of putting his energy toward his family and making a difference in the community. He urged those who haven't been to the clinic to walk through the waiting room and "feel the passion and the intensity."

"These are people in desperate situations, and you're their lifeline," Fulmer said.

Interfaith is kicking off a $500,000 capital campaign to expand its services; it's already raised $170,000 of that. The nonprofit has new options for donors to "sponsor a day of care" at the overall clinic or one of its components ($250-$2,000)in exchange for a sign in the lobby and other recognition.

Executive Director Melissa Knight said one of her biggest challenges is explaining that people who use InterFaith are not eligible for subsidies to help them purchase health coverage under the Affordable Care Act, nor do they qualify for TennCare, since Tennessee hasn't expanded Medicaid.

She said 96 percent of InterFaith patients earn minimum wage - and there is a five-week wait to become a new patient. InterFaith needs to be able to take more patients as well as have the flexibility to shift as health care changes.

"We are going to fill the gap and move to where the greatest needs are," she said.