British dental health is akin to that provided in Third World countries, according to hundreds of UK dentists.

The lack of access to NHS treatment in many parts of England has led to a 'crisis' in care and a system that is 'unfit for purpose', they said.

A coalition of dentistry professionals said millions of British people go for such long periods without seeing a dentist that charity groups who usually provide access to dental care in the Third World now have to do so in England.

British dental health is akin to that provided in Third World countries, according to hundreds of UK dentists. The lack of access to NHS treatment in many parts of England has led to a 'crisis' in care and a system that is 'unfit for purpose', they said (stock photograph)

The 400 dentists wrote to the Daily Telegraph to complain that they are stretched increasingly thinly and are struggling to meet ambitious targets to increase the numbers of patients treated.

They complained that it was hard to work amid tight constraints on budgets, and warned that millions of adults are ignorant of even the most basic dental hygiene.

'Far from improving, the situation has worsened to such an extent that charity groups normally associated with providing dental care in Third World arenas now have to do so in England', they wrote.

'While we applaud groups such as Dentaid, which volunteer such services, their role serves to demonstrate the lack of a proper national dental strategy and service.

'When more than 90 per cent of all dental diseases can be prevented, it is also a disgrace that children aged under 10 in England are still more likely to be treated in hospital for rotten teeth than for any other medical reason.'

NHS figures show that almost half the adult population of England (48 per cent) and a third (31 per cent) of children have not seen a dentist within two years.

Mohammed Khaliff, 16 (left), from Syria, suffers from dire dental problems common in Third World countries. He receives treatment (right) from a Dentaid volunteer

Crucially, almost 62,500 people are admitted to hospital in England per year because of tooth decay – three quarters of them, or 46,400, children.

And estimates from the Health and Social Care Information Centre show that within the biggest age-group – those aged between five and nine years old – the numbers leapt by 14 per cent in three years to almost 26,000.

However, NHS England denied that there is a crisis, pointing to a survey which found that more than nine out of 10 people who wanted to see a dentist in the last two years got to see one.

Official figures show that almost 1.7 million more people in England have seen a dentist within two years than were doing so a decade ago.

But when population growth is taken into account the overall increase amounts to less than one per cent.