CHICAGO — The nation’s air travel system slowly began to recover Saturday after an alleged act of employee sabotage at a large regional air traffic control center brought Chicago’s two international airports to a halt.

At the height of the travel misery Friday, more than 2,000 flights in and out of O’Hare and Midway airports had been canceled, disrupting travel across the country.

Authorities say a contract employee started a fire Friday morning in the basement telecommunications room of a control center in the Chicago suburb of Aurora and then slashed his throat. Brian Howard, 36, of Naperville, Ill., was charged with destruction of aircraft or aircraft facilities, a felony. The FBI said Howard remains hospitalized and no court date has been scheduled.

As of late Saturday afternoon, Chicago flight cancellations for the day stood at more than 780 — still a high number, but an improvement. Southwest Airlines, the dominant carrier at Midway, had hoped to resume a full flight schedule Saturday but had to cancel all flights between 10 a.m. and 2 p.m. CDT.

Lines remained long at O’Hare. Many travelers stranded overnight slept on cots provided by the airport.

The Federal Aviation Administration facility in Aurora, about 40 miles west of downtown Chicago, handles planes cruising at high altitudes through the air space as well as those beginning to approach or completing a departure from airports in the Chicago area. It remained shut down Saturday, and its responsibilities have been transferred to centers in Cleveland, Indianapolis, Kansas City and Minneapolis.

The disruption left some aviation analysts, travelers and politicians calling for a smoother backup plan and wondering how one person could be in a position to wreak so much havoc.

Howard entered the building about 5 a.m. Friday, and about 30 minutes later posted a suicide note on Facebook in which he apologized to loved ones for leaving “a big mess,” according to a federal criminal complaint.

“Take a hard look in the mirror, I have,” the post says, according to the FBI special agent who prepared the complaint. “And this is why I am about to take out ZAU and my life.” ZAU is the three-letter designation for the Aurora facility.