"Nine million women die of cardiovascular disease every year worldwide," she says flatly. "If a virus came around and did a fraction of that …" She trails off, shaking her head. "It's mind-boggling. Heart disease is the most costly, the most preventable, the most deadly, yet we spend the least amount of money on screening."

As a young doctor, Bairey Merz, now 58, wondered why so many women with heart attack symptoms had no evidence of heart blockages — and why so many returned for medical care, often disabled or dying from heart attacks.

At that time, most doctors still believed heart problems were rare in women, especially those under 65. Nothing could be further from the truth. More U.S. women have died of cardiovascular disease than men in every one of the past 30 years. And since 1998, even as overall deaths from heart disease have been slashed by nearly a third, there is one glaring exception: Heart disease deaths in younger women — those who are under 55 — keep rising, according to the journal Global Heart.

Part of the problem is the medical establishment's failure to allocate research money to the disease. Every year, Bairey Merz notes, almost $675 million is spent on breast cancer research in the U.S., compared with about $173 million on research about women's heart disease, which kills five times as many women as breast cancer annually. "Women are more likely to be missed because of our failure to do research in women," Bairey Merz says. "We have to recognize that the last 70 years of heart research has been conducted in men, for men and by men, so we have knowledge gaps about what may work best in women."

While more research is clearly needed, Bairey Merz has immersed herself in the cause. She has some 200 research papers to her name, and her offices have become the de facto laboratory for women with persistent but undiagnosed cardiac symptoms. Such as the 34-year-old vegetarian mother of three, an avid runner, whose heart arteries were almost fully blocked, even though her doctors had told her all was well. Or the pediatric nurse reassured by 10 cardiologists that her debilitating chest pain was benign, before finally getting a correct diagnosis and effective treatment. Then there's the patient who had extensive dental work for her jaw pain before learning she had advanced heart disease.

Next page: Why has heart disease been misdiagnosed for so long? »