Last week, there was a major decision on same sex marriage made by the Supreme Court that now makes it legal for same sex couples to wed in all 50 states. And while that decision generated a lot of commentary, there’s one band who took a different approach to addressing the Supreme Court ruling. Ladies and gentlemen, we present Coheed and Cambria.

The veteran rockers known for creating elaborate concept discs showed their lighter side by teaming up with Funny or Die to record a new song. But the subject matter is not their usual fare. The band noticed that Justice Antonin Scalia was one of the dissenting opinions on the same sex marriage ruling, and it’s not the first time he’s been on the wrong side of history. So, they decided to record a song coming from his wording in not only the same sex marriage ruling, but also on the Affordable Care Act.

Watch as singer Claudio Sanchez offers a tender, melodic approach to lyrics like, “The Court’s interpretation renders words inoperative / Goes beyond giving words bizarre meanings / Words no longer have meaning.” And watch as the band picks things up, letting an egg shaker up the tempo as Sanchez belts, “Understatement, thy name is an opinion on the Affordable Care Act!”

Coheed and Cambria are between albums at the moment, but things have been good in the band. Last fall, guitarist Travis Stever told us, “I would say we’re as closest as we’ve ever been, personally, within the band. And a lot can be said for Zach [Cooper] being a part of it, to help fuel that. Because he’s just such an accepting, and a really personable, and just like, positive influence on all of us. So that’s Zach. And then you have Josh [Eppard], Claudio, and I, well we have this huge history since the beginning. And I don’t like to over examine things, but, something’s happened where the three of us are closer than ever, along with Zach, and that’s what I’m saying. You don’t like to question things, you don’t like to over analyze, but I, flat out, we just went on a tour, and we’ve enjoyed it more than ever, so, I don’t really always get to say that.”

He added that the band is always working and that after taking some time for themselves last fall, they would be back working on new music soon.

Travis Stever Talks Revisiting 'In Keeping Secrets' Disc