Libraries face 6 to 8 percent annual price hikes for subscriptions to academic journals, other content

Anthony Pucciarelli, an Environmental Design senior, walks up the stairs at the University of Colorado's Norlin Library on Wednesday. ( Cliff Grassmick / Staff Photographer )

This week The CU Board of Regents will hear the campus's initial budget recommendations for the upcoming fiscal year, including potential tuition increases. The regents are not expected to vote on next year's budget until later this spring.

If you go What: University of Colorado Board of Regents meeting When: 9 a.m. to 10:30 a.m. Thursday, intercollegiate athletics committee meeting 12:30 to 5:00 p.m. Thursday, executive session (closed to the public) 8:30 a.m. to 3:30 p.m. Friday, general board meeting Where: Rooms 235 and 245, University Memorial Center, Boulder campus More info: bit.ly/1qgOocu

Every spring, Dean Jim Williams holds his breath and hopes that the University of Colorado will provide the Boulder campus libraries with an "inflation fighter," or a budget increase to offset the dramatic cost increases for academic journals and other subscription-based publications.

This year is no different.

As the Boulder campus prepares to make its budget recommendation to the Board of Regents this week, Williams and other library administrators will be waiting to see how many journal subscriptions they'll need to cut next year—even with a funding increase.

Costs for subscriptions to academic journals, books, databases, directories, indexes, magazines, newspapers and other forms of content can increase 6 to 8 percent annually, according to Williams and other pricewatchers.

That means that even with a 4 percent funding increase, like the one CU-Boulder's libraries got last year, library administrators still need to cut costs.

"We are under an obligation to stay solvent," said Williams, dean of libraries at CU. "We cannot create debt for the campus. We know that. That's how we live. So then we have to figure out what are going to do, or not do, in order to stay within budget? We have to do that annually. That's our fiscal life as part of the campus."

The high inflation rate the libraries face each year is just one of the factors campus officials must consider before likely asking the regents to increase tuition for the upcoming fiscal year.

"Our budget doesn't grow like that," said Kelly Fox, senior vice chancellor and chief financial officer on the Boulder campus. "It makes it very hard even just to maintain our position."

'We have all had to cut'

Ezekiel Trujillo, bottom, lies down to study at Norlin Library on Wednesday at the University of Colorado. (Cliff Grassmick / Staff Photographer)

The problem of annual price increases for subscriptions is not a new one, and it's not unique to CU, said Karen Williams, president of the Association of College and Research Libraries and dean of university libraries at the University of Arizona.

"There isn't a library anywhere, I don't think, that could tell you they've never had to reduce what it is they're getting," she said. "We have all had to cut."

Between 1986 and 2011, serial expenditures increased 402 percent among members of the Association of Research Libraries, which includes CU-Boulder. To compare, salary expenditures increased 146 percent between 1986 and 2012, according to the association's statistics.

CU's libraries provide content to faculty members, researchers, students and members of the public to "to ensure the rich interchange of ideas in the pursuit of truth and learning," which is part of its mission.

In other words, publishers are selling inelastic goods.

"We're a captive audience," said Fox. "We need what they have in order to do our research and our work. That gives them more leverage."

With digital content, libraries can now share a single journal article with thousands of students, CU's Williams said. That also means publishers can charge more.

Also driving price increases is the fact that publishers are selling in a global marketplace and their goods have an "impact factor," he said.

"Their publications make a difference in the world of knowledge and they know that," he said.

Budget talks

The library's budget comes from CU's general fund, which is funded with tuition, state dollars and indirect cost recoveries, Fox said.

Gov. John Hickenlooper has requested an additional $107.1 million for higher education for fiscal year 2015-2016. Though it's still early, CU's share of the money likely will be $16 million, a 10 percent increase from last year.

The campus won't reveal it's budget proposal to the public until the regents meet this week, but Williams is hopeful.

This year, and nearly every year, Williams is hoping for a 5 percent funding increase to fight inflation and keep the library "treading water," he said.

Even if he gets it, the library will work hand-in-hand with faculty to figure out which subscriptions are flexible.

"We've done cuts like this regularly over the years," said Leslie Reynolds, senior associate dean of libraries. "It cuts across all disciplines. Every drop in the bucket counts, whether it's an art journal or an engineering journal."

By now, professors and department heads know the drill. But that doesn't make it any easier.

"One of our jobs is to make sure that the faculty who are here are able to be productive," Williams said. "If they can't get the content they need, they leave, and they tell the campus that."

Solutions

Research libraries have gotten creative to keep the annual price hike damage to a minimum. As the world becomes more of a "digital village" it's easier for institutions to pool their resources, Williams said.

CU often collaborates with in-state and regional institutions to subscribe to content they all need.

"Because it's digital, we can leverage CU's dollars with those other institutions' dollars on those things we find in common," Williams said.

The library frequently subscribes to journals that contain CU research, Williams said, which essentially means the university is buying back its own scholarship.

So schools are turning to open access, a movement to make all research free and readily available to the public. The university launched last fall CU Scholar, an electronic repository to preserve and freely distribute research originating from the Boulder campus.

"One of the strategies that we are engaged in is the notion of open access and the notion that institutions have some kind of legitimate claim to the work produced through the labor of their researchers," said Martha Kyrillidou, senior director of statistics and service quality programs at the Association of Research Libraries.

Though upping fundraising efforts might seem like another obvious solution, Williams and Reynolds said relying on donations for content every year isn't sustainable.

The library does fundraise for endowed faculty positions, capital construction projects and programmatic needs, Williams said. But even so, getting people to donate to the library on its own is a hard sell.

"For something as core as the library, people think 'Oh no the campus is going to do that,'" he said. "It's like all of the other core things on the campus. You've got to have a police force, a health center. People don't give gifts to those things."

Libraries don't have alumni, Reynolds added.

"What is that old quote? 'No one ever graduated from the library, but no one ever graduated without one,'" she said.

'Not your grandfather's library'

It's still unclear what effect the newly created College of Media, Communication and Information will have on the library, because many of the departments that will live within the new college already exist on the campus.

Reynolds and Williams said the number of new subscriptions needed may depend on new faculty members hired by the college and the direction they want to take their research. That college begins enrollment this fall.

For now, Williams, Reynolds and library administrators around the country will continue negotiating with publishers, year after year, to ensure they can provide crucial content to the campus and community.

That's the business of libraries these days — managing money in international markets, negotiating million-dollar deals and making tough decisions about whose journal subscriptions stay and whose go.

"We have to be business managers," Williams said. "This is not your grandfather's library."

Sarah Kuta: 303-473-1106, kutas@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/sarahkuta