You see them at the bus stop, outside your grocery store, you watch them curiously as you are paused at the stoplight. They appear aloof to your presence, aloof to their own need. They appear disconnected from their surroundings, disconnected from themselves. This makes it easy to drive past and not look back.

But, what if? What if we stop, and truly look at them, look at their faces, examine the creases etched from the sun, examined their weathered hands, their wild and untamed hair, peer into their eyes and see if we can draw them back from the distance.

Who are these people? What caused them to become so distant, so lost? Are they lost? Perhaps they have chosen this existence. Who are we to pry? What if they become angry? Perhaps they are not stable enough to speak to. Surely they are thirsty, standing in the sun. Then, your light turns green, something distracts you and you think to yourself, someone else will help them.

Texas currently ranks 49th in the country for dollars spent on mental health care ($38.99 per capita, according to the National Association of State Mental Health Program Directors Institute, 2012).

The impact of the lack of funding and resources is evident as we observe it directly affecting those in our community with mental illness. While our community mental health service providers strive to meet the needs of those diagnosed with a mental illness, the needs of those with chronic mental illness greatly exceed the services available.

Chronic mental illness is defined by the National Institute of Mental Health as: “While mental disorders are common in the United States, their burden of illness is particularly concentrated among those who experience disability due to serious mental illness (SMI). A mental, behavioral, or emotional disorder (excluding developmental and substance use disorders); Diagnosable currently or within the past year; Of sufficient duration to meet diagnostic criteria specified within the 4th edition of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-IV); Resulting in serious functional impairment, which substantially interferes with or limits one or more major life activities. In 2012, there were an estimated 9.6 million adults aged 18 or older in the U.S. with SMI in the past year. This represented 4.1 percent of all U.S. adults.”

Those with chronic mental illness experience serious, functional impairment which often prevents them from maintaining employment, housing, relationships and compliance with medication/treatment. Furthermore, many of these individuals struggle with meeting their own basic life needs such as nutrition, health care and hygiene without significant assistance.

Due to the toll it takes on family members and caregivers, individuals with chronic mental illness often become estranged or abandoned by loved ones. Some, who are less advanced in their illness, are able to maintain independence, sustaining themselves on Social Security disability payments. However, those spoken of in the above narrative are not so fortunate. Many times, they too have received Social Security disability, but are unable to maintain their own finances and cannot manage in independent living.

These individuals function best in structured, supportive environments. The effects of the 1981 repeal (Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act) that decreased the federal government’s spending on mental health services by 30 percent are still being directly seen. Many with chronic mental illness who were dependent on institutions that offered necessary structures were rendered homeless. This has not only been a continued effect of the repeal, but the number of homeless individuals with mental illness has increased. Additionally, many times, individuals with mental health disorders find themselves in the custody of law enforcement for engaging in criminal behavior for survival (petty theft of food, criminal trespassing) or acting out in ways that they would not ordinarily if they simply had access to mental health treatment services.

What do they need?

Supported-housing such as a group home, or assisted living which would offer a safe, affordable housing option that would foster socialization, support of staff when needed to aide with budgeting, medication compliance, transportation to doctors appointments and recreational activities in an accepting environment.

What can you do?

The next time you see the person at the intersection, or wandering aimlessly down the road — offer water, a kind word, a smile or food. Educate yourself and someone else. Talk about mental illness and how we can all be part of the solution to end the stigma, and help those in our community.

If you find that you are drawn to do more, give more or be part of the solution, please join us for our first chronically mentally ill housing meeting as we discuss how we can come together to serve some of our most vulnerable community members. The primary discussion point will be funding for a group home.

The meeting is scheduled for 1 p.m. Aug. 22 at 1800 S. Washington Suite 202B. Please RSVP at 806-351-4994.

Christina Rolerson, LCSW, ACSW, is director of case management/social work’s at Northwest Texas Healthcare

System-Pavilion.