With piles of plowed snow lingering in the Kansas Expocentre’s parking lot, thousands of people were greeted inside the building Saturday by a welcome springtime flair and an impressive tropical display at the entrance of the annual Garden Show.

The event sold about 3,000 tickets Friday, and organizers on Saturday expected 5,000-plus would be purchased that day.

Greatly accentuating the omnipresent feeling of warmer months ahead was Designer Palms Inc., a family-owned small business based in Andover that constructs steel palm trees. This weekend is the company’s first appearance at a Topeka event.

Wendell Turner said the business is a fun venture he began from scratch after he created a steel palm tree sculpture as an anniversary gift to his wife, Helen, who grew up in Florida.

Now he and his sons fill orders as far away as Hawaii and Dubai, an emirate in the United Arab Emirates federation. Turner said warm-climate people transplanted to colder locales are drawn to his work.

“They just get sick and tired of looking at the cold weather,” he said.

Turner and his wife did their first show 12 years ago and now his sons visit events in larger cities as the company grows. The average height and weight of the trees they construct are about 300 pounds and between 7 and 14 feet tall. They build them as high as 25 feet. Each one averages about 40 to 50 hours to make.

Lights and speakers also are affixed into some of them. Sculpted monkeys were spotted among the leaves.

The palm tree is a symbol of success and relaxation, Turner said, and a wonderful way to accent patios, pools and parking lots or landscaping in general.

“It’s something to pretty them up,” he said.

Another few thousand people were anticipated for the Garden Show’s final day, which runs from 11 a.m. to 5 p.m. Sunday with tickets at $6 apiece.

Jamie Hancock, a horticulture agent in Shawnee County and an organizer of the Garden Show, said the turnout has been great. She said people particularly enjoy the landscape booths and “a taste of spring” they experience while snow remains outside.

There even was a show of national pride with a large display of the Olympic Rings comprised of plants and flowers.

Addysen Welker, 6, with a koala bear and Powercat logo painted on her cheeks, was creating spin art. She was helped by spin art guru David Cain as her grandmother, Mary Welker, stood nearby.

The elder Welker said “we’re remodeling everything” inside and outside, and that she had collected ideas perusing the show.

“Everything is so nice out here,” she said.

Cain, who with his wife takes up a post at numerous Expocentre events with their face painting and spin art booth, leaned forward in his chair as he emphasized how “very busy” the two had been Saturday.

The couple enjoy providing youngsters with fun activities to break up the monotony of walking around booths and displays with adults.

“It’s just something the kids love to do,” Cain said.