The market conditions for brokerage and agency principals who are looking to sell their firms has never been better, according to several industry merger and acquisition experts.

According to Reagan Consulting, brokers are enjoying their best combination of growth and profitability in nearly a decade, with deal activity being brisk and valuations at record highs.

Values being paid for insurance agencies and brokerage firms have “never been higher,” Bobby Reagan, CEO of Reagan Consulting, told a group of 150 insurance industry leaders who attended a three-day workshop in Atlanta co-sponsored by the Council of Insurance Agents and Brokers.

A key theme of the conference was equipping firms to build an agency perpetuation plan to remain independent, since a shortage of producer recruiting could hinder success, according to Reagan Consulting.

A conference highlight was a panel of the CEOs of six of the most active buyers: Pat Gallagher of Arthur J. Gallagher; Jim Henderson of Assured Partners; Powell Brown of Brown & Brown; Marty Hughes of Hub International; David Eslick of Marsh & McLennan Agency; and Mike Sicard of USI.

The six leaders reported strong acquisition pipelines and collectively projected they hope to acquire more than $1 billion in revenue in the coming year.

Kevin Stipe, president of Reagan Consulting, told attendees that his firm has “never seen valuations as strong as they are today.”

Stipe told the gathering that his firm that widespread buyer demand is responsible for pushing acquistion multiples to record levels.

“There is nothing today to suggest that valuations will be going down any time soon, Stipe said.

Stipe said high deal multiples have jumped another 10% during the past 18 months.

“There is a lot of demand among all buyer groups, but private equity buyers are now most active – 43% of all acquisitions in 2014,” Stipe said.

However, the bright outlook is not entirely unqualified.

Recruiting and retaining staff remains a top challenge for agencies and brokerage firms – particularly those hoping to perpetuate internally. Reagan Consulting suggests that 60% of agencies are under-recruiting, which is a “long-term threat to growth, profitability and perpetuation,” Stipe said.

“If you don’t have young, up-and-coming producers in your shop, perpetuation will become impossible,” he warned.