Hillary Clinton in an interview on CNN’s “Fareed Zakaria GPS” Sunday addressed the recent poll that shows Darth Vader polling higher than all potential 2016 presidential candidates, including Clinton herself.

Zakaria asked Clinton to delve into the “deeper meaning” of the poll, and Clinton proceeded to blame Washington gridlock for the American people’s preference of Darth Vader.

“People love fantasies and sometimes when we’re so frustrated with the gridlock in Washington, we would like some deus ex machina figure,” Clinton explained. “Darth would not be my choice, but, you know, somebody, perhaps a slightly more positive attitude in his presentation … to come in and just fix it.”

Like President Obama, Clinton appears to favor blaming Congress instead of considering her own culpability. For example, perhaps Clinton’s poverty claims and outrageous speaking fees are turning the American people off and prompting them to choose the “Star Wars” villain over her.

“People are just so fed up with the gridlock and dysfunction in Washington,” Clinton expanded. “The Congress is just, you know, so, unfortunately, unable to even agree on the most obvious kinds of matters, that I think, you know, Darth Vader looks pretty good to a lot of people.”

During the interview, Clinton also assured Zakaria that Obama is not golfing too often instead of dealing with issues at home and abroad, despite critics — like The Washington Post’s Charles Krauthammer — who have knocked the president for spending too much time on his own hobbies.

“I know from my own experience with the president, where we worked so closely together, and as I write in the book, you know, went from being adversaries to partners to friends, that he is constantly working and thinking,” answered the former secretary of State. “But he also wants to do what will make a difference, not just perform. He wants to be sure that we know what the consequences, both intended and unintended, are.”

The president recently took over five hours out of his weekend to play golf while simultaneously refusing to visit the southern border of Texas to address the immigration crisis. Obama will also spend a good part of August golfing when he travels to Martha’s Vineyard, Mass. for his longest summer vacation since he took office.

Perhaps some of that Washington gridlock — and hence Darth Vader’s sudden popularity — is a direct effect of Obama’s decision to golf instead of address the crises in our country.