Terror on the streets of N.Y.C.

Astoria: Police Commissioner Ray Kelly has no problem using his officers to stop-and-frisk blacks and Hispanics, trampling the U.S. Constitution they’re supposed to protect. However, when it comes to reckless thugs who speed through red lights, drive on the wrong side of the road, drive on the sidewalk, assault motorists and terrorize neighborhoods, he does nothing. I’m aware of the NYPD’s policy on vehicle pursuit. However, to turn a blind eye to these thugs is unacceptable. Charles Castro

Wall, N.J.: The driver of the SUV, Alexian Lien, was understandably trying to get out of a terrifying situation, especially with his small baby and wife in the car. When the bikers attacked, slashing his tires and bashing his car, one can only imagine the terror of the passengers inside the car. I wonder how many of us would opted to flee. While I believe most bikers are considerate, this bunch needs to have their toys taken away for a while and go back to biking school. Barbara Barnett

Color blind

Manhattan: To Voicer B. Corrigan: I totally agree that anyone creating a disturbance and hurting another human being is wrong and criminal. However, I would like to know where he received the fact that the bikers were mainly African-American. I watched the same news programs over and over and could not tell if the majority of riders were male, female, black, white or blue. Theresa D. Marshman

Politically incorrect

South Ozone Park: Shame on Voicer B. Corrigan for pointing out that the rogue bike mob consisted primarily of blacks. Doesn’t he know that in this country, and especially in a liberal city like New York, this is taboo, and mentioning it is simply another form of lingering white racism? George De Beir

Lessons learned

Bayside: To Voicers Michael Caserta and B. Corrigan: Bravo! You both hit the nail on the head. If I can add my own two points: A) Had Alexien Lien been in possession of a licensed firearm, that incident never would have escalated to the extent it did. B) He should have put his car in reverse and gone the wrong way. I doubt those morons would have followed him. Dennis Palazzola

Comic relief

Oceanside, L.I.: The front-page picture of Harry Reid as Moe, President Obama as Larry and John Boehner as Curly was not only accurate but hysterical (“Still fools on the Hill,” Oct. 3). I had a good laugh and, for a few moments, forgot about our miserable economy. Thank you. Joseph J. Rebando

News blackout

Brooklyn: Your Oct. 2 headline about the shutdown (“What did YOU do for our country?”) was despicable. It was President Obama and Harry Reid who would not negotiate. I will never buy your paper, filled with everything but real news, again. Patricia Mangan

The three S’s

Putnam Valley, N.Y.: To Voicer Mary Boyer: Who gave you the right to decide who is and is not an American patriot? What makes you deserve that title and not others? Obviously, you belong to the Democratic “S” party: self-important, self-serving and self-indulgent. Anne Cioffi

The C-word

Flushing: Perhaps it would behoove the Tea Party fringe to go back to their so-called roots and take a lesson from our forefathers. Lest it take too much time away from vapid arguments and insidious grandstanding, let me refresh your collective memory. During the Constitutional Convention of 1787, the basis of our government was formed via a wonderful concept called compromise. In fact, the Great Compromise is the reason that we are stuck in this current stalemate, as it set up the bicameral Congress with a Senate and House of Representatives. I, for one, find it ironic that the forefathers whom Tea Party members constantly champion compromised for the good of a “more perfect union.” Blasphemy! George Washington and company must be rolling in their graves watching this current bunch throw their grand design under the bus. Liz Nacinovich

Idiocracy

Kearny, N.J.: First it was about defunding Obamacare. Then it was about the national debt. Then they started blaming President Obama and congressional Democrats for their shutdown. Now they’re scrambling to fund in piecemeal fashion those programs that make them look really bad if not made available — primarily dealing with public health, veterans and national parks. The Republicans are absolutely shameless and clueless, and it’s become abundantly clear that they are totally unfit to govern. John Woodmaska

Does not compute

Myrtle Beach, S.C.: I have worked with computers for more than 40 years. Could we please get the media to stop using the term “computer glitch”? It’s misleading and untrue, as computers don’t make mistakes but humans do. If something does not work right in the high-tech area, it is either a programming mistake, a system design mistake or an operations error — all human. All I have heard since the Affordable Care Act rollout is “computer glitch.” Can’t we come up with a different expression that puts the onus on human errors? John M. Schaeffer

Clearing the air

Astoria: My mother — a non-smoker surrounded by smokers in her office for many years — died at 58 of lung cancer. So when second-hand smoke from my neighbor’s apartment began entering mine, I had to do something about it. My tenants’ association found that at least 45 other households in my building of 126 apartments are also fed up with second-hand smoke permeating their lives. We are working with our landlord to institute a no-smoking policy in all apartments in our building. More tenants, associations, landlords and coop boards should consider going smoke-free in their buildings so everyone can breathe clean air at home. Dorothy Oshiro

Doff the cap

Bronx: It occurs to me that one reason we are losing good teachers in New York City may be the cap imposed on teachers’ salaries. I believe most teachers who go into the administration end of education do so because of higher salaries. Maybe without the cap, good teachers would remain in the classrooms — which is probably where many of them would prefer to be anyway. Georgine Sheridan

Hurtful language

Manhattan: Re “Hooker rescue” (Sept. 26): We commend Chief Judge Jonathan Lippman for setting up the new Human Trafficking Intervention Courts, which will protect some of the most vulnerable people in New York State. There has been a growing realization in law enforcement that prostitution is often not a profession, but a horrendous crime in which pimps and traffickers control and abuse the victims. For this reason, we take issue with with the Daily News’ use of the word “prostitutes” and, in other articles, “hookers,” which stigmatize victims and ignore the crimes perpetrated against them. Laurel W. Eisner, Sanctuary for Families

Strange bedfellows

Manhattan: So scandal-plagued Brooklyn Distict Attorney Charles Hynes has decided to run as a Republican and Conservative after voters fired the crook in the Democratic primary last month (“Hynes is ‘right’ back in DA race,” Oct. 4). Wow. He’s got less class than we all thought. This proves what his critics have said all along: The man has zero principles and only cares about winning. At any cost. This is why so many innocent men got framed. The DA will hide evidence if it means he will lose and not get a conviction. Winning is all he cares about, which is why this “lifelong Democrat” is suddenly running as a Republican and Conservative. I don’t know who is more vile, Hynes for his opportunistic whoring, or the GOP for giving their ballot line to anyone, as long as it thinks that person can win. (That’s why they put lifelong Democrat Mikey Bloombucks on their ballot three our three times while decrying everything he did as the nanny-emperor.) Let’s teach these frauds a lesson on election day. Remy Shapiro

Same old, same old

Whitestone: Re “Gov’s probe off ‘balance’” (Oct. 3): Gov. Cuomo created the Moreland Commission and gave it power to issue subpoenas, then squashes them before they can be sent. Subpoenas were sent to the Senate Republicans and the Independence Party, but not to the state Democratic Party, which the governor controls. When are we going to learn that, no matter who we elect, the corruption will continue as business as usual? Kim F. Cody