GRAND RAPIDS, MI -- A federal appeals court reaffirmed Friday an Affordable Care Act provision involving contraceptive coverage does not violate the rights of nonprofit entities that oppose such coverage on religious grounds.

Under the provision, nonprofits and other entities with closely held religious beliefs are exempt from providing or paying for the law's so-called contraceptive mandate. However, the provision requires insurance issuers and third party administrators to provide contraceptive coverage to employees.

In response, organizations in Michigan and Tennessee, including the Michigan Catholic Conference and Catholic Charities Diocese of Kalamazoo, filed a lawsuit against the federal government. They claimed the provision violates their rights under the Religious Freedom and Restoration Act.

On Friday, the Sixth Circuit Court of Appeals issued an opinion upholding the provision, saying it "effectively insulates these entities from the contraception-provision process."

"They no longer have to pay for contraceptive coverage, and all individuals under their plans are notified of the entity's religious objections," the ruling said.

Neither the Michigan Catholic Conference nor the Catholic Charities Diocese of Kalamazoo could be reached for comment Friday afternoon.

Related: Michigan Catholic Conference challenges Affordable Care Act contraception mandate in federal court

Prior to Friday's opinion, the sixth circuit also had supported the contraceptive mandate, the opinion said.

A U.S. Supreme Court ruling in a case involving Hobby Lobby in 2014 spurred a review of an earlier decision from the appeals panel, as ordered by the nation's high court.

Under the Hobby Lobby ruling, the Supreme Court decided family-owned for-profit businesses can't be required to provide contraception coverage under the federal health care law.

In the opinion issued Friday, the sixth circuit said the Hobby Lobby decision does not change its belief the contraception provision does not violate the Religious Freedom and Restoration Act.

The issue in the Hobby Lobby case is "fundamentally different" from the issue at "the heart of this case – whether an entity's decision not to provide such coverage by exercising an accommodation is, by itself, a violation of that entity's religious beliefs," the opinion said.

"We upheld this accommodation against a RFRA challenge in our initial opinion," the opinion said. "Nothing in Hobby Lobby changes this."

Brian McVicar covers education for MLive and The Grand Rapids Press. Email him at bmcvicar@mlive.com or follow him on Twitter