Reprinted from THE AIS REPORT ON BLUE CROSS AND BLUE SHIELD PLANS , a hard-hitting independent monthly newsletter on new products, market share, strategies, conversions, financing, profitability and strategic alliances of BC/BS plans. (Not affiliated with the Blue Cross and Blue Shield Association or its member companies.)

A lawsuit over whether health insurance carriers’ provider networks were adequate has screeched to a halt following accusations of impropriety within the Washington State Office of the Insurance Commissioner, headed by Mike Kreidler (D). One of the insurers, Premera Blue Cross, subsequently filed a motion to vacate all of Administrative Law Judge Patricia Petersen’s decisions, which could result in Seattle Children’s Hospital starting all over again in its case (Washington State Office of the Insurance Commissioner, Hearings Unit, Docket No. 13-0293).

Last fall, Seattle Children’s sued the insurance commissioner’s office in King County Superior Court after it approved rate filings for four health insurance carriers participating in the state’s exchange, Healthplanfinder, that did not include Seattle Children’s in their networks. In April, Coordinated Care Corp. and Molina Healthcare of Washington, Inc. reversed course and added the hospital, leaving Premera and BridgeSpan Health Co. — a Regence BlueShield subsidiary that more recently filed a joinder in support of Premera’s motion to set aside Petersen’s orders — as the remaining carriers.

However, in a May 13 ex parte filing in the case, Petersen, who has worked for the insurance commissioner’s office for almost 30 years, said that once she was involved in cases related to the Affordable Care Act, Chief Deputy Insurance Commissioner James Odiorne “made…efforts to communicate with me ex parte about ongoing cases (at the time, the Coordinated Care case which involved the same significant issue as does the instant Seattle Children’s Hospital case which is ongoing now) in order to influence the outcome of my decisions in the area of the federal Affordable Care Act, the Commissioner’s approvals/disapprovals of the Washington Health Care Exchange filings made by carriers for certification by the Exchange and ultimate sale to Washington consumers.” She cites September as when Odiorne’s efforts to communicate started, which is the month before Seattle Children’s filed its case.

Judge Files Whistleblower Complaint

Petersen contended that Odiorne “expressed displeasure about those of my decisions which did not uphold the Commissioner’s position and he told me how he believed I was expected to have decided (always in support of the Commissioner’s positions).” She alleged that in two meetings, he “instructed me to go meet with the Commissioner when I receive a case, find out how the Commissioner wants the case decided, and decide the case in the way the Commissioner wants.”

Petersen also filed a whistleblower complaint with the state auditor’s office, which declined to investigate — and that means the complaint is now being investigated by her own agency. The insurance commissioner’s office maintains that the communication between the two was allowed, and it also said that it was investigating Petersen herself also regarding ex parte communication around her whistleblower report, which she allegedly had someone email to one of the attorneys in the case. She acknowledged the leak but said it was inadvertent. Petersen is on paid leave during the investigation, which should be final by the end of this month. In the meantime, the agency signed a former judge for the King County Superior Court, George Finkle, to a 90-day contract.

The situation prompted Sen. Mike Padden (R), chairman of the Senate Law and Justice Committee, to address the issue of administrative law judges deciding cases against the agencies they work for during a committee work session. Petersen testified, although she was under a gag order from Kreidler, so she couldn’t discuss specifics. According to Padden, he invited Kreidler to attend, but he declined, sending a couple of deputy commissioners to discuss the logistics of the hearing system.

“I just know, from 12 years as a district court judge, that independence is a bedrock principle the entire judiciary should embrace,” said Padden in a statement.

“The implications are enormous,” he continued, “especially when a hearings officer is essentially deciding which health-care facilities are to be included in a health-care insurer’s network. Then you’re talking, literally, about the choices that families have.”

Premera: ‘Orders and Rulings Are Tainted’

In its filing to vacate Petersen’s rulings, Premera contends that “Regardless of the merits of her accusation, her own words leave no question that Judge Petersen’s decision-making and her ability to remain impartial were compromised prior to issuing rulings in this case. Her prior orders and rulings are tainted as a matter of law, and cannot stand.”

Generally speaking, says Jack Rovner, an attorney and a principal of The Health Law Consultancy, one of two things will happen in this “mess” of a situation:

(1) “They can reinstate the case with the new administrative law judge and start from scratch.” That judge “could review the evidence, which is not tainted,” he says. As far as Petersen’s judgments on motions, it’s unclear if they would stand or not. The new judge “may require the motions to be refiled.”

(2) “They can say this is a dead case and invite Seattle Children’s to start anew,” an option that “seems like an unnecessary step,” he tells The AIS Report.

“The whole thing seems to be in suspended animation,” he says, adding that he has “no idea what’s going to happen procedurally.”

Attorney Tim Parker, a principal with Carney Badley Spellman who represents BridgeSpan, tells The AIS Report that “the administrative case is still pending; it was not dismissed. It is set for hearing the week of Aug. 18” in order to determine whether the two plans’ networks must include Seattle Children’s “in order to satisfy network adequacy requirements.”

According to Parker, “The substantive issue is whether an exchange network in Washington is inadequate if Seattle Children’s Hospital is not a contracted provider. SCH is a pediatric specialty care and research hospital in the Seattle area.”

Case Comes Down to Money

The case is about network adequacy standards, which are “pretty vague,” says Rovner. More specifically, he says, such narrow-network cases are “really about money.…The problem becomes when,” for example, including Seattle Children’s in a network increases premiums $10 to $15 for everyone.

When a provider pushes back in a situation like this, the question becomes “what are they charging and why,” Rovner says. “If the answer is they are charging too much,…somebody’s paying the bill.” If a provider does not face competition, which would help keep prices down, then “the government is supposed to regulate it like it does a public utility,” he asserts.

In Premera’s petition to intervene, it maintains that “Put simply, this case directly affects Premera’s rights because it will affect the cost of health plans that Premera would sell in a competitive marketplace. Thus, this case may affect Premera’s members’ interest. Plaintiff also seeks relief that if granted would preclude Premera from selling in the WHIE [i.e., Washington Health Insurance Exchange]. Plaintiff asks this Court to expel Premera from the WHIE or force Premera to pay rates demanded by the plaintiff.”

Premera, says Rovner, “left Seattle Children’s out of their network so they can have a cheaper premium.” He points to data on exchanges showing that “consumers, particularly consumers who were uninsured,” are “extremely price-sensitive.…A plan needs to provide a product that’s inexpensive,” but with requirements on essential health benefits, metal levels and no exclusions for pre-existing conditions, plan sponsors must “go to the supplier of the service to get a deep discount, and the only way they can do that is to promise volume, and the only way to do that is by a narrow network.”

“It always comes down to money,” says Rovner. “There are no free lunches.”

© 2014 by Atlantic Information Services, Inc. All Rights Reserved.