Less than a year ago, President Bashar al-Assad of Syria and his forces were sporadically using chemical weapons on rebels and civilians in the civil war. Today, the stockpile that he grudgingly admitted to under international pressure is gone.

There are still questions about whether Syria retains hidden weapons and related technologies, but the deal brokered by the United States and Russia that eliminated the known arsenal — a 1,300-ton cache of chemical agents — has achieved an important result.

On Monday, Syria delivered the last of its known stocks to the Syrian port of Latakia where they were loaded aboard a Danish ship. Some of the arsenal is being destroyed in Finland, while other materials for weapons will be destroyed at sea on an American ship and at facilities in the United States, Britain and Germany.

The 2013 agreement was ambitious and the logistics daunting, especially because the chemical munitions components had to be cataloged and removed in the middle of a war. Even so, elimination of these weapons has not ended the Syrian civil war that has killed more than 160,000 people, displaced millions and spread into Iraq through a Sunni militant group, the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria.

President Obama last week asked Congress for $500 million to finance the Syrian rebels who are trying to topple Mr. Assad, but it is unclear how or whether this could turn the tide.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

The chemical removal operation is a particular accomplishment for the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons, which implements a treaty that outlaws such arms and has worked with the United Nations to ensure that Syria fulfilled its commitments under the deal. However, the group, which won a Nobel Peace Prize in 2013, could not say categorically that Syria no longer possessed any chemical weapons. There is still verification work to do, and Syria has still not destroyed — as required — a dozen facilities used for making and mixing them.

One big weakness of the deal is that only the weapons acknowledged by Syria were affected; it is entirely possible that Mr. Assad is hiding an undeclared stockpile. Another question is whether he is trying to get around his commitments by using chlorine gas as a weapon. Chlorine is a common industrial chemical and not on the list of banned chemical agents, but its use as a weapon would still violate the Chemical Weapons Convention treaty.

American officials and international monitors must stay vigilant, of course, but the biggest burden falls on Russia to make sure that Mr. Assad, its ally in Damascus, does not subvert the deal in any way.

Despite the caveats and delays over nine months, the outcome has proved the wisdom of President Obama’s decision to threaten, and then back away from, military strikes against Syrian targets when Russia proposed a negotiated solution after the Syrians were found using sarin gas in August 2013 on the town of Ghouta, killing hundreds of people.

The resulting deal, which obligated Syria to give up its stockpile of mustard gas and precursor chemicals for sarin gas and other nerve agents, reduced the threat to innocent civilians. Mr. Obama averted military strikes, which were deeply unpopular at home and could have pulled the United States into the Syrian war, and President Vladimir Putin of Russia, faulted for selling arms to Mr. Assad and enabling his atrocities, saw his way to a diplomatic success.

President Obama’s critics excoriated the deal, but they have been proved wrong. The chemical weapons are now out of the hands of a brutal dictator — and all without firing a shot.