On Thursday, in an act of “domestic terrorism,” a man identified as Mohammod Youssuf Abdulazeez opened fire on two separate military centers in Chattanooga, Tenn.

Authorities said the 24-year-old shot through the glass doors of a recruiting center, before driving to a naval reserve center where he killed four Marines. A wounded sailor died early Saturday.

Abdulazeez was shot and killed at the scene.

This is the aftermath of a tragedy that rocked a Tennessean town and brought in support nationwide.

The four marines killed in Thursday’s shootings include Gunnery Sgt. Thomas Sullivan, Staff Sgt. David Wyatt, Lance Cpl. Skip Wells and Sgt. Carson Holmquist. The sailor who died Saturday of his wounds was Petty Officer 2nd Class Randall Smith.

According to The Boston Globe, Sullivan, 40, went on two tours of duty in Iraq and had earned a Purple Heart for his service. He was a native of Springfield, Mass.

For those who have not heard yet, one of the four Marines murdered today was one of our own – Thomas Sullivan. Please keep his family in your thoughts and prayers. Semper Fidelis Zimminite! Posted by India Battery 3rd Battalion 12th Marines – I 3/12 on Thursday, July 16, 2015

Wells, 21, went to Georgia Southern University before deciding to join the Marine Corps.

US Marine Skip Wells, 21, is among the dead in Chattanooga shooting rampage: http://t.co/QWBeE4SNF2pic.twitter.com/p3rfBDPPar — ABC News (@ABC) July 17, 2015

Holmquist, 26, from Grantsburg, Wis., served in Afghanistan. He lived in North Carolina with his wife and child.

RIP Marine Sgt. Carson Holmquest, Husband & Father. #Chattanooga pic.twitter.com/cECzSCiGIo — Mary Forbes (@MaryForbes14) July 17, 2015

Wyatt, 37, served in Iraq, Afghanistan and South Korea, where he specialized in field artillery. He lived in the Chattanooga area with his wife and children.

#BREAKING David Wyatt identified as third U.S. Marine killed in #Chattanooga shooting @CNN @CNNbrk pic.twitter.com/KPuys3bgb3 — Carol Costello (@CarolCNN) July 17, 2015

Smith, 26, from Paulding, Ohio, was a Navy reservist serving on active duty in Chattanooga. He was married and the father of three daughters.

Friends mourn @USNavy Petty Officer Randall Smith: http://t.co/h6fwzOTiFd #military #ChattanoogaShooting pic.twitter.com/JcvtPLFNlk — Stars and Stripes (@starsandstripes) July 19, 2015

Local and national law enforcement agencies worked together to gather data in the effort of understanding the details and motives behind the single shooter’s attack.

Local community members gathered at the scene to show their support and to honor those that lost their lives.

As Chattanooga police chief just told me “this scene says it all” about community reaction & support pic.twitter.com/jklSGPSuQH — Mark McCarter (@markmccarter) July 17, 2015

This report was updated to include Smith’s death.