Nearly 800,000 Pennsylvania residents are enrolled in health insurance made available under the Affordable Care Act.

That puts Pennsylvania among the top handful of states in terms of reaching eligible people, according to an analysis by the New York Times.

Health care advocates and some hospital industry officials are noting the successful enrollment was accomplished despite several disadvantages. One disadvantage was that former Gov. Tom Corbett, before becoming governor, was among the group of state attorney generals who filed a federal lawsuit over the act.

There was little state leadership and few state resources toward informing state residents about the act and helping them enroll, say advocates including Antoinette Kraus of the Pennsylvania Health Access Network and Paula Bussard of The Hospital and Healthsystem Association of Pennsylvania.

Of the level of enrollment, Bussard said "We're pretty proud of it." Hospitals have been a driving force in enrolling people, using staff members to enroll uninsured people who seek medical care at hospitals. The hospitals have their own powerful incentive to sign people up, since the coverage can offset the bills of people who might otherwise be unable to pay, and it also retroactively covers unpaid bills from the previous three months.

Another driving force has been advocacy organizations such as Kraus', which, along with low-income health centers, have used a relatively-small allocation of federal funds to pay for navigators to help people enroll.

States that decided to run their own health insurance exchange — Pennsylvania is among about three dozen states which chose to rely on a federally-run exchange — received more money than did Pennsylvania to promote the exchange and sign people up.

According to recent figures from Bussard, 472,097 Pennsylvania residents have enrolled in coverage through the federally-run exchange. Eighty-one percent of those qualified for a government subsidy to help cover the cost. Another 305,000 people have enrolled in the state's Medicaid expansion which became available Jan. 1.

Between the two programs, 777,097 people are covered, according to Bussard's figures, which are from the federal government. Before the launch of the Affordable Care Act, Pennsylvania had about 1.2 million uninsured people.

Advocates believe most of the uninsured people who had an urgent need for health care are enrolled. Still, they estimate there are about 365,000 more who would likely see the programs as a good opportunity. These include about 250,000 more people eligible for the Medicaid expansion, which is for people earning up to 138 percent of the federal poverty level, and about 115,000 people eligible for a tax credit toward coverage bought on the exchange.

While people could begin signing up for coverage on the exchange on late 2013, Corbett opted not to immediately accept the Medicaid expansion, which is for people whose incomes are too low to afford coverage on the exchange, even with the tax credit. As a result, there was no program for the people with the lower incomes until expanded Medicaid became available at the beginning of 2015.

Advocates believe many people with lower incomes who couldn't afford coverage on the exchange ended up thinking there was no affordable coverage for them. "We still run into people all the time who don't think they are eligible," Kraus said.

They hope Gov. Tom Wolf, who is switching back from Corbett's version of Medicaid expansion to the Obamacare version, will launch an advertising effort. Still, advocates believe that many of the remaining eligible, unenrolled people are located in rural areas, and will be harder to reach.

Advocate Erin Ninehouser of the Pennsylvania Health Access Network believes "a good goal" is to strive to enroll 100,000 more people in expanded Medicaid this year. While coverage bought on the exchange is available only during the annual open season, people eligible for expanded Medicaid can sign up at any time.

People can enroll in expanded Medicaid at the state's site at www.healthchoicespa.com, or by phone by calling 1-866-550-4355. People can also can get help signing up for any type of Affordable Care Act coverage from the Pennsylvania Health Access Network though its website at pahealthaccess.org, or by calling 1-877-570-3642.