Tennessee Sen. Marsha Blackburn has been named the 2016 Woman of the Year by the Clare Boothe Luce Policy Institute.

Blackburn accepted her award Friday during the Conservative Political Action Conference in National Harbor, Md. The event was only open to female college students attending the conference, over 200 of which were present during the ceremony.

“We work exclusively with younger women. So this event is really to put up Marsha Blackburn as a role model,” Program Director Laurel Conrad said.

The CBLPI is a nonprofit think tank founded in 1993 that prepares young women for leadership by providing them with inspiration and mentorship from established conservative women. The institute also supports and promotes female conservative politicians and activists.

The organization gave Blackburn its Conservative Leadership Award in 2007, and she frequently attends and speaks at its events.

“The Clare Boothe Luce Policy Institute has done a tremendous job of not only encouraging young women to lead in their communities, but preparing them with the tools they need to fight for conservative, constitutional principles,” Blackburn said. “It was an honor to accept this award in a room full of young women who are the future of the conservative movement.”

Blackburn also regularly appears in the organization’s annual Great American Conservative Women photo calendar. The calendar is designed for female college students who share the institute’s views.

“It’s a nice little reminder that there are conservative women,” President Michelle Eaton said.

Eaton said the CBLPI selects its Woman of the Year through discussions with staff but also the young women it serves.

“We look for one who’s been great always, but especially this year,” she said. “Marsha is a wonderful role model who’s excellent in conservative policy and leadership.”

Blackburn was selected this year in part because of her defense of pro-life arguments, Eaton said.

In October 2015, Blackburn was appointed chair of the congressional committee tasked with investigating Planned Parenthood. She also criticized a poll concerning women’s health released by Vanderbilt University in Dec. 2015. Blackburn accused the university of trying to advance a pro-choice agenda by not specifically asking in the poll about abortions provided by Planned Parenthood.

Eaton said the CBLPI also chose Blackburn based on her opposition to the Affordable Care Act. Blackburn has frequently voted to defund the program, most recently on Jan. 17.

The senator’s character and demeanor throughout her career are another reason the CBLPI selected her for the award.

“She’s strong and principled but she makes these arguments in such a gracious way,” Eaton said.

Eaton said Blackburn is an excellent role model for the young women the organization supports.

“Marsha is very inspiring to young women,” Eaton said. “You can be strong and successful but still feminine.”