<p>Contributed rendering</p><p>The Christus Spohn Health System proposed replacing Memorial hospital with a 40,000-square-foot primary care clinic named the Dr. Hector P. Garcia — Memorial Family Health Center.</p>

By Dave Hendricks

It may seem like a bad joke: With fewer emergency rooms available, patients will spend less time waiting ... in emergency rooms.

Last year, though, about 40 percent of the emergency room visits at Memorial hospital involved patients with non-emergency medical problems, according to data provided by the Christus Spohn Health System. They typically wait, sometimes for several hours, while physicians treat patients who require immediate attention.

Data about non-emergency visits to emergency rooms partially prompted Christus Spohn's recent proposal to demolish Memorial and build a new 40,000-square-foot primary care clinic on the hospital campus, said Dr. Osbert Blow, medical director for the health system's trauma and surgical critical care services. Christus Spohn would spend approximately $12 million to $16 million on the clinic, according to the Nueces County Hospital District, and offer an array of services designed to keep patients healthy ? and away from the emergency room.

"We have a saying: Get people to the right place for the right care at the right time," Blow said.

Under the $325 million proposal, Christus Spohn would shift major medical services to Shoreline hospital, including the region's only Level II trauma center and two medical residency programs currently housed at Memorial. Demolition would require approval from Nueces County, which owns the two-building hospital complex.

Negotiations between Christus Spohn and the Hospital District over the details remain ongoing, but a draft agreement released last week provided a rough framework. The seven-page document included a commitment from Christus Spohn to improve emergency room services.

"Spohn is also currently utilizing a widely recognized process improvement methodology (the "Lean methodology") to improve processes within the ED at Shoreline. To date, Spohn has seen an improvement in average wait times," according to the draft agreement, which abbreviated references to the hospital emergency department. "Spohn's Transformation of Care plan includes the expansion of sites that will allow more access to primary care for patients that are not truly urgent. This is expected to improve the wait-times for truly emergent patients treated in the Shoreline ED and improve the experience for all patients."

Emergency room waits at Christus Spohn's three Corpus Christi hospitals ? the federal government considers them a single hospital for statistical purposes ? rank well above the state and national averages.

Patients spent an average six hours and 57 minutes in the emergency room before they were admitted to the hospital for inpatient care, according to data collected by the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, which calculated the wait by sampling hospital data collected between Oct. 1, 2012, and Sept. 30, 2013. Texas hospitals averaged four hours and 30 minutes, slightly less than the national average.

Patients at Christus Spohn's local emergency rooms also spent an average 58 minutes waiting to see a health care professional, according to the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services data. Both Texas and national hospitals averaged 26 minutes, less than half the wait at local Christus Spohn hospitals.

Blow cautioned against comparing Christus Spohn with the average data, saying the health system's responsibility for indigent care, role as the region's trauma center and other factors prevented an apples-to-apples comparison. He suggested comparing Christus Spohn against University Health System in San Antonio or University Medical Center Brackenridge in Austin.

Both serve large urban areas and fulfill similar functions to Christus Spohn, Blow said. They both also have wait times well above the Texas and national averages.

How any agreement between the Hospital District and Christus Spohn would affect emergency room waiting times, beyond the health system's commitment to improvement, remain unclear. The Hospital District hasn't requested any data from Christus Spohn about emergency room waiting times and the draft agreement doesn't provide any mechanism to measure improvement or enforce the broad commitment.

Regardless, hospitals have limited control over emergency room waiting times, which depend on a complex array of factors and vary day to day.

"One of the biggest concerns, and it's a nationwide crisis, is a lot of people are using ERs as their primary healthcare," said Julie Fomenko, an assistant professor at the Texas A&M Corpus Christi College of Nursing and Health Sciences.

About 21.5 percent of Nueces County residents don't have health insurance, according to the U.S. Census Bureau's 2012 American Community Survey. Many don't earn enough money to afford private health insurance but earn too much to qualify for federally subsidized health insurance plans. They rely on hospital emergency rooms, which treat patients regardless of their ability to pay.

"And if you look where our biggest populations are centered, they're centered around Memorial and Shoreline," said Fomenko, who worked at Shoreline as a nurse for seven years.

Christus Spohn's proposal would tackle the root problem with the new, 40,000-square-foot primary care clinic located on the Memorial hospital campus.

Focused on family medicine, the new clinic would include a pharmacy, laboratory and x-ray services. Clinic workers would offer advice on managing chronic conditions, including high blood pressure and diabetes. Counselors would help clinic patients navigate health care services, understand how to correctly take their medication and make other basic-but-critical health care decisions.

Blow said Christus Spohn wants to encourage patients with non-emergency conditions, which accounted for 40 percent of emergency room visits at Memorial and 30 percent of emergency room visits at Shoreline last year, to visit the new clinic. That would provide better, more efficient care for everyone and presumably reduce emergency room waiting times for patients with urgent medical problems.

"You've basically got a hospital that's looking at what the future of care is," said Lance Lunsford, a spokesman for the Texas Hospital Association.

The Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act of 2010 ? commonly called Obamacare ? encouraged hospitals to re-examine how they provide health care, emphasizing a so-called "continuum of care" that looks beyond simply billing for procedures.

"If you actually look at it, Lunsford said. "They're actually doing more for the community,"

Twitter: @CallerDaveH

Fast Facts

The Christus Spohn Health System proposed building an approximated 40,000-square-foot primary care clinic named for civil rights leader Dr. Hector P. Garcia on the Memorial hospital campus. Construction would cost approximately $8 million, based on the estimated $200 per square foot cost. Fully equipping the new clinic would bring the total cost to between $12 million and $16 million, according to the Nueces County Hospital District.

Services offered at the clinic would include:

Extended hours, including 24-hour service on Thursday, Friday and Saturday. Spohn would continually evaluate the demand for 24-hour service and may alter the hours based on need.

Specialty clinics including urology, cardiology, neurology, endocrinology, orthopedics and post-trauma care.

Pharmacy services

X-ray services

Laboratory services

Community health workers, who would help patients navigate the health care system

Management of chronic conditions, including diabetes, high blood pressure and heart conditions

Social and behavioral health services

Wellness education focused on diet and lifestyle choices

A chapel

Benefits counselors from the Nueces County Hospital District

Source: Christus Spohn Health System, Nueces County Hospital District