But the strategy carries a cost. Such spending through the tax code not only offered the false promise of smaller government. Its most insidious effect was to hide what the government does and, notably, to shield from political debate which people it benefits most. That is clearly not those of middle and low income, who don’t earn enough to qualify for many tax deductions and often don’t even claim them.

Taxing Power Direct public spending on social insurance is much smaller in the United States than in most other advanced nations. Accounting for taxes on government benefits and the effect of tax expenditures moves the United Stated much closer to the other countries. Net public social expenditures Gross expenditures France Spain Germany E.U.-21* Italy Denmark Britain Sweden Portugal Japan Ireland United States O.E.C.D.-33† Australia Norway Canada Poland Korea 0 5% 10 15 20 25 30 Share of gross domestic product * All E.U. countries excluding Bulgaria, Croatia, Cyprus, Latvia, Lithuania, Malta and Romania. † All O.E.C.D. countries excluding the U.S.

Built in the shadows, protected from democratic accountability, the government developed into a Rube Goldberg contraption that has only a weak claim to a defensible social purpose. It might not be the smallest government in the advanced world, but it can lay claim to being among the least efficient and the most unfair.

Professor Mettler argues it has helped cement the image of a government that most Americans wrongly consider largely irrelevant to their lives. “I see it as a case of smoke and mirrors,” she argued.

Interestingly, this suggests that the idea animating most liberal Democrats these days — that government must tax and spend more to provide the generous social insurance that is common among America’s peers — might be wrong.

Indeed, looked at this way, the government might actually be big enough. But if the United States is to moderate the extreme inequities thrown up by the market economy and provide a true safety net to people in need, the federal government would have to tax and spend very differently.

Jacob Funk Kirkegaard, a senior fellow at the Peterson Institute for International Economics, notes how different the American government looks when one includes all it spends through the tax code.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

By conventional measures, public social spending in the United States — defined as what the government spends directly to help people get through hard times like illness, unemployment or old age — ranks significantly below the average among the other 33 industrialized countries of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development.

In 2011, social spending from all levels of government amounted to 19 percent of gross domestic product, about three percentage points less than in Norway and 11 points less than in Denmark.

But including both taxes on government benefits, which tend to be higher in other countries, and the cost of tax subsidies like the deduction for company-provided health insurance, American public spending on social insurance rises to almost 21 percent of G.D.P.

That is above the O.E.C.D. average, ahead of Norway and no longer that far behind Denmark.

And this doesn’t even count government spending on education above the age of 6, which the O.E.C.D. considers an investment rather than social insurance, nor the costly mortgage tax deduction, which provides the vast bulk of its benefit to the most affluent households.

Photo

At bottom, the American government’s approach to taxing and spending is mildly progressive, but basically an impotent weapon against inequality.

According to Mr. Kirkegaard’s calculations, the disposable income gap between families at the top 10 percent and those at the bottom 10 percent of the income distribution, after taxes and government transfers, is bigger in the United States than in any other O.E.C.D. nations except Mexico, Turkey and Israel.

“The main thing here is not about not spending enough,” Mr. Kirkegaard said. “It is about the distribution of this spending.”

For instance, President Obama’s American Opportunity Tax Credit to subsidize college tuition has particularly benefited families making from $100,000 to $180,000, where the subsidy is cut off. Many economists have exposed how the mortgage tax deduction, which rises in value for those in higher tax brackets, does little to further its ostensible purpose: expanding middle-class homeownership. Over all, the Congressional Budget Office shows how the richest fifth of Americans get more than half of the benefits from the costliest tax breaks.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

For most voters, however, it’s just too hard to tell how much the government spends on these priorities and when the playing field is tilted toward those at the top. “Just from a democratic transparency perspective, this is a huge problem,” Mr. Kirkegaard said.

And the inefficiency of American social insurance manifests itself across the board.

Consider spending on health care, which by some accounts wastes as much as 5 percent of the nation’s G.D.P., or about $800 billion. The government spends more on health, per person, than every O.E.C.D. nation except Luxembourg and Norway. Yet too much of that enriches doctors and other health care providers while American rates of infant mortality and premature death are off the charts compared with other wealthy nations.

As Americans file their tax returns and Congress debates the federal budget, Republicans are once again appealing to the public by proposing to sharply cut the scale of domestic spending, which would mostly fall on the poor.

But their plans fail to recognize that Americans actually prefer a strong safety net. In fact, counting private expenditures along with public ones, the United States spends more on social insurance than every O.E.C.D. country but France.

In light of these preferences, perhaps it is time to stop focusing so much on the visible part of government. Instead, Washington might be better occupied culling the many goodies hidden in the tax code that serve little or no social purpose other than coddling well-connected constituencies. Those billions could then be used to provide regular American families the social insurance they really need.