A healthy community is a more productive community, which is one of the reasons behind the 14th annual Healthy Affair, to be held Saturday, April 23 at Welcome Baptist Church in Pontiac.

Free health screenings will be offered for Oakland County residents by a number of health care professionals and representatives from Oakland County agencies.

As a part of the Greater Pontiac Community Coalition, a group of agencies and businesses who assist in social development, the Healthy Affair covers a number of health areas and examinations with a large commitment from the Oakland County community.

Representatives from St. Joseph’s Hospital, McLaren-Oakland Hospital will be on hand along with students from Oakland University, University of Michigan and Baker College to assist.

Advertisement

“We ask people to donate their service time,” said Earline Dowell, a co-chairwoman of the Healthy Affair. “We have doctors, nurses, medical students along with people from different (health) agencies. (And) everything is free.”

Screenings for blood pressure, cholesterol, diabetes, HIV/AIDS, hepatitis and other health tests, including blood lead testing for children aged 6 and under, and pregnant women, are provided. Doctors and pharmacists are on hand to answer questions on medications and other health issues. Hearing and eye tests, breast exams, podiatry, stress assessments and dental screenings will be offered.

Leona Patterson, a co-chairman of the Healthy Affair, said the fact that there is no charge for screenings and tests is an incentive for persons to take advantage of Healthy Affair.

“Everyone is still not tied into the Affordable Care Act,” she said.

In the past, some serious health issues had been discovered and caught in time at the Healthy Affair. Patterson recalled an instance when one woman visiting from out of town, upon examination, discovered a health emergency. “Her blood pressure was so high, we had to call an ambulance,” said Patterson of the woman, who is in good health now.

Another woman returned the following year, to tell that in her examination, a malignant mass had been found, and properly treated.

“The reception has been very good,” said Co-Chairwoman Dorothy Herron, “(but) our biggest problem is getting the teens in. (And) we’ve been reaching out to the Hmong community.”

All Oakland County residents are eligible to attend the Healthy Affair, but no one will be turned away. “We’ve had some people come from Canada,” Dowell said.

Translators will be on hand and also help for the hearing impaired will also be available. For those without a way to get to the event, free transportation to and from destinations, by appointment, is available.

A continental breakfast will also be served.

The Healthy Affair will be held from 9 a.m. to 3 p.m. April 23 at Welcome Baptist Church. For more information call 248-335-8740.