David Myers published a post on his company’s blog earlier this week informing the customers at Mighty Good Coffee that prices would be increasing.

His reasons: “Square, fair and Obamacare.”

“I’m concerned about how my customers react to price increases and we need to be open and proactive. I’ve told our core customers in advance so it’s not just out of the blue. I feel like we owe it to our customers,” said Myers, the owner of the 8-year-old downtown Ann Arbor cafe.

Myers said the prices of certain drinks at the coffee shop at 217 N. Main St. are being raised about 10 to 50 cents.

“In most cases, our customers will only see marginal increases, but if you’re used to paying $2 for a certain drink and now it’s $2.25, you’ll notice it when you’re digging that other quarter out of your pocket.”

Myers said that his credit card processor, Square, discontinued its $275 monthly flat rate fee for credit card transaction and businesses now have to pay a standard 2.75 percent fee for every credit card swipe, and a 3.5 percent fee, plus $0.15 per manually input transaction.

He also said that he wanted to offset the cost of the Affordable Care Act coverage that his employees signed up for in January. He gave each of his employees a raise of about 60 cents per hour to pay for health insurance.

Mighty Good Coffee is not mandated to provide coverage for its employees because of the size of the business, but Myers said wanted to be a responsible business owner and help offset the cost of health care for his employees.

“I didn’t know what the subsidies would be until they started signing up. I knew about what the individual prices and policies would be if you were to call an independent agent, and they were pretty much on par with what Obamacare costs were,” he said.

“For me it’s not crippling at all. I feel like it’s the right thing to do. We’re not really even big enough to be affected by Obamacare because there are nine people who work for me. All-in-all, it’s a net zero gain. The price increases will help offset some costs.”

Myers said that he talked to several of his regular customers as well as a number of casual customers and they were receptive to a small price increase because of his reason for doing it.

“The bottom line for me is that we have really high employee retention, and I believe that’s because of the work environment we provide,” he said.

“We’re able to pay our employees a really fair wage that is much higher than the $7.40 to $8 per hour that you see advertised for some other coffee shops, and we do that because we produce a quality product for our customers and they can tell in our service and in everything we do.”

Myers said that with tips factored in, his employees take home an average of $12 to $13 per hour.

“If I was paying minimum wage or just above it, I don’t think we could get people to provide the quality that we do.”