Democratic state Senate candidate Susan Smith has gone on the offensive, launching an aggressive advertising campaign accusing her Republican opponent of going soft on child molesters and people who leave children inside hot cars.

A campaign flier features a young girl with an apprehensive look on her face standing in front of an iron fence. In front of her sits a man leering at her from behind the wheel of a vehicle.

"Why does Greg Albritton refuse to stand up for children?" the flier asks, which then references a pair of bills Albritton opposed while he was a state representative a decade ago.

In addition to the fliers, sent to voters in District 22, the message also has aired in radio spots. It drew a sharp rebuke from Albritton, a Republican lawyer from Conecuh County. He played a recording of the radio ad for an audience at a candidate forum in Robertsdale Tuesday night.

"I've been called worse. But not in public," he said. "I wish she were here."

Smith, an Atmore City Council member, said she could not attend the forum because of a council meeting and a previously scheduled meeting with the Alabama Education Association. But she defended the ads, produced by the Matrix Group, a Montgomery consulting firm with a reputation for hardball politics.

The candidates face each other Nov. 4. The sprawling district includes the northern and eastern parts of Baldwin, as well as all or parts of seven other counties.

On the first bill, Albritton cast one of two "no" votes in 2003 against a measure that expanded the list of people required to report suspicions of child abuse to the Department of Human Resources or law enforcement authorities. In addition to teachers, police officers, pharmacists and other professions, the bill added members of the clergy

Although it contained language confirming that certain confidential communications between the clergy and their parishioners would remain privileged, Albritton said he believed it did not go far enough to protect the pastor-parishioner relationship.

"There's a privilege with regard to that," said Albritton, who noted that the other "no" vote came from liberal Democrat Jeff McLaughin.

The other bill involved a proposal by then-Rep. Cam Ward, R-Alabaster, to make it a misdemeanor crime for anyone 14 or older to leave a child 8 years old or younger in a vehicle under conditions that pose a danger to the youngster.

Ward agreed to delay the bill following about a half-hour debate on the House floor after some lawmakers raised concerns that it intruded on parental responsibilities.

"I'm concerned that we're putting in Big Brother supervision that would be difficult for parents to abide by," Albritton said at the time.

Albritton's appearance Tuesday at the forum, sponsored by the tea party-affiliated Common Sense Campaign, was supposed to be a head-to-head showdown with Smith. In her absence, he instead answered questions from a moderator about his views on a variety of issues.

Albritton reiterated his opposition to abortion, the Common Core State Standards Initiative in education, a state-run lottery and expanding Medicaid under the federal Affordable Care Act.

On spending, Albritton said he favors further consolidation of state government agencies but opposes combining the education and General Fund budgets, which advocates contend would give lawmakers more flexibility in solving budget shortfalls. Despite court rulings that largely gutted Alabama's tough illegal immigration law, Albritton said he favors a law that would register residents who are in the country illegally.

On economic development, Albritton said his district has several dozen working oil and gas wells and added that he would like to see a local refinery built to process that fuel. On why voters should choose him over Smith, he cracked a joke referencing actor-director Clint Eastwood's appearance at the 2012 Republican National Convention.

"No. 1, I'm here. She ain't," he said. "I've got an empty chair. I feel like Clint Eastwood."