Step on to the beach this time of year and you may see both tourists and locals with a can or cup in hand.

Law enforcement say they deal with over intoxication every day during spring break, and they say some of that is caused by binge drinking.

Five drinks in one hour for men, and four for women. It's what the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention define as binge drinking. And according to the CDC one out of six adults binge drinks four times a month.

With thousands of tourists and locals packing the beaches, police say it happens here every day.

"It's more people getting sick. I've seen a lot of that. Throwing up in trashcans or passing out. It's pretty dangerous," Cori Carson and Jackie Saganich, spring breakers from Michigan and Orlando, said.

If you're going to drink, the CDC recommends sticking to one or two drinks a day. Many spring breakers say the don't plan to follow that.

"We're drinking, don't get me wrong," Saganich said. "We're on vacation. But we're not getting crazy. Nobody's thrown up or blacking out. We're staying safe."

The spring break stereotype is an all-day party, but some spring breakers say they're actually practicing moderation.

"It's kind of pointless to get totally wasted not be able to function if you're trying to have fun," Shebi, a spring breaker from Missouri, said.

"Just literally a beer or two an hour," Cody Stahl, who's visiting from New York, said. "Just remember that you're going all day, that alcohol is not going to run out."

But according to the National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism, that behavior can still qualify as over drinking, depending on factors like how much and how often you drink, and your age and health.

"Drink in moderation. Drink a lot of water," Carson and Saganich advised. "You're sitting out in the sun all day long. Drink water while you're drinking."

Some spring breakers may plan to stay safe, but Panama City Beach Police say they deal with over-intoxication every day and regularly see alcohol poisoning during the spring.

"Yesterday I just didn't pace at all and didn't quite make it out, so today I'm probably going to do a little more pacing," Shane Tanzosh, a spring breaker from New York, said.

"We're just trying to have fun," Shelbi said. "It's all innocent, just a good time."

The CDC says excessive alcohol consumption causes about 88,000 deaths and more than $200 billion in economic costs each year.