Last week's appellate court decision striking down a charity care law allowing hospitals to avoid paying property taxes was a blockbuster with a huge local impact.

It is so big Urbana Mayor Laurel Prussing couldn't decide whether to run a victory lap or spike a football in the end zone. So she did both.

Meanwhile, local hospital officials were forced to divide time between crying in their beer and consulting with their high-priced lawyers on the question of appeal.

Yes, 'twas big news. But it's not the first time the vexing hospital/property tax issue has made such a splash. The local story — one that expanded into a statewide story with implications in every community where there is a hospital — has been part of the local conversation since 2003 when the county's Board of Review kicked off a property tax version of the War of the Roses with Provena Covenant Medical Center.

That battle waxed and waned until 2010, when the Illinois Supreme Court ruled that tax authorities "properly denied the charitable and religious property tax exemptions requested by Provena Hospital in this case."

But the court's opinion was fractured and unclear, to the point that the court invited state legislators to clarify the meaning of Article 9 (the revenue article), Section 6 (property tax exemptions) of the Illinois Constitution.

It reads: "The General Assembly by law may exempt from taxation only the property of the State, units of local government and school districts and property used exclusively for agricultural and horticultural societies, and for school, religious, cemetery and charitable purposes. The General Assembly by law may grant homestead exemptions or rent credits."

But what does that mean with respect to property tax exemption sought by hospitals that provide charity care to patients who otherwise could not afford treatment?

Rather than having state and local tax officials continue to guess, the court sought clarification from the Legislature.

"I do not believe this court can ... impose a quantum of care or monetary requirement, nor should it invent legislative intent in this regard. Setting a monetary or quantum standard is a complex decision that should be left to our legislature, should it so choose," wrote Justice Ann Burke in a decision that concurred in part and dissented in part.

Burke insisted that a "monetary requirement without any guidelines ... can only cause confusion, speculation and uncertainty for everyone: institutions, taxing bodies and the courts."

The court's ruling did sow confusion and, more importantly, political concerns all across the state where hospitals suddenly were in danger of losing their tax-exempt status.

Every community that was home to a concerned hospital soon turned to its legislators to do something about the controversy.

Two years later, with then-Gov. Pat Quinn pressing for action, legislators passed a package of health care-related bills that established guidelines by which tax officials could decide whether hospitals that provided charity care would qualify for property tax exemptions.

It was that law the appellate court struck down. The unanimous three-judge panel held that the legislative fix was constitutionally faulty because it is inconsistent with Article 9, Section 6.

Writing for the court, Justice Thomas Appleton said the Legislature "can make the exemption more restrictive than the terms and conditions of Article 9, Section 6, but cannot 'exceed' its terms and conditions.

"Rather than requiring the hospital entity to use the subject property exclusively for charitable purposes. ...(the law) merely requires the hospital entity, in a manner of speaking, pay for its property tax exemptions with certain service of equivalent value. The legislature thereby added a new exemption. ... a charitable exemption for hospital entities that, regardless of whether they use the property exclusively for charitable purposes, provide just enough (charity care) to economically counterbalance the property tax exemption," Appleton wrote.

Specifically, the legislation provides hospitals to qualify for property tax exemptions if they met a host of requirements, including providing free and discounted hospital care to the indigent, subsidized local health-care programs. If the cost of those programs met or exceeded their property tax bill, hospitals were excused from paying property taxes.

The legislation marked a solid win for local hospitals. Local mayors, including Prussing, were enraged by what they considered a giveaway that increased the tax burden on other property owners.

Now, however, Prussing is smiling, and it's the hospitals that are apoplectic.

Despite the setback, hospital representatives are putting on a bold face.

Danny Chun, a representative of the Illinois Hospital Association, said the ruling "does not have an immediate effect" and that he's confident the legislation struck down by the appellate court will be upheld by the Supreme Court.

"How many times was Obamacare struck down by appellate courts?" Chun said, noting that the U.S. Supreme Court has twice upheld the constitutionality of the president's controversial health care law after lower courts had ruled otherwise.

Chun said the charity care law was carefully vetted by legal and tax experts as part of the legislative process. He suggested the high court will embrace the clarity of the law rather than embrace the confusion that will result if the appellate court ruling stands.

This issue is all just a matter of opinion. The crucial factor in play is not which court rules correctly, but which one has the final word.

Jim Dey, a member of The News-Gazette staff, can be reached by email at jdey@news-gazette.com or at 217-351-5369.