Drug prices are increasing—but it’s not just the high cost of specialty drugs that has patients and policy makers worried.

A new report from AARP finds that prices for common prescription drugs has risen dramatically.

Using data from the Truven Health MarketScan Research Databases, researchers from AARP’s Public Policy Institute, in collaboration with the PRIME Institute at the University of Minnesota, analyzed retail price changes between 2006 and 2013 for 227 brand-name prescriptions widely used by older Americans.

They found that retail prices for these brand-name prescription drugs increased nearly 13% in 2013, which is more than eight times faster than the 1.5% general inflation rate, according to the report.

In a statement, AARP said the report indicates that this is the highest average annual price increase since AARP began tracking prescription drug prices in 2004.

“There was some speculation that drug companies would raise their prices to recoup any losses due to the Affordable Care Act [ACA],” Leigh Purvis, Director of Health Services Research at AARP’s Public Policy Institute, told pharmacist.com. “However, our data indicate that brand name drug prices were increasing substantially years before ACA passed.”

Most of the drug prices analyzed were for chronic conditions. In fact, only 25 out of the 227 drug products in the brand name category were used to treat acute or intermittent conditions, according to Purvis. Some of the highest 8-year cumulative price increases were seen in therapeutic classes such as Uroxatal (alfuzosin—Sanofi Aventis) 10-mg tablets; Solaraze Gel 3% (diclofenac sodium—PharmDerm); Humulin R U-500 (concentrated) (insulin human injection {rDNA origin}—Eli Lilly); Prandin (repaglinide—Novo Nordisk) 2 mg, among others.

“The brand-name prescription drug price trends that we are seeing are unsustainable, particularly in combination with ever-increasing launch prices,” said Purvis.

He warned that continued increases in the cost of medications could affect all Americans—not just seniors—and prompt them to stop taking necessary medications.

“Those with private health insurance will pay higher premiums and cost sharing for their health care coverage,” said Purvis. “Over time, it could also lead to higher taxes and/or cuts to public programs to accommodate increased government spending.”

Potentially worsening the situation is evidence showing that certain generic prescription drug prices are increasing as well. A Senate hearing on that topic is scheduled for November 20.