Six out of 10 Arizona health systems participating in Medicare’s “accountable care” programs spent more money than Medicare projected last year, and one program broke even. (Photo: Getty Images/iStockphoto)

A Medicare experiment that encourages doctors and hospitals to work in tandem to improve care while saving taxpayers money has produced mixed results in Arizona.

Six out of 10 Arizona health systems participating in Medicare’s “accountable care” programs spent more money than Medicare projected last year, and one program broke even. Another three health systems saved Medicare money compared to what the agency projected spending.

Accountable care is a health-care financing method that encourages doctors and hospitals to coordinate care. The goal is to help keep patients healthy while eliminating duplicate and wasteful spending. Those health organizations that meet quality measures and achieve Medicare’s savings targets can earn bonuses from the federal health-care program for older adults.

Advocates see accountable care as an alternative to the longstanding fee-for-service system that pays doctors and hospitals based on the number of tests and procedures ordered, as opposed to a patient’s health. That shift has prompted participating hospitals and doctors to take steps to keep patients out of hospitals, where medical care costs spiral.

The Affordable Care Act included accountable care to rein in Medicare spending while improving quality. The Obama Administration set as a goal that half of Medicare spending goes toward coordinated care by 2018.

The concept also has gained momentum in the private sector. Nordstrom and Aetna are among the private-sector companies that have sought accountable-care arrangements with Banner Health Network. The Banner-Aetna arrangement serves more than 100,000 people and helped trim health spending by 5 percent in 2013.

Other local hospitals, too, are looking to expand accountable care beyond the Medicare initiative.

"It really has spurred change in what we're doing," said Dr. Richard Silver, senior vice president of population health at Scottsdale-based HonorHealth. "What we were doing before was not sustainable. Health care is too expensive."

Still, Medicare figures show that despite the program's ambitious goals, the early results have been uneven.

Nearly half of the 353 accountable care organizations did not meet Medicare’s projected savings in 2014. After bonuses were paid to higher-performing health systems, accountable care last year produced a net loss of $3 million to the Medicare trust fund, a Kaiser Health News analysis found.

In Arizona, 10 health systems have enrolled more than 175,000 seniors in accountable care and saved Medicare about $2.2 million, according to figures from the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services.

Arizona’s savings, however, are largely due to Banner Health Network, which saved Medicare more than $29 million in 2014, the third largest savings among programs nationwide.

Phoenix-based Banner Health Network is among 20 organizations that remain in Medicare’s first accountable care effort, known as the pioneer program. Banner Health Network had Medicare's largest accountable-care program in Arizona last year with nearly 53,000 patients.

Dr. Shaun Anand, chief medical officer of Banner Health Network, said that Banner has learned over the past three years how to achieve quality in a more cost-efficient manner. That has included an investment in technology, and keeping close tabs on patients who are most likely to return to the hospital.

“We’ve been on this journey for three years and we learned what works and what doesn’t,” Anand said.

On the other end of the spectrum, Arizona Care Network spent $15 million more than what Medicare projected in 2014. Arizona Care Network is made up of health providers from two organizations, Dignity Health and Abrazo Health Care.

Arizona Care Network officials acknowledge it's been a rough start as it adjusts to Medicare's accountable-care framework.

"There are challenges that all of the networks are experiencing," said Todd Ricotta, executive director of Arizona Care Network, which served nearly 33,000 patients in 2014.

Ricotta said one problem has been that his organization does not know which patients Medicare assigns to its network. Medicare assigns the patients through their doctor, but it does not inform the accountable-care organization which patients are assigned to the network until the end of the year. That has made it challenging for Arizona Care Network to figure out how to zero in on patients in the network, Ricotta said.

In 2016, Medicare will inform accountable-care organizations at the beginning of the year which patients are included in a program.

Ricotta said another challenge has been that some patients are assigned to specialists instead of primary-care doctors. The Arizona Care Network also has included doctors and providers at skilled-nursing facilities that care for patients after they are discharged from the hospital. The idea is that such specialized care can help reduce the likelihood that the patient is readmitted to the hospital, where care is more expensive. But the network wants to make sure that Medicare does not penalize the network for spending money on this post-hospital care.

"The structure needs time to evolve and mature," Ricotta said.

Scottsdale Health Partners, part of HonorHealth, saved Medicare $3.7 million and earned a bonus of $1.8 million. The health network served more than 15,000 patients last year.

Scottsdale Health Partners has achieved its savings, in part, by improving communication among doctors who have a role in a patient’s care, Silver said.

For example, doctors now have a smartphone app they can use to send messages about a patient’s care. An emergency room doctor can use the app to ensure a patient can get an appointment with a primary-care doctor the following morning. That would give the doctor the confidence to discharge a patient knowing the person would get the follow-up care they need to stay healthy and out of the hospital, Silver said.

Read or Share this story: http://azc.cc/1KzyvEt