Topics: Climate Change, Coal, divestment, fossil fuels, greenhouse-gas emissions, power plant rule, Sustainability News, News

Coal has got to go. That much is undeniable. Climate change is presenting us with a tremendous, urgent threat, and coal is the dirtiest and largest single source of the fossil fuels still pouring into our atmosphere.

But while that’s settled (among scientists, if not some particularly stubborn politicians), the conversation about how we’re actually going to transition away from coal is just getting started. And too often left out of that discussion, says journalist Richard Martin, is the human cost of the industry’s decline — how the people, and communities, built on Big Coal’s promises will be left to fare once it’s no longer in the picture.

To better understand the dramatic changes afoot, Martin, who is currently the editorial director at the clean energy firm Navigant Research, traveled to the heart of coal country, in both the U.S. and China. His resulting book, “Coal Wars: The Future of Energy and the Fate of the Planet,” tells the stories of people living through the last days of the industry — and of the industry’s determination to not go quietly.

Salon spoke with Martin about the so-called war on coal and about how environmentalists and Republicans alike can make this necessary transition less painful. Our conversation has been lightly edited for length and clarity.

Let’s start with the title of the book. It’s provocative: The “war on coal” is a phrase that’s mostly thrown around by Republicans. Do you agree with that characterization?

People like Mitch McConnell claim there is a war on coal led by the Obama administration, and the fact is whatever you think of the administration’s policies, it’s not federal regulation that’s killing the coal industry, it is broad market forces that have been gathering for years, if not decades. The coal industry was in decline before the EPA released its clean power plan last year and the decline is going to continue beyond Barack Obama’s term in office.

I thought hard about that title before deciding to go with it. My personal opinion is that war metaphors and analogies are overused and they tend to diminish the horrors of real armed conflict. But in this case, I felt like a) that term is out there and b) there is something of a battle, a struggle, a war, if you will, going on between those who want to keep burning fossil fuels, particularly coal, and those who are bent on shutting the coal industry down. Again, whether you think it’s a good thing to limit our consumption of coal or not, the fact is there is a broad and growing consensus that we need to move off of coal. That is true in China, which is the world’s largest producer and consumer of coal, it’s true in the U.S. at a national level, and it’s increasingly true even at a state level in the places where the coal industry has traditionally been the mainstay of the economy.

Again, the political side of this is not as relevant to me as broad forces that are really forcing us to reckon with what we want to become of the way in which we get our electricity going forward. To play out the metaphor, the coal industry is an empire with no single emperor. But believe me, I’ve spent the last two years looking at a lot of coal plants and a lot of coal mines and it is an empire that stretches worldwide. It is a huge global industry, it accounts for still almost 40 percent of the electricity produced in the U.S., which is down from nearly half just a few years ago. It accounts for three-quarters of the electricity in places like China and it is something of an existential struggle.

This is not a book of advocacy or environmental policy or technology. The premise of the book is if we don’t do something to drastically reduce our consumption of coal, there is no hope of limiting global climate change. My view is either we shut down the coal industry, or it’s going to shut us down. What the book tries to do is take a look at the human drama and the human costs associated with this effort to transform our power system and really, if not shut down, then certainly limit our ongoing consumption of coal.

One of the things the book really gets at is that people on the environmental side who think about this as a war see big coal as the enemy — but there perhaps isn’t enough attention paid to the people who have jobs in the coal industry, who are being affected by the industry’s decline. How did that perspective change the way that you’re thinking about these issues?

I think that’s a great point and I’m glad it comes out in the book. I think what’s happening in the environmental community is there is a growing awareness of the cost of making this huge shift. Certainly the Obama administration just in the last few months has come up with a few initiatives to try to achieve what many people call a just transition — in other words, to provide some form of hope going forward for the people in these communities. I’ve been in places like Holmes Mill, Kentucky, and let me assure you, there is nothing there except coal. When the coal industry shuts down, as it has already done in many places in Appalachia, there’s nothing for these people to do except get jobs at Wal-Mart or Burger King. Those places have been abandoned and, again, I am all for shifting away from coal but we can’t do it unless we find a way to provide jobs and hope for the people in these communities that have been dependent on coal for decades. As one economic development official in West Virginia said to me, “Google is not coming to southwest West Virginia.” Google is not coming to eastern Kentucky. There’s not an economic savior on the horizon.

What there are, and what I write about a lot in the book, are a lot of grass-roots efforts to come up with new ways for these people to make their living and provide for their families, whether it’s farming hemp, whether it’s turning mountaintop removal sites into industrial parks that include solar power and so on. I wouldn’t say these efforts have borne a lot of fruit so far, but they’re certainly going on at the community and the county and the state level and that’s where we need to focus our resources. When people like Mitch McConnell stand up in the U.S. Senate and decry the Obama administration’s war on coal, they’re not really helping their constituents. Every hour or dollar spent on fighting the war on coal is a resource that doesn’t go to really helping these people in places where the coal industry is not coming back. That realization has taken hold at the community level, it hasn’t necessarily taken hold in the U.S. Congress.

We focus a lot on convincing people that coal is contributing to climate change, that climate change is a problem. But if we’re looking for political compromises, or just to not have someone like McConnell fighting every single effort to clean up coal or cut down on its use, it seems the more pertinent argument is just convincing people that this isn’t going to destroy them in the process.

I agree with that. It’s certainly true that the people in these communities are angry and bitter towards the federal government, towards the Obama administration in particular, etc. At the same time, I had plenty of conversations with people who have worked in the coal industry and live in these places, but are starting to acknowledge that this is not the future and we’ve got to find some other way to provide for these families. I’m based in Boulder, Colorado, and I went over to Craig, which is a coal town in the Yampa Valley on the western slope of Colorado, and its mayor worked for 30 years in the coal mine there outside of Craig. But he has worked with local officials and a company called Clean Energy Collective to bring a solar garden to Craig that is literally in the shadows of the Twentymile Coal plant. He’s one of the people who is saying, look, you can submit to these changes or you can get ahead of them. You can drive the car or you can get dragged behind the bumper, and we don’t want to get dragged. He’s one of those people who is by no means a fan of Barack Obama or his energy policies, but who is grappling with the changes that he sees happening around him and is being realistic about the way forward.

You mentioned before how coal is, at least in the U.S., an industry that is already on the decline. That isn’t Obama’s fault the way some Republicans suggest that it is. What does that suggest to you about whose job it is to start thinking about different ways forward for communities that are still dependent on coal?

I think it’s definitely the job of Barack Obama and the head of the EPA and the congressional delegations from these places. Again, it’s very interesting to see the dichotomy that’s happening in the environmental movement. If you talked to, let’s say, Bill McKibben, whose work I respect quite a bit, but I don’t think he’s very focused on what’s going to happen to the people in Holmes Mill, Kentucky, when the divestment movement really spreads. I think somebody like Bill — who, by the way, contributed a very nice blurb for my book — if you ask him he would say, yeah, we need to do something for these people, we need to figure out a way forward for these communities. But I think organizations like the Sierra Club have begun to think hard about this and have begun in certain limited ways to incorporate that into, for instance, their Beyond Coal Campaign. It is the job of the people who are working to change our energy system to think about a just transition, but in my opinion, where it’s really going to come from, again, is at the community level. You can offer all the retraining programs at the local community colleges that you want across Appalachia, but the fact is it’s only going to happen by those people getting together and figuring out what are the competitive advantages we have, what are the resources other than coal that we have that we can draw on to really create an economic future in these places.