ST. PAUL, Minn.--(BUSINESS WIRE)--Securian Financial Group has hired two people to lead strategy development and implementation.

Michael Webster was appointed second vice president, Enterprise Digital Strategy. His role is to lead expansion and execution of strategies for maximizing Securian’s use of digital platforms to engage new and existing customers, develop markets and provide superior customer service. Digital platforms include mobile, social media and the web, as well as customer intelligence tools.

Webster has extensive experience developing and implementing digital strategies for financial services organizations. Most recently, he was at Ameriprise Financial, where he led the company’s development of emerging digital channels in interactive marketing. Webster has a bachelor’s degree from the University of Houston, Houston, TX and an MBA from the University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN.

Patrick Boyd was appointed director, Enterprise Strategy and Business Development. He will drive Securian’s strategic planning and acquisition strategies. Most recently, Boyd was at United Health Group where he worked on projects related to the Affordable Care Act. Before that, he worked with RBC Wealth Management on strategic planning and acquisition. Boyd has a bachelor’s degree from the University of Minnesota and holds the Chartered Financial Analyst (CFA) designation.

“At Securian, growing our businesses through acquisition and a customer-centric digital experience are top priorities,” said Siddharth Gandhi, vice president and head of Enterprise Strategic Business Development. “Michael and Patrick are charged with maintaining the company’s focus on these two strategic priorities and keeping us on the path to growth.” Both will report to Gandhi.

Since 1880, Securian Financial Group and its affiliates have provided financial security for individuals and businesses in the form of insurance, investments and retirement plans. Now one of the nation’s largest life insurance groups, it is the holding company parent of several companies.

DOFU 10-2014

A05055-1014