CHILDBIRTH was once a reliably dangerous experience. As late as the 1930s, one out of every 100 live births in America cost a woman her life; similar rates were seen around the world. But the 20th century brought tremendous advances in obstetric medicine and widened access to decent care. The maternal-mortality rate plummeted in rich countries by as much as 99%, and now poor countries are starting to catch up. But in America something odd is happening: over the past quarter of a century, the maternal-mortality rate (which counts deaths within 42 days after delivery) has been creeping back up. In 2013 more than 18 women died for every 100,000 live births. America is one of only eight countries, including Afghanistan and South Sudan, where these numbers are moving in the wrong direction. What is going on?

The shortest answer is that no one really knows. Some speculate that it has to do with the fact that American women tend to be both fatter and older when they become pregnant these days. Indeed the risks associated with childbirth rise in tandem with weight and age. But these trends can be seen in plenty of countries where the death rates are still coming down. Others suggest optimistically that America is simply more rigorous about counting these deaths. The problem with this theory is that the system for collecting these records hasn’t changed much over the past decade, while the rate has continued to rise.

The most compelling explanation is that more women are in poorer health when they get pregnant, and then failing to get proper care. Chronic health problems, such as obesity, hypertension, diabetes and heart disease, are increasingly common among pregnant American women, and each of them makes delivery more dangerous. Indeed the traditional causes of pregnancy-related deaths, such as haemorrhage, venous thromboembolism and hypertensive disorders, have been declining in recent years, whereas deaths from cardiovascular conditions and other chronic problems have been on the rise. These conditions are more common among African-American women, which partly explains why they are nearly four times more likely to die from pregnancy-related complications than white women. Poverty is also closely correlated with worse health outcomes, as poor women are less likely to have access to proper health care, including contraception and prenatal care. (Women who become pregnant accidentally are less likely to seek timely prenatal care, which raises the risks of death.) Because African-Americans are more than twice as likely as their non-black peers to live below the poverty line, this also helps to explain the grim racial disparity in maternal mortality rates.

What is the solution? Many hope the Affordable Care Act (ACA), otherwise known as Obamacare, will widen access to health care, which would ensure that more women are in better shape when they become pregnant. In the 31 states plus Washington, DC, that expanded Medicaid under the ACA, poorer women will have access to contraception and better care before and after childbirth, which should reduce their mortality risks. (After-care is seen as essential for both managing potentially critical problems and putting women back on track for a healthy lifestyle.) Studies of obstetric emergencies have also shown that at least 40% of fatalities are completely avoidable in the moment. Once doctors are trained to spot the signs of haemorrhage, severe hypertension and venous thromboembolism when they arise, they can move more swiftly to protect their patients’ lives. Federal, state and professional organisations, including the Centres for Disease Control and the American College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists, are working together to make sure that hospitals and childbirth centres know how to handle these emergencies. Hospitals in California—where one in eight American births take place—have put these protocols in place already, and the state has managed to bring its maternal-mortality rate down. The hope is to see a similar transformation on a national scale.