Dr. Ezekiel Emanuel revisited The Kelly File tonight where he did even better than in his last appearance. He was pretty darned good last time but this time he went the extra mile (at least in my mind) by specifically calling out Fox’s bias and agenda.

Kelly was snippy right off the bat as she interrupted Emanuel and said shrilly, “Let’s have a question and answer. The interview works better that way.” Then she proceeded to pepper him with questions and interrupt his answers.

However, I’d have to say Emanuel gave as good as he got. For example, when he disputed Kelly’s claim that 5 million people have had their insurance canceled as a result of the Affordable Care Act, he said, “Only on Fox is it 5 million,” he told her.

At another point, after Kelly started shouting at him, Emanuel said, “Maybe if you would stop yelling at me?”

“Did you know or didn’t you?” Kelly demanded petulantly. She was referring to whether or not it had been foreseen that so many people would lose their health insurance coverage in the wake of ObamaCare.

“You don’t see that before ObamaCare those kind of cancellations happened all the time,” Emanuel replied. Then he took it the extra step by pointing out, “You never covered them. They were very common.”

When she interrupted again, he said, “You keep interrupting. Isn’t there any manners here?”

“Sir, it’s a back and forth,” Kelly snapped. “I’m not just going to give you the platform for a soliloquy.” That is, no platform so long as it’s a liberal doing the talking. Because when it came to her next guest, Tea Party Senator Ted Cruz, she let him talk as much as he wanted to without interruption. That video is the second video below, there for your comparison. There's a world of difference.

But here was my favorite part: Emanuel pointed out that when the exchanges were set up, it was “not an environment which was hospitable to setting (them) up.” As Kelly once again tried to interrupt, he added, “You and your colleagues were constantly criticizing, trying to underfund it and trying to make sure it didn’t work. …It’s a self-fulfilling prophecy. ‘We’re gonna try to do everything we can to make it fail and then when it fails, we’re gonna say, ‘Oh, why did it fail?’”

Kelly protested, saying that Fox News had nothing to do with setting up the healthcare.gov website.

But Emanuel shot back, “You were constantly attacking the law and you were trying to make it underfunded.”

And you know Kelly knew he had a point because she let it go by sneering she’d “give” him that for argument’s sake.

And she concluded by saying, “You’re fun to talk to. Thanks for being here.”

Kelly said in an interview shortly before The Kelly File premiered that she was not going to be a female version of Bill O’Reilly. Maybe not, but she sure seems to be doing her best to try sometimes. She even announced, at about 2:55, “That’s spin!” However, I suspect that in real life she’s much less of a conservative firebrand. Her respect for Emanuel confirmed that in my mind. But is playing a conservative mouthpiece on TV, while pretending otherwise, better or worse actually being one?

I report, you decide.

Meanwhile, I think we can definitively classify Emanuel as our latest Top Dog.