Just like its namesake inventor, Tesla Motors has been pushing the limits of design and technology since its founding in 2003.

The Silicon Valley-based company proved its prowess recently when it set a new record earning a 103 out of a possible 100 in a Consumer Reports evaluation of the battery-powered Model S P85D.

The P85D model’s score was earned courtesy of the car’s efficiency and power ratings. The over-the-top performance results even prompted Consumer Reports to recalibrate its rating methods.

Even so, the Tesla creation was soundly given a score of 100, setting the magazine’s new standard for excellence. Tesla’s P85D even bested the original Model S score of 99 points in 2013. Prior to that, the only vehicle to come close in the rating was a Mercedes-Benz S-550.

What Makes the Tesla Stand Out?

Tesla’s off-the-charts score was based primarily on its acceleration and efficiency ratings. The vehicle was able to accelerate to 60 mph from a stopped position in an impressive 3.5 seconds in the vehicle’s “insane mode.”

Tesla has since released an even-faster “ludicrous mode.” The new P85D is the company’s high-performance, all-wheel-drive version of the standard all-electric Model S, which has pulled off an equivalent of 87 miles to the gallon.

The P85D’s efficiency also scored incredibly high with Consumer Reports, but a more interesting gauge of its abilities in this arena came recently out of Denmark.

A programmer from the University of Oslo, Bjorn Nyland, managed to claim a record for his Model S, driving some 453 miles before its battery ran out of power.

Tesla only claims a range of about 253 miles for its P85D, but Nyland pushed that limit by about 80%.

A Few Faults

While there was no denying the P85D’s abilities, Consumer Reports found a few faults with the model, which has a starting price of $105,000.

The biggest knocks noted against the model included the quality, or lack thereof, of interior materials and the noise produced during operation.

The P85D’s overall performance offers insights into what the future holds for electric cars, Consumer Reports’ head of testing, Jake Fisher, has said. The advances shown in the new model are prophetic of what is yet to come.

“Cars with the performance of supercars and the comfort, convenience and safety features of a luxury car while still being extremely energy efficient,” Fisher said in a story for Bloomberg.

A total of 21,577 Model S units were delivered to consumers during the first half of 2015. Tesla anticipates total auto sales of about 50,000 in 2015.

Get Free Updates! Stay in the loop with a weekly newsletter, with all our news from the previous week. We will never give away, trade or sell your email address. You can unsubscribe at any time.

Please follow and like us:

Please Leave A Comment

comments