Colorado’s most dangerous dams all withstood a record rainfall test.

That’s the good news from a week of flood deaths, washed-out highways and evacuation orders that chased thousands of people from their homes.

But in the slower-moving world of reservoir storage, the time of trouble may not be over. Safety engineers have been unable to reach many of the dams above closed roads, relying instead on phone calls with dam owners on-site.

Statewide, 167 dams have water-storage restrictions because of structural deficiencies, and some probably exceeded their permitted storage levels during the flooding. Others could have been damaged when floodwaters poured down their emergency spillways.

The deficient dams have been restricted to reduced or no water storage for various reasons: no or inadequate spillways, excessive seepage, continual deterioration, general neglect, partial or complete breaches.

When the clouds clear, “that’s when we’re really going to kick into action,” said Bill McCormick, who heads the dam safety branch at the state Division of Water Resources.

“We’re going to be sitting with a bunch of full reservoirs,” he said. “Fifty to 100 of those, we’ll have to inspect as quickly as possible.”

Engineering consultants in the Denver area have offered free help with the inspection job, which McCormick plans to accept.

“Where we have to,” he said, “we’re going to release water again.”

The dam safety program classifies Colorado dams into three groups. Failures of high-hazard dams are likely to drown people. Significant-hazard dam failures may cause extensive property damage, and low-hazard dams are not a big threat to people or property.

Fears about one high-hazard dam eased Friday, but homeowners below should expect to see water pouring down its spillway.

The Baseline Reservoir, which serves as the city of Lafayette’s water supply, had a damaged inlet, water standing on the dam crest and signs of erosion on the embankment. Repair materials were brought in and tarps laid across the crest, and the dam is under round-the-clock surveillance.

But while the dam held, “its spillway is going to activate,” McCormick said, and people below may see unprecedented water flows.

So far, a handful of low-hazard dams have failed, along with dozens of other very small dams that the state does not inspect.

Those include fishing ponds, stock ponds and aesthetic ponds. “Generally, these structures don’t hold significant volumes of water but will cause localized flooding,” said Todd Hartman, a spokesman for the state Department of Natural Resources. “People living near these structures need to be vigilant.”

David Olinger: 303-954-1498, dolinger@denverpost.com or twitter.com/dolingerdp