See the Dream Grant unfold Follow Adriana DiFranco on her journey to Broadway journey to Broadway.

The question stumped Adriana DiFranco.

What would you do if you had $2,000 and your employer's support to chase your most ridiculous dream?

She pushed the application aside.

A Dream Grant, as her employer, Boulder-based Strength in Members, had called it. Any staff in good standing could apply. Any dream was eligible. The goal: to reward hard-working employees, promote morale and encourage people to do something they would never otherwise do for themselves.

Strength in Members is a company that helps nonprofits raise funds and supports organizations that make the world more compassionate. It was the company's first Dream Grant.

It wasn't that DiFranco, who works remotely from North Carolina, didn't have dreams. The professional copywriter had plenty.

It had just been so long since the mom of two had watered them that her dreams were wilted beyond recognition. And besides, she said, she was going through a separation from her husband. She would think about her dreams later.

Don't forget to fill out your Dream Grant application, the email from her employer nudged her. Due today.

"I sat down to write it and it was the first time in more than 20 years I have experienced writer's block," DiFranco said. "How can someone ask you what your dream is and you have nothing? I couldn't come up with a single idea."

She said she knew just what she would spent the money on for her parents, or her children. But to spend the money on herself?

Blank.

"This is crazy," she said. "I sat down and thought, 'What would be the most outlandish thing. If I could do anything.' "

She would dance on Broadway.

When she was a child, DiFranco loved to dance: in her house, on the playground, outside her apartment door.

There, in front of the mirrors with my leotard on, I felt happy and ... home, she finally wrote in her application. ... My dance teacher once pointed out to the class that I was always smiling when I danced.

She danced through college, but when she graduated, she traded her tap shoes for a red editing pen. Decades passed.

But sometimes when I see musical theater live or even when I hear the sounds of tap dancing, I feel something well up in me. A giant blast of emotion.

A lifelong dream, unfulfilled.

Emily Morgan, dance captain for Broadway's "Dames at Sea," poses with Adriana DiFranco, a copywriter who lives in North Carolina but works for Boulder-based Strength in Numbers. (Denis Chibiryak / Courtesy photo)

It seemed so far-fetched, after two sons and two decades without dance. But it was the right time for DiFranco; she was starting everything new again, she said. On a whim, she googled her idea and found something called the Broadway Fantasy Camp, a dance immersion program set in the very same New York studios where Broadway pros train.

Participants learn a real Broadway routine from seasoned Broadway performers and choreographers. Participants are fitted with costumes and get to perform in a small show.

Even if she had the money, she said, she would never allow herself to spend it on something as completely playful, selfish and dreamy as this, she wrote in her application.

I'm scared to even send in this application because ... holy cow ... what if I got it?

What if she couldn't dance anymore?

Even more frightening, what if she could?

One person wanted to learn how to meditate on a retreat. Another wanted to ride his bike along the hundreds of miles of the scale model of the solar system in Sweden.

All the Dream Grant applications were inspiring, but one hit Strength in Members' founder Peter Genuardi especially hard.

"I did a bunch of acting in high school, and this was interesting to me because it really resonated with me," he said. "If I had to list my top five dreams, this would be in it. It touched me, and the fact that we could fund something that exceptional for $2,000."

Genuardi got the idea to offer his employees a Dream Grant after he heard of something similar in another company. This was its first year.

DiFranco had won.

It was three weeks after her separation from her husband.

This was more than a just a grant, she said.

"Suddenly, my life took a different trajectory," she said. "I have a new life now, and who is this new person?"

DiFranco said she hung up the phone and stood in her kitchen in shock.

"I thought to myself, 'What have I done?' I was paralyzed with fear," she said. "I didn't even know how to move forward with this."

DiFranco kept quiet.

She told only a few people at first and began taking private tap dancing classes and conditioning her body. Her dancing became a life vest in a sea of turmoil, she said. She had a new dream to focus on: her own, personal dream.

"The fact that my tiny, little spirit at the time was like, 'I would like this one thing,' and then it happened — I was amazed," DiFranco said. "This really is a brand-new thing for me, to put myself first, which as a mom you never do and as a wife I really didn't do. I tentatively did it for the first time in a dozen years, and this amazing thing happened for me."

She eventually got up the courage to announce what she was doing on Facebook, and she said she was overwhelmed by the encouragement and support that responded. She said she set aside her fears and, buoyed by the confidence from her friends and family, she set sail.

"The minute I told people, everything changed," DiFranco said. "I opened myself up to the reality that I am doing this. I might fall on my face, but I am doing this."

Progress was slow, DiFranco said. Every week, she said, she got 2 percent better. But she kept going, until late August, when she and her children headed to New York City for a copywriter's big break.

DiFranco, working with Emily Morgan, the dance captain for "Dames at Sea," danced to live music played by the show's actual pianist.

And after a grueling day of rehearsal, in a cheerful sailor costume, DiFranco stood in the middle of a makeshift stage in Nola studios, with windows overlooking the Broadway traffic.

She had invited her children, but they arrived with more of her friends, and more. About a dozen people filed in to watch, unexpectedly.

DiFranco did not miss a step.

It was a side of there mom her children had not seen before, DiFranco said. They hadn't known this huge part of their mother's heart, her dancer's spirit. She couldn't hold back the tears when she was done.

"I hope in a small way, that my kids can see that audacious things are possible. Why not?" she said. "And it's OK for grown-ups to have dreams, too."

Aimee Heckel: 303-473-1359, heckela@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/aimeemay