Low-income people in three Southern states were recently asked whether they preferred Medicaid or private insurance. Guess which one they picked?

A study published in the journal Health Affairs found that poor residents of Arkansas, Kentucky and Texas, when asked to compare Medicaid with private coverage, said that Medicaid offered better “quality of health care” and made them better able to “afford the health care” they needed.

Medicaid, the federal-state program for poor and disabled Americans, is a frequent political target, often described as substandard because of its restricted list of doctors and the red tape — sometimes even worse than no insurance at all.

But repeated surveys show that the program is quite popular among the people who use it. A 2011 survey from the Kaiser Family Foundation found that 86 percent of people who had received Medicaid benefits described the experience as somewhat or very positive. A slightly more recent Kaiser survey showed that 69 percent of Americans earning less than $40,000 a year rated the program important to them or their families.

Michael Perry, a pollster at the left-leaning public opinion firm PerryUndem, has found that Medicaid tends to rank higher on satisfaction than private insurance.

Photo

“It’s surprisingly popular,” said Mollyann Brodie, Kaiser’s top pollster. She’s been surveying the public about attitudes on Medicaid for years and has seen the program get high marks for more than a decade. “Conventional wisdom is that it shouldn’t be, but it actually is.”

Studies have also found that Medicaid rates highly among the public at large. A majority of people told Kaiser pollsters that the program was important to them and their families. That’s perhaps not a surprise. Medicaid is now the country’s largest health insurance program, covering some 67 million Americans. Repeated surveys have shown that a majority of Americans support the program’s expansion as part of the Affordable Care Act.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

When asked to consider it alongside other big, popular government programs, Medicaid compares favorably, said Robert Blendon, a public health professor at Harvard who studies public opinion on health care issues and was a co-author on the recent study. “It’s only when you compare it to Medicare, which is so much more popular than 96 percent of what the federal government does, that it looks unimpressive,” Mr. Blendon said.

The people surveyed by the Harvard researchers didn’t prefer Medicaid to private insurance in every respect. They gave private coverage the edge when it came to seeing “doctors you want, without having to wait too long” and “to have doctors treat you with care and respect.” But Medicaid came out ahead on the question of whether it enabled them to “be able to afford the health care you need,” and on the overall question of “quality of health care.”

The results suggest that people understood that Medicaid had some drawbacks, but its affordability outweighed its inconveniences and stigma. Unlike private insurance, Medicaid does not require its beneficiaries to pay any premiums, and it allows only very small co-payments for medical services.

The Upshot In a weekly e-mail newsletter, get the best of The Upshot's analysis about politics, policy and everyday life.

Whether Medicaid will remain popular is unclear. The expansion of the program may increase difficulties for beneficiaries trying to find doctors; a recent study by the inspector general of the Department of Health and Human Services raised questions about whether there would be enough providers to go around in every state. But it’s also possible that Medicaid will grow even more popular as it touches more families.

The three states in the Health Affairs survey are approaching the program very differently. The Affordable Care Act gave states the opportunity to expand their programs to cover all residents below a certain income threshold. Texas declined to expand, and covers a very limited slice of its poor residents. Kentucky took up the expansion, growing its existing government-run Medicaid program. Arkansas is in the midst of a policy experiment; instead of a typical expansion, the state is using Medicaid money to give low-income residents access to private insurance plans on the new insurance marketplace.

But low-income residents of all three states viewed the program similarly — about 80 percent of those surveyed in each state supported expansion of the program. And there was no major difference in the proportion that favored Medicaid or private coverage — in Arkansas, more people still preferred Medicaid to a private plan over all.

“The political realities were not very relevant to these people,” said Dr. Benjamin Sommers, an assistant professor of health policy and economics and one of the paper’s co-authors.

And that mismatch may explain the divergence between the program’s popularity and its political image: Though low-income Americans value Medicaid, they’re not that likely to vote on it. Here’s another question to which the answers looked the same in all three states: Is your state going to expand Medicaid? Between a quarter and a third of people in all three states answered yes, even though two states were expanding, and one was not.

“The bulk of the respondents didn’t know there was a Medicaid expansion, which means these people aren’t voters,” Mr. Blendon said. “Most of them support an expansion, even though they didn’t know there was an expansion. Politically, that’s just not a powerful force.”