Three years after a similar bill received Assembly approval but died in a Senate committee, lawmakers are trying again to mandate installing electric vehicle charging stations at rest stops of New Jersey toll roads.

Bill S-1794, sponsored by Democratic Sen. Linda Greenstein, was approved 4-1 by the Senate Environment and Energy Committee Monday. Only Republican Sen. Sam Thompson was opposed.

It’s proposed that the New Jersey Turnpike Authority and South Jersey Turnpike Authority install electric vehicle charging stations at rest stops, with costs recovered through charging fees set by the Board of Public Utilities.

“Electric vehicle sales doubled last year (nationally) compared to 2012. We’re expecting more and more people to be driving these environmentally friendly cars,’’ said Greenstein, a panel member. “Without charging stations, this technology will not be effective.’’

Republican Sen. Kip Bateman noted the mixed signals makers of electric cars are receiving from New Jersey policy makers. Tesla’s direct-sales program was recently put on hold by the state Motor Vehicle Commission, though several lawmakers have begun efforts to implement rule changes that would allow Tesla to resume those operations.

“I find it somewhat ironic that we’re directing them to install these charging stations but yet we have companies like Tesla trying to sell their electric vehicles in New Jersey but having obviously the whole issue,’’ Bateman said.

In the 2012-2013 legislative session, both houses had similar bills that never reached committee votes, despite the Assembly’s version having nine sponsors.

Bob Jordan Statehouse Reporter: Bob Jordan has been writing about New Jersey politics and Gov. Chris Christie from the state capital since 2010 for the Asbury Park Press. He blogs on the Capitol Quickies site, which gets 20,000 hits a month, and has provided political analysis for MSNBC, News12, NJTV, My9 New Jersey, Aljazeera America and other media outlets. Via social media, Jordan has 1,000 followers on Twitter and is a prolific engager with other political junkies on Facebook. Jordan previously covered local government and spent more than 10 years as a sports writer on travel beats with the New Jersey Devils, New York Rangers and New York Mets. Among his honors is an FBI commendation as part of the Press’ coverage of the Operation Bid Rig investigation into Monmouth County government corruption.

Read or Share this story: http://www.app.com/story/news/politics/capitolquickies/2014/05/19/bill-on-installing-electric-vehicle-charging-stations-on-nj-toll-roads-inching-along/9303981/