"He [Sam Burgess] was their leader, and had it been really affecting him I'm sure he would've shown common sense and come off": NRL great John Sattler. Photo: Brendan Esposito

"Sam Burgess showed so much heart and sacrifice. He just wanted to win and he showed so much determination, it really inspired me. It might sound cliched but he did something I have dreamed of doing ... being tough enough to play on in a grand final with something like a broken face. He's like Rocky. I know Rocky Balboa was a movie character but Sam Burgess was like the real Rocky in the grand final."

Fourteen-year-old Isaac Longmuir was just one of the millions of people who watched Souths forward Sam Burgess defy the pain of having his cheekbone and eye socket broken in the first tackle of the NRL grand final to fight-on and lead the Rabbitohs to their first premiership title in 43 years.

That effort was compared with the legendary tale of John Sattler, who in the 1970 grand final for South Sydney played 77-minutes with a broken jaw.

"I did it and I was probably stupid but I did it because it was a grand final": Former Rabbitohs captain and 1970 grand final winner John Sattler. Photo: Farifax archive

However, while Burgess and Sattler's efforts were regaled by many as "courageous", there's a school of thought it was reckless and fool-hardy; that they should've been dragged from the field – kicking and screaming, if necessary – by the medical staff who needed to protect them. It's a compelling argument.

Advertisement

However, in an age where kids see images of human beings being killed in video games and sometimes sadly in real life; trolls write deplorable things about people on social media; police cadets are forced to take breaks during training exercises and army drill sergeants aren't allowed to bark their orders due to OH&S regulations, there's something that suggests that maybe it was good for children to see a man pick himself up and ignore a pain that would've floored most of us.

Four-time world champion boxer Danny Green received widespread praise from the community for his efforts to combat coward punches – when alcohol-fuelled dopes hit an unsuspecting victim, often with tragic consequences – by bankrolling his own television commercials to highlight the human cost of a stupid act of violence. However, as someone who was prepared to sacrifice his body to achieve his goals, he saw magic in Burgess's actions.

Courage rewarded: Sam Burgess after accepting the Clive Churchill Medal. Photo: Christopher Chan

"It was a big effort," Green said. "That desire to win is why Sam Burgess is a champion and it's why he's loved. It was an effort this Gen Y needed to see. He went old school and, while there'll be people who'll say it was bad for his health, sometimes people need to push themselves. Sometimes there's a need to dig deep. It was a serious injury and he persevered, and did something that most people would like to think that, if the crunch ever came, they could."

The great John Sattler appreciated better than most what drove Burgess last Sunday night but when asked for a word to describe it he said "stupid", although he quickly added there were valid reasons to try and play on.

"You can't compare one player to another," Sattler said. "I did it and I was probably stupid but I did it because it was a grand final. I was a member of the team and you do anything to stay with your team. Sam was the same, he was their leader, and had it been really affecting him I'm sure he would've shown common sense and come off.

"He's a tough bloke and a very tough player, and no doubt he thought he could battle on. He's a superstar. Once you get to first grade, you're boss of your own body, you make your own call. Sam's message to play on was a good message to young kids, and not just for rugby league or sport, but life in general – there's times when you have to turn up when you don't want to, you have to do the job and think of other people."

Sattler's son, Scott, grew up with everyone reminding him about his father's grand final heroics but he's not certain whether it drove him to pull off his own magic moment in the 2003 premiership decider when, as a big Penrith forward, he ran down fleet-footed Sydney Roosters winger Todd Byrne in a race to the tryline.

"There was always a subtle pressure without anyone saying anything," he said. "It never came from the family. The expectations came from others and it's a pressure you can fight through or buckle under.

"When I broke my jaw in '94, everyone tried to compare me with dad. My father's legacy is he was he was a great player, a great leader and one of the toughest players ever to have played rugby league. Back in 1970 when the game had no safety procedures, Clive Churchill had dad in the bathroom and said 'I'm not going to let you go back out there' and dad pushed the coach away and ran out with the team before they could stop him.

"As brutal as it is, the field is a player's comfort zone, they're away from the media and anyone who can get inside their space. They're around their teammates and up against the usual suspects and, if the truth be said, it hurts more for a player to be off the field."

Former Brisbane prop Shane Webcke, who went into the 2000 grand final with a big guard protecting his broken arm, said while sport was littered with stories of people defying the odds, many tales went unreported.

"There's a lot of stuff that goes on that we never hear about," he said. "I'm like everyone else; I admire what Burgess did but I can guarantee you that players do it all the time – maybe not to the level he did – but certainly it happens. And I think most players, if presented with the challenge Burgess was, would attempt to do the same. Whether they were tough enough is another story.

"You could talk about the negative aspects of what Sam did but he's a grown adult, he made the decision about his own body. It's not as though he's abusing his body by filling himself with drugs, he's out there performing on a massive sporting stage. It was something to admire.

"It was a great metaphor for life – when you face a challenge you can get through it. Look, had he been knocked senseless, like [his teammate] David Tyrrell, he would not have taken the field again. But he wasn't, he could fight on, and that was the difference."

The NRL has made sensible moves to protect the players by erasing the shoulder charge and introducing the concussion rule which means affected players must be replaced. However, there's no reason why courage can't be celebrated.

Regardless, of the debates, just before he underwent surgery to have four plates inserted in his face Sam Burgess let everyone know how he felt via Twitter: "Just laying in hospital waiting for surgery, I look similar to a hamster at the moment. I wouldn't change anything for the world though."