Just as his father, Buddy Ryan, used to blitz heavily as coordinator of formidable Chicago Bears’ defenses of the mid-1980s, his twin sons, Rex (pictured) and Rob, have done so as well. Credit: Associated Press

By of the

Green Bay — Rex Ryan didn't throw the book at Aaron Rodgers four years ago even with Darrelle Revis and Antonio Cromartie as his cornerbacks.

How Ryan and his New York Jets choose to defend an even more seasoned Rodgers late Sunday at Lambeau Field with one of the NFL's weakest collection of cornerbacks is the question that has occupied the Green Bay Packers' offense all week.

Does Ryan dare wholesale blitz the Packers, a seldom-seen tactic against Green Bay the past two seasons and one that coach Mike McCarthy and Rodgers have been known to welcome with open arms?

"I don't think he'll ever change that," said Alex Van Pelt, the Packers' quarterbacks coach who first coached against Ryan during his stint as a Buffalo Bills assistant from 2006-'09.

Van Pelt recalled a game against one of Ryan's aggressive defenses when the Bills took extreme measures trying to keep their quarterback upright.

"We stayed in base personnel so we wouldn't get his exotic nickel blitzes," said Van Pelt. "Even on third down we stayed in two-tight end sets.

"About the second quarter you could tell it was like an itch. He couldn't help it. He said, 'Screw you guys.' And he put his nickel out there and blitzed everybody.

"I guess that's just his nature."

Not unexpectedly, Ryan went after rookie Derek Carr of Oakland, rushing five or more on 17 of his 34 dropbacks last Sunday, according to STATS.

Just as his father, Buddy Ryan, used to blitz heavily as coordinator of formidable Chicago Bears' defenses of the mid-1980s, his twin sons, Rex and Rob (defensive coordinator for New Orleans), have done so as well.

Since becoming not only coach but also de facto coordinator of the Jets in 2009, Ryan probably has pressured more than anyone.

New York led the NFL in blitz rates during Ryan's first two seasons, sending five or more on 55.7% of passes in 2009 and 57.1% in '10, according to STATS.

The Jets' blitz rate ranked fourth in 2011 (46.5%) and third in '12 (44.3%) before easing back to a quiet 15th (30.3%) last season. Then the blitz was back against the Raiders.

"Anytime you have a creative schemer like Rex, you can come up with some stuff that you just don't see all the time," Rodgers told New York reporters last week. "There is not a lot of things you can really key on. It's about trusting your protections."

In terms of scheme, the Jets will make for a vastly more challenging experience than Seattle for rookie center Corey Linsley. The Seahawks blitzed just 7.9% against Green Bay.

The schemes of the Jets and Seahawks represent polar opposites when it comes to complexity, Van Pelt said.

"Aside from executing the fundamentals of your blocks, the biggest thing is everyone has to be on the same page," offensive coordinator Tom Clements said. "You have to make a call and everyone has to know what the call is.

"Because they just don't stand around and let you look at the best way to block them. They move around, bring safeties up and blitz them, show blitz and drop out. You have to know where you're not protected and make adjustments."

Ryan's multitude of shifting fronts, deceptions and gambling pressures forced the Packers to prepare for just about everything.

The first time Rodgers faced a Ryan-coached defense came in December of his rookie season. He played the fourth quarter of a 48-3 debacle after coach Mike Sherman pulled the embarrassingly inept Brett Favre.

Ryan, who at the time was in the first of his four seasons as the Baltimore Ravens' defensive coordinator, blitzed 45.1% on that Monday night. Rodgers threw 15 passes in garbage time, completing eight for 65 yards and throwing a red-zone interception.

After his defenses ranked fifth, first, sixth and second, Ryan was hired by the Jets. His defenses in New York have ranked first, third, fifth, eighth and 11th.

The only other meeting between Rodgers and Ryan came in October 2010 at the Meadowlands. This time, Ryan played mostly zone coverage rather than his trademark press-man, blitzed 35.9% and held Rodgers to a passer rating of 59.7 in the Packers' 9-0 victory.

Today, the Packers are in better position to parry the blitz.

They're at home, which means noise won't affect them. They're also a no-huddle team now with the capability of going fast or slow as Rodgers choreographs at the line.

"They are trying to smoke you out," said Dennis Thurman, who assists Ryan as defensive coordinator. "A lot of it is predicated on the snap count. They will give you the 'Hut-Hut' hard count to see if you will jump offsides or if you'll tip off some of what you're doing."

The Jets, said Ryan, practiced all week against the no-huddle. Seattle did the same thing and, as coach Pete Carroll said, "It was really no factor for us."

Ryan said the din at CenturyLink Field "slowed their tempo down drastically, quite honestly."

The Jets, according to Ryan, don't call their defense until both teams are at the line.

No matter which of the Jets' four undistinguished cornerbacks are on the field, Rodgers says they understand the timing of routes and when the ball should be thrown given the called rush.

Buddy Ryan showed his boys how the 1985 champion Bears protected pedestrian cornerbacks Mike Richardson, Leslie Frazier and Reggie Phillips by applying unrelenting, punishing heat on quarterbacks.

"The pressure packages give the corners a better chance," said Van Pelt. "The time clock's shorter. Guys don't have to cover long."

So what was Van Pelt's overriding message to Rodgers before he duels Ryan?

"Just let the game come to him. Just be himself. Don't press."