Obamacare has been a controversial healthcare plan since its introduction, but Megyn Kelly seemed to lose it on the air this week after hearing the latest lies and “scandal” surrounding the law. This week, the Fox News host grew visibly angry after welcoming Bernard Whitman, a Democrat and political activist, onto her talk show, “The Kelly File.” Breitbart News reveals this Thursday, November 13, that Kelly was adamant in arguing that the purposes of President Obama’s Affordable Care Act have been misconstrued by the American public for months now.

Wikimedia Commons

Are Obamacare “lies” something the U.S. public should really worry about this 2014? Megyn Kelly of Fox News certainly thinks so. The TV host lost her cool on the air this week while having a heated debate with Democrat Whitman over Obamacare architect Jonathan Gruber’s recent comments. Gruber, a national economist, apparently stated that the only reason the healthcare law passed was due to the American people being utterly deceived at its original intent. Kelly says that Gruber in fact hinted President Obama’s “takeover” health care plan a long time ago.

“He said in January that Obamacare was never meant to save money, don’t worry about that. But before it was passed, he said it was a deficit reducer, it was a cost effective step towards healthcare problems….Now he comes out and says, all that stuff we said about taxes, that was B.S. And this other stuff, it’s all B.S. We had to do it, because we had to get this law passed, and sorry.”

For his part, Whitman says that although Gruber might deserve to be known as skillful when it comes to public policy, he remains “a political idiot.” The Democrat continued by saying that the Affordable Health Care Act — Whitman never used the unofficial term “Obamacare” — has been successfully already, despite rumors of lies or scandal surrounding the bill.

“The fact is, the Affordable Care Act has brought down the deficit by almost $100 billion largely due to Medicaid reductions,” he said. The fact is, the cost of healthcare is going down. It went up 8% before this law, it’s now going up 4% … The fact is, 18% of Americans did not have health insurance before the law passed, that’s down to 13%. Over 15 million folks who didn’t have health insurance before the ACA was signed into law in 2010 are now covered bringing the total uninsured adults in the US from 18% to 13.4%.”

While Megan Kelly lost it upon hearing Whitman’s comments, Western Journalism News notes this evening that many from the U.S. public took issue with these statements as well. After all, says the report, the Senate Budget Committee revealed that the ACA will in fact be incurring an estimated $131 billion in federal deficits between 2015 and 2024, while a considerable number of American citizens are now experiencing higher deductibles that will ultimately lead to more expensive costs out-of-pocket.

The Fox News host denied Whitman’s claim that “everyone knew what they were getting.” She said Obamacare lies to the people, and that the healthcare law is in fact based on an untruth.

“Oh my God," she said. "Seriously? Seriously? Everyone knew what they were getting? Is that what you want the viewers to believe? … My head is about to explode.”

Regardless of which side U.S. citizens stand on, open enrollment for the Affordable Care Act is on its way soon. Enrollment for healthcare insurance officially starts this November 15, and will close on February 2015. Do you agree with Democrat Whitman’s support of Obamacare, or Kelly’s argument that the bill was ultimately passed on nothing but a “lie?”

Obamacare was first brought into the public limelight this week after the “architect” of the controversial healthcare law stated that the “stupidity” of the American voters was the only reason the bill passed. Jonathan Gruber says that community ignorance of what President Obama’s new plan actually entailed resulted in Obamacare ever making it through Congress. Do you agree?