Topics: From the Wires, Entertainment News, News

OTTAWA, Ontario (AP) — That the United States capped Friday with a victory over China to advance to the semifinals at the Women’s World Cup had special meaning for forward Abby Wambach.

Earlier, the U.S. Supreme Court ruled that same-sex couples across the nation have the right to marry. Justice Anthony Kennedy wrote in the majority opinion: “No longer may this liberty be denied.”

U.S. Soccer posted to Twitter: “More than ever, today we are #OneNationOneTeam #LoveWins.”

Wambach has been married to her partner, Sarah Huffman, since 2013.

“Obviously it impacts my life personally, but everybody on our team was super happy and excited about it. And to cap it off with a win, moving on to the semis at the World Cup, for me it doesn’t get any better,” Wambach said.

The United States defeated China 1-0 on Carli Lloyd’s goal in the 51st minute. The win sends the second-ranked Americans to a semifinal on Tuesday in Montreal against top-ranked Germany.

The Supreme Court ruling will put an end to same-sex marriage bans in the 14 states that still maintain them.

UNCERTAIN PAYDAY: Australian midfielder Katrina Gorry is far more concerned about facing Japan in the Women’s World Cup quarterfinal than she is about a pay dispute happening back home.

“We’ve come to the World Cup to compete with the best teams in the world and show the world what we’re capable of,” Gorry said, Friday. “So all those other things will take care of themselves, and it’s something we’re really not focused on.”

Gorry was responding to a question over how much the Matildas should get paid from Australia’s governing body, Football Federation Australia. The players’ union, Professional Football Australia, has put off discussions on the national women’s team pay to instead deal with the more pressing issue of negotiating a collective bargaining agreement for the country’s pro men’s league.

Gorry said the women’s team has tuned out much of the chatter about the talks.

“We are just kind of in our own little clam,” she said.

MAYBE HE’LL WEAR A COAT: Australian coach Alen Stajcic scoffs at questions about how hot it might get on the field in Edmonton for his team’s quarterfinal match against Japan on Saturday.