Participation in the federal health insurance marketplace ranged from less than 1 percent of the population to 5 percent in Alabama, according to figures released this week by the government that offered the first ZIP code breakdown.

Previously, the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services had reported that about 98,000 Alabamians signed up for a health insurance plan under the Affordable Care Act, also known has Obamacare. About 85 percent of those people qualified for taxpayer subsidies.

The ZIP code data show how the participation varies by geography. Four of the top ZIP codes by participation rate are in Mobile or Baldwin counties. The Orange Beach ZIP code, 36561, topped the state. Some 305 people bought policies on the exchange during the open enrollment period from Oct. 1 through March 31, good for 5 percent of the total population there.

Search your ZIP code

Type in your ZIP code to see how many people bought health insurance plans through the federal exchange.

The figures reported this week do not include data from ZIP codes where fewer than 50 people bought plans. That limitation was designed to protect people's privacy.

For ZIP codes where information is available, the lowest participation rate was in Elmore, where the 54 plans sold represent just .8 percent of the population.

Cynthia Cox, a senior policy analyst with the Kaiser Family Foundation, said calculating the number of plans purchased as a percentage of the population might not be the most useful way to compare the statistics. She said ZIP codes that have low participation rates may simply have fewer people eligible for subsidies on the exchange, either because of age or income.

A better comparison would be to measure the rate by the number of uninsured people in each ZIP who are eligible for subsides, she said, although she added that that information is not available at the micro level.

Cox said a quick look at the ZIP code data released this week did not reveal a strong relationship to the price of insurance plans offered in different geographic areas.

"There's really not a strong correlation," she said.

Cox added that 85 percent of Alabama residents who bought plans on the exchange received tax subsidies. The average cost after the subsidy in Alabama was $76 a month, the government reported in June.

"They're really not going to be as price sensitive," Cox said.

AL.com previously reported that the price and variety of insurance plans on the exchange varied dramatically from state to state, but not as much from county to county within Alabama.

Health reform advocates gearing up for the second open enrollment period said the ZIP code data will help them pick areas to target.

"This is something that we're very excited to have as a tool to help plot how to enroll people when the enrollment period opens again Nov. 15," said M.J. Ellington, a health policy analyst for the Arise Citizens' Policy Project.

Ellington said her organization, which advocates for policies on behalf of the poor in Alabama, is analyzing the data to see if there are pockets that need special attention during the second year of the health exchange.

Ellington noted that advocates originally had hoped to enroll some about 85,000 Alabama residents on the exchange and exceeded that target by more than 10,000.

"The figure for Alabama was surprisingly good," she said. "There was an extraordinary effort in Alabama by a number of groups."

The Arise Citizens' Policy Project did not directly enroll customers this year but offered training and other support to those who did. Ellington said they will benefit from that experience in year two.

"Alabama has areas where we know we need to work," she said. "We know more this year, having done this once."

In congressional testimony earlier this week, Medicare Administrator Marilyn Tavenner acknowledged that the number of people enrolled through the exchanges is 7.3 million. That is down from an earlier estimate of 8 million as a result of roughly 10 percent of enrollees failing to pay their first month's premium, she said.

Blue Cross and Blue Shield of Alabama, the state's dominant insurance carrier, said earlier this year that 24 percent of enrollees from the government marketplace had at some point failed to pay the monthly premium.

Still, Tavenner told the House Oversight and Government Reform Committee that the law has been a success.

"The Affordable Care Act is delivering on the promise of access to high quality, affordable health care coverage, while controlling the growth of health care costs," she said. "While the marketplace is still at an early stage, we are hard at work building on the successes and lessons learned from the first open enrollment, and look forward to meeting the needs of consumers and insurers as we continue to learn and improve for future years."