The Republican candidates for Texas attorney general talk more about secession than child support.

The race to replace Greg Abbott, who is running for governor and leaving his post as the state’s top lawyer, is centered on which candidate best embodies the conservative principles demanded by the activist base of the GOP.

At forums, debates and other campaigns stops, the candidates are more likely to get a question about Texas leaving the union or how to secure the borders than strategies to better collect child support or stop fraud, two major functions of the attorney general’s office.

Knowing this, Rep. Dan Branch of Dallas, Sen. Ken Paxton of McKinney and Railroad Commission Chairman Barry Smitherman have adjusted their campaigns to cater to the realities of GOP primary politics. They are tripping over each other to stake out ground on the right.

“Since the candidates are so similar, the curiosity is where they stand beyond the duties of the AG’s office,” said conservative radio host Mark Davis, who has interviewed the candidates on his KSKY-AM (660) show. “The primary voters are looking for something else. They want to know what kind of heart beats in their conservative chest.”

Dianne Edmondson, chairman of the Denton County Republican Party, which hosted the candidates for a recent forum, agreed that running for attorney general required more than a good legal résumé.

“The voters want to know what kind of conservative is going to replace General Abbott,” Edmondson said. “Conservative principles are important. They are the cornerstone of what voters are looking for.”

Responsibilities

The attorney general’s office is charged with “defending the laws and the Constitution of the state of Texas,” as well as approving public bond issues.

The office is best known to most Texans for collecting child support, the work that most of its employees perform. Other major functions include protecting Texas consumers against fraud and administering the state crime victims’ compensation fund.

None of these issues, however, is top of mind to voters, so the contest for attorney general is often obscured by the more compelling races for Texas governor and lieutenant governor, where candidates can run on or from their legislative records.

What’s more, Abbott is a conservative firebrand who has made his crusade against the federal government the starting point of the campaign to replace him.

In an era when Republicans are facing internal challenges from activists on the right and face purity tests on an array of issues, candidates in judicial and law enforcement contests have to talk about issues that they can often do little about in the posts they seek.

No more was that displayed than in the Denton GOP’s recent debate. A large segment was spent on states’ rights and secession. It followed Smitherman’s earlier comments that Texas should prepare itself to be an independent nation.

“Some people say I was advocating secession. I’m not an advocate of secession, I’m an advocate of preparation,” Smitherman said. “We’re not interconnected with the rest of the country. We can maintain our own independence.”

Other candidates had to address the question, but they did so less directly. Branch talked about standing up to the Obama administration.

“This is the fundamental reason for me to run for attorney general, standing up to an overreaching, aggressive and, I would say with this administration, an arrogant federal government,” he said.

Stopping illegal immigration has also been a topic of discussion, though aside from enforcing state laws that could be developed to deal with the matter, the attorney general has little to say on the issue.

“We do need to put more money into border security,” Paxton said. The attorney general has little influence on lawmakers’ budget-writing process.

The candidates have sparred on several issues involving qualifications and leadership.

Paxton, who is trying to rally tea party support to break from the pack, says he’s the only candidate with a proven track record as an uncompromising conservative.

“It’s easy in the Republican primary to say you’re going to stand up to Obama,” he said. “The question is, how do you know?”

Smitherman noted that he has run the state Public Utilities Commission and is now chairman of the Railroad Commission, giving him the advantage of being an executive.

Experience

Branch likes to dismiss Smitherman’s prosecutorial experience, dismissing him at one debate as a “junior prosecutor that was involved in handling misdemeanor cases.”

Smitherman countered that misdemeanors were serious crimes that needed to be prosecuted. And he injects Obama into his argument.

“Every candidate talks about fighting Obama,” he said. “I’m fighting Obama. I’ve sued the federal government seven times.”

The statement echoes Abbott, who jokes that he wakes up in the morning and thinks about how to sue the Obama administration.

Branch, one of the most influential members of the House, also attacks Obama at every turn.

“The environment we’re in is going to get worse than what General Abbott experienced,” Branch said. “We’d better stand up.”

Veteran GOP consultant Craig Murphy said voters don’t care about the mechanics of the attorney general’s office but base their votes on more of a gut check.

“They want to know, ‘Are they honest? Are they good people, and do they share my values?’” Murphy said. “That’s where campaigns are won or lost.”

Follow Gromer Jeffers Jr. on Twitter at @gromerjeffers.