The Interview

Amid a swell of controversy, backlash, confusion and threats, "The Interview" is being seen in theaters for the first time today. Sony Pictures broadly released "The Interview" online yesterday - an unprecedented counterstroke against the hackers who sought to spoil the Christmas opening of the comedy depicting the assassination of North Korean leader Kim Jong Un. "The Interview" stars Seth Rogen and Evan Goldberg showed up at the film's first Los Angeles showing, just after midnight on Christmas Day, and thanked those who attended and the theater that screened it, reports CBS Radio's Steve Futterman.

Shooting protest

Demonstrators again took to the streets of a St. Louis suburb last night, one night after the fatal shooting of an 18-year-old black man by a white police officer. Authorities said Antonio Martin was shot and killed late Tuesday after pointing a 9 mm handgun at the officer who was questioning him and another man about a theft at a convenience store.

Papal revelation

Pope Francis recently made a revelation. He was baptized on this day, Christmas, 78 years ago. The pope also talked about gifts this season and asked the world's Catholics to become "missionaries of joy." On "CBS This Morning" today, Louisville Archbishop and U.S Conference of Catholics President Joseph Kurtz said, "I think he lives in the present moment."

Christmas masses

Christmas midnight masses were held at the Vatican and in Bethlehem. CBS News correspondent Jim Axelrod reports Pope Francis presided over a mass in St. Peter's Basilica, reminding the congregation of the reason for the season.

Politicians' Christmas greetings

As politicians send out their greetings for Christmas, many are choosing to send their thanks to American troops serving abroad. Other politicians had a slightly more targeted audience in mind for some of their holiday greetings.

Pajama Lady

Far from the North Pole, there's a special delivery just in time for Christmas. Inside the delivered boxes are sets of pajamas -- hundreds of them -- for DC area foster children. Kathy Jackson, better known this time of year as the "Pajama Lady," wanted to make Christmas extra special for three adopted foster children. CBS News correspondent Julianna Goldman reports that feeling grew into the D.C. Holiday Pajama Drive.

Ebola exposure

A mishap at the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention in Atlanta may have exposed a lab worker to to the Ebola virus. The CDC said the incident happened after an Ebola sample researchers were working on in a high-security lab was mistakenly transferred to a lower-security lab on the CDC campus.

Drone rules

These quirky robotic flying machines may be the gift of the season. Manufacturers say they've sold 200,000 new unmanned aerial vehicles. While hobbyists are thrilled, the FAA is worried about a burgeoning fleet of personal drones flying into increasingly crowded skies. So, the FAA and the drone industry have launched a safety campaign to try to make sure novice remote-control pilots take precautions.

Dancing muse

When people watched Patricia McBride dance, many said they could almost feel her joy. She danced in more than 100 ballets throughout her career, but those created for her by the genius George Balanchine were the most glorious. He was the world's most innovative and influential choreographer, and she was his muse. McBride passes on the Balanchine fundamentals that are part of her DNA to the next generation. McBride spoke to CBS News cultural correspondent Wynton Marsalis about her career as the New York City Ballet's youngest principal dancer ever at just 18 years old.

On the Road

They made you laugh. They made you cry. They "restored faith in humanity," as so many of your comments suggested. Steve Hartman's "On The Road" series has brought us some of the most touching stories of the year. So what better way to end 2014 then by revisiting some of your favorite stories from the series?

Top News

World

Hong Kong protesters back on the streets

Rejected: Roman Polanski's latest bid to get sex case dismissed

Tsunami 10 years later: Is the world better prepared for disaster?

Ireland debates rights of dead woman versus fetus

Politics

Obamacare enrollment is off to "an encouraging start"

U.S.

Christmas eve shooting at Louisiana mall leaves 1 dead

At least 4 charged with threatening police after NYPD officers killed

DC's panda cub startled by "hot wire," hides in tree

Amazing X-ray picture of the sun

MoneyWatch

JetBlue offers to fly police to slain NYPD officers' funerals

Health

Caramel apples recalled due to listeria concerns

Experimental brain cancer cap shows promise

New weight-loss drug wins FDA approval