BOSTON - The cost for enrolling people in temporary Medicaid coverage last year due to Massachusetts' failed Health Connector website was $658 million, according to the Massachusetts Executive Office of Health and Human Services.

State officials say the cost is based on claims processed as of May 31 for the approximately 321,000 people who were enrolled in temporary Medicaid coverage through the end of February.

The state placed health insurance applicants in temporary Medicaid coverage after a health insurance exchange, which went online in October 2013 in order to conform with the federal Affordable Care Act, was a technological failure and was unable to enroll people in insurance.

Michelle Hillman, a spokeswoman for the Executive Office of Health and Human Services, said that figure represents the entire amount spent – not the cost to the state. Approximately half of the cost is likely to be borne by the federal government, although the final federal reimbursement amount is still unknown.

The state also revealed that it has spent $281 million so far on the health insurance exchange websites. That is far above the $174 million that the website was originally projected to cost. It includes the costs for developing and trying to fix the website last year, then for buying new software and creating a new exchange for this year.

In addition, although the health insurance exchange largely worked for people enrolling in health insurance this year, it still had some technical glitches. For example, the system for paying premiums online was separate from the website where people could shop for plans and enroll in them, and the payment portal was not always easy to use. The site has been unable to process life events – such as a person moving or having a baby. According to Hillman, the state has spent $47 million since December 2014 making upgrades and fixing defects in advance of next year's open enrollment period.

"This transition process is very painful, and a lot of people are getting stuck," said Brian Rosman, research director of Health Care for All, a health care advocacy group that has worked with the state to enroll people in coverage. But, Rosman added, "I think when we're done, the investment will be worthwhile."

The new numbers are the first comprehensive accounting of the cost of the state's problems with the health insurance exchange. Under former governor Deval Patrick, the state fired its technology contractor, brought in new leadership and spent a year rebuilding the website. Reports have emerged about mismanagement by the state. The U.S. attorney's office has subpoenaed documents relating to the Health Connector.

Joshua Archambault, director of health care policy for the Pioneer Institute, which has criticized the Affordable Care Act and the state's implementation of it, said questions still remain. For example, the state does not yet know how much the federal government will reimburse the state for the temporary MassHealth population, since the reimbursement rate depends on how many of those people were actually eligible for MassHealth or other subsidized insurance programs.

"That has a dramatic impact potentially on the state budget," Archambault said.

Hillman said the state is in regular contact with federal officials about the Connector improvements and about a redetermination process, to make sure everyone on MassHealth is still eligible for it.

The final tally for all the website fixes is also not yet known, since more problems could appear as the state moves forward with the additional work.

"I suspect this is not a final price tag for the ACA transition for the website," Archambault said.

But Rosman, whose organization has supported the Affordable Care Act, stressed that many of the costs will be borne by the federal government, even if the exact reimbursement figures are still unknown.

A new study by the Massachusetts Budget and Policy Center found that while state spending on MassHealth and related health care costs increased by $1.17 billion between fiscal year 2014 and 2015, federal reimbursements for health care grew by $1.02 billion. Much of this is due to higher federal reimbursement rates when the state expanded eligibility for MassHealth and other subsidized health insurance programs.

"Overall, the ACA is an enormous financial boon to the state," Rosman said. "So much of the spending that had been a full state cost will now be a federal cost."