The Better Business Bureau announced its “Top 10 Scams of 2013.” Leading the pack, believe it or not, was the Affordable Care Act Scam, which most would refer to as the Obamacare scam.

As much as he may want to differ, CBS late night host David Letterman didn’t invent the idea of a “top 10 list” — it’s been around for a long time, and that includes the 102 year-old Better Business Bureau, which has published a top 10 scam report for years.

“Scammers used the uncertainty of Obamacare to trick Americans into sharing personal information. They call victims and offer new insurance or Medicare cards if they provide personal information,” according to its website.

The remaining nine are, as Houston ABC-13 News reported this week:

Medical Alert Scam – This scam targeted seniors and caretakers with the promise of a free medical alert system. Scammers told victims their family members had already paid for it and they would just need to provide their bank account or credit information for verification. Auction Reseller Scam – Scammers used Ebay and PayPal to lure in their victims. They figured out a way to have sellers mail the goods without receiving payment. The sellers receive an email that looks like it is from PayPal, but it was really just a fake. The BBB says always confirm payments in your Ebay and PayPal accounts before shipping goods, especially overseas. Arrest Warrant Scam – These scams take advantage of the fact that you can change what shows up on caller IDs when you call someone. Scammers change their name to resemble a law enforcement agency and call people to tell them they have an outstanding warrant for their arrest. They tell victims they can pay to avoid criminal charges. Invisible Home Improvements – Scammers simply knock at your door and offer a great deal for home repairs that you can’t see, such as crawl spaces, air ducts, chimneys, and roofs. You can check out home contractors at bbb.org before hiring them. Casting Call Scam – Scammers pose as casting agents for hit television shows. They either offer acting lessons or photography sessions to help the aspiring actor or charge fees for fake applications and casting calls. Foreign Currency Scam – Scammers target their victims and tell them they can make great investments by purchasing foreign currency. You are told you can sell and cash in when governments revalue the currency, but this is very unlikely to happen and the currency will be difficult to sell. Scam Texts – These texts look like an alert from your bank asking you to confirm information with a fake link. Sometimes the link will download malicious software that gives scammers access to everything on your phone. Do Not Call Scams – Scammers call and offer to add your name to the National Do Not Call Registry. They ask for personal information and sometimes charge a fee to join.

Fake Friend Scam – On Facebook, people are creating fake profles to be used in a variety of ways. Some will download malware or use your account to prey on your friends.

Garbage collector’s patriotic gesture brings resident to tears

This is proof positive that although Obamacare is losing its luster among American citizens, it’s number one on the list of scammers and con artists and swindlers.