In November, Coburn said he had been diagnosed with a recurrence of prostate cancer. Coburn loses cancer doc due to ACA

Cancer-stricken Sen. Tom Coburn revealed Tuesday that his health insurance under Obamacare doesn’t cover his oncologist, but said he still is receiving excellent care.

“I’m doing well from a health standpoint, got great docs,” Coburn said on MSNBC’s “Morning Joe” on Tuesday when asked about his health. “Fortunately — even though my new coverage won’t cover my specialist — I’m going to have great care, and I have a great prognosis.”

Story Continued Below

The Oklahoma Republican’s spokesman confirmed to POLITICO that since the senator enrolled in his health insurance plan under Obamacare, his coverage has been reduced and he lost coverage for his cancer specialist. Coburn will continue to pay out of pocket and see his oncologist, his office said.

( Also on POLITICO: Keating won't seek Coburn's seat)

Coburn made public in November that he had been diagnosed with a recurrence of prostate cancer. He also had prostate cancer surgery in 2011 and has survived colon cancer and melanoma. He also announced earlier this month he would not serve out his full Senate term, but said his decision was not made because of his health.

The Oklahoma Republican and physician has been a critic of Obamacare, unveiling on Monday a plan with two other senators to repeal and replace the Affordable Care Act.

( Also on POLITICO: Coburn fights cancer again)

His spokesman said Coburn’s struggles with his own doctor illustrate the need for a new policy, saying that not every American has the option to pay out of pocket for care.

“We hope the White House will work with us to make sure Americans who can’t afford to pay out of pocket don’t lose access to life-saving care,” spokesman John Hart said. “As Dr. Coburn’s experience shows, the American people are about to learn they’re going to lose access to not only their doctors and plans, but their specialists and treatments.”

Follow @politico