City offers iconic restaurant 3-year lease renewal in light of Civic Area plans

Alec Ortiz, 5, left, and Charlie Young, 5, enjoy some hot dogs with their babysitter Kristina Wurst, not pictured, on Friday at Mustard's Last Stand on Broadway in Boulder. ( JEREMY PAPASSO )

Related Stories Boulder offers Mustard's Last Stand a three-year lease

Boulder officials want to renew the lease for Mustard's Last Stand for just three years because redevelopment plans for the Civic Area call for the city building whose ground floor the restaurant occupies to eventually be razed.

Mustard's, which serves Chicago-style hotdogs, Italian beef sandwiches, burgers and other Chicago-style fare, has been leasing space near the corner of Broadway and Arapahoe Avenue, on the first floor of the city's Park Central building, since 1983.

In the past, the city has entered into 10-year leases with owner Dan Polovin. The current lease expires at the end of this year.

However, the city has identified the Park Central building and the neighboring New Britain building as needing substantial work to withstand a 100-year flood, more work than is allowed in the current city code based on the buildings' value.

The Civic Area Master Plan adopted by the Boulder City Council earlier this year calls for those two buildings to eventually be removed and that area, along with much of the library parking lot, to become part of a Civic Center Plaza and expanded park area.

New office space to replace the two buildings would be built in other parts of the Civic Area, which runs from Ninth to 17th streets along Boulder Creek, between Arapahoe and Canyon Boulevard.

Advertisement

City spokesman Mike Banuelos said a lot of pieces have to come together before Boulder would do anything with the buildings. There is no funding now for the Civic Area Master Plan, though it's likely to be included in a future capital bond package.

The proposed lease would allow for a second three-year renewal, for a total of six years, with an option to terminate the lease with six months' notice during the second three-year period.

The Boulder City Council will be asked Tuesday to give its approval to City Manager Jane Brautigam to enter into the shorter lease.

Polovin said he has been concerned about the future of his restaurant since the city started the Civic Area planning process, and he had asked for two five-year renewals.

He also wanted the city to promise to at least try to find space for his restaurant within the Civic Area.

The city did not want to make that commitment part of the lease, Polovin said. At this point, he's "happy to get what I can get."

Polovin said he believes his restaurant could succeed in another location, but moving is always risky.

"That's the million-dollar question whenever someone relocates," he said. "I feel I could do well wherever I went. Do I want to bear that expense? Probably not. It takes a lot of capital these days to open a restaurant."

Polovin said he is working now to identify investors with experience in the restaurant business to assist with a move if and when it becomes necessary.

"It's hard to imagine," he said. "It's not just a business decision. That's my community down there."

Portland, Ore., resident David Naimon eats at Mustard's Last Stand when he comes back to visit his hometown.

"It's a hold-over from the Boulder I grew up in," said Naimon, 44.

If Mustard's ever did move, Naimon said he hoped it would retain the atmosphere.

"There's no pretense; it feels local," he said.

Ernest Lasen, a 33-year-old Denver resident who is a student at the University of Colorado, has been frequenting Mustard's over the past seven years.

A fan of the fare ubiquitous in big cities, Lasen said he enjoys getting the "real deal" close to home.

"They don't really have many places like this here," he said.

Lasen expressed concern about a Mustard's move or closure, saying the location is well-known to many past and current residents.

"I don't think it should be going anywhere," he said.

The city memo on the new lease refers to the present location as "almost a local landmark."

Polovin said Mustard's means a lot to him and to his employees and customers, but it doesn't seem to mean much in the context of the city's plans.

"They are comparing this to Millennium Park in Chicago, so they're thinking big," Polovin said of the Civic Area plan. "It makes you feel a little more meaningless, like you're a speck in the march of time, which I guess we all are."

Staff Writer Alicia Wallace contributed to this report.

Camera Staff Writer Erica Meltzer at 303-473-1355 or meltzere@dailycamera.com.