KRASNAYA POLYNANA, RUSSIA — Barely recovered from the effects of a concussion she suffered last October while training in Lake Placid, N.Y., Katie Uhlaender is in medal contention midway through skeleton competition at her third Olympics.

Wearing her late father Ted’s 1972 Cincinnati Reds National League championship ring and a tiny baseball pendant containing some of his ashes on a chain around her neck, the former Breckenridge resident is in fourth place after two of four runs. The third and fourth runs are Friday.

She is 0.69 of a second behind pacesetter Elizabeth Yarnold of Great Britain and 0.25 behind teammate Noelle Pikus-Pace, who is in second. They may be tough for Uhlaender to catch, but she’s only 0.14 behind the third-place slider, Elena Nikitina of Russia.

Feisty as ever, Uhlaender pretended to walk away in anger Thursday after she was asked if she could make up the 0.14 margin for the bronze medal. “Come on, it’s not over until it’s over,” she said. “I’m just going to do my thing, and hopefully I can put two runs together.”

Uhlaender finished sixth in the 2006 Turin Olympics and 11th in the 2010 Vancouver Games. She won a gold medal at the 2012 world championships and is a two-time World Cup season champion.

She slid the bottom of the course well on her first run Thursday but made mistakes at the top. She slid the top well on her second run but made mistakes on the bottom.

“I’ve just got to put them together,” she said.

Yarnold and Pikus-Pace have been the women to beat on the World Cup circuit this season. Yarnold is exceptional in the 20-meter sprint before the riding begins, and her first run Thursday broke the track record with a top speed of 78.8 mph.

“To see Lizzie have those starts, man, it’s going to really tough to catch her,” Uhlaender said. “Anything’s possible, it just depends on how she’s going to handle the pressure overnight, how hard she went today, if she’s got anything left tomorrow.

“I feel like I’m going to be better tomorrow than I was today, but I don’t want to jinx myself.”

John Meyer: 303-954-1616, jmeyer@denverpost.com or twitter.com/johnmeyer