Fourteen years ago, New York Times reporter Ann Crittenden published The Price of Motherhood: Why the Most Important Job in the World Is Still the Least Valued. She was inspired to write the book, she said, because of the loss of status she felt when she paused her career to have children. For many women, that loss is reflected in economic terms as well. As part of our series, The Cost of Being a Woman (see Paul Ford's piece on saving for his daughter, but not his son), we spoke with Crittenden about her seminal book.

Advertisement - Continue Reading Below

In the introduction to your book, you mention a few of the ways that motherhood is devalued in economic terms, for example that women can't earn social security benefits when they're taking care of their children. Is this still the case? Have any laws or policies been updated to help women who don't work outside the home gain a better economic foothold?

I can't think of any measures taken since 2001 that specifically target the economic vulnerability of mothers who don't work outside the home. But some changes have helped them enormously.

First, the Affordable Care Act expressly bans sex discrimination in health insurance so that women no longer routinely pay more than men for their health insurance. And policies now have to include maternity benefits, for a small co-pay, and gynecological care has to be covered―something that helps all women, including mothers.

And since the great majority of mothers work for pay at one time or another, other changes help working mothers from having to decide between a paycheck and a newborn or a sick child. Several states now mandate some form of paid family leave, including California, New Jersey, and Rhode Island; and others have recently mandated several days of paid sick leave for all workers, including California, Oregon, Massachusetts, and Connecticut. This is also in the works in New York and New Jersey. This helps millions of mothers―and fathers!

You suggest in your book that the attempt to get men to shoulder more of the responsibility for child-rearing has failed. Do you still think this is the case? Are efforts to get men to share child-rearing still hopeless?

I don't think it's hopeless to get men to share more household and child-rearing responsibilities—younger men are definitely doing more of their share than ever before. One reason is the fact that men will always do more at home when it costs the family as much to lose the mother's salary as the father's. I just point out in The Price of Motherhood that it's hard to convince someone to take on responsibilities that are not fully respected by society or rewarded economically in any serious way.

I also don't see how childbirth can be delegated! For obvious reasons women will always have the lioness' share of childcare.

You coined the term "Mommy Tax"—the idea that a woman will miss out on a great deal of income over the course of her lifetime—which directly relates to the feature we just published by Paul Ford. What do you think of Paul's method for dealing with the "Mommy Tax," and other gender-based economic inequalities, for his daughter?

Paul comes across as an unusually sensitive, thoughtful, fair-minded, great guy! Maureen sounds cool, too and her story is basically why I wrote The Price of Motherhood. It's way too high!

But I'm not sure about his "solution." I think it's more a talking point than a realistic answer to the problem. I would worry foremost about the favoritism issue, and how he could really explain this to his son. After all, in his (son's) world, girls are very equal, and women are too, all the way until that first—or second—child. When my son was about seven, he saw girls making great grades, being class leaders, etc. and he asked me one day why a woman wasn't the president!

I also wonder what his son would think if his sister married a master of the universe and her overall income skyrocketed—this kind of marriage between educated people is one reason why family incomes are so unequal in the U.S.

What if we required equal pay for equal work, so that people working part-time didn't get paid less per hour than full-timers for the exact same work? Share

Tweet

My own preference is to focus on and fight against all of the barriers out there to female equality and advancement. To take just two:

What if early education was publicly subsidized, like public school, so it wouldn't cost an arm and a leg to pay for childcare, forcing millions of women out of paid work?

What if we required equal pay for equal work, so that people working part-time didn't get paid less per hour than full-timers for the exact same work? That would give a huge boost to millions of mothers' income.

And it sounds like Paul Ford may already be doing this, but what if all fathers (and mothers) teach their sons that it's their job too to raise a family and make a home—that there's no such thing as "men's work" and "women's work."

That would make a difference, maybe even at those companies that sell kiddy underwear!

I admit to feeling uncomfortable when I read 'The Giving Tree', which you reference in your book, to my son. And my mother, a scientist who worked hard in her lab throughout my childhood, told me that she didn't like the book, either. Do you think that women who don't understand the unconditional aspect of parenting that, I think, you see represented in the book, don't understand or are missing something about motherhood?

I take your point about The Giving Tree and understand the queasiness. But personally, I was simply stunned by the selflessness that came with having a small child; that overwhelming feeling that you would do anything to protect that little creature. I hadn't experienced any feeling like that before. Maybe it's just hormones. And it continues, even when your kids are grown. Like that old saying: you're only as happy as your unhappiest child.

In your book, you wrote something that has stayed with me: "Housewives might become extinct, but mothers and fathers never would." I try to tell my friends that getting a housekeeper is a feminist move—that if they can't share the housework equally, they should force their partners to reckon with the economic consequences, and that they should budget for a cleaner. I was wondering if you had any thoughts on the way that unequal household work contributes to the "costs" imposed upon women?

Right! Hiring a housekeeper adds to the cost of motherhood, but also frees up a mother to do the paid work she wants to do, and gives another person a job. It puts a number on the value of that work at home. And it should be a reasonable number—never exploit the housekeeper!

What changed professionally for you after the book came out? Do you still encounter people who ask "Didn't you used to be Ann Crittenden?" How have you balanced family and work in the years since the book was published?

After the book was published in 2001, I spent nearly ten years traveling around the country lecturing on The Price of Motherhood and on a follow up book, If You've Raised Kids You Can Manage Anything. That one is out of print now but The Price still sells well—a second edition with a new preface came out in 2011.

I loved that experience, but I'm a reporter by temperament, and I finally felt like moving on to something new. I bought a house in France, where I spend a couple of months a year, and now I'm working on a memoir. I guess you could say I've achieved balance by not working so hard. My one child is now 33, I'm over 65 and I feel like I earned it!