MILLER, Mo. -- An Ozarks school district may move toward lengthened school days and shortened weeks.



"Instead of having a 35-minute math class, they might have a 50 minute math class," Miller Schools Superintendent Dr. Tracey Hankins said about the possible change for next school year.



Hankins spoke with parents in a community meeting Monday evening, saying shorter days and longer weeks could be an equation that benefits the district financially. She said the students will still get the same amount of instruction, or more, since less "transition" time, time spent moving from one class or event to another, will be needed throughout the week.



Hankins said a survey the district is conducting shows most parents, so far, do not oppose the proposal.



"I think it would be better for students. They're not going to be as pressured," parent Mindy Hawkins said.



Some parents told KOLR 10, however, they're concerned about how the change could affect learning.



"I'm opposed to anything i think will lessen my kid's education," parent Rob Maupin said. "My question is why can't we wait? Why can't we spend a year, see what's going on and understand the impact to the community? ... I don't believe they've done due diligence."



With just over five hundred students, the rural district covers a wide area. Fuel alone costs $100,000 each year, so without buses running on Mondays, the school system could save substantially. Hankins said beyond transportation lies even bigger possible savings.



"Because of the affordable care act and health benefits, we're going to rearrange some of our hours ... We're going to be able to save close to $100,000 in salaries and benefits," Hankins said.



Hankins invited Everton Superintendent Karl Janson to speak to Miller parents on Monday night. Everton adopted a similar schedule two years ago.



"It's just been a very positive situation all the way around," Janson said. "As far as teacher morale, students attitude toward school. All those things have gone up."



Hankins said so far, 35 percent of respondents said they would have a child care conflict if their children were to be given Mondays off.



The school board is expected to make a decision on the change by Feb. 19.



Copyright 2016 Nexstar Broadcasting, Inc. All rights reserved. This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten, or redistributed.