RICHMOND — Both houses of the General Assembly went home Tuesday passing a new state budget.

The assembly’s special session remained mired in gridlock, with the Senate and House of Delegates showing no signs of ending their dispute over Medicaid expansion and reaching a deal on a spending plan for the two-year period that begins July 1.

On the session’s 16th day, the Senate finally passed a two-year state budget bill that revives what supporters describe as a private-option plan to cover uninsured Virginians with federal Medicaid funds. The Republican-dominated House of Delegates maintained its opposition to any form of Medicaid expansion, and again demanded that the issue be severed from budget negotiations. The House passed a budget bill on March 25 that contains no Medicaid expansion provisions.

“We’ve done what we’re supposed to do, and now it’s their turn,” said Senate Democratic Leader Richard Saslaw, D-Fairfax County, after the politically divided Senate passed its budget (SB 5003) by a vote of 22-15.

The Senate’s two-year, $99 billion spending plan includes a provision to expand health coverage to an estimated 250,000 low-income, uninsured Virginians. The state would use federal Medicaid expansion funds available under the Affordable Care Act to help eligible adults purchase private insurance.

The House rejected an identical Senate Medicaid proposal during the regular legislative session, which ended March 8. At the outset of the special session, the House Appropriations Committee killed Gov. Terry McAuliffe’s proposal to expand Medicaid eligibility under a two-year pilot project that would be paid for with federal funds.

House Republicans have argued that the state must fully implement reforms to the existing Medicaid program before expanding the rolls to cover adults with incomes up to 138 percent of the federal poverty level. Del. Steve Landes, R-Augusta County, panned the Senate proposal during Tuesday’s House floor session.

“It’s flawed, it’s unworkable and it does nothing to fix a system that we know needs fixing,” Landes said.

The Senate budget would remove authority from a joint legislative commission that was established last year to determine whether Virginia had made the reforms necessary to expand Medicaid eligibility. Sen. Mark Obenshain, R-Harrisonburg, warned that the provision would give McAuliffe the authority to expand Medicaid without the legislature’s approval.

The Senate has taken no action on the budget bill the House passed two weeks ago. House GOP leaders said precedent demands that the House bill serve as the vehicle the two chambers use to negotiate a new spending plan. The Senate’s budget bill typically gets left in the House Appropriations Committee, said Del. Chris Jones, R-Suffolk, the committee’s chairman.

“That’s the way it is done; that’s the way it will always be done,” Jones said during the brief, uneventful House floor session.

Asked if the Senate will act on the House budget bill, Saslaw said: “We will gladly send them their bill as soon as they send us ours back with their amendments on them.”

By the time the House began its floor session Tuesday afternoon, the Senate already had left the Capitol.

“We’re very disappointed because, obviously, the intention of the Senate is just to stall,” said House Speaker Bill Howell, R-Stafford County.

The Senate budget incorporates McAuliffe’s proposal to increase salaries for state employees and teachers in 2015. The Senate budget would fund the state’s share of a 2 percent raise for teachers, certain instructional and support positions, and state-supported local employees effective April 1, 2015. State employees and college faculty would get a 2 percent raise effective March 25, 2015. The Senate plan also would restore state funding for a program that provides insurance coverage to first responders.

In a statement issued by his office, McAuliffe said the Senate budget “offers Virginia state employees a two percent raise, funds payments to families that lose a loved one in the line of duty, and includes a market-based plan to use our federal tax dollars to close the health care coverage gap.”

“Now it is the responsibility of the House of Delegates to take this budget bill up, make their amendments and pass it so that legislators from both chambers can get to work negotiating a final product in a conference committee,” McAuliffe said.