Knit caps from MaxLove Brand, which can cost as little as $16, raise money for children with brain cancer and other life-threatening illnesses. ( MaxLove Brand / Courtesy photo )

How to help • Want to aid the cause, even though you're not exactly sure what a loom is? Buy a hat. Caps cost about $28, Fedoras $34 and knits as low as $16. • To learn more about MaxLove Brand and the nonprofit's services, visit maxloveproject.org.

You might recall Jimmy Kimmel's glorious patchwork-rainbow blazer weaved on a loom that made its debut on "Jimmy Kimmel Live" earlier this year.

Or you might have PTSD recalling the late-night talk-show god's buddy, Guillermo Rodriguez, wearing rainbow-loom undies that revealed muscular legs holding up a "pinata of a body." Kimmel's words. And mine.

Those fancy man-panties have strings to Boulder.

They were woven as part of the MaxLove Project, founded to help children fighting cancer and other life-threatening diseases, as well as to help provide resources to their families.

The nonprofit was inspired by "Super" Max Wilford, a California kiddo who was diagnosed with brain cancer at age 5.

His mom, Audra Wilford, launched the nonprofit two years ago to support other families like hers. One of the fundraising arms was a clothing line, the MaxLove Brand, and it's based in Boulder, guided by "chief head honcho" (that's her official title) Diana Costello, local mother of two.

Now, to be clear, MaxLove Brand does not sell rainbow man-derwear.

MaxLove specializes in headwear: knits, fedoras, bucket hats, straw hats, ball caps and even a full line made here in Colorado.

The hats are stylish and unique, but best of all, 100 percent of the profits go toward the nonprofit, says Chelsea Montgomery, of Denver, who works for MaxLove Brand. Check them out online at givemaxlove.org.

In other fashion news From 2-5 p.m. Sunday, Sept. 21, Willow boutique is holding a pop-up shop for the Boulder International Fringe Festival at The Dairy Center for the Arts, 2590 Walnut St., Boulder. Willow stylists will be on hand to help you pick out the best outfits for fall. The event is free and open to the public. Info: willowboulder.com.

While Costello was designing and launching new lines of hats, Super Max himself, now 7, picked up a new hobby. While in the hospital for treatment, someone gifted him a loom.

"He fell in love with it and began making all these bracelets and creations," Montgomery says. "Then his school got involved."

MaxLove Brand, basedin Boulder, is one of the fundraising arms for the MaxLove Project, which supports children and families with brain cancer. (MaxLove Brand / Courtesy photo)

Other kids began looming, too, and selling their creations to raise money for the project. (Montgomery calls it "kid-spiration — kids helping kids.") Then came the Jimmy Kimmel spot. A "loom-athon" in March, where they tried to make a chain five miles long.

Then things got real.

The kids decided to try to make a chain 100 miles long.

Boulder stepped in to assist, with about 50 local folks looming up and down and all over town, measuring their creations and logging them online. Boulder held a loom-athon a few weeks ago at Outdoor Divas, and the Cali crew (of about 2,500 people) organized another this week.

Officials still are adding up the numbers to see if they reached their goal.

But they're sure they reached another goal, Montgomery says.

"We want to help kids stand up for each other and to work together as a community to thrive against childhood illnesses," she says.

Contact Camera Staff Writer Aimee Heckel at 303-473-1359, heckela@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/Aimeemay.