In the beginning was the river. Hundreds of years before the English explorers Christopher Newport and John Smith ever set foot in this part of the country, native people found the area around Richmond a good place for their villages.

Their trade routes converged here and stretched all the way from the falls of the Powhatan River (the Indian name given to what we know today as the James River) to the Great Lakes and to the southern Appalachian mountains.

In many respects, because of the transportation network, albeit by foot and canoe, the nexus of slack water and rapids made this place the center of far-flung economy that extended beyond the collection of villages along the Powhatan. In an odd twist of history, before Richmond became a city, it was already a region.

It was the intersection of geography and economics that gave birth to Richmond, so named because the bend in the James River reminded William Byrd II of the bend in the Thames River in Richmond, England.

The falls were ideal for a town. They forced a break in the mode of transportation, which urban geographers have long noted leads to trade and settlement. Goods had to be off-loaded from ships onto horse-drawn wagons or vice versa, if the products were to be exported from Richmond to other parts of the world.

The falls also powered water wheels needed for flour-milling and for making iron. They also made necessary the building of canals that enabled Richmond to extend its reach deeper into the interior. Later. when the railroad made canals less important, Richmond’s economy grew larger still.

***

Despite the population and industrial growth of Richmond during the 18th and 19th centuries, there were still only two types of settlement in Virginia, (1) towns and cities, and (2) plantations and farms. Whenever growth extended beyond the city limits, Richmond quickly annexed the areas. Moreover, to accommodate future growth, the city annexed undeveloped land. The consequence was that for almost 150 years since its founding in 1742, Richmond was a city without suburbs.

Altogether, Richmond has expanded its boundaries 11 times, once by consolidating with another city, and 10 times by annexing parts of either Chesterfield or Henrico counties.

The one consolidation that took place occurred in 1910 when Richmond and the independent city of Manchester, which was located directly across the river from Richmond, merged into a single city. The result of the consolidation was that Manchester was no longer a separate government, but rather a South Side neighborhood of the larger Richmond.

Today, Manchester has been completely reinvented. The old factories and warehouses have been converted to housing that has proved popular with the millennial generation. And the views? Spectacular! Why live Downtown with a view of Manchester when you can live in Manchester and have a view of Downtown?

Nine of the ten annexations involved Richmond absorbing its suburbs, with the largest expansions beginning in 1892 and then again in 1906, 1914 and 1942. The last annexation in 1970 added 23 square miles to the city, but by this time suburban growth was so extensive that the city was no longer able to stop it. By the end of that decade, the Virginia General Assembly stripped the capital city of its annexation authority, thus signaling that suburban populations throughout the commonwealth had grown to such an extent that they now controlled the state legislature.

***

During the 1880s, Richmond experienced a period of significant industrial expansion and population growth. The expansion of tobacco manufacturing together with the growth of iron and paper mills led to more jobs and more people moving to Richmond. As population increased, there was a corresponding increase in the demand for housing, particularly since commercial development and the growth of the business district had replaced older residential areas with office buildings.

Developers looked west, which at that time meant the area that is now The Fan. Property owned by three leading businessmen, John Shafer, Charles Morris and William Allen, became the prime spots for new housing. In fact, the 21st century equivalent of the late 19th/early 20th century Fan District — where VCU’s large west campus is now located — is Short Pump.

Contributing to the development in The Fan and to even larger-scale development in Richmond’s North Side and South Side, was technology that made transportation history and led to national headlines for Richmond as the first city in the United States to develop a commercially successful streetcar system. And what a streetcar system it was! (Carlton McKenney’s history of the Richmond trolley system is a must read for those who champion a regional bus rapid transit (BRT) system today.)

Hired by a group of Richmond and New York investors in the 1880s, Frank Sprague had to design and build a 40-car streetcar system, including the electrical generating plant and 12 miles of electrical lines and tracks — all in three months!

It actually took him eight months. But compared to today, how many years would that require? What evolved from Sprague’s genius was that by 1916, during an 8-hour day, one streetcar would pass the intersection of Broad and 7th Streets every second. Yes, every second!

In 1905, there was an inter-urban electric streetcar powered by two General Electric motors that, at top speed, could go 90 miles per hour! Here we are more than a century later, and our definition of high speed rail today from Richmond to Washington is 90 miles per hour.

The streetcar system fanned out across city boundaries into undeveloped land in Henrico and Chesterfield counties. The counties at that point were rural lands that featured farms and timber.

Because many of the streetcar companies were owned by real estate developers, streetcar lines were extended into the rural areas with the termini often consisting of amusement parks, lakes and all kinds of attractions designed to woo families to look at property.

It was the streetcar that led to the development of Ginter Park, Brookland Park, Hermitage Road, Barton Heights, Highland Park, Fairmount, Woodland Heights, Byrd Park, Forest Hills, Bon Air, and Westhampton. Had Richmond not annexed most of those areas, they would have remained as suburbs and thus converted Richmond from a city to a region in the early 20th century.

***

A second, more explosive growth of suburbs occurred when the automobile became the preferred mode of transportation and when, after Work War II, the development of highways and the popularity of Veterans Administration- and Federal Housing Administration-guaranteed loan programs made homebuying more accessible and more affordable.

Suddenly, fertile farmland became more suitable for planting subdivisions than grain. Growing suburban populations opened up new markets for retail trade and shoppers no longer had to go downtown. The growth of commerce and consumer services provided enormous employment opportunities. As people moved to take advantage of new jobs, the population increased even more — and with population increases came more jobs. The cycle repeated and growth continued unabated. Those seeking larger homes and more space moved farther out, with the result that household income increased as distance from the city increased.

Accompanying the enormous growth of the suburbs was the enormous decline of the central city. The city of Richmond lost both population and tax base.

***

Today, the Richmond metropolitan area exceeds a million people, with the city population representing just over 20 percent of the population. Though the city is no longer home to the majority of people living in Central Virginia, it remains the headquarters of the Fifth District of the Federal Reserve Bank and the Fourth U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals. The Richmond region is home to six Fortune 500 companies, including two that have headquarters within the city limits.

Since the 1950s, however, and until only about five years ago, the narrative has been about city shrinkage and suburban expansion. As cities hemorrhaged population and income, the suburbs grew larger and wealthier.

The word itself, “suburb,” connoted upwardly mobile middle-class families living the American dream by moving out of crowded cities with high poverty to newly built homes with garages roomy enough for a couple of cars. Until the 1968 Fair Housing Act, “suburb” was also shorthand for middle-class whites.

That was then. For the past few years, the U.S. Census has been reporting the influx of younger, well-paid, primarily white professionals to the city and a corresponding outmigration of low-income populations, mainly black.

For the first time in American history, the majority of the poor are now suburbanites. Metropolitan Richmond reflects these changes with 54 percent of the poor living in the counties, 46 percent in the city.

With a 70 percent increase in the number of poor residing in Henrico from 2000 to 2012 and a 41 percent increase in Chesterfield — (Richmond’s increase was 25 percent — the reversal of fortune between city and county is becoming the new normal.

The gentrification of Richmond’s historic neighborhoods has caused many longtime residents in those neighborhoods to move out. As apartment rents increase with the rising value of surrounding renovated property, there comes a point when the renter’s income can no longer stretch to pay the rent, thus forcing a move to a place where housing is more affordable — either to other parts of the city such as South Side Richmond, where property values are declining, or the worn-out inner-ring suburbs.

Sadly, income still varies widely by race and ethnicity so the cheaper rents primarily attract African-Americans and Latinos. The demographic changes become most visible in public school enrollments. As more children from lower-income families enroll, more white middle-income families move away, leading to a situation where city schools and suburban schools located near the city are faced with identical challenges.

Ironically, what the counties once vigorously opposed might now be welcomed. For urban counties, annexation was anathema, amounting to nothing less than central city imperialism. Given what’s happening today in the counties, annexation might be viewed differently.

Not long ago in a conversation with a high-level county official in one of the surrounding jurisdictions, I was told, “John, if Richmond could still annex, we’ve got some areas that we’d be happy for the city to take.” The official wasn’t referring to West End Henrico or West End Chesterfield, but to largely Latino and African-American areas where poverty is soaring.

***

Speaking of race and class, I must note another dramatic change in modern history. We are more segregated today than we were in the 18th and 19th centuries. During Richmond’s first 200 years, black and white residents were more interspersed with one another than they are now. There were black neighborhoods and white neighborhoods to be sure, but commingling was much more common then, most often for reasons related to where people worked.

It was not until the 20th century that Richmond became increasingly segregated, first by law and then by a combination of public policy and practices in the private sector. Beginning in the late ’60s and accelerating in the ’80s and ’90s, racial segregation morphed into socioeconomic segregation.

More and more middle- and upper-income black families began to leave the city for Henrico and Chesterfield counties, for the same reasons that white families had left earlier. Meanwhile, the number of impoverished African-Americans living in the city rose dramatically. As poverty skyrocketed in the East End and over time in South Side Richmond, public school enrollments included greater numbers of children from low-income households.

Unfortunately, these larger enrollments created an enormous force that led more middle- and upper-income black families to leave their old neighborhoods and move to the newer outlying suburban developments.

Roughly the same time that poor blacks began to move outward to the declining areas of the counties, they were joined by immigrants from Mexico and Central America who left their homelands to find a better life in Richmond. The language barrier, plus familial and village ties, prompted Latinos to live in close proximity with one another. The result is that poor African-Americans and poor Hispanics often live in separate communities.

Poverty is no respecter of local boundaries. It couldn’t care less whether it appears in Richmond, Chesterfield, Henrico or some other locality. When it comes to combating poverty, however, we have yet to unite in a common cause.

The city of Richmond has gotten underway with a comprehensive and substantive strategy to address poverty with the newly created Maggie L. Walker Office of Community Wealth Building serving as the central coordinating body. What about Chesterfield and Henrico joining this effort and, in so doing, working with the city in expanding community wealth-building to the entire region?

If heretofore unallied nations, even adversaries, can coalesce to fight brutal fanaticism in the Middle East, then couldn’t the city and counties of metropolitan Richmond, all united by a common history and culture, unite to fight a brutal enemy that affects thousands of fellow Richmonders?