After living around Treme and the 7th Ward for much of the last 20 years, John Simms was recently faced with an uncomfortable choice: leave his friends behind and find a new place] elsewhere, or continue to put up with a landlord who didn't want to fix anything. That included a heavy sliding door that Simms, left frail from two decades of serious illness, was too weak to lift himself.

Rents were shooting through the roof all around him. Choices for quality housing that would accept his housing voucher were slim. Then a friend told him about some units coming online with Providence Community Housing as part of the redevelopment of the former Lafitte public housing project.

Simms snagged a place on Governor Nichols Street in Treme. He moved in just a few days ago. His friends are close by. His doors open and shut like they should. And he even has an ice maker in his fridge, a luxury he thought he would never see again after his illness forced him to sell his condo and join the ranks of the more than 17,000 New Orleans renters on public assistance.

Simms may have gotten into his new home just in time. There is a budget standoff in Washington, D.C., and the program that funded the construction of his new place is squarely in the cross hairs.

Deep cuts

A proposal in the U.S. Senate would cut the HOME Investment Partnerships program by 93 percent from $900 million to $66 million. That would reduce New Orleans' share of the funds from $1.85 million to $130,000. The state's cut, which is often used to support homeownership in poor and rural communities, would drop from over $6.5 million to just under $500,000.

A competing plan in the House would leave HOME intact, but at the expense of the nascent National Low-Income Housing Trust Fund, whose funding would be cut off and redirected to prop up its sister program.

The loss of $1.85 million from a New Orleans general fund budget of $593 million wouldn't seem like a fatal blow, but Ellen Lee, Mayor Mitch Landrieu's housing czar, said the results would be catastrophic for the city's ability to produce and retain housing for low-income residents.

That's because the city has lately used its HOME grant money to leverage other funding, particularly Low-Income Housing Tax Credits, Lee said. Using a reserve of HOME money built up after Hurricane Katrina, the city last year awarded developers $6.2 million in HOME funds for rental construction. Those developers then brought in another $110 million more in outside money.

Some of that money may have come from private grants or, in the case of for-profit developers, from equity they put up themselves. But the lion's share came from private investment, much of it induced through the Low-Income Housing Tax Credit program.

Private investors are often leery of putting money into rental projects destined for low-income tenants. Rents are lower and management costs are higher. The resulting reduction in cash flow makes low-income projects riskier bets than market-based developments.

This is particularly true when the deal is for a package of smaller, free-standing homes rather than a traditional apartment complex, said Terri North of Providence Community Housing, a New Orleans nonprofit developer. Such scatter site developments are harder to manage because they are spread out, and more costly to build because they lack the economies of scale that large multifamily buildings bring, she said.

Since shotgun doubles and converted four-unit houses make up the bedrock of New Orleans rental stock, financing low-income housing in the city's urban core is a challenge, North said.

The tax credit program helps make such low-income developments more attractive to investors. And the state, which awards the tax credits, has recently made a point of prioritizing infill projects, which has boosted New Orleans' ability to compete for access to the credits.

Several of the New Orleans successful bids for the credits have been predicated on the city's access to HOME money, though.

That's because, even when a project has access to tax credits, there often remains a gap left between what private investors are willing to put up and the cost of building a successful project. Without something to fill the hole, what developers call "soft financing," a project can fall apart.

That's why the Louisiana Housing Corp., which is responsible for dolling out the federal tax credits, scores projects much higher if they have other funding sources in place, Lee said.

For many, projects, HOME dollars fill that role. Seven of the nine developers who got HOME grants in 2014 used them to obtain tax credits, Lee said, transforming $5 million into more than $100 million.

Pulling off that kind of coup would be "extremely difficult, unless we find another source to fill that gap," Lee said. "We can't underestimate the impact of home funds on the ability those projects to access those tax credits."

A house of memories

The city has also used HOME funds to keep low-income homeowners in their houses.

Doris Pollard, 64, spent much of her youth living in the downstairs unit of her mother's home on Louisiana Avenue Parkway in Broadmoor. Prior to her mother's death, the house served as the center of life for her and her extended family. Sunday dinners. R&B-fueled dance parties. Birthdays.

"It's our memories. Our tradition," Pollard said of the house, which she inherited when her mother passed away.

The house also represented some financial security for her as a single mother working low-wage jobs in area hospitals, she said.

Hurricane Katrina ripped that security out from under her, Pollard said, forcing her to move into a rental unit for years as she looked for help getting her house repaired.

Project Homecoming, a nonprofit that grew out of post-Katrina relief efforts, eventually stepped up and, using HOME funds allocated by the city, is repairing her house. She hopes to move in early next year.

"I'm going to kiss the floors. I'm going to kiss the walls," Pollard said. "And I'm going to cook."

She might even dance a little, just like her mom used to do, she said.

What will become of the HOME program, and by extension the elderly and infirm like Pollard and Simms, remains an open question.

Sequester looms

In an effort to break budget gridlock, Congress in 2011 passed the Budget Control Act, which set up the sequester system, automatic spending cuts that kick in if legislators fail to come up with a bipartisan budget that would reduce the deficit.

With no budget in place, the federal government has been limping along under continuing resolutions bound by the sequestration spending caps. The latest resolution is good until Dec. 11.

Congress has until then to either come up with grand budget bargain or approve another continuing resolution. If it doesn't, nonessential branches of government will be shut down.

Another continuing resolution would avoid a shutdown, but if it leaves the sequester spending caps in place, it could spell doom for the HOME program anyway.

Forced to pick where to apply the budget knife, HOME presents a less politically painful target for legislators than some housing programs such as Section 8, which supplies rental assistance to poor families. Cuts to that program would result in the widespread loss of housing for single mothers, the elderly and the disabled.

HOME, by contrast, is often used to create new affordable housing, so cuts would be far less visible in the present, even as they undermine affordable housing for thousands of low-income residents in the future.

Congress could still come up with a budget deal that lifts spending caps, and President Barack Obama has threatened to veto any bills that doesn't. But both chambers are moving forward with legislation that assumes the sequester caps will remain in place.

New Orleans Rep. Cedric Richmond said he supports the program and joined most Democrats in voting against bills that would see it cut.

A deal that saves HOME, however, will need buy-in from Republicans.

Sen. Bill Cassidy, R-Baton Rouge, is well placed to influence the debate, as he sits on the Appropriations Committee and the subcommittee in charge of the Department of Housing and Development's budget.

Cassidy voted in favor of the appropriations bill that called for the 93 percent cut to the HOME program, but his office said that was just a procedural move aimed at setting up larger negotiations on the budget.

"Senator Cassidy supports the HOME program and the work it does in communities across Louisiana. He wants to see its funding restored as part of a bill that would raise sequestration's spending caps on discretionary and defense spending," said his press secretary, Jillian Rogers. The subcommittee needed to move a bill forward so it could be sent on to conference committee, which will serve as a vehicle for budget talks, she said.

Asked whether he supports maintaining funding for HOME, Sen. David Vitter, R-Metairie, was far more reserved and dismissed as "hypothetical" the potential cuts to the HOME program, which sit as part of an appropriations bill waiting to be introduced on the Senate floor.

"As we move forward, there are two things we absolutely need to consider: that we root out any fraud in the program, and implement protections for the taxpayers," Vitter said in a statement.

Enterprise Community Partners Inc, a national affordable housing developer based in Maryland, has been leading a lobbying effort to salvage the HOME program and called on legislators to consider how the elimination of the HOME program would effect the most vulnerable members of their communities. Sarah Mickelson, senior analyst for Enterprise, called on Congress to "pass a budget that works for our communities and adequately funds HOME and other critical affordable housing and community development programs.

"The only way to do this is if Congress reaches a deal to raise the artificially low spending caps," she said.