Effect won't be dramatic, but special glasses will help

Thousands of people, equipped with protective sunglasses, gathered at Folsom Field to watch the last full eclipse of the sun, May 20, 2012. ( Courtesy photo / University of Colorado )

If you go What: Partial solar eclipse When: Starting at 3:18 p.m. Thursday Where: Fiske Planetarium, University of Colorado More info: tinyurl.com/FiskePlanetarium

It's only a partial eclipse coming Thursday, but Doug Duncan sounds close to fully excited.

"More than partially," said Duncan, director of the University of Colorado's Fiske Planetarium. "This one kind of snuck up on us a little bit, to be honest."

The moon will start its eclipse of the sun at 3:18 p.m. MDT on Thursday, reaching the peak of its partial eclipse at 4:35 p.m., when about half the sun will be covered by the moon. It should conclude at 5:44 p.m.

The greatest effects of the moon-shadow's passage over Earth will be manifest in Canada's Nunavut Territory near Prince of Wales Island, according to NASA, but North American sites such as the Boulder-Denver area, Vancouver, San Francisco and Toronto should all see its effects.

People will not notice what's happening above them, however, unless they're looking for it.

"Our eyes handle an enormous range of brightness," Duncan said. The difference "from day to night is more than a factor of a billion. And so, if you reduced the brightness of the sun to half of its normal brightness, surprisingly, that's really hard to notice."

Advertisement

But people looking at the sun in a safe manner Thursday will be able to see a healthy-sized bite out of the fiery orb. Duncan and the Fiske staff are well positioned to help skygazers do just that.

Fiske is equipped with several thousand protective sunglasses that are being sold to anyone who needs them, for $2.50 before Thursday or $5 on the day of the partial eclipse. Fiske is selling them from 9 a.m. to 5 p.m.

Standard-issue Ray-Bans, Duncan said, are not the way to go.

"Do not do that," Duncan said. "You would immediately turn away because the sun is incredibly bright, and a typical pair of Ray-Bans knocks the brightness down to 10 or 20 percent, which can still hurt your eyes. Our special sunglasses knock down the brightness 100,000 times. You'd have to have 10,000 pairs of (normal) sunglasses stacked on each other to be safe."

With the weather expected to be mostly sunny with a high of about 70, Duncan expects a lot of people to be enjoying the partial eclipse from the lawns outside the planetarium — although the crowds will likely fall short of the several thousand who packed Folsom Field for a partial eclipse in May 2012.

"In the unlikely event that we have lousy weather outside, we will link to a view somewhere else in the U.S. and show that inside" Fiske, Duncan said.

"Somewhere in the world, there's an eclipse of the sun every year, but a partial eclipse, 50 percent or even 75 percent, is not that spectacular," Duncan said. "A total eclipse of the sun — completely different. It looks like the end of the world, there's pink flames around the edge of the sun and big silver streamers stretching across the sky."

It's not too early, he said, to start getting excited about what he termed "the next really good total eclipse of the sun," coming Aug. 21, 2017, when he will host an eclipse viewing at the Jackson Lake Lodge, in Wyoming's Grand Teton National Park.

That's more than 1,000 days away, but Duncan cautions that space to watch the event from the park is going to be limited, and reservations for the Jackson Lake Lodge event are expected to fill up soon.

"Anybody who is at home in Colorado on August 21, 2017, has made a huge mistake, and I'm very sorry for them," Duncan said.

"Even if you can only make it just over the border to Wyoming to get yourself in the path of the total eclipse, you'll see a sight you'll remember for the rest of your life."

Contact Camera Staff Writer Charlie Brennan at 303-473-1327 or brennanc@dailycamera.com.