Much like Obamacare, the latest tech for tech sake is getting rammed down our throats by Ford when the 2015 Mustang goes on sale this summer. As expected, it will get Ford’s next-generation SYNC AppLink system, and oddly enough the disgraced term “MyFord Touch” is missing from this latest announcment.

Ford says the improved system will give drivers easier access to new features from many of their favorite mobile apps while on the go. Notably, the new Mustang will be the first model to get simpler menus, enhanced voice control and other new capabilities of Ford SYNC AppLink.

“Ford led the industry in giving drivers the ability to control their smartphone apps on the go with the introduction of SYNC AppLink in 2010,” said Raj Nair, Ford group vice president, global product development. “We are now making the in-vehicle app experience simpler and more intuitive to further help drivers keep their hands on the wheel and eyes on the road.”

Mustang drivers will soon have access to powerful new capabilities thanks to a host of new functions developers can integrate as they modify their apps to communicate with enhanced SYNC AppLink.

These new functions include a myriad of things. But given Ford’s rollout of MyFord Touch which has gone much like the Obamacare website, they point out that it first and foremost has simpler in-vehicle menus and controls so drivers can launch apps on their mobile device more quickly.

By simpler they mean pressing the SYNC voice button on the steering wheel and just saying the name of the app without having to say the command “Mobile applications” first.

Being that this is the Mustang, the selling points include the fact that Apps can get access to a variety of real-time vehicle data such as speed, acceleration, odometer and location that can be used by the connected app to further customize and personalize the user experience.

For example, access to the in-vehicle GPS signal can enable more precise and accurate location-based services than phone sensors. In addition, a more consistent user experience due to voice pass-through capability, which enables developers to use the on-device or cloud-based voice recognition systems to evaluate commands given by the driver.

This means drivers can use the same set of voice commands to control the app when connected to the vehicle as they would when not connected to the vehicle. Notifications that can be read aloud to drivers as they come in without ever touching the phone.

Ford says the best part is that alerts are available anytime a mobile device is connected to SYNC AppLink, even if the app is not currently active or the driver is listening to the radio.

“Our goal with AppLink has always been to let drivers take advantage of the information, news and entertainment apps they value most,” said Doug VanDagens, Ford global director of connected services. “The new version of AppLink gives developers even more tools to help deliver a seamless app experience.

We will see how welcome all these important and groundbreaking features end up being to a buyer demographic who is still wanting to know if the 5.8 liter supercharged V8 is coming back, and if Ford Racing will offer a solid rear axle kit so they can hook up better.