I did a parking-app roundup last December of smartphone apps that offer drivers parking options. But in prepping for a separate story about the business of parking apps (see “How parking apps will help you find a spot for Rockies opening day from April 10, 2015,” here’s a more complete rundown of apps that work in Denver:

BluCar — This ultimate valet-parking app beckons a parking attendant to come to you! Users tell the app where they need to go and the app sends a uniformed parking attendant to meet the driver near the destination. He then parks the car in a secure spot. Developed by a Boulder company, BluCar launched Thursday in Denver and partnered with L.E.G. Valet in Denver.

SpotHero — Helps drivers find nearby parking spots, reserve and pay for them. Launched this week in Denver with 22 garages, the Chicago company specializes in contracting several spots with local garages. It plans to add another 20 locations here in the next month and more than 80 locations by the end of 2015.

CurbStand — Targets people who prefer valet parking. When you’re ready to pick up the car, use the app to call the valet and then tip and pay right on the phone. Launched last December in Denver, CurbStand works at about a dozen locations (mostly restaurants) plus spots in Breckenridge, Vail and Edwards.

ParkingPanda — Find, reserve and pay for parking right on the app. Currently has spots available about 30 locations in Denver, including special partnerships with event centers like History Colorado, Denver Center of Performing Arts and the Clyfford Still Museum. At those venues, patrons can reserve parking on the organization’s website. ParkingPanda said it specializes in event parking and letting garage and lot owners increase the number of available spots that are offered in the app.

ParkMobile — Best known as the app where you can pay for metered parking in Boulder and Denver. If you spot the ParkMobile logo near your parking spot, you can pay right in the app and even extend the time, if necessary. The app supplies the car’s license plate and payment to enforcers.

ParkWhiz — Reserve and pay for your spot ahead of time. Even if the garage fills up between the reservation and when you arrive, your spot is guaranteed. Just hold up your smartphone to the parking garage’s scanner. ParkWhiz promises the “best price, every time.”

BestParking — App shows where nearby parking is plus posted rates. But most rates aren’t guaranteed. Some lots may offer paid-reservations or a rate guarantee, which doesn’t require payment until you’re at the location. But the app advises that if the garage won’t give you the promised rate, don’t argue. Just e-mail the app to get reimbursed.

ParkMe — A mostly informational app to help drivers find nearby lots and approximate prices. There is some ability to reserve and pay for a spot ahead of time, and sometimes that will take you to another parking app! Other features include “Parking timer,” so you know how long you’ve parked; and “Mark My Car,” to let your phone’s GPS direct you back to where you parked.

Parkifi — Not an app itself, but it plans to partner with others to help consumers find and pay for parking. Parkifi, which is based in Denver, is working on real-time availability by installing special sensors in every spot at parking lots (it’s currently working on the lot at 2000 Larimar St., which should start working Monday). The company expects to have 1,000 spots online by mid-May. Also, it will partner with mobile-app services Passport for payments, and MobileNow, which tracks open spots.

Spot another one that works in Denver? I’m sure there are many others. Leave a comment below.