Relishing his freedom: Jockey Kerrin McEvoy. Photo: Getty Images

Godolphin stable jockey Kerrin McEvoy is enjoying the opportunity to take outside rides and build connections under the new structure that has been put in place by the racing giant.

McEvoy has ridden for Sheikh Mohammed since 2002 and had been the retained rider in Australia since he returned home six years ago. But the landscape changed last year, with Godolphin's Australian arm falling into line with the the rest of its global operation on retained riders.

"Godolphin no longer retains jockeys anywhere in the world and that is the model we use here now," Godolphin racing manager Jason Walsh said. "Kerrin remains our stable jockey and is open to incentives that other jockeys riding for us are not.

"However, Sheikh Mohammed believes that if trainers are being judged by results, then they should have the ability to choose the rider that best suits each horse. John [O'Shea] has that choice and that is why we are using different jockeys but Kerrin is still the stable jockey."

Advertisement

McEvoy was relieved that Godolphin had cleared the air following speculation about his position.

"I could see the landscape changing over in Europe and knew it was coming in here as well," McEvoy said. "I knew the situation and have accepted it and it is a new challenge.

"There are benefits in it for me, but of course I want to continue to ride winners for Sheikh Mohammed, John [O'Shea] and the team at Godolphin. I have been working closely with my manager Glen Courtney and things are going all right."

McEvoy has been sharing the Godolphin rides with premier jockey James McDonald, but it has also allowed him to get on other spring contenders, such as impressive mare Lucia Valentina, who runs in the George Main Stakes at Randwick on Saturday.

A group 1 winner as a three-year-old, Lucia Valentina came from last to win the Tramway Stakes on her return and McEvoy believes her best will come as the distances stretch out.

"She will be better at the mile [1600 metres] on the weekend and is an exciting mare to be on," he said. "In my situation now, when a super ride like her comes along, I can make a commitment to it, which is a good place to be.

"[Lucia Valentina's trainer] Kris [Lees] is actually still learning about her and it will be interesting to see if a mile, 2000 metres or even 2400 is her best trip. We are going to find out a bit more about her at weight-for-age on Saturday."

McEvoy can ride the mare at her 51 kilograms in the Caulfield Cup if she gets that far.

Lucia Valentina will take on the three-year-old Panzer Division in the George Main. McEvoy was sounded out about the possibility of taking the ride on the younger horse, but was already committed to Lucia Valentina, so Brenton Avdulla will ride the Arrowfield colt.

There will be an international influence in the George Main, with Corey Brown returning again from Singapore to ride Toydini while Zac Purton will back from Hong Kong to ride Sacred Falls, on whom he won the Doncaster last year.

Premier trainer Chris Waller will also start Chelmsford quinella Hawkspur and Royal Descent, while McDonald is back on Australian Oaks winner Rising Romance.

McEvoy will again ride Rowley Mile winner Mr Chard in Wednesday's Cameron Handicap at Newcastle.

However, he wants to be the one to give Godolphin its first locally trained group 1 in Australia and Sweynesse and Earthquake, who he will ride this week, could get that honour later in the spring.

Sweynesse, a first-up winner over 1400 metres at Randwick, will step up to 1600 in the Spring Stakes at Newcastle on Wednesday. He is leading towards the Spring Champion Stakes and is part of a book of rides McEvoy has for Godolphin at the carnival, including Tupac Amaru in Thursday's Newcastle Cup.

"Sweynesse is the sort of horse that is only going to get better as the races get longer. I think 2000 metres will be his trip but he is good enough to win at mile," McEvoy said. "He gives the feel of really good horse with everything he does."

It will be decision day for Blue Diamond winner Earthquake in the Tea Rose Stakes at Randwick on Saturday and McEvoy is hoping for a dry track.

"As long as the sun stays out, you will see a different Earthquake on Saturday. It will probably decide if she goes towards the group 1 fillies miles like the Flight Stakes or Thousand Guineas or drops back to sprinting," McEvoy said.