Have you ever heard someone say, "My hope is to have a normal life" or "I just want what everyone else wants"? I have a friend who is the epitome of that. Despite the intellectual and physical disabilities she's had since birth, in many ways, her life strongly resembles mine. She eats three meals a day, she has a job, she exercises regularly and she gets Chinese food with her roommates nearly every Friday night.

In reality, there's not much that separates this individual from anyone else — except for one factor. A selfless, nourishing force who is constantly by her side. Her name is Mary Patrick.

Patrick is a direct care worker. Without Patrick's help, my friend would have difficulty with some of the mundane tasks we take for granted. Getting dressed, bathing and going to the bathroom would be virtually unachievable for my friend.

Sadly, as she works arduously so that my friend doesn't struggle, Patrick herself is struggling financially because she, like thousands of direct care workers in Tennessee, is grossly underpaid. Because she has a family to provide for, and better-paying employment opportunities are becoming increasingly available, my friend losing Patrick is a constant possibility.

My friend isn't the only one in danger of losing this vital source of support and care. Thousands of people with intellectual and developmental disabilities across Tennessee risk losing critical support services because those who help them live their lives to the fullest are barely making minimum wage. These frontline workers are worth far more than they are being paid, and desperately need the state to allocate funds to provide a competitive wage. Otherwise, the quality of care for our state's most vulnerable citizens and their families will be seriously jeopardized.

At the typical direct care worker pay rate of roughly $8.50 per hour that the state pays to service providers, an employee working 40 hours per week would earn gross wages of about $340. When opportunities arise for these direct care workers to work for one of a growing number of community employers, such as when a big-box retailer opens a new store, the better pay and benefits are nearly impossible to refuse.

Over the past 10 years providers have seen an increase in funding from the state of roughly 1.9 percent. Virtually no increase in funding coupled with the tremendous cost of health care imposed by the Affordable Care Act make it impossible for providers to keep up with the large for-profit entities and the wages they can provide.

Unlike workers who are paid to stock shelves, direct care employees are highly trained and specialized. Failure to pay competitive wages compromises a service provider's ability to retain these valuable team members, and reduces its capacity to attract new, qualified hires.

In a recent survey, service providers reported an average turnover rate of more than 46 percent.

The most common reason given for leaving was that they could make more money elsewhere, especially considering the difficulty of the job compared to the pay.

As this reality worsens, it's ultimately the health and safety of Tennesseans with intellectual and developmental disabilities and their families who pay the price.

In his State of the State address, Gov. Bill Haslam emphasized that helping Tennesseans with disabilities is a priority. He is to be applauded that the state's 2016 budget includes more than $24 million for people with disabilities, but none of those resources would be directed to the 8,000 Tennesseans with disabilities who are already receiving services, or to the approximately 20,000 direct care workers who are critical to keeping the support network stable.

Rather, most of this new funding would be directed to thousands of Tennesseans with disabilities who are on a waiting list to receive services, which is much needed, but unfortunately does not address the ballooning caregiver crisis.

A $1 per hour wage increase from the state, to about $9.50 an hour, would assist community providers to create a stable environment of efficiency and effectiveness, and continue to provide quality and continuity of care and support for Tennessee's most vulnerable population, despite rising operational costs and other funding challenges.

As the state considers this proposition, I beg our legislators to think not only of my friend and the thousands of Tennesseans with intellectual and developmental disabilities like her who depend on direct care workers, but also of the caregivers like Mary Patrick, who give so much so that others may experience a full and happy life.