Friday afternoon, Jusuf Nurkic walked out of the Pepsi Center toward his car with a little extra bounce in his step. Because this drive, to the airport to catch the Nuggets’ charter plane bound for San Francisco in advance of Saturday’s game at Golden State, had extra meaning.

The second-year center boarded the plane with knowledge he was just hours away from making a long-anticipated season debut.

“I feel excited about everything,” Nurkic said. “I feel great. My shape right now is not right, but I want to play.”

The final hurdle in a marathon, eight-month saga of rehabbing a partially torn left patellar tendon was getting through an entire practice. Nurkic needed to see himself do it. Nuggets coach Michael Malone needed to see him do it. Both parties were satisfied with what they saw.

“He had a good practice,” Malone said. “Today was a big day for him. Seeing him out here, seeing him up-and-down, he’ll definitely play (against Golden State). We’ll monitor his minutes, make sure we don’t overload him too much on his first game back. But it will be good to see him out there and get him back in the rotation.”

Nurkic isn’t the only returning player.

Danilo Gallinari’s hair gave him away. The veteran forward goes with a mohawk when he’s ready to play, and after a bit more than a week of growth had filled it all in, there it was — sides freshly shaved. Gallo, ready to return.

He, too, went through all of Friday’s practice. He’ll be back in the starting lineup against the Warriors after missing six games with a sprained left ankle. And the Nuggets need him.

“Gallo is our leading scorer, so it’s always good to have him back,” Nuggets guard Will Barton said. “Gives us some more scoring punch.”

Gallinari averages 17.3 points per game, and getting back that production helps.

The Nuggets know they can get 20 points or more from Gallo most nights, and they desperately need that additional, reliable firepower.

“(He’s) an attacking player,” Malone said. “A ‘small’ player that we can put in the post. He’s one of our higher-volume post-up players. He’s a guy that gets us to the foul line. He’s a guy that generates free-throw attempts. He drives. You’re getting back size, versatility and an offensive weapon in a guy that can score in a lot of different ways.”

While the wait to get Gallinari back seemed like a long time for everyone else, to him he’s coming back in the blink of an eye.

“A week is great,” Gallinari said. “Nineteen months without playing basketball (due to ACL rehab), trust me, a week is nothing. It’s like one hour, maybe. I feel good, it was just a week. I’m ready to go.”

Gallinari said he’s not pain-free but ready nonetheless.

He’ll try to help the Nuggets snap a four-game losing streak against the defending champions.

“How do we beat them? Well, we’ve got to play for 48 minutes,” Gallinari said. “We proved against everybody that when we play for 48 minutes, we give ourselves a good chance to win. We’ve just got to do it for 48 minutes.”

Christopher Dempsey: cdempsey@denverpost.com or @dempseypost

DENVER AT GOLDEN STATE 8:30 p.m. Saturday, ALT; 104.3 FM

Spotlight on Harrison Barnes:

Just as the Nuggets are getting players back for Saturday’s game against Golden State, the Warriors could also get the return of a key cog that has been missing for a while. Harrison Barnes has dealt with an ankle injury that has caused him to miss 15 consecutive games. Barnes is the fourth-leading scorer for the Warriors, averaging 13.4 points per game.

NOTEBOOK

Nuggets:

This is the start of a back-to-back set for the Nuggets, who return home for a quick rematch against the Portland Trail Blazers. The Trail Blazers beat them Wednesday night in Portland. … The Nuggets are trying to snap a three-game road losing streak. … In the last three games, Kenneth Faried is averaging 14.0 points and 10.3 rebounds.

Warriors:

An anticipated return isn’t reserved just for Barnes. Star guard Stephen Curry has missed two straight games with a lower leg injury and could return against the Nuggets. Also, coach Steve Kerr, who has not been on the sideline all season because of complications from back surgery, is closing in on a return too. And his return could come against the Nuggets.