WASHINGTON -- Neurology isn't often mentioned in the same breath as primary care, but the American Academy of Neurology (AAN) is again lobbying to gain that sobriquet -- this time to take advantage of a recent policy change that benefits primary care providers.

The Affordable Care Act provided a bonus for primary care providers in Medicaid so that certain services are paid at Medicare rates, which are higher than Medicaid rates.

The ACA provided the bonus for 2013 and 2014, but the AAN is pushing to have Congress include its members in an extension beyond 2014 -- an extension that could come in legislation that repeals Medicare's sustainable growth rate (SGR) payment formula.

Rep. Frank Pallone (D-N.J.), the top Democrat on the House Energy and Commerce Health Subcommittee, called the bonuses "an important policy" that should be extended. "I also believe that there are physicians who are essential to the Medicaid program such as neurologists, psychiatrists, and OB/GYNs that aren't included in the bonus payment but should be," he said during a recent hearing on the topic.

Hold the phone. Neurology should be included in the same bucket as general pediatricians, general internists, and family medicine?

As it happens the AAN first tried the primary care gambit back in the early 1990s when an overhaul of Medicare Part B began increasing pay for "cognitive services" -- especially those offered by designated primary care specialties. That cognitive shift occurred when Medicare instituted the resource-based relative value scale hampered neurologists' reimbursements.

This time around, the ACA provided the extra money to Medicaid providers to incentivize more to participate in the program, and to throw providers already seeing Medicaid patients a lifeline from a payer whose reimbursements are meager.

Rod Larson, AAN's chief health policy officer, said neurology is a "nonprocedural specialty" with more than 60% of reimbursements coming from evaluation and management codes. Also, many patients view their neurologist as their principal provider for their neurological condition, he said.

"It makes no policy sense to pay neurologists, who are seeing the most difficult patients, less than primary care and internal medicine specialties for the time they spend with their patients," Larson told MedPage Today in an email. "If a primary care physician refers a complex patient to a neurologist, should the neurologist be paid 10% less for the same service? We also hear constantly about long waiting periods to see a neurologist if a patient can even find one in their area."

Neurology is not alone in this battle: rheumatologists, infectious disease specialists, allergy, asthma, and immunologists, and endocrinologists are also on board.

The American Academy of Family Physicians (AAFP) said specialists focus on a single organ or disease system, while primary care physicians focus on the whole health of the patient.

"A major concern is that designating a sub-specialist as a primary care provider because she or he evaluates and manages that single condition or disease for which that subspecialist has been trained will fragment care at the time we need to break down such silos of care," AAFP President Reid Blackwelder, MD, told MedPage Today in an email. "If an Alzheimer's patient has a heart condition, a skin disease and diabetes, who is the primary care provider: the neurologist, the cardiologist, the dermatologist or the endocrinologist?"

The organization has also been increasing its presence on Capitol Hill. Larson states on the AAN website that the organization's political action committee last year gave more than $300,000 to 117 candidates running for Congress. The group now has three Washington staff members, when it had none as recently as 2003.

Pay and Practice is a blog by David Pittman for readers with an interest in health policy.