Clemson quarterback Deshaun Watson walks the field during warm ups before the start of an NCAA college football game against South Carolina, Saturday, Nov. 29, 2014, in Clemson, S.C. (AP Photo/Richard Shiro)

CLEMSON - Starting quarterback, Deshaun Watson. Finishing quarterback? We'll see.

Clemson announced about 90 minutes before kickoff the freshman quarterback would draw his fifth start, and his first against South Carolina.

Watson initially lasted six plays, guiding the offense 71 yards, before coming up lame while rolling out and attempting a pass (which was dropped by Germone Hopper with the ball hitting him in the numbers.) Watson immediately went to the sideline, relieved for one play by Cole Stoudt, preceding a 47-yard field goal attempt left short by kicker Ammon Lakip.

However, Watson jogged along the sidelines to test his knee, and re-entered for the next drive - which resulted in a 53-yard tap to Artavis Scott for an equalizing score.

Watson went on to play the majority of the first half - squirting in for a 1-yard touchdown run to give Clemson a two-touchdown lead - but departed again with two minutes to play. Stoudt threw a pick to Skai Moore a couple snaps later.

Watson headed to the locker room with a minute to go before intermission, but his No. 23-ranked Tigers lead South Carolina 21-10 with the second-half kickoff coming their way. Stay tuned.

Turnover margin

Clemson scored its first points off a South Carolina turnover in six years when Vic Beasley garnered his seventh career strip-sack, chasing down Dylan Thompson and letting Ben Boulware recover the fumble. Wayne Gallman followed with a 5-yard touchdown run.

However, Stoudt's interception by Skai Moore led to a 47-yard field goal by Elliott Fry with three seconds left in the half, giving South Carolina 65 points off turnovers in the past six meetings.

Wild thing

Both teams rolled out the Wildcat look, each success. On his first touch of the game, Pharoh Cooper took the direct snap, shooting around right tackle and outrunning Grady Jarrett and Tony Steward to reach daylight and a 20-yard touchdown score to open the game.

Also, during its opening drive, Clemson also tried out the Wildcat, and Artavis Scott picked up a 5-yard gain. Wayne Gallman and Adam Humphries

Onside off-base

What seemed to be a huge special teams play turned into a special teams gaffe.

After Clemson's first touchdown of the game, kickoff specialist Bradley Pinion pooched a short kick to the right side for a surprise onside try. Jayron Kearse swarmed in and caught the ball while crashing into South Carolina blocker K.J. Brent.

The referees, after a short conference, ruled that because the ball never touched the ground, Brent was entitled to an unimpeded try to catch the return. So Kearse was assessed a 15-yard personal foul, giving the Gamecocks possession on Clemson's 43-yard-line, though the Tigers forced a punt.

Family affair

Two of Clemson's four captains (strong safety Robert Smith and defensive tackle DeShawn Williams) had family members who each played for Clemson, and played well against South Carolina.

Smith's cousin, defensive back Tye Hill, went 4-0 from 2002-05, while Williams' father, running back Ronald Williams, was 2-1 from 1990-92, against the Gamecocks.

Banged up, bruised

Three different Clemson players had to leave the field on the same offensive drive.

Center Ryan Norton had an equipment issue with his helmet, and was relieved by Jay Guillermo for a few plays. Wide receiver Artavis Scott departed with a right ankle injury after picking up a 3rd-and-1 first down. And tight end Stanton Seckinger suffered what appeared to be a bad left leg injury, hoisted by two trainers immediately to the locker room.

On the South Carolina sideline, tight end Rory Anderson and defensive tackle J.T. Surratt are each uncertain to return with elbow strains.

Johnson earns start

Clemson free safety Jadar Johnson started in place of Jayron Kearse. This was Johnson's first career start in his 23rd game, while Kearse had started the past 13 games there. Johnson played the first two series, before being relieved by