A set of factors that includes the state of the industry and a desire to set long-term strategies in the face of the Affordable Care Act point to increased merger and acquisition activity in the near term for health insurers, according to industry observers quoted by AIS’s recent issue of Health Plan Week.

Among the factors cited:

An increase in health plans acquiring smaller providers and issuers, and IT and data analytics firms;

the strength of the insurance industry in the post-Affordable Care Act era; and

the desire by carriers to set long-term strategies.

“Last year we saw 22 announced deals in the managed care sector, and already this year we have had 10 announcements of deals between insurance companies,” Lisa Phillips, editor of Health Care M&A News, told HPW. “It looks like activity is picking up for 2015 for sure.”

In addition to these mergers between carriers, “I think right now one of the dynamics that certainly is impacting the private sector is the [price] that people are willing to pay for managed care plans, for data analytics companies, for health care IT services,” Bill Baker, partner-in-charge, health care transaction services, for audit, tax and advisory firm KPMG LLP, told HPW, saying that the industry is currently at a high valuation peak. “You are seeing a lot of people today who six months ago said ‘we’re not for sale,’ but now you’d have to be an idiot to at least not consider it.”

Baker added: “We are doing a lot of transactions for your large established managed care companies who are out there buying provider networks.”

Another factor spurring M&A activity is the trend of providers offering their own health insurance products.

“Every health system over $1 billion or $2 billion in revenue, I can tell you with an unbelievably high degree of confidence those guys have a group of people in that health system trying to figure out how they are going to roll out a health plan,” Baker told HPW.

Click here to see the full AIS/HPW article, including a table ranking the top 10 provider-sponsored health plans by membership, featuring data from the recently published AIS’s Directory of Health Plans: 2015.