Buy Photo Chef Joe Scully worked strenuous hours as a chef in the kitchens of New York City. New overtime laws may kick some workers out of the kitchen once they've hit 40 hours. (Photo: Katie Bailey/bkbailey@citizen-times.com)Buy Photo

Joe Scully came to be a chef in the heavy-production kitchens of New York City, where hard-bitten sous chefs regularly worked 10 hours a day, six days a week.

Scully's hours were equally strenuous. But that was fine by him.

"I had food, I had people my age, there were girls there, they gave you a shift beer, and it was fun," he said. "Why would I ever go home?"

But new overtime laws recently proposed by President Barack Obama's administration might kick some workers out of the kitchen once they've hit 40 hours. And not everyone seems to agree on whether that's a good thing.

Salaried workers making more than $455 per week, or $23,660 annually, are exempt now from paid overtime hours — regardless of the industry. That yearly salary is below the poverty line for a family of four.

Obama recently detailed in an op-ed piece in the Huffington Post that he's ordered the Department of Labor to issue a proposal seeking to update overtime regulations, last revised a decade ago.

"An exemption meant for highly paid, white collar employees now leaves out workers making as little as $23,660 a year — no matter how many hours they work," Obama wrote.

If passed next year, overtime protections could be extended to all salaried workers making up to $50,400. The administration has the power to issue the regulation without congressional approval.

Penalizing businesses for success?

New overtime rules could have big implications for more than 5 million workers, with the U.S. Department of Labor estimating annual direct employer costs of $239.6 to $255.3 million a year.

But restaurants, where kitchens tend to breed a culture where the ability to work long hours is a badge of honor, might see the biggest changes.

Scully, owner of the Corner Kitchen and Chestnut with his business partner Kevin Westmoreland, worries if the proposal goes through, many salaried employees working in restaurants — front-of-the-house managers, sous chefs and the like — will find themselves with their hours cut.

But where it's not possible to cut hours, labor expenses will climb. In a business where long hours are the norm, that could result in menu price increases. "The Reuben that is creeping over $10 now is going to be a $12 sandwich," he said.

The Affordable Care Act will already take a bite out of Scully's profits when, in January, businesses with more than 50 employees — his restaurants collectively have about 70 — will have to pay into health insurance.

"It feels a little bit like I'm being penalized for success," he said. "It's a low-margin business to begin with. Any investor in the world looking at a business that yields on average between 4-7 percent will simply laugh at you."

But even though he says the new rules could hurt him as a business owner, Scully maintains he's pro-social justice. "Maybe Obama's right," he said. "Maybe we're just going to change our paradigm, work people 40 hours, and not a minute more."

Scully's restaurant doesn't run on the backs of cooks slogging it out for 70 hours a week on a meager salary. "But a lot of restaurants, there's a lot of people on salary making $26,000 as sure as I'm sitting here," he said.

Poverty-line pay

Alia Todd, an organizer of the Asheville Sustainable Restaurant Workforce and a server at Tupelo Honey, said it's industry standard for a chef to work up to 70 hours a week without overtime pay.

"These new overtime requirements level the playing field a bit for those that are taken advantage of for their job title rather than receive fair compensation," she said.

She thinks the new laws provide overtime pay for the workers who need it most.

The Bureau of Labor Statistics says first-line supervisors in Asheville restaurants make an annual mean wage of $33,110, while chefs and head cooks' mean wage is $40,190.

Todd acknowledges businesses will need to make adjustments with an eye on the bottom line, but she views the possible changes as a positive thing. "It's really difficult to tell a fast-food worker that's working 60 hours a week for $24,000 a year that this is a bad idea," she said.

An Oxford Economics analysis of the proposed rules says raising the overtime threshold could mandate overtime pay for an additional 2.2 million workers in the retail and restaurant industries.

"Assuming, unrealistically, that employers do nothing to alter workers' hours, benefits, or hourly rate of pay to compensate for their increased costs, this would cost restaurant and retail employers $9.5 billion per year," the report said.

But it's unlikely managerial workers and supervisors would see their take-home pay improve simply because they gained the potential to earn overtime pay.

Instead, employers would likely find ways to strategically reduce the additional labor costs to remain competitive, including hiring at lower hourly wages, cutting benefits or reducing workers' hours, the report said.

Tres Hundertmark, executive chef of Asheville French Quarter, which includes Bouchon and Lafayette, calls the potential effects on small business "terrifying."

The proposal is missing the big picture, he said. In restaurants where hourly employees often get sent home when the business is slower — often in the winter when the heating bills are higher — salaried labor ensures a worker receives a steady paycheck, no matter what the weather.

"When the slow time comes around, you're not getting cut from five days a week to four days a week, and your shifts are six hours instead of eight hours," he said.

Now 46, Hundertmark worked as a sous chef for Fine Friends for $300 a week when he was 19. In those days, 60-hour weeks were the norm. But those long hours acted as the best education a teenage cook could receive.

That paid education wouldn't be possible without working closely with mentors — the very managers and chefs that could see their hours cut if the new rules go into effect, he said.

A bump in the road for businesses

Sabrina Rockoff, a lawyer with McGuire, Wood & Bissette P.A., practices primarily in the area of labor and employment, working closely with members of the Asheville Independent Restaurant Association.

She said restaurants have a tough road ahead to adjust to the proposed rules, particularly if the threshold increases dramatically. Such a leap could be bad for both businesses and for workers, she said.

"Just because the law changes, doesn't mean there's suddenly going to be this bucket of money that wasn't there before," she said. "I think that it will likely result in more management-level folks in restaurants being hourly and being restricted in how many hours they can work."

At Tupelo Honey, which will have 16 stores by the end of next year, including one in Texas and another in Denver, Colorado, owner Steve Frabitore said he has a number of managers already making more than $50,000. New overtime rules wouldn't be too much of a financial or cultural stretch, he said.

With 1,500 employees and a stout management staff getting vacation time and health care, company culture already has workers fairly treated, Frabitore said. "You have to treat them with dignity and respect, or you're not going to have a successful business."

But he said too many one-size-fits-all labor rules add enormous complexity and expense to the operations of any business.

Todd, who works for Frabitore, acknowledges that Tupelo follows the letter of the law. But she says industry-wide standards are important.

And with the costs of goods and services rising, workers need to be able to afford the basics, she said.

"When the standards of labor law do not change and improve over time, it is the government that steps in to prod business," she said. "You cannot run a 2015 business model while paying your workers decadesold wages and benefits."

Read or Share this story: http://avlne.ws/1IRm6MM