A winter storm that hit the West with deadly fury is headed east to soak New Jersey just before Thanksgiving.

Currently located over Texas and Oklahoma, the winter weather system is expected to continue across the South before it heads up the Atlantic coast and drops rain and snow on the Northeast through Wednesday, according to the National Weather Service.

Though there is still some variability in the storm’s track, meteorologists are expecting New Jersey will likely avoid snow, except in the northwest corner and high-elevation areas.

“The model is indicating the snow line won’t quite make it to New Jersey except in the northwest, but it’s still a little too early to tell,” said Jim Bunker, observing program director with the National Weather Service in Mount Holly.

The storm is expected to hit the state late Tuesday night and bring rain and winds of up to 20 mph, according to Bunker. The temperature is expected to drop to the high 30s in much of the state.

The rain will persist through Wednesday and into early Thursday, though it should taper off before people hit the road for their Thanksgiving dinners, Bunker said. Wednesday should see highs in the 40s, and Thanksgiving stands to be a bit chillier.

A change to the storm’s track could change the forecast and drop a rain-snow mix on the state, Bunker noted, though that is less likely.

But with one of the biggest travel days of the year approaching, any inclement weather could be cause for concern.

“The biggest thing is, if folks are planning to travel to higher elevations like to the Poconos, make sure they have good snow tires or chains, and make sure they check the road conditions before leaving,” Bunker said.

There’s a potential that drainage issues in rainy areas could lead to road flooding, he added.

“It’s common sense that with this significant weather coming, there could be travel delays,” Bunker said. “So folks need to pay attention to what’s going on with the forecast.”

The storm is being blamed for eight deaths across the West, where it dropped snow and heavy rain on areas unaccustomed to to the winter weather.

In New Mexico, five inches of snow was predicted for many areas of the desert state, and roadways were already being shut down. An accident there killed a 4-year-old girl.

Three other storm-related deaths were reported Saturday in a crash in the Texas Panhandle involving nearly a dozen vehicles.

In California, where the storm first hit, three deaths have been linked to the weather since Thursday. In southern Arizona, firefighters recovered the body of a man who was swept away by high waters Friday in the Santa Cruz River.

The Associated Press contributed to this story.