With only three days to go before the first 2016 Republican debate, Donald Trump has finally begun revealing what his administration would focus on if he were elected.

Trump said Monday that the first items on his agenda would be increasing the U.S. military’s strength and getting rid of President Obama’s Affordable Care Act.

“Our country is a mess and there’s so many things that we could do,” Trump explained on Fox News Channel’s “Fox and Friends.”

DONALD TRUMP SLAMS PRESIDENT OBAMA FOR NEGLECTING BLACKS

Donald Trump said Monday that his hypothetical presidential administration would be made of "business people, not political people." (FREDERIC J. BROWN/AFP/Getty Images)

“I want to build up the military so nobody messes with us,” Trump said when asked what he would do first, if elected. “I would bring it (military levels) back to where it was at the height because we’re in such trouble.”

“And I would absolutely repeal and replace Obamacare,” he added, before offering more thoughts on illegal immigration.

“We would make a strong border, people are pouring through,” he said. “Illegal immigration is a big, big thing.”

Watch the latest video at video.foxnews.com

He also said his administration would comprise “business people, not political people.”

EXCLUSIVE: DONALD TRUMP TRIED TO PUSH OUT STREET VENDORS

The ideas, while vague, are still the most clearly defined ones Trump has revealed since he announced his campaign in June.

The bombastic billionaire, who has attracted widespread attention with outrageous one-liners and unusual attacks against his competitors, has been widely criticized for failing to disclose specific policy proposals.

Trump, nevertheless, has rocketed to the top of national and early-state polls ahead of Thursday’s Republican debate in Cleveland, the first of the season.

A poll out Monday, however, showed that the outspoken mogul was unpopular with at least one group — Latinos.

A new NBC News/Wall Street Journal/Telemundo poll showed that 75% of Latinos had a negative view of the GOP’s front-runner. A whopping 61% of those polled said they had a “very negative” view of Trump, while only 13% said they had a positive view of the candidate.

ON A MOBILE DEVICE? WATCH THE VIDEO HERE.