Buy Photo Zoe Voris (left) of the WSRA Falcons chases down a loose ball against the Borp Jr. Road Warriors in the Junior 10 Division on Saturday during the National Wheelchair Basketball Association Championships at the Kentucky Exposition Center. The NWBA was founded in 1948 and today consists of men's, women's, intercollegiate and youth teams throughout the United States and Canada. April 5, 2014 (Photo: David Lee Hartlage/Special to The Courier-Journal)Buy Photo Story Highlights 80 teams are competing in the National Wheelchair Basketball Association championships

More than 1,100 players are playing on a dozen courts set up at the exposition center

The tournament is the largest of its kind in the United States

The NWBA includes more than 200 teams

While many Louisvillians are focused on Dallas this weekend with the University of Kentucky's men's basketball team playing in the Final Four, wheelchair basketball players from across the country are competing for their own national title at the the Kentucky Exposition Center.

More than 80 teams are competing in the National Wheelchair Basketball Association championships at the exposition center this weekend.

"There are a lot of great athletes here who are striving," said Dom McNaughton, a player for the Philadelphia 76ers, a team in the tournament's adult division named after the city's National Basketball Association team.

More than 1,100 players are playing on a dozen courts set up at the exposition center. Some of the courts feature floors used at Freedom Hall.

The tournament is the largest of its kind in the United States and one of the largest wheelchair-based sporting events in the world, said Amy Lawicki, an NWBA organizer.

About 40 teams competed in the event when it was held at the expo center last year, and the tournament will return to the venue next year, Lawicki said.

"It's a great central location," she said. "We have a lot of teams east of the Mississippi River, so it's the perfect spot."

The NWBA includes more than 200 teams. Teams often travel — sometimes many hours away — and this weekend's tournament is the pinnacle of their sport in the United States.

Larry Marks, a 16-year-old player for the Kady (Pa.) Komets, has been to Alabama, Tennessee, Kentucky and other states to play in tournaments.

"It takes a special kind of person to play this," Marks said, noting that the game is more physical than able-bodied basketball.

The tournament held a game to honor veterans Friday night. It harkened back to the association's beginning, when it was founded following World War II as a way to assist wounded veterans. Today, about 20 percent of the association's players are veterans.

"It's a fun sport to watch that's been growing," organizer Josie Owen said, adding that 39 states have teams.

The tournament continues Sunday with championship games for the adult and women's divisions.

Reporter Patrick T. Sullivan can be reached at (502) 582-4335 or on Twitter @CJ_PSullivan.

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1gymqxa