Kathe Perez, left, watches as client Nicole Johenning sets a baseline white noise balance on the Exceptional Voice App, aka Eva, during a meeting at Vic's Coffee in Louisville. ( Mark Leffingwell / Staff Photographer )

At age 24, Nicole Johenning found her voice.

It has required her to train for about five minutes, five times a day. Every day for three months. And even so, she still has a ways to go. This process typically takes six months to a year, depending on the person. Commitment plays into it, but so does anatomy and medical conditions such as acid reflux.

Johenning is committed. If all goes as planned, the male-to-female transgender woman from Erie hopes to have her final surgery next summer. When that time comes, she says she wants to be ready.

Until then, she is training her voice.

One of the highest hurdles in gender transition is your voice, says Kathe Perez, of Louisville, a speech pathologist. She specializes in training transgender voices.

"The biggest thing transgender people feel is they want to be themselves, and part of that is sounding like themselves," she says. "When they feel good about how they look and stop at a coffee shop and order their morning coffee and the barista says, 'Sir,' it's a stab in their gut."

Learn more • Get more information about the Exceptional Voice App at exceptionalvoiceapp.com • Watch male-to-female transgender client Rachel, before and after. • Watch female-to-male transgender client Alex.

Perez is the co-creator (with Annika Kappenstein) of an interactive iPhone app called Eva (Exceptional Voice App) that coaches both transgender men and women, using an audio analyzer and self-guided and video-based lessons to train nine different components of speech.

Eva MtF is for trans women and Eva FtM is for trans men.

Eva is the only speech-coaching app for transgender people, with thousands of clients in 18 different countries, Perez says.

A screenshot of the Eva MtF iPhone app for transgender women. (Courtesy image)

The app tracks voice output to let users know where their voice falls on the gender spectrum, using algorithms designed by a University of Colorado-Boulder engineer, and provides tangible, measurable methods to adjust that.

Perez also teaches this in her face-to-face sessions, but the app appeals to people who live far away, want privacy or independence or would like to supplement their speech therapy sessions with work at home.

"A transgender person's biggest challenge is their voice," Perez says. "While it's expensive to do surgery, it really is something that someone else does to you. But to change their voice, they have to do something very active themselves to make it happen. People get frustrated and discouraged."

That's what brought Perez's first transgender client to her then-Boulder-based office in 2000. (She has since moved her office to Denver.)

"Their voices don't match the essence of who they are. That's what brings me to tears," Perez says. "I hear the sadness. I hear the stories. I hear their souls' concerns."

The demand for male-to-female voice coaching quickly grew to consume Perez's business, until she expanded to offer female-to-male coaching in 2009.

She released the first version of the app in 2013, inspired by an idea at a transgender conference, and just released the updated version, Eva 2.0.

Nine elements of the voice

Although most of us take it for granted, it turns out, male and female voices are pretty textbook.

"There are nine elements that go into producing anybody's voice, and we are systematically training all of those elements in the lessons," Perez says.

First, the pitch. The average adult man's pitch falls lower on the hertz scale than a woman's. You can train this using musical notes on a keyboard (not that you have to be musical to do so, Perez says)

Voice quality also matters, Perez says. This refers to whether your voice is scratchy, airy or breathy. Quality doesn't vary between genders, but transgender women tend to gravitate toward an airy sound, which is not common for the modern woman, Perez says. And women who begin taking testosterone often go through a hoarse phase, as the vocal chords physically change; large doses of testosterone automatically lower the pitch (although no amount of estrogen can make your pitch rise), she says.

Kathe Perez demonstrates the Eva app at Vic's Coffee in Louisville. (Mark Leffingwell / Staff Photographer)

She also trains loudness and projection; articulation (men tend to mumble more), pacing (women tend to talk faster), phrasing (women tend to say more words per breath and use longer phrases), melodic intonation (men tend to speak more flatly with less melody) and fluency (men tend to be more staccato and choppy, whereas women tend to be more flowing).

Finally, the most difficult but most important factor is resonance, Perez says.

Think of a musical instrument, she says.

"We can hear in our heads the tone of a violin and the tone of a cello. Both can play the same pitch, like A4 at 440 hertz, but our ears tell us they're two different instruments," Perez says. "It's the resonance that tells us that."

Just like a cello versus a violin, the body of the instrument affects the quality of the tone, and a larger throat space gives a voice masculine tones, even if it hits the pitch in the female range, she says.

"While it's easy to change the pitch, it's a whole new ballgame to get the minute muscles of the throat, tongue and jaw to adjust to the resonance of a female voice," Perez says.

She says many people underestimate the amount of time and effort necessary to train a voice.

Many put it off to the end of their transition. That's very common, even though most would say their voice is one of the most important things," she says. "Then they're surprised when everything is ready to go, but their voice is not."

Positive side effect

Johenning, of Erie, has been living as a woman full time for two months now. She began her voice training even before that.

For her, it's more than sounding like a woman.

Johenning says she always has been shy and introverted.

"Now, I have so much more confidence, so it allows me to break free from the shyness," she says. "It helped me be a more social person. I used to be deathly afraid of speaking with strangers, especially over the phone."

Being self-conscious about her voice and not feeling like it matched her identity forced her to withdraw even further, she says.

Now, she says, she can go into any social situation and not think about her voice too much.

Johenning works in the service industry.

"I used to come home from work and be a nervous wreck, thinking about every little interaction I'd had," she says. "Now when I come home, I think of the normal stresses from work. I don't have any of the stress that came with feeling awkward and uncomfortable."

Aimee Heckel: 303-473-1359, heckela@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/aimeemay