Phyllis Holst donating all her equipment from Animal Medical Clinic to a clinic in Ghana

The prospect of cleaning out your building after having owned your own business for 35 years could be daunting.

So retired veterinarian Phyllis Holst had someone else do it for her. Movers were in last week, packing everything in her office in preparation for its long journey to another continent.

"I've been a supporting member of Christian Veterinary Mission ever since I've been a vet," said Holst, who closed her Animal Medical Clinic at 133 S. Main St. in Longmont last week after 35 years.

The organization, which was founded in 1976, connects Christian veterinarians and other professionals with communities around the globe that need their assistance. What started out as an organization that mainly helped with animal husbandry instruction in developing countries has grown and evolved over the years, according to its website.

Retired veterinarian Phyllis Holst photographs her office being packed at the Animal Medical Clinic, 133 S. Main St., on Wednesday. Holst is donating her equipment to a clinic in Ghana through the Christian Veterinary Mission. To view a video, visit www.timescall.com (Lewis Geyer / Longmont Times-Call)

"So when it came about that I was closing the clinic it just came to me — maybe I can donate the equipment," Holst said. "So I contacted (Christian Veterinary Mission) and the answer came back yes. I was happy to let CVM handle these logistics."

Holst said she learned the name of the clinic her donation was destined for only Wednesday, the same day the movers were there wrapping everything in brown paper and shrink wrap. It will take two months for the shipment to arrive at its final destination: the Tema Animal Hospital in Tema, Ghana, a port city in west Africa. The clinic's website says it was established in 1993 as the only fully staffed privately owned veterinary practice in Ghana.

Her donations include anesthesia and surgery supplies; microscopes and other lab equipment; examination tables; stainless steel cages; text books; office supplies; and bandages. Nothing perishable and no liquids, she said, and she was holding on to a few things she'd accumulated over the past decades.

"A few books that I need to keep, and my diploma," Holst said. "They won't want that."

Holst said that another retired local veterinarian, Cindy Bauman, also donated some books and some scrubs, and a local Safeway is donating a bunch of school supplies. She even had a plumber and a technician donate their time to get things ready for shipment, she said.

Spared from the flood

Holst has been in the South Main Street building since 2008; before that Animal Medical Clinic was located in the Southmoor Plaza shopping center. When she decided in 1979 to stop working for other vets and go into business for herself, she found what's now her clinic for sale. It had been open for two years and came complete with equipment and, importantly, a client base, making it easy for her to hit the ground running.

Phyllis Holst, who shut down the Animal Medical Clinic last week after 35 years, is donating all of her equipment and supplies to a clinic in Ghana. (Lewis Geyer / Longmont Times-Call)

Her business will probably be the last one ever in 133 S. Main unless the building is moved. Holst said it is in the path of the city's plans to rebuild the Main Street bridge, which is right next to the building.

In fact, for weeks after September's floods there was a huge steel railroad container wedged under that bridge. Her clinic, somehow, was spared from the flood, she said.

More time for hiking and gardening

Before she became a veterinarian Holst was working in a veterinary research lab at Colorado State University, studying the embryology of dogs — research that she said was groundbreaking. That work led to her earning a Master's degree from CSU in canine reproduction and writing a book: "Canine Reproduction — The Breeder's Guide." It came out in 1985 and is now in its third printing.

But seven years of working in research was enough for her, Holst said. She decided to leave the lab behind and pursue a doctorate in veterinary medicine.

"I thought I would like it better," she said. "Practice, rather than research — I thought I would like it more."

After some time spent working for a couple of other vets in larger clinics, the opportunity to buy her own clinic came up.

"The training at CSU was so good," Holst said. "When I started my first job I came in and they said, 'You've got 10 surgeries to do this morning.' And I could do it. Not as well as I could do it a few years later, but I could do it."

Now that she doesn't have to go to work every day Holst, 70, will have a lot more time to pursue her passions, including spending more time with her two beloved Shetland Sheepdogs — better known as "shelties."

She used to breed the herding dogs, she said, but now she just raises them. Holst estimates that over the course of her life she's probably had 50 or so shelties. She loves the breed for their beauty, intelligence and eagerness to please their masters, she said.

Hiking is also a big part of her life, Holst said. She's always kept her clinic open five, not six days a week, to give herself that extra day to do her weekly hike. She's also an avid gardener, she said, and likes to sing in the choir at her church.

"Seventy is long enough to work, don't you think?" Holst said.

Contact Times-Call staff writer Tony Kindelspire at 303-684-5291 or tkindelspire@times-call.com