Donald Trump has hit out against Supreme Court Chief Justice John Roberts over his voting record on Obamacare during a question and answer session.

Quizzed by Attorney General Alan Wilson over how he would vet potential future Supreme Court judges, Trump went off topic to give his opinion on the current crop of top legal minds.

He branded Roberts 'disgraceful' and a 'disappointment' to conservatives, which adding that Associate Justice Clarence Thomas has been 'strong and consistent' in his voting record.

Donald Trump has attacked Supreme Court Chief Justice John Roberts as 'disgraceful' tonight over his record on supporting legislation which upheld Obamacare

Trump said that Roberts (left) had been a 'disappointment' to conservatives while instead giving his backing to Associate Justice Clarence Thomas (right) who he branded 'very, very strong'

In June this year, Roberts wrote a 6-3 decision that upheld the broad reach of President's healthcare act in a decision that was widely criticized in Republican circles.

It marked the second time in three years that Roberts backed the controversial legislation that was a key pledge during Obama's first presidential campaign.

Speaking in front of around 4,000 supporters in South Carolina, Trump told them: 'Justice Roberts really let us down.

'What he did with Obamacare was disgraceful, and I think he did that because he wanted to be popular inside the Beltway.'

The 'beltway' refers to the area around Washington D.C. which is seen as the center of political power in America.

Trump added that while he respects Roberts as a 'great legal scholar,' the chief justice 'knows it better than any of us - there was no legal reason,' to support the healthcare act.

Thomas has been a consistent source of irritation for Republicans since being appointed to the top spot at the Supreme Court ten years ago.

He announced early on during his tenure that he saw the court's role as more of an umpire at a baseball came, making each call as it comes, rather than trying to influence play like a batter.

Since then, he has praised the increase in unanimous decisions by judges while resisting categorizations of the 'conservative bloc' or 'liberal bloc' within his court.

Meanwhile Thomas has consistently voted conservative on most issues, including 'affirmative action' legislation that would allow employers to favor minorities when hiring.

Trump also promised to gut Obama legislation forestalling the deportation of some illegal immigrants, promising to gut it if elected, and also hit out over water regulations

Pressed on the issue by Wilson, Trump added: 'Clarence Thomas, we should give him credit, he has been so consistent. He has been very, very strong.'

Asked to return to the original question of how he would interview future justices, Trump would say only: 'We want smart, conservative and we want people that are truly in love with the Constitution.'

During later parts of the discussion, Trump attacked Obama's executive order forestalling the deportation of some illegal immigrants from America, promising to gut it.

Trump also blasted government regulation, singling out water regulations in particular.

'There's no water pressure," he said. 'The problem is you stand under the shower five times as long wasting more water than if you used the other one.