Opinion

'Sunshine' law may keep doctors from taking industry gifts

Photo: Matt Rourke / Associated Press Image 1 of / 1 Caption Close Image 1 of 1 Feeling a little slow? There’s a nootropic for that. Feeling a little slow? There’s a nootropic for that. Photo: Matt Rourke / Associated Press 'Sunshine' law may keep doctors from taking industry gifts 1 / 1 Back to Gallery

Soon a public website mandated by the Affordable Care Act and supported by the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services will report all but trivial payments to the nation's physicians from pharmaceutical and medical device companies. The companies will be required to report honoraria, travel expenses, grants and even meals. The sunshine in the Physician Payments Sunshine Act is the light that shines by disclosure of these industry ties, and then it will be time for the public to interpret the findings.

The Sunshine Act was the result of a failed effort over more than a decade by major medical organizations to persuade the medical profession to deal with financial conflicts of interest. Evidence had accumulated that these financial ties had led to biased and sometimes dangerous recommendations in physicians' speeches and publications, skewed research results, ghostwritten articles, costly prescribing practices and other inappropriate practices.

Industry had so saturated the profession with its largesse that some medical editors were unable to find a physician without such financial ties to write an editorial or an article reviewing a subject. I considered the problem not only one of interfering with optimal medical care, but one that had roots in medical ethics: I didn't think that physicians should be in a position to be swayed by industry money, especially because the influence can be subconscious. When the profession failed to act, Sen. Chuck Grassley, R-Iowa, and former Sen. Herb Kohl, D-Wis., did; they co-sponsored the act.

Now that we will be able to look up disclosures on every doctor, how will we interpret the information? Is a $100,000 yearly payment to Dr. A for joining a drug company's advisory board more influential than a $75 meal ingested by Dr. B? Is either Dr. A or B more likely to prescribe a drug distributed by the drug company who gave the gift than Dr. C, who has no financial deal? Though logic might lead us to believe that both A and B are less trustworthy than C, it would take a mind reader to know the answer; we just cannot know A's and B's motives.

And there, in a nutshell, is the problem with interpreting the data from the Sunshine Act: If our physician has received no drug or device money, we need not worry about a financial motive for his actions, but if they have received gifts, no matter how small, we will be left wondering whether or not industry's largesse has influenced them to prescribe the company's risky or costly drug. We will be left guessing.

If disclosure is a necessary, but insufficient solution to financial conflict of interest, what is the solution? The only viable solution for individual physicians is not to be "on the take" in the first place. Though some drug companies are apparently backing off on doctor gift giving, others continue. If physicians do not want to leave their patients and colleagues guessing about their opinions and prescribing habits when drug companies come to call, then they will have to just say no.

By financially co-opting a large fraction of the nation's physicians, companies are poisoning the trust between patients and their doctors. Trust is hard won, but especially difficult to recapture when lost.

Perhaps the exposure by the Sunshine Act will help dissuade physicians from signing deals with industry, or perhaps it will embolden even more to make such arrangements if their peers are signing up. Declining income from a medical practice would certainly be an impetus for physicians to look for new sources of income and the industry to further entwine its tentacles into the profession.

The choice for physicians is a personal and moral one. At some point each physician will have to decide whether the money is worth it. He will have to decide whether he will be a statistic on the government's website and thus willing to keep his patients and colleagues guessing.