Obamacare has been one of the most talked about policies in recent American history. From “death panels” to the Supreme Court to the birth control mandate to the government shutdown to the website’s disastrous launch, it’s been a mainstay of the national debate for years. But with less than a week until the deadline to sign up for 2014 coverage, some people are still undecided about whether or not to sign up. Or at least, they’re actively avoiding thinking about it. America Tonight gathered together four "young invincibles" Monday -- the exact kind of people the Obama administration is desperately trying to recruit as it tries to meet its goal of 6 million enrollees. And two of them were still conflicted. “It concerns me a bit,” Kevin Brunell admitted, about not having health insurance. “There’s always the proverbial bus that you could get hit by. But I do my best not to get hit by buses.” Brunell is a real estate agent in Washington D.C., functionally self-employed and has been without health insurance for four years. The 30-year-old said he does his best to be healthy. He eats a plant-based diet, goes to yoga a few times a week and has declined invitations to go snowboarding.

It’s not high on my list of one way to spend an afternoon. Kevin Brunell

He knows that he probably should sign up for health insurance under Obamacare (his financial adviser recommended it). “Eventually I’ll sign up, I’m sure. It just hasn’t necessarily been a priority,” he explained, adding that he hasn’t really done any research about it. “I don’t know how much insurance costs. I haven’t looked into it.” Brunell went on the federal Obamacare website on two occasions. The second time, he said he couldn’t log in. (If Brunell can prove this, he could get an extension beyond the Monday deadline). The first time he said he saw a plan costing $200 a month, and thought “that’s too much money.” He explained that he was told that he should set aside half a day to look at all the options properly, and “it’s not high on my list of one way to spend an afternoon.” That’s half a day he could spend selling houses or hanging out in the park. “It’s a bit of a roll of the dice, I suppose,” he added. Fanna Gebreyesus, a graduate student in art history at American University in Washington D.C., chimed in. “What if something does happen? What if I do get hit by a bus? What if something I couldn’t prevent happens?” she said. “That’s going to destroy my life, you know what I mean? It’s not going to be half a day, it’ll be maybe half a year, who knows.”

Just the jargon of it all, the prices. It’s not something I really want to think about. Fanna Gebreyesus