As most people were finishing last-minute holiday shopping, members of Spencer Schiavo’s family were frantically working to create what they have called a miracle.

Kevin R. Wexler/STAFF PHOTOGRAPHER Al Schiavo and his girlfriend, Julie Skolnik, in the Hawthorne bedroom of Schiavo’s 10-year-old son, Spencer. The hole in the wall was made by Spencer, whose autism sometimes causes violent outbursts.

That’s what it took, they said, to reverse a surprise insurance company decision that would have forced 10-year-old Spencer to leave an intensive treatment program for his severe autism by the weekend after Christmas.

Al Schiavo and his son Spencer at the boy’s treatment center in Baltimore.

Convincing the company, AmeriHealth, to reconsider took dozens of phone calls and letters from Spencer’s teachers and caregivers, many of whom his family had to track down after they had left their offices for the holidays. Spencer and his twin brother, Griffin, live with their father, Al Schiavo, and Al’s longtime girlfriend, Julie Skolnik, in Hawthorne. His mother, Hana Greene, lives nearby.

Their efforts paid off with a brief phone call on one of the last business days before Spencer’s time at the renowned Kennedy Krieger Institute in Baltimore was to run out. The message: Spencer could continue at the institute until at least February, by which time they hope treatment will be complete.

By many measures, it was a happy ending. Spencer’s advocates had persuaded an insurer with one of the largest networks in New Jersey to spend tens of thousands of dollars in an attempt to make him better. The four- to six-month program is meant to curb Spencer’s impulses to hurt himself, a tendency the family feared was about to force them to commit him to an institution.

The battle was one of dozens the family has waged to get Spencer access to often staggeringly expensive services for children with autism, and to navigate the complicated system of state and federal laws that are meant to help families access such care. It is one of countless such disputes between families of people with autism and their insurance companies every year.

In response to a growing body of research showing the efficacy of early treatment, state and federal authorities have required insurance companies to increase their coverage for the condition and provide appeals processes for families who believe their claims were wrongly denied. New Jersey passed such a statute in 2004.

Such regulations have made it easier for families of children with autism to get insurers to cover their care. But advocates have pointed out that there are loopholes. Many small group and individual plans aren’t covered by state and federal mandates. Most states end mandated coverage at age 21. Even when a family believes they have found a treatment covered under their insurance plan — as in Spencer’s case — persuading the company to pay is often a test of wills.

'Wall of ignorance'

A reversal of fortune like Spencer’s is a sign that the system is working, said representatives from the insurance industry and a non-profit group that advocates for people with autism. They declined to comment specifically about Spencer’s case.

“Our main priority is to help our members get quality health care,” said AmeriHealth spokeswoman Jill Ronan. “That means ensuring requests for coverage are thoroughly reviewed and medically necessary, while also adhering to the requirements of our members’ benefits plan.”

The family was thrilled with the outcome, but said the weeks of turmoil were a reminder of how much they depend on the good­will of strangers, and how quickly Spencer’s situation can change.

“I don’t even know how to describe the frustration,” said Al Schiavo. “Here I am trying to do right for my son who can’t do for himself, find the thing that’s going to help him. I’m paying insurance premiums, doing everything I’m supposed to do, and here I hit this wall of ignorance. Once we enlightened them, with testimony from all over the place — from Spencer’s doctors, lawyers, teachers — they all of a sudden came to their senses.”

The Kennedy Krieger Institute represented a last hope that Spencer would be able to continue to live at home.

The walls of Spencer’s bedroom are pockmarked with holes he made with his fists. His knuckles are constantly bleeding from injuries that he has given himself during outbursts, and inflames by picking at them. The family rarely leaves home, because Spencer is too hard to control during outings — he is constantly trying to climb out windows.

During Spencer’s worst periods, his mother worried not only about his safety, but about the family’s, she said.

There was the time when she walked into his bedroom and saw him perched, like a gargoyle, atop a bookshelf, or when he shattered a glass coffee table into dozens of knife-like shards.

But the hardest part of raising Spencer, Greene said, has been knowing that he showed no signs of cognitive impairment. He would sing songs with perfect pitch and read at a sixth-grade level, but would not speak.

“I know he’s not going to be the poet laureate of the United States, but he has a lot of joy and happiness,” Greene said. “I can’t sit by and see him held captive when I know there is a way in.”

Yearlong process

The family spent almost a year working to get Spencer accepted by the Kennedy Krieger program, which is affiliated with Johns Hopkins Children’s Center and specializes in treating children with disabilities. Only 16 people at a time are accepted in Spencer’s unit, which receives applications from all over the world, his family said. Applying was a time-consuming process that required submitting videos and testimonials from Spencer’s caregivers. Once he was accepted, he had to wait seven months for a bed.

When he was admitted, “we had no hope that he could get better at all,” Skolnik said.

After 10 years of living with Spencer, the family was used to taking extreme measures to get him care.

When he was first diagnosed with autism, and before they were separated, Hana and Al Schiavo gave up what Hana described as their dream home in New York to move to New Jersey. They had been told Spencer would have access to better programs in public elementary schools here.

Al Schiavo, who pays for Spencer’s insurance, said a rough but conservative estimate of his out-of-pocket expenses to date for Spencer’s care would be from $150,000 to $200,000.

National estimates of the lifetime costs of supporting a person with autism range from $1.4 million to $2.4 million, according to a report published in June by The American Medical Association’s JAMA Pediatrics.

Schiavo wasn’t sure how much the Kennedy Krieger institute would bill the insurance for Spencer’s treatment, but he estimated, based on the cost of previous treatments that the family had tried that it would cost about $28,000 a week.

Schiavo, a self-employed salesman in the colorants industry, thought he had prepared for such an opportunity when he chose what he thought was a “top-shelf” health plan. He paid $1,435 a month last year and the premium was set to increase to $1,537 starting in January. The Kennedy Krieger Institute was considered an in-network provider, Schiavo said.

But after Spencer was there for four weeks, the family learned just after Thanksgiving that AmeriHealth had declined to pay for Spencer to complete the program, which lasted longer than the plan generally allows for acute care, Julie Skolnik said.

Spencer had been at the institute long enough for an initial assessment and to be weaned from his medication, but not long enough to start his new treatment or for Schiavo or Skolnik to complete a training program to help them deal with his outbursts at home. And with a long waiting list, the institute could not hold a bed for Spencer if he was discharged early.

“It would be like if you went to the hospital with chest pain, and they do all the diagnostics to figure out what the problem is, and when they’re ready to do the surgery, the insurance says it’s time to go home,” Schiavo said.

3 levels of appeals

New Jersey state law provides a three-level appeals process when insurance companies determine that a treatment is not medically necessary, the first two conducted internally by the insurance company. Spencer’s family lost both, which were filed by the hospital on Spencer’s behalf. The insurance payments were scheduled to stop on Christmas Eve, although the hospital offered to allow Spencer to stay until the following Friday if the appeals fell through.

With time running out, the family heard that the third-party agency contracted by the state to conduct the last review would expedite their claim. A spokesman for that agency, Improving Healthcare for the Common Good, said he could not comment on individual cases.

On the eve of the decision, Dec. 22, Julie and Al took a 6 a.m. train to Baltimore, hoping they would not have to bring Spencer back with them.

They spent that Monday in cram sessions organized by the hospital, which had agreed to condense weeks of parental training into one day. They made social-media appeals to every political figure and celebrity they could think of who might take up their cause, including Baltimore Ravens running back Ray Rice, Real Housewives of New Jersey cast member Jacqueline Laurita and Assemblyman John Wisniewski, D-Middlesex.

They were told that they would have a decision by the end of the day. As they were losing hope, the call came through after 5 p.m.

Best Christmas gift

Elena Graziosi, manager of information services at Autism New Jersey, a non-profit group, said it has focused on educating insurance companies about the expense and duration of successful treatment programs for people with autism and that the insurance industry has been “responsive” to their work.

Spencer’s experience also sounded like an example of what happens when a family successfully advocates for itself, Graziosi said.

“This family was very resourceful,” she said.

Schiavo said he hoped that the ordeal could ease the process for someone else. In the meantime, he said, his family was grateful for what they considered a victory.

“Although Spencer’s not aware of it, he just got one of the best Christmas presents he ever had in his life,” Al Schiavo said.

This week, Spencer’s caregivers asked Greene to bring Griffin, Spencer’s twin, to Baltimore so they could work with the boys together.

“You never think that your kids will be warriors against each other for the rest of their lives,” she said. “Before, that was a distinct possibility for me. But to see them look each other in the face, to concentrate on the same activity, and to take turns, it was a watershed moment.”

The boys are genetically identical and share so many physical features that, when they are standing still, it can be hard for a stranger to tell them apart. But it was the first time, she said, that they had played together in their lives.

Email: akin@northjersey.com