Buy Photo In his closing remarks to the jury on Tuesday, Somerset County Assistant Prosecutor Timothy Van Hise told the jury there is no reason not to believe David Granskie Jr.’s confession that he murdered his father’s girlfriend five years ago at their Bridgewater home. (Photo: Kathy Johnson/Staff Photographer )Buy Photo Story Highlights Prosecutor: No sign of distress from heroin withdrawal during confession

Defense: No physical evidence linking Granskie to murder

Jury will start deliberating on Wednesday morning

It’s now up for the jury to decide whether to believe David Granskie Jr.’s confession that he murdered his father’s girlfriend or to determine that his confession was false and the result of his withdrawal from heroin and not supported by any evidence.

After more than a month of testimony, the jury will begin deliberating Wednesday whether Granskie is guilty of murdering and sexually assaulting 45-year-old Carolyn Stone following a party at their Bridgewater home during the 2009 Memorial Day weekend.

Granskie, Gary Wilson and Rocky DiTaranto, all Bridgewater residents, were charged with Stone’s murder. The three were accused of sexually assaulting her in the backyard of their Oak Street home in the Bradley Gardens section of the township after a party, then killing her.

Wilson pleaded guilty to murder and was sentenced to 45 years in prison. DiTaranto pleaded guilty to one count of conspiracy to commit aggravated sexual assault.

Katharine Errickson, Granskie’s lawyer, concluded her 3 ½-hour summation Tuesday morning in Superior Court Judge Robert Reed’s packed courtroom. Somerset County Assistant Prosecutor Timothy Van Hise finished his summation before the lunch break and Reed began to deliver the 45 pages of jury instructions in the afternoon.

Van Hise argued that the jury should not accept the defense’s claim that Granskie’s confession was caused by his withdrawal from heroin.

Van Hise said the jury should study the DVD of the confession made to Bridgewater police detectives and determine if they can see signs of Granskie’s “distress” during the questioning.

Van Hise discounted the testimony of Dr. Clarence Watson, a defense expert on false confessions, who pointed to Granskie’s runny nose during the interrogation as a sign of withdrawal.

“Where’s the evidence other than other than Dr. Watson pointing out the sniffles?” Van Hise asked the jury, adding that Granskie did not show signs of “significant physical distress” either at Bridgewater Police Headquarters or the Somerset County Jail.

Van Hise also criticized the defense’s contention that Granskie would say anything in order to be released from police custody in order to score heroin.

“There is no evidence that David Granskie’s opioid withdrawal affected his ability to reason,” Van Hise said.

He pointed to Granskie’s statement, after he gave the confession, that he would be going to jail for the rest of life as an example of Granskie’s “clear, rational and logical” thought.

“It suggests a reasonable understanding of what he has done,” Van Hise said.

But Errickson argued that the prosecution had not presented any evidence to corroborate Granskie’s confession.

“Where is the evidence to show the confession is credible?” she asked the jury. “No way is it credible.”

Errickson told the jury that no DNA evidence links Granskie to the crime scene.

The defense attorney said the police and the prosecution “cherry-picked” the evidence. She also said the police had “tunnel vision” in their questioning of Granskie.

“There is zero physical evidence connecting David Granskie to anything,” she said. “If that’s not overwhelming reasonable doubt, I don’t know what is.”

Errickson repeated her argument from Monday’s court session that Wilson alone murdered Stone by dropping a cinderblock on her head because she was laughing at him because he could not sustain an erection.

“This case is simple,” Errickson said. “Gary Wilson snapped.”

Staff Writer Mike Deak: 908-243-6607; mdeak@mycentraljersey.com

Read or Share this story: http://mycj.co/1wiVRqq