Photo

At a time when many say loneliness is increasing in America, a new study offers what seems like hopeful news: Teenagers, at least, may be less lonely than they used to be. But some think the findings may reflect a change in how teenagers see their social worlds — one that may not be particularly positive.

For research published in Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, D. Matthew T. Clark, Natalie J. Loxton and Stephanie J. Tobin looked at a survey given to high school students from 1991 to 2012. The survey asked them how much they agreed with statements like “A lot of the times I feel lonely” and “I usually have a few friends around I can get together with.”

The researchers found that teenagers actually got less lonely, at least as measured by their self-reports, between 1991 and 2012. They write:

“This decline contrasts with the idea that society is becoming increasingly lonely, an idea present in both popular media and research. The contrast may be due to negativity bias, a bias that causes negative events to appear more negative the closer events are to the present. People may imagine examples of isolation in the present easily but forget examples from the past.”

They add that while “social media can reduce feelings of loneliness,” they doubt that its rising popularity caused the decline they saw, “because social media became prominent recently and after declines in loneliness began.”

The authors also note that, as loneliness decreased, what they call “social network isolation” — measured by students’ responses to the statements “There is always someone I can turn to if I need help” and “I usually have a few friends around I can get together with” — actually increased. In other words, though students in 2012 may have felt less lonely than they did in 1991, they were also more likely to feel that they didn’t necessarily have someone to rely on.

If teens are more socially isolated than they used to be, at least by these measures, why isn’t it bothering them more? Dr. Clark told Op-Talk in an email that people might see less need for friendship than they used to: “Worse social networks may not have produced an increase in the experience of loneliness because people are more self-sufficient.” Today, he said: “People may feel like they do not need to rely on people as much as previously. People can choose more aspects of their life, including what job to choose, where to live, and who to marry. Labor specialization could lead to a focus on the individual.”

And while factors like labor specialization may not always affect teenagers directly, they “may lead to changes in cultural values and attitudes, which would affect the attitudes and motivations of high school students.”

We may also need to question the idea “that social networks are all there is to belonging,” said Dr. Clark. “Belonging may also encompass how you fit in with society at large. Belonging may be also be about your skills, and a belief that you have skills that are respected and useful to your culture.” In other words, there may be ways to feel a part of something larger, even if you’re all by yourself.

So should we stop worrying about loneliness? Not according to John T. Cacioppo, a psychologist who studies the phenomenon. For one thing, he said, the data Dr. Clark and his team analyzed show “at best very modest decreases” in young people’s loneliness. And high schoolers may not be the group researchers are most concerned about right now: “Where we and others have seen what looks to be an increase is in middle-aged and older adults.” Loneliness may have harmful physical effects, he noted, and those are more likely to show up in older people than in kids.

“These are teenagers, and they might not be needing their social networks in the way that you or I as adults might really need our social networks,” Emily White, author of the book “Lonely: Learning to Live With Solitude,” told Op-Talk. When she and her spouse separated, she said, “I needed help in all sorts of ways, and if that help hadn’t been there I would’ve felt lonely, whereas if I was 16 and you asked me after drama class whether my social support network mattered a lot to me, my answer might have been no.”

She also floated a potential explanation for the finding that students’ self-reported loneliness dropped even as social network isolation increased. Environmentalists, she said, sometimes use the term “environmental amnesia.” “What it means is that every generation is born into a more degraded ecosystem,” she explained, “and they take that degraded ecosystem as their baseline, and they adjust to it.” Maybe teenagers today have a sort of “social amnesia” — “I’m wondering if these high-school students have had weaker support networks their whole lives, and so they’re reporting less loneliness because that’s what they’re used to.”

Robin Marantz Henig, a co-author of “Twentysomething: Why Do Young Adults Seem Stuck?” and a New York Times Magazine contributing writer who has also explored loneliness, thinks the drop in that condition might be “a reflection of changes in expectation.”

“My husband and I have very similar social networks,” she told Op-Talk, but while she feels lonely, he does not, “because he’s very self-sufficient and doesn’t expect to be spending a lot of time with people.” Maybe teenagers now expect to have fewer friends than they did in the past.

Still, if loneliness really is declining in young people, that could bode well for the future. “It clearly is something that becomes more common as people get older,” she said, “if it’s really the case that the next generation is starting from a better place, that would be encouraging.”

And understanding why teenagers’ loneliness is dropping — if, indeed, it is — might give us clues about how to help those kids who are still lonely. Dr. Cacioppo wonders if the spread of anti-bullying programs in schools had anything to do with the drop Dr. Clark and his team saw. And, he said, such programs might give us ideas for addressing loneliness in schools, too.

But are we truly ready to address loneliness? Media coverage over the last few years has certainly drawn attention to the issue. However, says Ms. White, attention hasn’t always meant acceptance. Loneliness “seems to have become more talked about, which is great, but also slightly more controversial.”

“It seems like as people are getting lonelier, there’s this sort of chorus that says that we’re not,” she said. “I don’t think we’re comfortable with the thought that we’re getting increasingly lonely.”