Topics: Antonin Scalia, Harvard Law School, Media Matters, Supreme Court, Politics News

This article originally appeared on Media Matters

President Obama hasn’t even named his nominee to fill the current Supreme Court vacancy, and already the toxic right-wing media attacks have begun on jurists thought to be under consideration for the highest court in the land.

Sizing up federal district judge Ketanji Brown Jackson, an African-American woman who graduated magna cum laude from Harvard-Radcliffe College and cum laude from Harvard Law School, National Review’s Ed Whelan this week suggested Jackson just isn’t smart enough to sit on the Supreme Court in the seat once occupied by the late Justice Antonin Scalia.

And last week, National Review smeared Eighth Circuit Court of Appeals Judge Jane Kelly, another judge reportedly under consideration to fill the vacancy. The attack centered around the fact that Kelly, who served as a federal public defender in Iowa for nearly 20 years, once arranged a plea deal for a client charged with receiving and possessing child pornography. National Review suggested that’s disqualifying for Kelly.

Note: Public defenders are paid to advocate for clients and sometimes those clients are guilty. (The whole point of the job is written into the Constitution.) Attacking a jurist for previously serving the state by providing accused criminals their constitutionally mandated right to legal representation is, of course, a duplicitous cheap shot.

We’ve seen this guilt-by-association playbook used before when conservatives try to demean jurists promoted by Democrats. And according to Republicans, who have already vowed to block Obama’s nomination and to not even hold hearings, the ugly attacks are only going to intensify when Obama’s pick is announced. “I think they will bear some resemblance to a piñata,” Sen. John Cornyn (R-TX) said of the soon-to-be nominee. (A day after Cornyn’s “piñata” remark, video was unearthed of Cornyn saying in 2006, “The current regime treats Supreme Court nominees more like piñatas than human beings. And that’s something none of us should be willing to tolerate.”)

Early indications are those piñata attacks will be specious, mean-spirited, and detached from reality. And yes, Republicans will surely be working behind the scenes with the conservative media in an attempt to degrade the next high court nominee. So while Republicans obstruct in the Senate, the Fox News-led noise machine will likely be blaring out attacks and misinformation.

The third leg of the attack apparatus is made up of conservative groups like the Judicial Crisis Network and America Rising, which churn out hit pieces on Obama judicial picks that are repeated endlessly by the right-wing media. “Top Republican senators are also expected to meet with conservative groups involved in the strategy,”Politico recently reported.

True story: Under President George W. Bush, Judicial Crisis Network’s name was Judicial Confirmation Network and its guiding principle was to “ensure that the confirmation process for all judicial nominees is fair and that every nominee sent to the full Senate receives an up or down vote.”

Today, not so much.

It’s clear that with the GOP’s radical blockade surrounding this nomination, we’ve already entered uncharted political waters. With the Republicans’ refusal to even meet with Obama’s nominee, the GOP has opted to systematically shred more than 100 years of Washington, D.C. protocol for Supreme Court nominations. But that doesn’t mean the press should allow the conservative media to also rewrite the norms of the nomination process. And that shouldn’t give the far-right press the power to dictate the public debate that will soon unfold.