Ted Cruz has unleashed a series of videos and ads ahead of Tuesday's critical primaries. ( Video Screenshot Image )

Ted Cruz's last web-based video was a lengthy attack on the record of Republican presidential front-runner Donald Trump, suggesting the Hillary Clinton campaign couldn't wait to unload on the businessman.

Following ESPN's firing of retired baseball legend Curt Schilling as an analyst over a social media post deemed "transphobic," and Trump's apparent capitulation to political correctness on transgender bathrooms, the Cruz camp had all the ammo it needed for a new video. This one clocks in at a much shorter 20 seconds, though.

The video titled "Common Sense" features a quick voice-over introduction to Schilling being fired by ESPN:

"Curt Schilling was fired by the PC Police for suggesting that grown men shouldn't use the bathroom with little girls. Guess who's joined the ranks of the PC police?"

It is followed by a clip of Trump making his now-infamous claim about transgender bathrooms:

"People go, they use the bathroom that they feel is appropriate."

It quickly ends with another voice-over:

"Donald Trump can't be trusted with common sense why would we trust him in the White House?"

With the GOP presidential nominating process reaching a critical point for both the Cruz and Trump campaigns, and with another series of states headed to the polls Tuesday, the Cruz camp has released a batch of new ads. Three of them began running in Pennsylvania over the weekend.

The first, "Right," is a 19-second ad highlighting how Hillary Clinton, as president, would be worse than President Obama, and how Cruz would fight to undo the damage that has been done to America. The second, "Solutions," is a 30-second appeal to the citizens of Pennsylvania, the biggest prize on Tuesday:

"I don't think the people of America are interested in a bunch of bickering schoolchildren. They're interested in solutions, not slogans. This is the single moms, the truck-drivers and the steelworkers and the mechanics with callouses on their hands. This is all the young people coming out of school that aren't able to find a job.

"As president I will repeal Obamacare, pull back the EPA and all the regulators that are killing small businesses and manufacturing. We're going to see wages going up, we're going to see opportunity. We need a president who stands with the American people."

In the final ad, titled "Not Easy," Cruz goes after both Clinton and Trump for being out of touch with middle class Americans because of their immense wealth. He suggests he understands better what it means to have a difficult time in life, and highlights his plans to cut taxes, roll back regulations and repeal Obamacare.

Draw closer to God. Experience the presence of the Holy Spirit every month as you read Charisma magazine. Sign up now to get Charisma for as low as $1 per issue.

Has God called you to be a leader? Ministry Today magazine is the source that Christian leaders who want to serve with passion and purpose turn to. Subscribe now and receive a free leadership book.

-

See an error in this article? This email address is being protected from spambots. You need JavaScript enabled to view it.