ALBANY — In this year of the outsider, John Kasich spent the middle of Monday pitching an unlikely audience: New York’s elected class.

The Ohio governor plunged into the heart of the state’s political bubble, chatting with about two dozen Republicans from the Assembly at the stately Fort Orange Club and then walked over to the Capitol building itself to huddle privately with Republicans in the State Senate.

He was one of three presidential candidates campaigning in the Capital Region on Monday — Bernie Sanders and Donald Trump both held rallies nearby — but he’s the first this year to go stumping for votes in the state Capitol. As Trump whips up populist anger but offers few specifics, Kasich is hoping elected officials will give him a sympathetic ear.

“Kasich’s strength is he has practical, hands-on experience dealing with the real issues facing taxpayers, both as a former congressman and a current governor,” said Assemblyman Andy Goodell, a Republican from Jamestown who said he is supporting Kasich. “He knows that the elected officials here in Albany wrestle with those same issues and understand those issues, and would, as we did, ask him the tough questions.”

About half of the chamber’s four dozen Republicans were present, Goodell said, along with some top staff. Ed Ra, a Republican from Long Island, said Kasich eschewed a podium to sit at a table with officials set up in the Fort Orange Club’s President’s Room, adorned with portraits of the industrialists who got the elite institution running at the end of the 19th century. The conversation touched on endorsements and electability, but also budgets and the Common Core.

“We like public policy. We like sinking our teeth into things, and I think he’s very much cut from that same cloth, so I think it was a productive conversation,” said Ra, who has not endorsed any candidate. “Some of that stuff though, can be seen, for the general public as inside baseball or not the rah-rah type of stuff that you’re going to get from a Donald Trump. How it plays with the general public is another story, but he put himself out there as a ‘reasonable conservative,’ that he’s going to go out there, make his points and he hopes it resonates.”

Most of New York’s delegates are awarded based on the winners in each congressional district, with the second-place finisher grabbing a pledged delegate if the first-place finisher — likely Trump, polls show — is held under 50 percent. (If the winner captures more than a majority, he gets all three delegates.) Allies like Goodell around the state, then, can help Kasich or Cruz deny Trump some delegates ahead of the party’s convention in Cleveland.

The core of this “reasonable conservative” case is electability and this kind of path to frustrating Trump’s path to the nomination. Speaking to reporters next to the sandstone pillars of the Capitol’s Million Dollar Staircase, Kasich repeated his claim that he’s the only GOP candidate who consistently beats Hillary Clinton in general election polls — and predicted that Trump or Texas Sen. Ted Cruz could cost Republicans control of the State Senate if they led the ticket.

“At the end of the day I’m the only one who consistently beats Hillary Clinton and the only one with the record and experience to actually run this country,” Kasich said, a refrain he later repeated at events in Troy and Saratoga Springs.

Republican senators rejected Kasich’s claim about their own electoral fragility, and said they would rise and fall based on the quality of their own candidates and records. Carl Paladino, a Trump supporter, said via email that Kasich was a RINO “chumming up with an even bigger fraud in [Senate Republican Leader] John Flanagan.” Kasich also told reporters that he didn’t support a $15 minimum wage — something the GOP conference just voted for unanimously — but was not “crazy” enough to second-guess their calculation.

These disagreements notwithstanding, other legislators have endorsed Trump or Cruz, and rejected Kasich outright.

“Kasich is the embodiment of the status quo, a senior member of the establishment. I don’t care for him,” Assemblyman Kieran Lalor, of Poughkeepsie, said. “Particularly statewide, you have to be somewhat in the middle. But that doesn’t mean that New York Republicans are somehow a mushy middle. I represent a conservative place. That’s he’s tied for last place doesn’t surprise me, despite his pro-amnesty, pro-Obamacare, kind of moderate bona fides.”

Members of the State Senate also invited Trump to address their conference, but he demurred. About 10 senators — including Deputy Republican Leader John DeFrancisco and George Amedore — met with the reality television star in a private room before his rally, shaking hands, taking pictures, and in some cases leaving before Trump’s speech began.

The meeting was brief, and did not include any formal remarks, each man said. Despite their time with both candidates, neither was prepared to make an endorsement.

"I'm still a free agent," DeFrancisco said. “I think either candidate that I’ve met today would be far superior to the options on the Democrat side, and I’m going to support whoever gets the nomination.”