Democrats claim to be of the Party where women do well, but last night liberal women went down in flames at the polls with Hillary Clinton standing right beside them.

U.S. Senate races:

Kentucky: Democrat Alison Lundergan-Grimes lost to Republican Mitch McConnell by 16 points.

North Carolina: Democrat Kay Hagan lost to Republican Thom Tillis by 2 percent.

Georgia: Democrat Michelle Nunn lost to Republican David Perdue by 8 points.

Louisiana: Democrat Mary Landrieu didn't gain enough votes in Louisiana to clinch a majority against Republican Bill Cassidy, sending her race to a run-off. Because Republicans have already gained control of the Senate, there's no reason for Democrats to dump resources into her race, especially since the chances of her losing are high. She's done.

Montana: Democrat Amanda Curtis lost to Republican Steve Daines by 18 points, which was expected.

Maine: Democrat Shanna Bellows lost to Susan Collins by 36 percent, which was expected.

West Virginia: Democrat Natalie Tennant lost to Republican Shelley Capito by 28 percent. Capito is the first Republican Senator from West Virginia in more than 50 years and the first woman ever elected to the U.S. Senate from that state.

New Hampshire: Democrat Jeanne Shaheen was victorious over Republican Scott Brown by 4 percent.

Governor's races:



Massachusetts: Democrat Martha Coakley lost the governorship by 2 percent in a deep-blue state against Republican Charlie Baker.

Texas: Democrat Wendy Davis, who quickly rose to fame for her pro-late term abortion stance, lost to Republican Texas Attorney General Greg Abbott by 20 points. Further, she lost among Texas women by 9 percent and Davis' former Texas State Senate seat went to conservative tea party candidate Konni Burton.

Wisconsin: Democrat Mary Burke lost to Republican governor Scott Walker by 6 percent.

New Hampshire: Democrat Maggie Hassan beat Republican opponent Walt Havenstein by 6 percent.

Rhode Island: Democrat Gina Raimondo beat her Republican opponent Allan Fung by 4 percent.

For fun:

California: Democrat Sandra Fluke, yes, the same Sandra Fluke who asked you to pay for her birth control back in 2012 and the woman who has been hailed as a liberal feminist hero since President Obama's re-election campaign in 2012, ran for a seat in the California State Senate. She lost to fellow Democrat Ted Lieu by a 2-to-1 margin.

And one of the biggest losers of the night? Hillary Clinton. The Clintons campaigned for candidates in Iowa, Kentucky, Colorado, Massachusetts, Arkansas, North Carolina, Wisconsin, Michigan and New Hampshire. They lost everywhere except New Hampshire and Michigan. This does not bode well for Mrs. Clinton should she choose to run for president in 2016.

Meanwhile, conservative Republican women did really well last night, raking in victories in races across the country. Here is a list of the winners.

U.S. Senate races:

Iowa: Joni Ernst

Maine: Susan Collins easily beat her opponent.

West Virginia: Shelley Capito

Significant House race:

Utah: Republican Mia Love became the first black Republican woman elected to Congress in U.S. history after beating her opponent Doug Owens by three percent.

New York: Republican Elise Stefanik became the youngest female member of Congress after beating her opponent Aaron Woolf by 22 points.

Governor's races:

South Carolina: Nikki Haley

New Mexico: Susana Martinez

Oklahoma: Mary Fallon

Editor's note: a previous version of this post said Mia Love became the first black Republican elected to Congress in U.S. history, that is obviously incorrect. She is the first black Republican woman ever elected to Congress, which I knew but failed to type in correctly. My apologies for the error.