Topics: From the Wires, News

PHOENIX (AP) — An Arizona woman convicted in the disappearance of her young son was released from prison Friday without ever providing authorities details on the whereabouts of the missing boy.

Elizabeth Johnson carried a cardboard box of belongings as she walked out of prison just after midnight and was driven away by her attorney to an undisclosed location. She has no plans to make any public statements.

Johnson, 27, is “happy to be out, excited about her future, and optimistic about how things are going to go for her,” her lawyer Marc Victor said.

The release from prison was the latest twist in the case that began with the December 2009 disappearance of 8-month-old “Baby Gabriel” and included police searches of trash containers and a Texas landfill.

Authorities have said Johnson initially told the boy’s father that she killed her son and dumped him in a trash bin but later recanted and said she gave the infant to a couple at a park in San Antonio, Texas. With no sign of the child, prosecutors were only able to file lesser charges against her, including kidnapping, custodial interference and unlawful imprisonment.

A jury deadlocked on the kidnapping charge — the most serious count against her that could have brought more than two decades in prison. She was sentenced to 5 1/4 years on the interference and imprisonment convictions.

Despite Johnson being released from prison, the case isn’t necessarily finished. Authorities could still bring charges against her if the child turns up dead.

Deputy Maricopa County Attorney Angela Andrews, the prosecutor who tried the case, said she thinks about the missing baby every day and is bothered by the lack of closure.

“For the family, for the prosecuting team, for the investigators who worked the case, there is absolutely no closure in the case,” Andrews said.

At sentencing in December 2012, Johnson sobbed and apologized but didn’t provide any information about the baby’s whereabouts. Prosecutors had offered to only seek probation if Johnson would tell them Gabriel’s whereabouts, but she refused.