As we age, most of us slow down. We get a little cautious about making sudden moves, taking big steps, hopping over some obstacle in our path. We don't want to lose our balance and fall; that would be embarrassing.

It could also be extremely dangerous. Did you know that 16 percent of all emergency room visits and 7 percent of all hospitalizations in the United States stem from fall-related injuries? That when older people fall and wind up in the hospital, there's more than a 50-50 chance that they'll never go home again?

Oh, there's more. If you have vision, mobility or foot problems, if you get dizzy when you stand or are taking four or more medications, or if your home is a minefield of beloved objects you can trip over (including pets), your chance of falling doubles. If you have any two of these conditions, it triples. You get the idea -- with three of these six risk factors, you're six times as likely to fall; with four or more, you're eight times as likely.

If you're an elder with none of these strikes against you, don't be smug: You still have a one in 10 chance of taking a bad spill.

I could go on with more daunting statistics, but between now and Sept. 23 -- which is National Falls Prevention Awareness day -- you'll probably get enough. In fact, we should be past the point of creating awareness and ready to start doing more about the problem.

Research into why elders fall has produced a counterintuitive solution: Stop being so fearful and tentative when you move. Take big, quick steps -- those are what help catch us when we fall. Start with a balance fitness class, and then move on to tai chi or ballroom dancing. And then keep moving. A recent review of studies shows that mobility is your best defense against gravity.

To help get you going, here are some local options:

Pines of Sarasota's Ready & Steady Plan for Better Balance: A new, complimentary assessment service that launches Sept. 9. To determine your risk or the risk of someone you care about, call the Pines of Sarasota Rehabilitation Center at 552-1882 for availability.

Senior Friendship Centers' "Take a Stand to Prevent Falls," Sept. 16: Free vision and balance screenings 9 a.m. to noon at the Sarasota center; plus half-hour discussions on balance and medications, and a balance movement class demonstration. For information on ongoing classes, call 556-3259 in Sarasota and 584-0075 in Venice.

Sarasota Memorial Hospital's Falls Prevention Series, Sept. 21-25: Join physical/occupational therapists in SMH HealthConnection, 1700 S. Tamiami Trail, Sarasota, from 1 to 2 p.m. daily for free presentations on balance issues, medication safety, better balance exercises and vision issues, culminating Friday with a free gait analysis and balance screening. Information & RSVP: 917-7011.

Follow Barbara Peters Smith on Twitter @BarbaraPSmith.