By Erinn Hutkin

Annie Ryan tells herself every day that she has the best job in the world.

A certified pediatric nurse practitioner for Swedish Covenant Medical Group Pediatrics in Chicago, Ryan helps children and families become better people - mentally, physically and emotionally.

"What's not to love?" she asked. "I'm fortunate to have these families trust that I know what's best for their particular child, and to see the parents and child implement a tailored plan of care is so rewarding."

Ryan, 36, said pediatric primary care today is much different from what she remembers as a child. She and other health care providers are very involved in young patients' lives and well-being.

"It's not (just) a yearly check-up to make sure the child looks 'OK,'" Ryan said. "Primary care is much more in-depth (today) and covers many aspects of the child's life."

Julie Ann Creaden, an administrator at Advanced Practice Nursing at Lurie Children's Hospital in Chicago, said pediatric nurse practitioners (PNPs) are health care providers dedicated to improving children's health in primary care, as well as specialty and acute care.

Pediatric nurse practitioners treat children and families in a range of settings, including pediatricians' offices, specialty clinics, school clinics and hospitals.

They provide family-centered and culturally respectful care, as well as coordinating care between specialties, and advocating for patients and families. PNPs participate in national organizations and offer advanced educational expertise to nursing staff, as well as design, implement and interpret research, Creaden added.

In a private-practice setting, such as a pediatrician's office, PNPs independently care for children during checkups and sick visits, as well as provide guidance for age-appropriate counseling, medical decision-making, and evaluation and treatment of a child. They take down medical histories, perform physicals, order and interpret diagnostic tests, and prescribe medications.

Acute Care PNPs (ACPNPs) work in specialty-based clinics or hospitals, where they perform many of the same tasks: physical exams, interpreting diagnostic studies, prescribing/ordering medications and therapies, and developing and evaluating therapeutic management plans.

A PNP candidate must first become a registered nurse by earning a bachelor of science in nursing. Nurse Practitioner status requires additional graduate work. Like all nurses, PNPs must be board-certified and licensed.

In addition to clinical know-how, caring for sick children takes "a special person" because it means being completely engaged in the children's care without becoming emotionally distraught over diagnoses or complications, Creaden said. PNPs must be empathic but objective to treat children in pain or with life-threatening conditions.

"We know what we do makes a difference and that we're (often) helping patients and families through (some of) the most difficult and challenging experiences of their lives," Creaden said. "A sick child disrupts the entire family milieu and creates a stress beyond comprehension. We help families navigate that fear and stress in a supportive, meaningful way."

Ryan's mother is a nurse, which sparked her interest and gave her "an immense respect" for the profession. "The amount of knowledge it takes to be a competent and respected nurse is immense and continues to expand," she said.

Ryan earned a B.S. in science and nursing at the University of Michigan, followed by three years of graduate study at the University of Illinois' advance practice nursing school, which specializes in pediatrics.

She cares for children from birth to age 18, doing everything from annual physicals to acute visits that involve illnesses and conditions that can be treated in an outpatient setting, such as asthma. Patients who need a higher level of care may be transferred to Lurie Children's Hospital.

Ryan also visits newborns at Swedish Covenant Hospital and other facilities. She takes calls one night per week, allowing parents to page her. Ryan is on call to work one weekend a month and works two Saturdays a month.

"It's an amazing feeling to know that I might be making a real difference in a child's and their family's life," Ryan said.

Demand for all types of nurses expected to surge

Those choosing a career in nursing can opt to be a registered nurse or nurse practitioner.

Registered nurses provide and coordinate patient care, educate patients and the public about health conditions, and offer advice and emotional support to patients and family members. Nurse practitioners are trained to take on additional tasks, such as ordering tests or x-rays, and evaluating the results. They also may prescribe medications.

Nurse practitioners also focus on patient-centered care, meaning they work to understand patients' concerns and lifestyles throughout their course of treatment. In addition, they sometimes conduct research or teach medical staff about new policies or procedures.

Registered nurses typically take one of three educational paths: They earn a bachelor's degree in nursing, an associate's degree in nursing, or a diploma from an approved nursing program. They also must be licensed.

Nurse practitioners, nurse anesthetists and nurse midwives must also earn a master's degree from an accredited program, including both classroom and clinical experience. Courses typically include anatomy, physiology and pharmacology. Many NPs go on to earn a Doctor of Nursing Practice (DNP) degree or a more standard doctorate.

Registered nurses can opt to specialize in certain areas, such as pediatrics. Pediatric nurses and pediatric nurse practitioners work with children from birth through adolescence. Degree programs for a pediatric specialty aren't typically offered at an associates or undergraduate level, so many candidates opt to acquire training through clinical experience within a pediatric facility.

Alternately, graduate pediatric nursing programs can provide comprehensive education in child development, reproductive health, adolescent development and pediatric health assessment. Locally, highly regarded graduate pediatric nursing programs are available at Rush University and the University of Illinois-Chicago.