Topics: Dusty Rhodes, Professional Wrestling, Sports, Wrestling, wwe, Entertainment News, News, Politics News

Christopher Lee, Ornette Coleman, and Dusty Rhodes passed away on the same day last week, June 11, 2015.

Christopher Lee is one of film’s greatest actors. He will be honored around the world for his contribution to cinema. Ornette Coleman is one of jazz’s greatest musicians. He will be written about extensively and his legacy preserved. Jazz, as a community of musicians, scholars, and fans, is resolute in policing its borders and history. Dusty Rhodes is one of professional wrestling’s greatest performers. Both inside the ring, and on the microphone, he was a virtuoso. Fans of professional wrestling will sing the praises of Dusty Rhodes and deeply mourn his passing. However, while Lee and Coleman will be universally treated with seriousness and respect, Rhodes will likely be looked at as a curious sideshow by those who are not initiates into the world of professional wrestling, and therefore know little about his life.

This is unfortunate.

The character Dusty Rhodes was in fact the man Virgil Runnels Jr. Born in rural Texas, Runnels’ father was a plumber and the family lived in poverty. The man who would later become “The American Dream” came of age in a predominantly black and Latino neighborhood. He also attended services at a local black Southern Baptist Church, absorbing the cadence and verbal style of its preachers.

I first saw Dusty Rhodes on television during the early 1980s. My grandmother, a fan of roller derby and professional wrestling, would sit me down to watch the latter late at night and on the weekends. She, a black woman from rural North Carolina, had grown up watching all of the great wrestling in the Mid-Atlantic and National Wrestling Alliance “territories” (an industry term for the regional promotions that existed before the juggernaut now called the World Wrestling Entertainment gobbled them up). Watching with me then, my grandmother was extremely animated. She would yell at the television: “Look at that! That man Dusty Rhodes! He is a white soul brother! Beat up that Ric Flair and his phonies for the people, Dusty!”

I was six or seven years old at the time. I remember wondering who this strange white man was, and why my grandma was so drawn to him. However, a few minutes of watching him eliminated any shred of doubt: This was someone special.

As a working-class black kid from the broader New York and Connecticut area, and a product of the 1980s, my main childhood fixations were “Star Wars,” video games, bowling, comic books, “freestyle” BMX, “Dungeons and Dragons,” and a new musical genre called “rap music.” Now, thanks to my grandmother, I could add wrestling to that list.

All in all, I was a ghetto nerd. At the time I thought myself to be relatively alone and unique. Now, I see that we were legion, and everywhere.

In the 1980s, a child couldn’t easily avoid the enchanting power of the WWF and its breakout star, Hulk Hogan. “Hulkamania” was everywhere. The WWF’s “Saturday Night’s Main Event” was required viewing. And wrestling was near-religion. One of my fondest memories is watching Andre the Giant face off against Hogan in the “Wrestlemania III” main event at the Pontiac Silverdome. I wasn’t there in person to see the iconic match; rather, I watched it on closed-circuit television, with thousands of other people in a sweaty, stinking, decrepit local sports arena. We all screamed in disbelief when Hogan did the impossible, body slamming the unbeatable Andre into the mat.

My friends and I loved Hulkamania. However, on a basic level, we knew that most of it was playacting. But wrestling was more than just the WWF. There was another wrestling promotion as well, this one down south, which featured a tough white guy “who talked black.” This was Dusty Rhodes.

Dusty had an atypical physique for a wrestler, more flab than muscle, but there was something compelling and even magnetic about him — how he would fight, striking down foes with his patented move, “the bionic elbow”; how he would speak, delivering monologues like a southern preacher; how he would bleed, suffering horrific in-ring injuries and yet somehow persevering regardless. (“Blade jobs,” the old-school wrestling practice wherein wrestlers would slice themselves with a concealed razor in order to induce bleeding — for dramatic effect, of course — were among Dusty’s trademarks. By the end of his career, his forehead was a veritable roadmap of scars.)

We could watch Dusty late at night on TV, see him bleeding on the cover of wrestling magazines, and eventually even watch on ESPN and TBS. Even as I was beginning to figure out that professional wrestling may in fact be rigged, Dusty seemed to defy all of that. Everything about him screamed real.

* * *

Popular culture is inherently political; it is a type of informal public opinion and a barometer for the public mood. Pop culture also reflects the struggles, values, and battles over identity in a given society, and channels topical matters of public concern. While there is a rich technical language used by academics and other professionals to discuss popular culture—e.g. “mass culture,” “populism,” “hegemony,” “representation,” “floating signifiers,” “Power,” “reception,” “circulation,” “genre,” imaginaries,” “audience,” “the public”—popular culture ultimately “matters” because individuals have an emotional connection to it. It resonates because it is one of the primary ways that we tell stories about ourselves, and make sense of our place in the world.

Historically, professional wrestling has been one of the most authentic forms of “low culture.” It is real and sincere, a reflection of the authentic desires and feelings of the People. On a basic and fundamental level, the spectacle of wrestling — whether offered by a huge corporation like the WWE, or smaller independent promotions like Ring of Honor — is a morality play, one that uses physical storytelling not just to exhilarate but also to engage us emotionally. In its most basic and classic form, wrestling channels the grotesque and the spectacular. The heroes are especially heroic; the villains are hugely evil. Alignments can (and ultimately always will) change over time, but the conflict is always about good vs. bad (or, more accurately, “us vs. them”) with little room for anything in between.

Philosopher and cultural critic Roland Barthes offered one of the best analyses of the logic and aesthetic of professional wrestling in his book “Mythologies,” where he wrote:

“The wrestlers, men of great experience, know just how to inflect the spontaneous episodes of combat toward the image which the public creates out of the great marvelous themes of its mythology. A wrestler may irritate or disgust, he never disappoints, for he always ultimately achieves, by a gradual solidification of signs, what the public expects of him. In wrestling, nothing exists unless it exists totally, there is no symbol, no allusion, everything is given exhaustively; leaving nothing in shadow, the gesture severs every parasitical meaning and ceremonially presents the public with a pure and full signification, three-dimensional, like Nature. Such emphasis is nothing but the popular and ancestral image of the perfect intelligibility of reality. What is enacted by wrestling, then, is an ideal intelligence of things, a euphoria of humanity, raised for a while out of the constitutive ambiguity of everyday situations and installed in a panoramic vision of a univocal Nature, in which signs finally correspond to causes without obstacle, without evasion, and without contradiction.”

While the lines of morality and the role of the anti-hero have shifted and grown in recent decades to reflect the nihilism and moral ambiguity of the present era, the sport still follows a basic script of larger-than-life figures in conflict with one another, archetypes summoned as if from classic mythology in order to exorcise the dissonance at the heart of America’s cultural consciousness.

Race, and the colorline, in particular, are central to America’s cultural history. Slavery and white supremacy are defects at the core of the founding of the United States and its Constitution. They cast a shadow over American life and society–one that continues even into the Age of Obama. In American professional wrestling, the color line is what I can only describe as a “beautiful ugly” thing.

Because racism is an ugly thing, its ugliness and evil has usually been outsized and exaggerated in professional wrestling. Black wrestlers were and are still often reduced to racial caricatures — criminals, or savages, or political radicals, or mute manservants and butlers to rich white people. (Asians, Hispanics, Latinos, and First Nations brothers and sisters were also typecast as martial artists, devious “Hop Sings,” or various types of foreign Other.) These observations are not a comment on the work ethic, sincerity or personal values of those black folks forced into such stereotypical roles. Professional wrestling has historically reflected the values of a racist society that through the White Gaze, even today, still too often portrays black men and women as “bucks, mammies, or coons.”

And yet, professional wrestling could also be amazingly beautiful in how it negotiated the colorline in some surprising and transgressive ways. There were black professional wrestling stars such as Sweet Daddy Siki, Sailor Art Thomas, Bobo Brazil, Luther Lindsey, Norvell Austin, and others, who because of white racism would never be given the opportunity to grow beyond regional popularity. But they were still heroes to their largely black fan base in places like Detroit, Washington state, and the District of Columbia.

Because of Jim and Jane Crow, and its legacy even after the end of formal segregation, in many parts of the South and elsewhere it was illegal for white and black athletes to compete against one another in boxing or professional wrestling matches because of the supposed potential for “race riots.” But those tired traditions were shattered by African-American professional wrestlers such as the late Junkyard Dog and Ernie Ladd; by certain more progressive white booking agents, wrestlers, and territory owners such as Bill Watts and Sputnik Monroe; and by fans of all racial backgrounds.