A recent physician survey revealed that specialists like me enjoy an average annual income of about $396,000. Primary care doctors are relatively under-reimbursed, but still average approximately $220,000 in yearly compensation. Thus, doctors in well-run practices continue to make enviable wages by caring for Medicare patients.

I agree with Dr. Forzley that the S.G.R. formula should be reworked to reward quality rather than quantity of care, but I also contend that shared sacrifice will be required by nearly everyone in health care, including most physicians, in order to make Medicare sustainable for the future.

JAMES RICKERT

Bloomington, Ill., Sept. 11, 2013

The writer is president of the Society for Patient-Centered Orthopedics and an assistant clinical professor at the Indiana University School of Medicine.

My large, physician-owned group practice was forced to restrict new Medicare patients out of pure survival years ago.

It seems that Medicare is determined to make sure that only hospital-employed doctors can see Medicare patients, as they get paid far more for the same routine office visits. What non-hospital employed doctors get barely covers our overhead.

NICK BENTON

Corvallis, Ore., Sept. 11, 2013

The writer is a surgeon and president of the Corvallis Clinic.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

As retired seniors on a fixed income seeking continuity of care from Medicare-accepting physicians, my wife and I have been priced out by two (going on three) physicians from the clinic we have been using for many years. They have given us excellent service, but all are turning to “boutique” care that we cannot afford. They complain about Medicare payment delays.

The “boutique” plan requires patients to pay as much as several thousand dollars more per year to get the kind of care we thought all physicians promise when they take the Hippocratic oath. What’s a Medicare patient to do?

ROD LOPEZ-FABREGA

Norwalk, Conn., Sept. 11, 2013

While I see only a few Medicare-insured patients, it is clear to me that the problem of controlling costs without distorting clinical standards is at the center of protecting Medicare’s solvency.

Photo

Fee-for-service is seen to promote excessive care. While linking payment to outcome makes sense, it could easily make doctors reluctant to accept severely ill patients or those with complex conditions.

Systems with health-maintenance-organization-style salaried doctors can compromise the sanctity of individual treatment decisions and give incentives for less active care.

Financial incentives cannot create sound medical practice nor Medicare solvency. Good care depends on doctors practicing with ethical and clinical priorities; bad care increases costs and suffering. If your doctor is primarily thinking of money, something is wrong.

SARA HARTLEY

Oakland, Calif., Sept. 11, 2013

The writer is a psychiatrist and on the faculty of the U.C.B./U.C.S.F. Joint Medical Program.

I am in complete agreement with Dr. Forzley. Congress must find a permanent, value-based solution to physician payments. But given Congress’s propensity to neutralize any Medicare spending increase — and this fix will be a big one — the solution cannot come from further reducing hospital payments.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Under the Affordable Care Act, hospitals in the United States have agreed to take a cut of $155 billion in federal funds over the next decade, not including annual reductions in payments. Hospitals should not be further affected by modifications in physician payment.

PAUL J. CONNOR III

Greenport, N.Y., Sept. 11, 2013

The writer is president and chief executive of Eastern Long Island Hospital.

It is high time that Congress permanently fixed the Medicare physician payment formula. The annual angst that attends to this issue discredits Medicare in the eyes of physicians and demoralizes doctors and patients alike.

Want to know where to get the money to pay for it? Require Medicare to negotiate what it pays for prescription drugs.

JUDITH STEIN

Executive Director

Center for Medicare Advocacy

Willimantic, Conn., Sept. 11, 2013

Until doctors are reimbursed at market rates, there will be “cost shifting” — to the rest of us, contributing to the upward spiral in health care costs. The “physician payment fix,” which restores draconian cuts, only brings reimbursements back to abysmal levels.

And where does money for the “fix” come from? Is it taken from other programs? Or is it borrowed, or just printed?

None of these solutions are good ones. Significant tax increases, and not just on “the rich,” are needed to correct this badly underfunded program.

ALEXANDER GOLDSTEIN

Brooklyn, Sept. 11, 2013

The Writer Responds

The responses confirm my assertion that, as a group, physicians want to ensure the accessibility and sustainability of high-quality care. The respondents — physicians, administrators and patients — seek greater clinical excellence, improved individual outcomes and affordable payment mechanisms that can sustain these improvements. Congress must commit to a revised reimbursement model.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

As Dr. Hartley states, physicians must focus on giving the best possible care to patients. But they must still run viable practices, repay significant educational debt and keep pace with medical innovations and improvements. Dr. Rickert notes that physicians, especially surgeons and other specialists, are comparatively bigger earners, and that a “shared sacrifice” is needed. Does “sharing” mean across-the-board cuts? If so, what about family physicians who spend more time listening to patients and coordinating care among various specialists? Traditionally there is little reimbursement for these activities.

Since the current payment model rewards procedures rather than consultative conversations, I contend that “sharing” is better achieved through a fair reimbursement model that permits all physicians to have viable practices. There is no question that the sanctity of the doctor-patient relationship must be preserved. What Mr. Lopez-Fabrega and his wife have experienced is very unfortunate. As health care evolves, patients and ethics must be a physician’s highest priorities.

True reimbursement reform would provide the means for physicians to improve models of care, end the threat of cuts that could be debilitating to a small practice and allow all doctors to leverage their commitment to healing for the benefit of their communities.

GREG FORZLEY

Livonia, Mich., Sept. 13, 2013