There was not an empty seat to be found Saturday as Dr. Ben Carson took the pulpit at First Baptist Church Spartanburg to close the weekend's "Truth for a New Generation" event.

Carson, a retired neurosurgeon and an emeritus professor at the Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, has been mentioned by some conservatives as a potential presidential candidate for 2016. He received national attention for his strong criticism of the Obama administration during last year's National Prayer Breakfast.

Similar to his speech at the National Prayer Breakfast, Carson's hourlong speech Saturday was mostly light, with jokes and colorful anecdotes throughout, while critical of the U.S. government.

Carson began by criticizing the Affordable Care Act.

"I don't want the most important thing you have," Carson said, speaking about personal health and responsibility, to be "in the hands of the government."

Carson then explained his idea for Health Savings Accounts, comparing them with food stamps as a way to encourage residents to take a vested interest in their own health care and budget responsibilities.

The Fox News contributor and author also took a moment to address some of his critics over political correctness.

"I am not politically correct," he began as the crowd applauded. "It keeps people from talking."

Carson encouraged the crowd to ignore people who try to adhere to that correctness, as well as secularists and progressives.

On education, Carson talked about his own struggles as a child, a one-time failing student advancing to the top of his class.

He criticized today's education system, pointing to a survey that ranked America next to last in terms of eighth-grade math competency.

"If we were tested on knowledge of sports and entertainment, we'd be number one or two," he said.

Carson went on to criticize the Environmental Protection Agency, the national debt, and the U.S. tax code. He also warned that the issues many people see in America are not matters of right versus left, or conservative versus progressive, but of "American and Anti-American."

The speech closed with a call to repeal "Obamacare" and end the IRS, and a comparison of modern conservatives to the fallen soldiers of World War II.

"You can't be free unless you're brave," he said, challenging the crowd to leave the country better for the next generation.