By Caleb Bedillion

Daily Journal

TUPELO – Following the failure last week of legislative attempts to remove a Confederate emblem from Mississippi’s state flag, city Mayor Jason Shelton acknowledged that local leaders may have to again confront controversy over that unaltered flag.

“It will likely come back up,” said Shelton, citing conversations he’s had with community members. “It’s certainly a controversial issue, but it’s an issue that’s not going to go away.”

Last summer, the Tupelo City Council heard multiple requests from the public regarding the state flag: some urged local officials to remove the flag from municipal properties, while other urged that the flag remain in place.

In August, city leaders paused any discussion of the subject pending attempts to sort out some legal questions. Shelton said there was potential ambiguity as to whether state law allowed municipalities not to fly the state’s flag.

Shelton had expressed an intent to obtain an advisory opinion from the state’s Attorney General’s office as to what the law allows.

When asked last week, Shelton and City Attorney Ben Logan said a formal request was never made for an opinion because the Attorney General’s office released an opinion last October that largely settled the question.

That October opinion was in response to a request submitted by the city of Greenville.

Under the view expressed in that opinion, the flying of the state flag on municipal property is discretionary and not mandatory.

Shelton said this opinion largely settles the statutory question in his mind.

According to Logan, he had several additional questions that weren’t addressed by the October opinion. But the city attorney said he would only resume efforts to request an Attorney General’s opinion if asked to do so by city officials.

One of those additional questions regarded the governor’s prerogative to order the state flag be flown at half-staff as a public memorial.

As to how renewed conversations might proceed, Shelton did not have any details to provide.

“The state legislature has apparently decided not to take action on that,” Shelton said. “There is still some debate as to whether the city will pass some kind of resolution pertaining to the issue.”

Lee County NAACP President Rev. Chris Traylor said he wants Confederate symbolism removed from the state flag.

“I do not oppose people having the Confederate flag on their car, in their yard, in their home. That’s their right,” he said. “What I oppose is having the Confederate flag in the state flag. The state flag should represent all races.”

As long as Confederate symbolism remains a part of the state flag, Traylor said he would prefer to not see it fly on city property in Tupelo, noting the current flag’s potential to alienate black residents, particularly older residents who remember the era of Jim Crow and segregation.

“I feel that the flag should not stand on any city property if it’s going to cause confusion, if it’s going to bring bad old memories, bring back pain,” Traylor said.

However, he said any decision about removing the state flag should be made through a process of dialogue and conversation.

“In order to take that flag down in our area and city, we need to come together, the people that are for the flag and the people that are against the flag,” said Traylor. “We need to come to the table. We are an All-America City and I am glad to be a citizen of the All-America City, so I want us to come together in peace.”

Following the slaying of nine black churchgoers by a gunman in Charleston, South Carolina last June, controversy reignited over the symbolism and meaning of the Confederate battle flag.

Mississippi remains the only state to retain the battle emblem on its official state flag.

A number of Mississippi municipalities have opted not to fly the state flag in protest of the battle flag’s presence.

Those cities include Columbus, Oxford, Clarksdale, Grenada, Magnolia, Greenville and Hattiesburg.

The University of Mississippi and the University of Southern Mississippi have also removed the state flag on school grounds.

caleb.bedillion@journalinc.com