No game Wednesday provides time to rest, recover for difficult stretch ahead

Colorado State men's basketball players, from left, Daniel Bejarano, Gian Clavell, J.J. Avila, John Gillon and Carlton Hurst will get some time to rest and heal up before hosting San Diego State on Saturday. ( Steve Stoner / Loveland Reporter-Herald )

FORT COLLINS — Finally, Colorado State has a chance to catch its breath.

Following Saturday's 70-41 win at San Jose State, the Rams now have an idle date Wednesday before hosting San Diego State on Saturday, Jan 24.

It's the first time all season CSU has had six days between games, and the break comes at the perfect time.

On one hand, the Rams (17-2, 4-2 MW) have been fortunate to avoid any serious injuries, unlike many of their league foes. On the other, the team has been far from 100 percent for a while now.

Only three Rams — Stanton Kidd, Joe De Ciman and John Gillon — have played in all 19 games. While J.J. Avila's only absence is due to a one-game suspension, several others have been playing through some nagging injuries.

Tiel Daniels has dealt with a calf, Gian Clavell a shoulder, and both Marcus Holt and Kidd ankle sprains. Daniel Bejarano even sat out a game with strep throat, though that was a precautionary measure taken in order to avoid infecting any of his teammates more than anything.

The Rams plan on taking practice off Sunday, Monday and Tuesday, something Clavell said will be nothing short of "amazing."

As Avila pointed out, class resumes Tuesday, so it's not like players are about to go on a short vacation. But the time away from the court will provide the chance to "get our minds right and get ready for (San Diego State)," he said.

When the team does return to practice Wednesday, it's full steam ahead, especially considering the tough slate CSU faces over the next month.

Advertisement

Beginning with next Saturday's game against the Aztecs, the Rams will play six of their next eight against teams that are a combined 17-5 in league play. The upcoming stretch includes two games each against SDSU (4-1 MW) and Fresno State (4-2), and rematches against the Rams' only two losses this year, at Wyoming (5-1) and home against New Mexico (4-1).

And the other two games are far from gimmies, at Boise State (1-3) and against UNLV (1-4).

Players and coaches are adamant about sticking to a one-game-at-a-time approach, but Bejarano for one is well aware of the gauntlet that awaits. In fact, he welcomes it.

Rough Road Ahead Following Saturday's game at San Jose State, six of CSU's next eight games are against teams that entered the weekend a combined 15-4 in the MW. Five of the eight opponents are in the RPI top 100: Jan. 24: San Diego State (14-4, 4-1) RPI: 27 Jan. 27: at Boise State (11-6, 1-3) RPI: 65 Jan. 31: Fresno State (9-10, 4-2) RPI: 226 Feb. 4: at Wyoming (16-3, 5-1) RPI: 98 Feb. 7: UNLV (10-8, 1-4) RPI: 103 Feb. 10: New Mexico (12-5, 4-1) RPI: 85 Feb. 14: at San Diego State (14-4, 4-1) RPI: 27 Feb. 18: at Fresno State (9-10, 4-2) RPI: 226

"Knowing that we have a tough task ahead of us, a lot of challenges, we know what we have to do," the senior guard said. "It's just more focus, stay focused, get in the gym, and we just have to play Rams basketball. The way I look at it is every game is an NCAA Tournament game."

How the Rams handle the next month of play may very well determine whether or not they make the NCAA Tournament.

Following the Rams' 56-point win over Nevada on Wednesday, two of the nation's leading bracketologists were split on CSU's postseason chances. ESPN's Joe Lunardi projects CSU as a 10 seed right now in the Big Dance while Jerry Palm of CBS did not include the Rams in his bracket posted Friday.

The good news for the Rams is the upcoming stretch provides them a chance to add some of those coveted quality wins the committee looks for.

But regardless of how the next month unfolds, coach Larry Eustachy says his team will continue to get better, even if it isn't reflected in the standings.

"We're going to end too soon, wherever it takes us. We'll get better every day, every week. Sometimes it won't show on the scoreboard," he said. "We can get better and the win-loss may not show that. We have a lot of room for improvement, probably as much upside as anybody in this league, because we can get healthy again and there are guys who can get better."