CINCINNATI--(BUSINESS WIRE)--HealthWarehouse.com, Inc. (OTCQB:HEWA), the only Verified Internet Pharmacy Practice Site (VIPPS) accredited online pharmacy licensed in all 50 states, announced the relaunch of its website to serve consumers who pay out of pocket for their prescriptions, a market expected to grow to $80 billion in 2015.

Consumers who pay out of pocket for their prescriptions include those:

1. With no insurance coverage

2. With high insurance deductibles or copays

3. With Health Savings Accounts (HSA) or Flexible Savings Accounts (FSA)

4. With insurance through the Affordable Care Act (ACA) with high deductibles

5. With Medicare Part D plans with high deductibles

6. With drug exclusions and quantity restrictions placed by insurance companies

The new website, which employs “responsive design” for usability on tablets and mobile devices, enables consumers to quickly find the price of their prescribed medication, place an order, and have it conveniently delivered to their home. Consumers cited affordability, legitimacy, and convenience when paying out of pocket for their medications as factors in choosing HealthWarehouse.com.

A recent consumer commented, “HealthWarehouse.com saved my life more than once and I have told many people. I used HealthWarehouse.com when I did not have insurance many years ago. I was so pleased to find out that I could count on these folks for REAL prescription fulfillment. Now, I have prescription insurance, but found that insurance costs me more than HealthWarehouse.com to fill a prescription, so I'm back...”

See what other consumers are saying at http://healthwarehouse.com/reviews.

Lalit Dhadphale, CEO of HealthWarehouse.com commented, “The Affordable Care Act (ACA) has been a catalyst for rising insurance deductibles and co-pays nationwide, creating a $80 billion market for consumers who purchase prescriptions out of pocket. As the only known VIPPS accredited online pharmacy targeting this market segment, our new website and proprietary technology further solidify our position as a leader strategically poised to capitalize on the structural change occurring in the pharmaceutical industry.”

About HealthWarehouse.com

HealthWarehouse.com, Inc. (OTCQB:HEWA) is a trusted VIPPS accredited online pharmacy based in Florence, Kentucky. The company is focused on the growing out of pocket prescription market, which is expected to grow to $80 billion in 2015. With a mission to provide affordable healthcare to every American by focusing on technology that is revolutionizing prescription delivery, HealthWarehouse.com has become the largest VIPPS accredited online pharmacy in the United States.

HealthWarehouse.com is licensed in all 50 states and only sells drugs that are FDA-approved and legal for sale in the United States. Visit HealthWarehouse.com online at http://www.HealthWarehouse.com.

Forward-Looking Statements

This announcement contains forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933 and Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934. Actual results may differ significantly from management's expectations. These forward-looking statements involve risks and uncertainties that include, among others, risks related to competition, management of growth, new products, services and technologies, potential fluctuations in operating results, international expansion, outcomes of legal proceedings and claims, fulfillment center optimization, seasonality, commercial agreements, acquisitions and strategic transactions, foreign exchange rates, system interruption, inventory, government regulation and taxation, payments and fraud. More information about factors that potentially could affect HealthWarehouse.com's financial results is included in HealthWarehouse.com's filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission, including its most recent Annual Report on Form 10-K and subsequent filings.