“I refuse to let anybody speak for me in terms of trying to evaluate what’s in the best interest of the district,” Barrow said during a Martinez Evans Rotary Club luncheon. “I decide every issue on whether it’s good or bad for the people I represent. If it’s good, I’ll vote for it. If it’s bad, I’ll vote against it.”

Barrow’s comment comes two days after his campaign – and that of his opponent, GOP challenger Rick Allen – fought back against $2 million worth of attack ads the national Democratic and Republican parties aired for several weeks in Georgia’s 12th Congressional District.

On Wednesday, Barrow launched a campaign commercial re-assuring voters he’s no Obama booster, while Allen rolled out a TV spot saying partisan attacks against his construction company using insider deals to land lucrative projects are “shameful smears.”

Both candidates will face off at 3 p.m. today in the race’s first and only scheduled Augusta-area debate at the Evans Government Center. Allen is scheduled to speak to the Rotary Club from noon to 1 p.m. Friday at the Snelling Center on the Augusta Goodwill campus at the corner of Washington and Furys Ferry roads.

Much of the Rotary Club’s question-and-answer session focused on Barrow facing his first midterm election in a district redrawn by Republicans in 2011 to exclude the Democratic legislator’s Savannah base and replace it with most of GOP-leaning Columbia County. He won re-election in 2012, soundly defeating farmer Lee Anderson.

Barrow estimates the district’s makeup is now 55 percent Republican and 45 percent Democrat.

He said his fifth re-election campaign remains as competitive as ever, supporting a Public Opinion Strategies poll released Thursday that shows he is well below the 50 percent mark on the ballot in a virtual tie with Allen.

The survey, which phoned 400 likely general election voters Sept. 15-17, found 44 percent of respondents support Barrow, 42 percent back Allen and 11 percent are undecided.

Barrow said he has been able to beat the odds in the past because he votes for the people, not his party.

“Congress has changed dramatically over the last 30 or 40 years and the most compelling driving force that is making it more partisan is gerrymandering,” Barrow said, referencing the act of drawing a district to favor a certain party.

Barrow said redistricting nationwide has led to a Congress more controlled by legislators who speak from the “extreme wings of the warring parties” and a fear among Americans that dysfunctional representation reflects poorly on them.

“We are not at all as screwed up as our Congress,” Barrow said. “We are not really as partisan as a nation as our Congress is.”

Barrow said the brand that is most needed in Congress is “independent,” somebody who represents the people as a whole and will decide issues on merit, not on which party is proposing, opposing or benefiting.

Members of the Rotary Club agreed, saying gerrymandering has skewed representation.

“I’m very upset of what has happened here,” Superior Court Judge David Roper said of redistricting. “We don’t have a chance of electing a senator or House representative from our area of Columbia County. It’s not right.”