From left, SV Groceries 2 owners Haritha Panuganti, Vamsi Panuganti and Ashok Reddy are shown in the store on Wednesday. All three live in Longmont, and Reddy opened the original SV Groceries 2 in Lone Tree four years ago. ( Matthew Jonas / Longmont Times-Call )

Tired of having to drive to other cities to buy the traditional ingredients used to make the recipes they grew up on, three long-time friends and Longmont residents, who were born in India, have opened SV Groceries 2.

The "SV" in the name doesn't stand for "St. Vrain" — instead, it's an abbreviation for one of the Hindu gods the three owners worship. And it's called "2" because the original SV Groceries was opened by Ashok Reddy in Lone Tree four years ago.

SV Groceries 2 What: Indian-themed grocery store Where: 2055 Ken Pratt Blvd., Longmont Hours: 10 a.m. to 7 p.m. Sundays; 10 to 8 Mondays; 4 p.m. to 8 p.m. Tuesdays; 10 to 8 Wednesday through Saturday Phone: 303-485-8770 Onilne: On Facebook as svgroceries2

"Ashok's been wanting to set something up because he lives here, and we've been wanting to set something up too, because we had to go far (to buy these products)," said Vamsi Panuganti, who, with his wife, Haritha, is partnering with Reddy on the Longmont store.

Reddy is involved in several businesses outside of groceries, including running a building maintenance contracting company and working as a financial adviser.

The Panugantis' backgrounds are both in high-tech: she in software development and he in electronics.

"The reason I put that store (in Lone Tree) is a lot of the Indian community lives there," said Reddy.

Advertisement

But Longmont made sense first, because they live here, they said. And, they notice that a lot of non-Indian people here support the Indian restaurants.

"Living in Boulder County (after being born in India and then living in other parts of the U.S.), it's a reintroduction back into healthy (eating)," Vamsi Panuganti said.

Rice and legumes are staples of the Indian diet, so you'll find a large selection with brands not available in mainstream stores. And unrefined chick pea, whole wheat and rice flour is available in large bags, as are the spices.

Another specialty of SV Groceries 2 are exotic vegetables that are hard to find. Here, owner Ashok Reddy is shown holding a bitter gourd, tendora and a squash opo. (Matthew Jonas / Longmont Times-Call)

There's also teas, snacks, sweets and even some frozen Indian dishes, such as samosas with chutney included. But one of the biggest attractions have been the vegetables, Vamsi Panuganti said.

He said that Thursdays is fresh vegetable delivery days. As soon as they announce on their Facebook page that the vegetables have arrived, he said, there is "pandemonium."

Onions, garlic and a few other traditional veggies are available, but the store specializes in exotics. Not only are they used for Indian cooking but they are often renowned for some kind of health benefit, Vamsi Panuganti said.

"I have an 11-month-old baby and I would go anywhere, I would go any distance, to get these leaves," he said, holding up a bunch of fenugreek leaves. "They're very good for nursing mothers."

Other vegetable highlights of the store are the bitter gourd, tendora and squash opo, the owners said.

Contact Times-Call staff writer Tony Kindelspire at 303-684-5291 or tkindelspire@times-call.com