CAMARILLO, Calif.--(BUSINESS WIRE)--Today, Coastal Dental, Inc. announced that it has changed its name to The CDI Group, Inc. This new name reflects the company’s plans to accelerate its growth across the nation, driving continued expansion of the discount dental plan market.

Founded in California in 2007, The CDI Group specializes exclusively in designing, developing and administering proprietary discount dental plans. It partners with dental practice management companies, dental service organizations and dental practices to offer innovative and individualized alternatives to dental insurance for insured and uninsured people across the nation.

“Our company began as Coastal Dental in California,” said Neil Schroeder, Co-Founder, President and CEO of The CDI Group. “In the last seven years, we have expanded significantly, working with our partners to create dental plan options for people nationwide. Our new name, The CDI Group, is a reflection of this growth. We are excited about the new initiatives and products we have planned for the coming year that will help families across all 50 states have access to affordable dental care.”

Quality dental care is critical to overall health. Although twice-annual dental checkups are recommended, data from the Centers for Disease Control shows that nearly 20 percent of children and 40 percent of adults have not been to a dentist in the last year. In addition, dental procedures are often the largest out-of-pocket medical expense.

Sweeping changes in dental coverage are driving growth in the discount dental plan market. According to the National Association of Dental Plans (NADP), when the Affordable Care Act is instituted, approximately 30-40 million people will enter the dental benefits market and another 10-20 million people will either lose or change their current benefit plans. As a result, more dental patients will pay for their services in cash, making discount dental plans, like those offered by The CDI Group, more important – and a more popular choice for many Americans – than ever before.

“Although many organizations are beginning to offer discount dental plan options, few can offer the same level of service and innovation that The CDI Group can,” said Schroeder. “Discount dental plans are not a subset of what The CDI Group does, they are all we do. Because of this we offer our partners unique expertise in creating, marketing and administering great plans, engaging members and navigating the changing regulatory landscape.”

Discount dental plans are an alternative to dental insurance in which plan members receive discounted rates for dental care. These low cost plans are flexible and customizable for individuals’ and families’ needs. They do not have deductibles, annual maximums or participation requirements, and costs for routine dental care and specialty services such as periodontics, oral surgery, orthodontics, endodontics, pedodontics, and cosmetic procedures are available for members to see.

The CDI Group currently provides discount dental plans to approximately 1,200 dental practices in more than 40 states from Hawaii all the way to Massachusetts.

“Everyone – the insured, uninsured and under-insured – should know their dental care options,” added Schroeder. “The CDI Group offers dental patients the opportunity to receive better oral healthcare. We offer dental practices the opportunity to offer more services to a broader base of patients. Together with our partners, we can help more people have access to the dental care they need to ensure their total health.”

Learn more about The CDI Group, Inc. and the discount dental plans it offers by visiting http://thecdigroup.com/.