VANCOUVER, British Columbia — Goalie Ryan Miller seemingly perfected his position Sunday night, only allowing shots off the iron beside him for more than 59 minutes in Vancouver’s 5-1 victory over the Avalanche at Rogers Arena.

“Probably one of the better performances I’ve seen from a goaltender against us this year,” Avs coach Patrick Roy said. “He was really good. Very solid. He was moving well, reading plays well. He was outstanding out there. Outstanding.”

Roy added: “We did a lot of good things out there. In the second period I thought we did everything except score. We had a lot of chances to get back in that game.”

Nearly every puck heading into Miller’s net or even off iron was turned aside by the former U.S. Olympian — until Matt Duchene struck with 41 seconds remaining. Miller heard at least four shots carom off his friendly pipes before Duchene spoiled his shutout.

The triumph snapped the Canucks’ four-game losing streak in which they became the NHL’s first team to lose four straight by 5-2 scores.

Carl Soderberg led the Avs with six shots, Nathan MacKinnon had five and Duchene four.

“Too bad, to play that well and lose. It was one of our better games in a while,” Duchene said. “They got the bounces when they needed to. They were probably batting .500 on their chances and we were pretty much .000 all night.”

For the Avs, the result was similar to what they often do: get outshot badly but find a way to win behind stellar goaltending. Colorado peppered Miller with shots from all angles, all situations, but didn’t get good enough goaltending from Sem- yon Varlamov and the defense in front of him was subpar.

Avs Mailbag: Pose a question for Terry Frei, Mike Chambers

The Avs, who were concluding a consecutive-night trip in Canada, outshot the Canucks 27-19 after two periods and 38-28 for the game. But Miller was seemingly unbeatable and Varlamov was blitzed by two goals from Jannik Hansen and one apiece by Adam Cracknell and Radim Vrbata. Defenseman Christopher Tanev scored an empty-net goal at 11:37 of the third period when Avalanche coach Roy pulled Varlamov to try to get one behind Miller with the man advantage.

Captain Henrik Sedin had four assists and twin brother Daniel Sedin had three helpers.

The Canucks led 2-0 after the first period and took a 3-0 advantage into the third. Cracknell (backhand shot) and Hansen (one-timer) scored just outside the crease 8:31 and 18:46 into the game in the opening frame in which Colorado produced 11 of the 19 shots.

Miller was again seemingly unstoppable in the second period and Varlamov wasn’t nearly as good. He allowed two more pucks to get by him in the second, although one was disallowed after replays proved Cracknell batted the puck in with his glove.

Soon thereafter, former Avs forward Vrbata scored a power-play goal — giving Vancouver its first three-goal game in its last five.

Colorado, which won 3-2 at Edmonton on Saturday night, fell to 18-14 on the road and saw its wild-card playoff lead shrink. The Avs are still in postseason position with 66 points, but they have played three more games than Nashville (65 points) and Minnesota (64).

The Avs return home to prepare for Wednesday’s home game against the San Jose Sharks. Colorado’s two-game homestand continues Saturday with the NHL Stadium Series game against the Detroit Red Wings at Coors Field.

Mike Chambers: mchambers@denverpost.com or @mikechambers