Three weeks ago the Obama administration desperately launched a new public relations campaign in an effort to make Obamacare popular with the American people. So far, President Obama has made a few speeches urging people to sign up for the law and White House Press Secretary has berated Obamacare critics from the briefing room. But now, Organizing for Action, Obama's left over campaign wing, is urging people to "get talking" while they sit around at Christmas time in their pajamas. They sent the following photo out last night on Barack Obama's Twitter feed.

How do you plan to spend the cold days of December? http://t.co/Rwf5AYc3bG #GetTalking pic.twitter.com/PBQ397yLf4 — Barack Obama (@BarackObama) December 17, 2013

The jokes write themselves, but my take is that the Obama administration wants American males living in their parents' basements forever. Over to you, Andrea Tantaros:

Look at how they portray the American male: a hot chocolate drinking doofus in a onesie. Disgraceful. pic.twitter.com/Ov1wAaShk0 — Andrea Tantaros (@AndreaTantaros) December 17, 2013

The embarrassing "get talking" campaign comes at a time when millennials are abandoning Obamacare and President Obama in droves.

Young Americans are turning against Barack Obama and Obamacare, according to a new survey of millennials, people between the ages of 18 and 29 who are vital to the fortunes of the president and his signature health care law.



Obama's approval rating among young Americans is just 41 percent, down 11 points from a year ago, and now tracking with all adults. While 55 percent said they voted for Obama in 2012, only 46 percent said they would do so again.



When asked if they would want to recall various elected officials, 45 percent of millennials said they would oust their member of Congress; 52 percent replied "all members of Congress" should go; and 47 percent said they would recall Obama. The recall-Obama figure was even higher among the youngest millennials, ages 18 to 24, at 52 percent.

If you like your onesie, you can keep your onesie.