Aiming for consistency in city's message on fair labor policies

Claire Levy

Correction: This story has been correct to reflect that Claire Levy was elected four times -- 2006, 2008, 2010 and 2012 -- to the Colorado House of Representatives, representing western Boulder and the surrounding area.

Former state representative Claire Levy wants the city of Boulder to walk the walk, so to speak, when it comes to working with contractors that treat their employees fairly.

Levy, a longtime Boulder resident who was elected four times to represent the western part of the city and surrounding areas in the Colorado House of Representatives, is urging city leaders to reexamine policies when it comes to picking contractors for outsourced work to better emphasize fair employment practices.

Stemming from conversations Levy's friend and fellow Boulder resident Mary Ann Wilner had with custodial staff members at the city's various recreation centers, the former state representative's concern is that the city is using contractors that pay low wages and often limit their employees to part time hours so they do not have to provide them health benefits.

Noting that some members of the Boulder City Council publicly opposed Walmart's opening in town because of the company's questionable labor practices, Levy urged council members at Tuesday's meeting to look at how it selects contractors, so that it can ensure Boulder is working with companies that reflect city values.

"I think we ought to be consistent," Levy said on Thursday. "If people are going to object to labor practices in the private sector that leave people without insurance and unable to support their families then we should not have those same practices for city contractors."

'Not right' to seek savings 'any way possible'

City Spokesman Mike Banuelos said each city department selects its own contractor for custodial services, and often use metrics including employment practices and benefits for contractor employees to help them make their decision.

The current custodial contractor for the parks and recreation department is Denver-based Kleen-Tech Services Corporation, he said.

According to the Kleen-Tech human resources department, employees on their cleaning crews typically make between $8 and $12 per hour.

Levy pointed to a study prepared in 2011 for the Colorado Center on Law and Policy that indicated that in order for a single adult to live self-sufficiently in Boulder County in that year the minimum amount they needed to make per-hour for full time work was upwards of $11.60. An employee making $8.25 per hour would make $17,160 a year.

Levy is the executive director of the Colorado Center on Law and Policy but was not speaking on behalf of the organization on Tuesday and is not representing it in this article.

Levy said she wants the city to consider making employment practices a more important element of their contracting process.

"I would just like to see the city pay some attention to it and consider changing its procurement practices," she said. "It's not right to look for cost savings in any way possible and close your eyes to the consequences of those cost savings."

Wilner said she was naturally interested in the benefits employees receive after spending much of her career in nonprofit advocacy working toward improving conditions at nursing homes by improving job quality for workers. She has a doctorate in social welfare policy from Brandeis University.

An avid swimmer, she said has visited all of the city's rec centers over the past eight years and wants to see the custodial staff people treated fairly. She said the power to improve the job conditions is in the city's hands.

"It's not particularly about the company. I think that any municipality that is contracting out work needs to stipulate for themselves, based on their values what are the labor practices they want to espouse through their municipal contracting policies," she said.

Issue may see greater attention in 2015

City manager Jane Brautigam at Tuesday's City Council meeting said Councilman Macon Cowles, alerted to the situation by Wilner, approached her about the issue late last year. She said Karen Rahn, director of human services, brought the idea of looking at establishing a living wage for Boulder employees to the city's human relations commission.

She said the commission has the issue on its agenda for this year, but the process will likely take extensive research from staff and recommended it be placed on the work plan for 2015.

Councilwoman Lisa Morzel also spoke with Wilner about the city's contracting policies late last year. As a vocal Walmart critic, Morzel said she is eager to address the issue but does not want to overload city staff with work in 2014.

"I think there is some interest on the part of council to really work on this. I think it's really important and belies the values of Boulder," she said. "We worked very hard for affordable housing but if we can't provide wages that allow people to live here than we're really not realizing our vision."

Contact Camera Staff Writer Joe Rubino at 303-473-1328 or rubinoj@dailycamera.com