Farming is always an uncertain business: Temperatures and commodity fluctuate wildly, potentially turning a good year into a marginal one.

And this year, uncertainty extends to the political arena. Congress adjourned in December without passing a farm bill, leading some farmers to wonder when payments they are accustomed to might come.

The temporary extension of the previous year’s farm bill expired in September, though Congress did pass a temporary extension of the current bill before adjourning for the holidays. That expires Jan. 31, meaning Congress will have to pass either a new farm bill or an extension in the next three weeks.

The farm bill costs about $500 billion annually, with roughly the majority of that going to food stamps. The Republican-controlled House passed a version of the farm bill that cut $4 billion from food stamps, while the Democratic-controlled Senate’s version cut $400 million.

Tim Fulton, of Rossville, owns an 80-acre farm in Jackson County where he grows corn, soybeans and hay. He said he receives between $300 and $500 in direct payments, commonly called subsidies, in most years. He said not having a farm bill could delay those payments, but it won’t have a large impact on his business.

“It helps pay the taxes on the place,” he said.

Lawmakers have discussed ending direct subsidies and replacing them with payments based on crop prices and revenue. Some agricultural industry groups have opposed the changes, however, so it isn’t certain that they will be part of the final bill.

Brad Tollefson, of Silver Lake, farms on two patches in Leavenworth County and one in Shawnee County. He said he doesn’t take subsidies, but the farm bill’s conservation programs have helped him in the past. He used that money to do some water quality improvement projects, he said.

“I feel sorry for somebody who’s in the middle of a project,” he said. “They’re not going to get paid.”

Still, Tollefson said he doesn’t mind waiting for the farm bill if it means cutting government spending overall.

Ted Birtell, who has a farm in Osage County, said he isn’t directly affected by the lack of a farm bill, but he believes one needs to pass soon. Birtell said he is retired, but rents his land to farmers who get crop subsidies.

“We need some kind of a farm bill,” he said. “It looks like we’re headed for lower grain prices.”

Amanda Whitehurst, executive director of the U.S. Farm Service Agency office serving Jefferson, Leavenworth and Wyandotte counties, was one of the FSA representatives taking a turn manning a booth at the Topeka Farm Show on Thursday. She said farmers still need to report how many acres they are planting of different crops by Jan. 15 to avoid extra fees. The acreage reports are used for programs like crop insurance, which has continued despite the lack of a bill, and direct payments.

Jennifer Snyder, farm program technician for the same FSA office, said farmers usually have received payments on June 1, but the program is “in limbo” until a farm bill passes. It isn’t clear if payments could be pushed back because of the delay in passing a bill.

“If the deadline is the same, we’re going to be doing nine months of work in four or five months,” she said.

Todd Domer, vice president of communications for the Kansas Livestock Association, said his members are concerned about less commonly discussed parts of the bill. One of the most important parts in the farm bill for livestock farmers is an often-overlooked provision to require the U.S. Department of Agriculture to change its rules on how meat is labeled after the World Trade Organization ruled the U.S. plans violated its rules, he said.

USDA had set up rules to require meat be labeled with where the animal was born, raised and slaughtered, Domer said, and Canada and Mexico threatened to retaliate against U.S. beef imports.

“Those are two of our three largest U.S. beef customers,” he said.

Domer said changing the rules to require only one country to be listed is a start, but the Kansas livestock farmers would rather that labeling be voluntary. The program hasn’t been cost-effective for producers because American and Canadian cattle can’t be slaughtered together and the cattle have to be tracked, but customers aren’t willing to pay more for U.S. beef, he said.

“Packers have to segregate, and some of them have decided they will not process Canadian cattle because the segregation is too costly, too cumbersome,” he said.

Other important provisions would retroactively compensate farmers for livestock lost in disasters since the program expired in 2012 and would reinstate cost-sharing programs to help farmers comply with environmental regulations, Domer said.