Editor's note: A previous version of this story incorrectly reported the name of another private Obamacare health plan that dropped out of the Onondaga County market last year. That plan was Today's Options, not Total Care.

Syracuse, N.Y. -- A company that has enrolled more Onondaga County residents in private Obamacare health plans than any other insurer is going out of business.

The state has ordered Health Republic of New York to stop writing new insurance policies because regulators expect the company to become financially insolvent.

Existing individual Health Republic policies will remain in effect through Dec. 31, according to the state Department of Financial Services. Health Republic customers will be able to sign up with another insurer for 2016 coverage when open enrollment begins Nov. 1.

Health Republic enrolled 4,066 Central New Yorkers in its plans last year and has more than 200,000 customers statewide.

Health Republic debuted in 2013 and sold plans on the New York health insurance exchange to capture business created by the federal Affordable Care Act, also known as Obamacare, which requires nearly all Americans to have health insurance.

Health Republic enrolled more people statewide than any other insurer by offering low prices.

In Syracuse, for example, the co-op's initial monthly price in 2013 for a standard "silver" individual plan that covers on average 70 percent of medical costs was $291.14. That was nearly 31 percent below average in the Syracuse market where other insurers were selling the same plan at monthly rates as high as $533.23.

Earlier this year it told state regulators it needed more than 20 percent rate increases on some of its plans to sustain itself.

The New York City-based nonprofit lost $77.5 million last year and another 52.7 million during the first half of 2015. It is one of 23 consumer-operated and oriented plans, or co-ops, created nationwide under Obamacare to increase competition and improve consumer choice on state insurance exchanges.

The federal government provided $2 billion in loans to create co-ops in 24 states.

Health Republic was started by the Freelancers Union of Brooklyn, which sells insurance to freelance workers. The union received $174.4 million in federal money to set up the New York co-op and another $167 million to start co-ops in New Jersey and Oregon.

Other co-ops in Nevada, Iowa and Louisiana have also failed.

Benjamin Wakana, a spokesman for the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, said it is premature to speculate about what will happen with the federal loan to Health Republic of New York.

He said the co-ops face the same challenges as any start-up businesses and not all of them will succeed. The government monitors and evaluate all co-ops to assess performance and compliance. Wakana said he could not rule out the possibility that other co-ops will develop solvency problems this year.

In Onondaga County, 40 percent of the people signing up for private health coverage last year through the state health insurance exchange enrolled in Health Republic, while 33 percent enrolled in Excellus.

Health Republic will be the second Obamacare plan to drop out of Onondaga County since the state health insurance exchange began in 2013. Today's Options bailed out last year. That means Onondaga County residents will have just three plans to choose from in the next open enrollment period. Those plans are Excellus, Fidelis and MVP.

"Given Health Republic's financial situation, commencing an orderly wind down process before the upcoming open enrollment period is the best course of action to protect consumers," said Anthony J. Albanese, the state's acting superintendent of financial services. He said state and federal regulators will work to help ensure continuity of coverage for Health Republic customers.

Health Republic small group plans do not have calendar year policy terms. State officials said they will evaluate the best course of action to take with those small group plans based on Health Republic's ongoing financial results.

Any future decisons made on small group plans will be announced with enough notice to provide a transition period to new coverage and protect policyholders, the state said.

Doctors and other providers are required under the terms of their contracts to continue delivering care to Health Republic customers. Any consumers facing issues with their coverage or who have additional questions should contact the state Department of Financial Services consumer help line at 1-800-342-3736.

Consumers with questions about coverage available through the state health insurance exchange can call 1-855-355-5777.

Contact James T. Mulder anytime: Email | Twitter | 315-470-2245