Photo

When the man who was about to become my patient couldn’t tolerate the fatigue any longer, he asked his son, one of 10 children, to take him in their buggy from his woodworking shop to the local doctor who tended to this Amish community, located 90 miles south of Cleveland. Labs showed a white blood cell count that was 12 times normal and profound anemia, and he was driven by ambulance to our hospital.

His white beard made him look much older than his 50 years. His overalls, and the plain dress and bonnet worn by his wife sitting by his side, were incongruous with the starched white of his bedsheets and the crisp, official-sounding blips coming from the machine monitoring his vital signs. He lay comfortably, hands clasped in his lap.

“It’s nice to meet you, though I’m sorry it’s under these circumstances,” I said as I shook his hand, his grip much stronger than mine.

We already had confirmation of his leukemia from a test, flow cytometry, that we had performed on his blood. I told him this and started a discussion about treatment options.

“Given your young age and good health, I recommend we treat your leukemia with intensive chemotherapy, which we give here in the hospital. You would need to remain here, though, for four to six weeks.” He absorbed this information, and I could see him consider the effect this would have on his business and his ability to provide for his family.

“Well, let me ask you a question,” he said, his voice both serious and philosophical. “What if I chose to leave the hospital without treatment and go back home.”

His leukemia was particularly aggressive and had already started to affect his organs. He also had a fever. I told him there was a good chance he would die in the next few days if he left.

“What is your reticence in being treated?” I asked.

He set his jaw. “I’ve seen too many folks spend their remaining time getting chemotherapy only to die anyway. I’ll not go through this if it means just a few more months to live.” He looked squarely at me. “This world is not my final destiny, anyway.”

I explained that sometimes the leukemia was curable, and the number of chemotherapy courses finite, but acknowledged that he was right, with bad leukemias like his, treatment could be futile. Something else seemed to be troubling him.

“Are you worried at all about the cost to your community of a hospital stay?” I asked. Many Amish do not carry private insurance, but pay for a member’s catastrophic illness by pooling their resources.

For the first time, his wife spoke. “I think that’s part of it.”

“I am a deacon, and see the hospital bills that come through,” he said. “ It just doesn’t seem worth the cost.”

He made up his mind and left the hospital soon after. We cobbled together the best plan we could for him to be cared for as an outpatient, with a doctor I trusted in nearby Wooster, Ohio.

Later that day, I visited an 80-year-old woman with advanced myelodysplastic syndrome in the intensive care unit. As a result of her disease, her platelets were very low, and she had suffered a subdural hematoma, a bleed into her head. In contrast to the quiet of the leukemia floor, the I.C.U. was cacophonous with blaring machines and people talking loudly to be heard over them.

I had met her weeks before at a patient conference and recalled that she and her family had emigrated from the United Kingdom. She had asked intelligent questions and set clear goals of how to manage her disease. I admired her focus.

When I walked into her room though, she was a fragment of the woman I remembered. One eye was closed, one open; half of her face animate, half slack. I greeted her and held her hand, but she didn’t respond. Her husband, son and daughter were in the room and motioned for me to step out with them. Her son, who was a doctor, spoke.

“The neurosurgeon came by and recommended putting a burr hole in her skull, to relieve the pressure. The professional side of me wants to try it, but I think I’m outnumbered.”

“She would never want that,” her husband said. “She’s lived to be 80 years old, and her time has come. Enough is enough.” His voice cracked. “I’m lucky to have had the 58 years with her that I did.”

He started sobbing, and his daughter hugged him tight, comforting him. “Can we just move her someplace quiet, away from all this?” she asked.

We transferred her to a palliative medicine floor, and she died within hours.

As the Affordable Care Act is being put in place, we hear a lot of debate on how best to control spiraling health care costs. We should pause to consider that a critical component to true health care reform is in changing our core expectations about the use of heroic measures at the end of life and whether to treat illnesses that are likely incurable. In this respect, sometimes it’s our patients who can teach us the most.

Photo



Dr. Mikkael Sekeres is director of the leukemia program at the Cleveland Clinic.