KANSAS CITY, Kan. — Colorado State-Pueblo’s seven-year climb to the national championship podium is complete.

And the ThunderWolves didn’t wait until the final gun to begin the celebration of their NCAA Division II title with a 13-0 victory over Minnesota State on Saturday.

With about 35 seconds remaining, when it became apparent the ThunderWolves would not be required to take another snap, the players and coaches on their sideline spilled onto the field, arms raised in triumph.

Later, head coach John Wristen fought back tears explaining the program’s remarkable journey from restoration to national title.

“I wanted to be part of something special to Pueblo, Colorado,” Wristen said. “We just put our head down and went to work.”

Wristen, a quarterback when the school was known as the University of Southern Colorado in the early 1980s, has been the architect. Football and other sports were shut down in 1984 as a cost-cutting measure. Upon football’s return to competition in 2008, the ThunderWolves have been a national power and have a 48-4 record over the last four years.

The program had been knocking on the door of national success in that time, and Saturday, CSU-Pueblo finished the job.

“To be able to come through in the end like this, it’s beautiful,” said Widefield product Paul Browning, a senior wide receiver who scored the only touchdown.

CSU-Pueblo (14-1) rode its stout defense, holding Minnesota State (14-1) to 265 total yards before a crowd of 6,762. The Mavericks were shut out for the first time since 2004, a span of 128 games.

“They played outstanding,” Wristen said of his players.

The ThunderWolves were motivated too. Wristen made sure his team knew that Minnesota State entered the game ranked first nationally in scoring defense.

The ThunderWolves also can play great defense. That was the message on display throughout the game at Sporting Park.

After CSU-Pueblo missed a field goal late in the first quarter, Minnesota State responded with its best drive of the game, reaching the ThunderWolves’ 8-yard line.

The Mavericks were at the 11 when they lined up for a 27-yard field goal. CSU-Pueblo’s Josh Bredl broke through for the block.

“That was a huge momentum change,” Wristen said. “We kind of got going there.”

After the blocked kick, running back Cameron McDondle started getting yards in chunks. His 34-yard gain set up the game’s first score, a 27-yard field goal by Greg O’Donnell. McDondle finished with 113 yards rushing and surpassed 2,000 yards for the season.

When they got the ball back, the ThunderWolves reached the Mavs’ 18 and quarterback Chris Bonner lofted a perfect strike to Browning down the sideline for the game’s only touchdown.

“I just saw a good matchup out there with Paul and anytime I’ve seen that this year, I know if I give him a chance to go out and get it he will,” Bonner said.

O’Donnell’s 24-yard field goal early in the third quarter made it 13-0.

The ThunderWolves pitched the first shutout in a Division II championship game since 1997.

“Our defense was outstanding, and our offense made the plays they needed to make to win the game,” Wristen said. “We’re here and we finished it.”