Published: Saturday, 8/22/2015



GOP presidential hopefuls criticize Gov. Kasich



ASSOCIATED PRESS Enlarge Republican presidential candidate Ohio Gov. John Kasich speaks during an education summit in New Hampshire.

COLUMBUS—Three of Gov. John Kasich’s GOP presidential opponents took aim directly and indirectly today at a pair of his policies at a gathering of tea party conservatives that didn't invite the Ohio governor to a summit in his own state.

Texas Sen. Ted Cruz, Florida Sen. Marco Rubio, and former Texas Gov. Rick Perry went after decisions by governors to expand Medicaid and defend Common Core standards during the Americans for Prosperity's Defending the American Dream Summit.

Mr. Perry was the only one to specifically go after Ohio, without mentioning its governor by name. Mr. Kasich just narrowly edged Mr. Perry in national polls to qualify for the Fox News prime time debate held in Cleveland earlier this month.

“President Obama's massive expansion of the broken Medicaid system under Obamacare—I opposed it from day one,” Mr. Perry said. “The same cannot be said for every governor in this race. The argument has been made that states should reclaim their share of federal dollars, but that begs the question: What about our children's share of the federal debt?

“Justifying Medicaid expansion on the grounds of returning federal money to your home state can only be done if you turn a blind eye to the fact that we are $18 trillion in debt,” he said. “The idea that Washington has this federal pot of Ohio Medicaid money that would have gone to some other state is just nonsense... . It is borrowed from bankers in China and children in Cleveland and Columbus.”

The convention included a video celebrating how opponents turned back an effort to expand Medicaid in Tennessee.

This summit, AFP's ninth, is its first in the "heartland.” The registered crowd of roughly 3,800 marked its largest turnout to date, although today’s crowd was noticeably smaller than Friday's.

The two-day, well choreographed event at the downtown Columbus convention center had a high-tech feel of a small political convention and featured five GOP presidential contenders appealing for the conservative support of the overwhelmingly white, self-professed “freedom fighters.”

Former Florida Gov. Jeb Bush and Louisiana Gov. Bobby Jindal headlined Friday's opening.

All three of the presidential contenders speaking today vowed to end the Common Core K-12 educational standards that Mr. Kasich and former Florida Gov. Jeb Bush have defended against allegations that they represent a federal takeover of local schools.

“If you give the federal government the power to set curriculum, they will force the states to do it the way they want to do it or you won't get money.” Mr. Rubio said. “And you know what that means to parents? If you don't like what's being taught in schools, you have to get on an airplane and fly to the Department of Education to lobby them instead of your school board member.”

All three talked about securing the nation's southern border.

Mr. Cruz called for closing the Internal Revenue Service and then jokingly suggested sending the agency's 90,000 employees to the Mexican border.

“Imagine you have traveled thousands of miles in the blazing sun, you're swimming across the Rio Grande, and the first thing you see is 90,000 IRS agents,” he said. “You'd turn around and go home, too.”

The convention sparked protests against AFP's founders, billionaire brothers Charles and David Koch, on Friday in a nearby park and directly outside the convention center on both days.

"Their idea of the American dream is ’We do all the work, and they sit in the high-life,’" said AFL-CIO President Tim Burga at Friday's rally of roughly 3,000 people.

"Well that's wrong, sisters and brothers," he said. "Let's look at their plan to move America forward. Their plan is more tax breaks for the rich, golden parachutes for Wall Street, offshoring of our jobs. They want to take away collective bargaining. They want to take away prevailing wage. They don't want us to have a defined retirement benefit. They have no empathy for others. Does this sound like the American dream to you?"