CLEVELAND, Ohio - Over the next several weeks, MetroHealth Medical Center will be taking its insurance sign-up outreach on the road -- in a 38-foot long RV. The white and blue vehicle will be staffed with financial counselors ready to help people navigate the new healthcare marketplace and sign up for Medicare or Medicaid.

The RV, part of the health system's "Enrollment on Wheels" program, makes its first stop Friday morning outside Mound-STEM School in Cleveland's Slavic Village. MetroHealth opened a school-based health center there in November as part of a pilot program designed to improve access to primary care for Cleveland school children.

Craig Richmond, the health system's chief financial officer, said the primary goal of the enrollment outreach vehicle is to make signing up for health insurance simpler, whether people plan to use MetroHealth for their care or not.

"Navigating the health insurance enrollment process can be very complex and confusing," Richmond said in an email. "We are making it easier for people to access health care coverage when we come to them."

Increasing the number of people with health insurance is a win-win for healthcare providers and patients, he said.

"We are increasing the numbers of people who will have coverage and who will seek health care on a regular basis rather than just when it's a dire emergency," Richmond said. "Ongoing health care is less expensive for health systems than emergency care, and certainly adds to better long-term health of the patient."

Financial counselors certified by the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services will be on hand at fixed work stations inside the RV to help people learn about the insurance options available through Medicare, Medicaid, and the Affordable Care Act's health insurance marketplace.

As the healthcare marketplace's open enrollment period comes to a close on March 31, sign-ups have picked up nationwide. About 800,000 people across the country have enrolled for health insurance plans on the state and federal marketplaces this month, according to government officials. The new health law requires most Americans to have health insurance or incur a penalty of $95 or 1 percent of their income this year, whichever is higher.

The RV will be at Mound-STEM on Friday from 10 a.m. to 1 p.m. Other March stops will be from 10 a.m. to 5 p.m. Sunday, March 30 at Imani Temple Ministries on North Taylor Road in Cleveland Heights. For more dates, check back at MetroHealth's calendar here.

To schedule an enrollment appointment, you can call a MetroHealth outreach worker at 216-957-2325. Walk-ins are welcome.