MUR DE BRETAGNE, France — Frenchman Alexis Vuillermoz won the eighth stage of the Tour de France on Saturday with a late attack on the final climb, while British rider Chris Froome kept the leader’s yellow jersey and defending champion Vincenzo Nibali lost valuable time.

The mostly flat 181.5-kilometer (112.5-mile) ride started in Rennes and finished with a short and sharp 2-kilometer (1.2-mile) climb up Mur de Bretagne.

After Vuillermoz made an early move, Froome counter-attacked about 850 meters from the end and briefly moved into the lead. But Vuillermoz responded with a strong attack and then raised both his arms in the air when he crossed the line to give French riders a first win on this year’s Tour.

“Congratulations to Vuillermoz. That was a great win, he was very strong,” Froome said. “That was a tough climb, my team did a great job to bring me to the front. There was a lot of head wind.”

Vuillermoz, a former mountain bike specialist, finished third on stage 3, which also finished with a sharp climb.

“It’s always been a childhood dream of mine to win a stage on the Tour,” said the 27-year-old Vuillermoz. “I lost my father three years ago. I was thinking of him a lot today and I hope he’s proud of me.”

British rider Dan Martin was second and Spaniard Alejandro Valverde placed third.

The climb took its toll and Nibali lost 10 seconds to Froome and to his other main Tour rivals: two-time champion Alberto Contador, 2013 Tour runner-up Nairo Quintana of Colombia and American Tejay Van Garderen, who has made a solid start to the race.

As they started to climb, thousands of raucous fans — many of whom were waving the black and white flag of Brittany — cheered them on loudly.

Froome positioned himself to the right, while Vuillermoz and two other riders pushed ahead. Froome then launched one of his trademark blistering attacks but, after Vuillermoz showed he could respond in kind, Froome let him go and rolled in 10 seconds later in eighth place.

Froome’s attack did some damage, though, as Nibali crawled up at a sluggish pace.

“I was surprised to learn that I gained some time on Vincenzo Nibali there,” Froome said.

Before the start, Eritrean fans waved flags and chanted songs in honor of the African MTN-Qhubeka team’s two Eritrean riders: Daniel Teklehaimanot and Merhawi Kudus.

“It’s amazing, they’re so passionate about their own people, and their own countrymen’s success,” team principal Douglas Ryder told The Associated Press. “It’s incredible to see them come out and support the riders.”

MTN-Qhubeka is the first African team to compete in the Tour, with two South Africans also racing.

Rolling through the Brittany countryside, the riders went past the imposing Chateau de Hac on the Cotes-d’Armor, a 15th century castle perched on the Brittany coastline.

An early breakaway of four riders were joined by a small group some 69 kilometers (42.8 miles) from the line, with Froome’s yellow jersey group about 20 seconds behind.

The stage, in baking hot conditions, took its toll and British rider Mark Cavendish, winner of Friday’s seventh stage, and fellow sprinter John Degenkolb of Germany both dropped back. Kudus fell approaching the end, along with French riders Nicolas Edet and Damien Gaudin, but all continued.

Sunday’s ninth stage is a team time trial and Monday is a well-earned rest day.

After an intense start to the race marked by three big crashes, strong side-winds and searing heat, the rest will be needed. Especially as Tuesday is the first of three straight days of tough climbing in the Pyrenees.

“I feel really good at the moment. Better or worse than 2013, it’s hard to say,” Froome said. “When we arrive in the Pyrenees that will be the Tour. The fight for the yellow jersey will begin then.”