Thursday night at the Colorado Music Festival's season finale concert, I chatted with several members of the CMF board and music director search committee.

Though they obviously wouldn't disclose where the CMF search was headed, it became clear that a decision could be made as early as this week; the board starts deliberations Monday.

With that in mind, I would like to outline what I perceive as strengths and potential concerns of each candidate.

It is curious that none of the three "official" candidates is American (they are English, Mexican, and Canadian), but each does hold a post with an American orchestra. (Interestingly, the other four guest conductors all were Americans.) An international outreach is an important consideration, but it should not be the only one.

Carlos Miquel Prieto seemed to connect well with the CMF audience. (Courtesy photo)

Of the official candidates, Carlos Miguel Prieto, 47, seemed to make the most heartfelt connection with both the audience and the orchestra. He was delightfully engaging, and his musicianship is impeccable. His outstanding chamber orchestra concert, which featured an almost-spiritual Mozart performance from pianist Gilles Vonsattel and the best Beethoven Fourth Symphony I have ever heard, drew one of the season's largest crowds.

I had genuine concerns about his large orchestra program, however. The concept was fantastic, and the orchestra rose to an enormous challenge, but the evening of ballet music did create a sensory overload. And there is no doubt the concert order was a miscalculation: Stravinsky's "Petrouchka" most definitely should have preceded, not followed, Falla's "Three-Cornered Hat." Such ambitious programs will need to be the exception, not the rule.

Jean-Marie Zeitouni, 40, closed the season with a glorious Strauss program and presented an extremely interesting, highly unusual chamber orchestra concert. He has charisma and passion and is a commanding presence on the podium. Strangely, both of his concerts were poorly attended, and it is impossible to know exactly why. The Strauss works should have been enough of a draw without a soloist.

Jean-Marie Zeitouni, the last candidate to audition, offers charisma and passion. (Courtesy photo)

William Boughton, 65, was both dignified and personable. His chamber program contained unknown gems, and his full program was rich and diverse. I did think his conducting motions were somewhat vague, though, which might frustrate the orchestra. He is considerably older than the other candidates, so the length of his potential tenure is a real question.

The CMF board has made clear that the other conductors on the season program will be given consideration and at least two of them seem to have a true interest in the job. Of those, Andrew Grams, 37, seems the most likely possibility. Both of his programs were wonderfully planned, and both drew a sizable audience. His professionalism was consummate, which clearly pleased the orchestra. He also seems to be a favorite of soloists; his collaboration with pianist William Wolfram was a thing of beauty.

Joshua Gersen was outstanding, but his youth might prove detrimental in his impressive bid. (Courtesy photo)

Yet Grams seemed self-effacing in a strange sort of way. He was not particularly demonstrative, and he would need to adapt to an audience used to Michael Christie's effusiveness.

Joshua Gersen's program, closing with Copland's Third Symphony, was superb, but his youth (30) and somewhat thin resumé might work against him (although we should not forget that Christie's resumé was virtually nonexistent in 2000, when he took over the CMF at age 26).

Larry Rachleff, 59, a previous guest conductor, was obviously much-loved by the orchestra and directed a memorable program, but he seemed uninterested in being considered for the position. Boulder Philharmonic music director Michael Butterman, 48, drew the season's largest crowd at his opening concert, a historic event for both of the city's premiere classical organizations. It seems a no-brainer that he should return for guest engagements in the future.

Larry Rachleff doesn't appear interested in the CMF post. (Courtesy photo)

I should say a few words about the polarizing "mash-up" series. I understand why it has been established, and I have real respect and admiration for its curator, Steve Hackman. His actual mash-up arrangements, though reviled by some, are intriguing to me, and there were moments of the Beethoven/Coldplay combination that I found truly moving. But the other two concerts, which I was unable to attend, struck me as glorified "pops" programs.

I wonder if too many resources are spent promoting the mash-up series. One positive was this year's isolation of the concerts on alternating Tuesdays as a separate subscription, following last year's complaints from subscribers about being "trapped" into them.

The chamber series at eTown Hall on the other Tuesdays, now curated by concertmaster Calin Lupanu, remains a marvelous showcase for the tremendously talented CMF musicians. All three programs were sublimely performed and thematically satisfying, but works with piano, which returned after the move from Rembrandt Yards, were again missed this year.