Every day brings fresh evidence why Americans should regret that former Massachusetts Gov. Mitt Romney lost the 2012 presidential election. Imagine how immensely better off America would be under a Romney administration.

By 2014, Romney’s pro-market, pro-growth policies would have unleashed a robust recovery. American multinationals would have had powerful incentives to return and reinvest the $1.95 trillion accumulated outside the United States – no longer scared off by President Obama’s confiscatory taxes and suffocating regulations.

Under Romney, the U.S. would have progressed substantially toward achieving energy independence: Romney would have encouraged exploiting huge new oil reserves and natural reserves on the North American continent, building the Alaskan and Canadian pipelines, fracking untapped sites in North Dakota and exploring and drilling off America’s coastlines.

The emergence of the U.S. as an alternative exporter of energy may have stiffened the spine of an irresolute Western European Union. In that case, Vladimir Putin’s Russia could no longer have blackmailed an energy-dependent EU into silence or subservience over Ukraine by threatening an energy embargo.

Romney also would have boosted prosperity and the psychic well-being of Americans by putting Obamacare on the path to extinction. The looming, shifting and prohibitively expensive mandates of Obamacare would no longer have inhibited employers from hiring. Most Americans would no longer have faced the near-certain prospect of losing the coverage and doctors they prefer, while paying far more for far less.

Like Ronald Reagan, Mitt Romney would have restored the preponderance of American power that has eroded even more precipitously during Obama’s second term than his first. Romney would have increased, rather than slashed, the defense budget.

Though Obama mocked Romney during the second presidential debate for objecting to shrinking the Navy, China’s relentless military buildup and belligerent assertions of sovereignty over disputed territorial seas have vindicated the wisdom of Romney’s plan to enhance America’s air and maritime capabilities. A Romney presidency would have reassured America’s increasingly worried democratic allies of America’s determination to sustain a generous margin of U.S. military superiority necessary to deter an authoritarian, arrogant and expansionist China from dominating East Asia.

Though Obama mocked Romney for calling Russia an enemy, Putin’s invasion of Crimea and his swelling ambitions proved Romney right. Romney would have abrogated the strategic arms-control agreement, which he had always opposed, permitting Russia to build up its nuclear arsenal, requiring the United States to build down ours, while tightly constraining the development and deployment of effective ballistic missile defense.

Romney would have reacted vigilantly to Putin’s campaign of aggression in Ukraine: ending Obama’s feckless “reset” and imposing serious sanction on Russia’s banking and energy sectors. Romney would have deployed missile defense in Poland, the Czech Republic and Hungary, which Obama blundered by scrapping.

In the Middle East, America’s reputation would not have suffered greviously from making withdrawal, rather than victory, the priorities in Iraq and Afghanistan, while issuing multiple red lines in Syria that the United States lacked the will to enforce. Romney never would have tolerated a nuclear Iran, lifted sanctions on the Iranian regime, or engaged in negotiations tranquilizing the U.S. to the gathering danger of a nuclear Iran. Nor would Romney – a stalwart friend of Israel – have threatened to impose a suicidal “peace agreement” on an embattled democratic, pro-American ally.

Romney also would have harbored no illusions about the dangers of Islamic radicalism or the fecklessness of propitiating the Muslim Brotherhood in Egypt.

We can hope Americans have learned their lesson well from the painful consequences of spurning Mitt Romney. That hope also applies to the millions of conservatives who, inexplicably, stayed home rather than vote for an honorable, wise alternative to Obama.

Robert G. Kaufman is a professor of public policy at Pepperdine University.