Editorial: If you could help kids go to the doctor without any cost to the state budget, you'd do it, right?

Arizona froze enrollment in the KidsCare health-insurance program for low-income families in 2010. (Photo: Getty Images/iStockphoto) Story Highlights HB 2309 is good for children, families, Arizona’s health-care industry and the economy

The bill would restore the KidsCare health insurance program

The federal government will cover 100 percent of program for at least two years

A move in the Arizona Legislature could be a cool hand on a baby’s fevered brow.

It could be the difference between getting to the doctor in time or rushing a much sicker child to the emergency room later.

It could keep a parent from losing a job due to the needs of a child whose treatment was delayed.

It could mean that Arizona’s hospitals face fewer uncompensated costs for emergency treatment, and doctors are paid in federal dollars that will go elsewhere if Arizona doesn’t take the chance to bring the funding here.

Twin bills, HB 2309 and SB 1385, are good for children, families, Arizona’s health-care industry and the economy in general.

Sponsored by Republicans Rep. Regina Cobb in the House and Sen. Carlyle Begay in the Senate, these identical bills have bipartisan support and make solid fiscal sense.

The plan is to restore the KidsCare health insurance program, which was frozen during the recession.

Even in those dark days of state budget deficits, it made little sense not to participate in this program, which offered a 3-1 federal match.

Freezing KidsCare saved Arizona $12.9 million in fiscal 2011, according to the Kaiser Commission on Medicaid and the Uninsured. But the state lost $41 million in federal matching money that year.

In addition, more than 100,000 children went on a waiting list for medical insurance at a time when many of their parents were facing job loss and foreclosure.

Some of these children were subsequently covered by the Medicaid expansion.

But an estimated 30,000 to 40,000 children would benefit from reopening KidsCare.

What’s more, the federal government will cover 100 percent of program for at least two years.

Gov. Doug Ducey’s policy staff is analyzing whether there would a fiscal impact to the state, according to Ducey spokesperson Daniel Scarpinato, who says “the governor is open to any good idea that is fiscally sound within the confines of the budget and other priorities.”

Cobb says she plans to amend the bill in committee to address concerns the governor has expressed. One of those changes would impose an automatic sunset to the program if the federal funding falls below 100 percent.

“There is absolutely zero cost to the state,” Cobb says.

Her bill has been assigned to three committees, which can delay progress, and no hearings have been scheduled in any of those committees. But Cobb is hopeful her bill will be heard soon. Begay's bill has not yet been assigned to any committees.

KidsCare has not been popular with Republicans in previous legislatures. But this plan makes sense for Arizona and its families.

It offers medical care to children of the working poor. Their parents make between 138 percent to 200 percent of the federal poverty level. In dollars and cents, that’s a range of $33,465 to $48,500 for a family of four.

It’s too much to qualify for Medicaid and it can be too little to buy health insurance on the marketplace – even with the financial help offered by the Affordable Care Act.

KidsCare requires co-pays. It is not a free ride for parents. But it makes medical care affordable.

It is a good deal for the state, which benefits from working parents who have healthy children.

Lawmakers who may have philosophical objections to federal spending need to remember that refusing to bring those dollars to Arizona doesn’t mean they won’t be spent. It just means they won’t be spent here.

Lawmakers and the governor also should remember that this is about real, live children, as well as mothers and fathers who are working hard to better themselves on low wages.

Arizona comes in at 46th among the states in a ranking of child poverty and well-being, according to the Annie E. Casey Foundation. Helping children of the working poor get needed medical care at federal expense is a no-brainer.

Freezing KidsCare when the federal government offered a 3-to-1 match showed questionable judgment -- even during the recession. Failing to accept a 100 percent deal from the feds when Arizona has a budget surplus would be unjustifiable.

Arizona has the ability to offer a compassionate hand to children. It should do so.

Read or Share this story: http://azc.cc/1WXeNb5