Although little-known, the city owns all the land and most of the large buildings at Chautauqua. The city leases all this real estate to the Colorado Chautauqua Association (the "CCA") via a 20-year lease, which is up for renewal in 2018. How much does the CCA — with a current bank balance largely from hotel rentals of about $3 million — pay for all this real estate under the current lease? $2,500 per year plus $2,000 "in lieu" of property tax. How much is proposed for the new 20-year lease (with now automatic extensions to 2048)? $1 per year. That's about 1 cent per per year per cottage.

Despite Chautauqua land values of about $500,000 per lot (based on average lot land values in the city of Boulder), property owners at Chautauqua are exempt from all property taxes on the land (since the land is city-owned), but pay instead an sublease rental payment of about $230 per month to the CCA treasury — chiefly on the argument that all cottage owners are "entitled" to this very low rent. Is this really fair? Owners at the Vista Village Mobile Home Park (and other mobile home parks in town) now pay close $700 per month for land rent. (Both pay tax on the value of the house or mobile home independent of the land value.

Advertisement

) In a city that prides itself on diversity and "ability to pay," is this the way things ought to be on Chautauqua city-owned land with a value, based on $500,000 lots plus commercial property, north of $70 million?

Even though the city owns 100 percent of the land, it gets to appoint only two representatives on the 15-member CCA Board — that's 13 percent of the voting for 100 percent of the land. And there some big issues coming up — such as the CCA coming to the city, hat in hand before 2020, for as much $10 million in infrastructure projects, including undergrounding utilities, storm water management and roadway improvements (see CCA "Strategic Planning Financial Summary," April 28, 2015). All this with a current CCA liquid treasury of about $3 million. Shouldn't this be resolved before the lease is signed?

While never officially part of the city's "affordable housing program," 30 years ago about 50 cottages were leased at very low rents to students and educators during the school year. How many of these affordable units are now left? About zero. While we require new developers to provide as much as 40 percent affordable housing on annexed land, is it right for Chautauqua affordable housing to be simply stripped away?

While technically "public," the lease negotiations so far have been entirely between the city and the CCA staff. Observers from the Boulder community have only been allowed to speak after a long, three-hour meeting — then only for three minutes or less — and such comments have generally been ignored. Despite our pleas to the staff, we were not given a copy of the draft lease until July 17. Sure, there's a "free-for-all" four-board, 22 person "review process" in a giant auditorium on Sept. 10, but is this the best way to determine "community benefit?" We don't think so.

In the Open Space Visitors Master Plan, Chautauqua is listed as a major trailhead for much-loved paths to the west and south. And yet, the CCA has increasingly restricted parking for Boulder residents — all 30 spaces at the lot the east of the Chautauqua tennis court are now allowed only for registered "permit holders" with the CCA.

While many of the changes to Chautauqua over the last 20 years have been beneficial, isn't it time to examine just how much more "improvement" and "enhancement" (per the recently adopted Chautauqua Mission Statement) are for the community good? Is Chautauqua increasingly becoming a haven for the wealthy, at the expense of the general public?

What's the rush? Isn't almost three years until 2018 enough for some real community dialogue and discussion? Why not seven or eight city representatives on the CCA Board, instead of a paltry "two" (out of 15) that are proposed.

Chautauqua is much more than outstanding Victorian architecture — it represents a spirit and vision for all — and this vision is in danger of being lost.

John Spitzer is a member of the Boulder Friends of Chautauqua and writing here on behalf of the nonprofit association.