The last time Mississippi’s 1st Congressional District held a special election, it shocked political observers by picking a Democrat.

Majority white and largely conservative, the district had just lost its longtime Republican representative after Roger Wicker resigned to join the U.S. Senate. Most people assumed voters would pick another Republican.

More than 60 percent of the district voted Republican in the 2004 presidential election; more than 57 percent did four years prior.

Instead, this time, they chose humble, mustachioed Prentiss County Chancery Clerk Travis Childers over his more polished and better-funded GOP opponent, Southaven Mayor Greg Davis, in a May 2008 runoff.

The district didn’t swing left. It stuck together, like it usually does.

Nestled into the hills of northeast Mississippi, the 1st District boasts some of the state’s most conservative residents. They’re hardworking, church-going, community-minded folks who grow soybeans, build cars and shout “Hotty Toddy” or clang a cowbell every Saturday.

Their big cities include Tupelo and the DeSoto County hubs of Southaven, Olive Branch and Horn Lake. Not far behind are Columbus and West Point — two-thirds of the Golden Triangle — as well as Corinth and Oxford, home to the University of Mississippi.

Most of its 756,400 residents, though, live in rural areas.

And while they don’t always agree, the people have a long history of collaborating on projects benefiting them all. Case in point: The tri-county PUL Alliance that shared resources to develop a megasite and then successfully recruited Toyota to open a manufacturing plant there. Or the CREATE Foundation, a nonprofit committed to improving the quality of life for all residents in the 16-county region.

“It could be one of the most solid areas in terms of being able to work together,” said Vaughn Grisham, a sociologist who has studied the region extensively through his work with the McLean Institute for Community Development at the University of Mississippi.

So when confronted with an outside candidate — although in the 1st District, Southaven is considered by many as a Memphis suburb — voters banded together to pick the homegrown guy despite his Democratic label.

It didn’t help that Davis had angered central district Republicans with his relentless, D.C.-funded attack ads against Tupelo’s favorite GOP candidate and former mayor, Glenn McCullough Jr.

As soon as it had another viable Republican candidate, the district veered right again. They picked longtime Republican state Sen. Alan Nunnelee for the seat in 2010.

Will they shake things up anew this year? Don’t count on it.

Thirteen candidates are vying for the position left vacant in February when Nunnelee lost his battle to brain cancer. All but one — Walter Zinn Jr. of Pontotoc — are Republican. And while Zinn has the smarts and qualifications to lead the 1st District, he doesn’t enjoy the same favorable circumstances that got Childers elected.

It’s anyone’s guess who among the 13 will win this year’s race, but most bets are on a Republican.

“As compared to the rest of the state, that area in particular does have a significant number of the remaining old-time Jamie Whitten Democrats …, but those folks are in decline,” said Marty Wiseman, former head of Mississippi State University’s Stennis Institute of Government. “It’s a Republican district like the rest of the red South. It’s virtually hopeless for a Democrat, but not impossible.”

Whitten represented the 1st District for more than two decades, at a time when the entire state — the entire South — voted blue. In reality, though, Whitten had held power in the region since 1941, when it was still part of the 2nd District.

When he retired in 1995, he did so as the then-longest serving representative in the nation.

“Whitten gave the region a political identity and a political unity,” Grisham said. “It was very deliberate.”

The region owes its success to a long parade of business leaders who partnered with Whitten and other members of the congressional delegation to bring home federal pork. Among the most memorable projects is the $2 billion Tennessee-Tombigbee Waterway. But millions more dollars went to north Mississippi in the form of agriculture subsidies and highway project funds.

Whitten had earned the title, King of Pork, which he shared with his congressional counterpart and fellow Democrat John Stennis.

Their ghosts would howl at the anti-pork rhetoric of their would-be successors, who at a recent debate in Tupelo denounced that type of “wasteful” Washington spending. They’re all reading from the same GOP playbook, the one that derides Obamacare and limits the role of federal government.

“They’re all saying the same thing,” Wiseman said. “The only difference is the amount of emphasis they’re putting on how conservative they are in hoping to top the others.”

Without much else to differentiate the candidates, voters will rely on name recognition.

Congressional hopeful Mike Tagert wins that contest, since he already represents the entire district as its transportation commissioner. But he faces competition from opponents spending hundreds of thousands of dollars to get their faces on TV.

Those efforts might be too little too late for most voters.

“I have lived here 20 years, and I have no idea who most of the people are — and I pay attention to politics,” said John M. Bruce, chairman of the University of Mississippi’s Political Science Department. “Not only is this election at the wrong time of the year, but there’s a slew of candidates without political labels. From a political science standpoint, it’s the worst time to have an election.”

Bruce predicts low turnout comprised of voters loyal to one particular candidate. It’s anyone’s guess who will win the race.

“My flip answer,” he said, “is that the winner will be whoever has the most friends.”

THE 1ST DISTRICT’S 2008 SPECIAL ELECTION

Just a fraction of the nearly 575,000 voting-aged residents of Mississippi’s 1st Congressional District cast ballots in the previous special election. Turnout could be equally low this time around.

Special election results

Travis Childers, Democrat – 33,304

Greg Davis, Republican – 31,117

Steve Holland, Democrat – 789

Glenn L. McCullough, Jr., Republican – 968

Wally Pang, Independent – 725

John M. Wages Jr., Green Party – 389

(Total voters 67,361)

Runoff election results:

Travis Childers, Democrat – 58,037

Greg Davis, Republican – 49,877

(Total voters 107,914)

Source: Mississippi Secretary of State

Read or Share this story: http://on.thec-l.com/1bH1Rn5