Buy Photo Priscilla Ewing is a former smoker who has turned her health around. April 9, 2014 (Photo: Michael Clevenger/The Courier-Journal)Buy Photo

If you live in Old Louisville or downtown, you can expect to live around 71 years, only a little longer than in Iraq. But if you live in St. Matthews, you're likely to live to 82.

Those stark differences and many others are outlined in a newly released 2014 Louisville Metro Health Equity Report, which reveals a lingering health gap among different neighborhoods and racial groups throughout metro Louisville.

It shows that disease rates and health outcomes are much worse for black residents than white residents — ultimately shaving years off of many Louisvillians' lives.

In fact, more than 65 percent of Louisville residents, or 485,000 people, live in neighborhoods with life expectancies below the national average of 79.

"It's not about 'them;' it's about 'us.' It's about all of us," said C. Anneta Arno, director of the Center for Health Equity, a division of the health department that is releasing the report Thursday. "Getting everybody aware is a critical first step."

The report — timed for the start of a Health Equity Summit being held in partnership with Norton Healthcare — also explores why inequities persist, looking at issues such as income, education, environment, stress, access to health care and discrimination. The findings reflect the city's first health equity report, released in 2011.

"There are great differences based on class and income and where you live," said Bill Wagner, executive director of Family Health Centers, a network of clinics serving many low-income patients. "It determines how long you'll live and how healthy you will be."

But he said change is possible — both around the community and individually.

Larry Fugett, a 63-year-old West Louisville resident, said he once counted himself among the unhealthy, and knew he was putting his life at risk.

A smoker since age 21, his pack-a-day habit caused him to wheeze constantly and worsened his bronchitis and high blood pressure. So he decided to quit in January with help of a health department tobacco cessation class. In recent weeks, his blood pressure has started to drop, and he plans to work on improving his diet and losing weight.

"I feel better," said the retired concrete worker and grandfather of five. "I want to be here for the grandchildren."

Picture of inequality

The equity report shows that Louisville's minority population has been growing.

From 2000 to 2010, the number of white residents grew less than half a percent to nearly 539,000. During the same period, Louisville's African-American population grew 17.8 percent, to 154,000; and the city's Hispanic/Latino population grew by 163 percent, to 32,500.

But the report says "there is still considerable geographic separation, with racial and ethnic groups typically concentrated in certain regions of Louisville."

Life expectancy and other health indicators follow a similar pattern, with "obvious geographical clustering of lower life expectancies concentrated around the downtown and western portion" of the city.

For example, the average life span in the Portland neighborhood is 72 years, and the average in the California-Parkland neighborhood is 71.4 years. Citywide, the life expectancies range from 69.8 for black men to 79.3 for white women.

Rates of disease are also far worse in neighborhoods with low life spans, and for minorities. For example, 8.1 percent of white residents reported having diabetes in 2011, compared with 13.4 percent of black residents and 10.3 percent of Hispanic residents.

Geographically, Portland's diabetes death rate was more than three times higher than Jeffersontown's rate, and its heart-disease death rate was more than twice as high.

Suicide and homicide death rates also varied widely by neighborhood (based on the victim's residence), with the highest homicide rate in the Butchertown-Clifton-Crescent Hill area and the highest suicide rate in Chickasaw-Shawnee. The age-adjusted homicide and suicide death rates are based on 2006-10 death records and 2010 census population.

The report calls poverty "one of the strongest social determinants of health," limiting access to good food, health care, education and other ingredients of a healthy life.

The percentage of adults under 65 living in poverty varies from 4 percent in Floyds Fork to 52.7 percent in the Russell neighborhood, while unemployment ranges from 4.4 percent in St. Matthews to 30.2 percent in Russell.

The report says economic problems, plus living in areas of high crime among a high density of vacant homes and environmental hazards, add up to diminished health.

"Health is based on so many different things. It's based on socio-economics, lifestyle," said Dr. Steve Hester, chief medical officer for Norton Healthcare. "How do we educate the population about these things and what they can do to improve their health?"

'Seeds of change'

Community health leaders said progress will take a concerted effort.

"We need to come up with solutions to help all of us," Arno said. "I don't want this to be a report on a shelf, but a tool for everyone."

Arno said agencies dealing with issues such as housing, education and jobs all need to consider health as the city government adopts a "health in all policies" approach.

"The report contains a lot of valuable data that all sectors of our community can use to make Louisville a healthier city," Mayor Greg Fischer said. "We have made progress in some areas, but there is still much work ahead and I'm grateful that we have the data to guide us. My team and the broader community work every day to create healthy neighborhoods for all."

City officials pointed to a number of recent and ongoing efforts, such as outreach to get residents signed up for Medicaid and private insurance under the Affordable Care Act, launching a program to provide healthy produce at corner stores in so-called "food deserts," and providing community groups in vulnerable areas with Healthy Hometown mini-grants to encourage healthy habits, among others.

Officials said programs are covered in different budget areas so it's not immediately clear how much the city has spent on such efforts.

Hester admitted that addressing entrenched social issues will be difficult, but he said businesses moving to west Louisville could provide more jobs, and community efforts to improve education could help long term.

He said hospital systems like his can do their part by continuing to push wellness and sponsoring efforts such as the health summit, which includes among its speakers former U.S. Surgeon General Dr. David Satcher.

Wagner, whose clinics are in some of the most unhealthy neighborhoods, said improving access to health care is only "a Band-Aid," since some research shows it accounts for about 10 percent of the factors determining health. Dealing with the more stubborn and complicated problems, such as poverty and unemployment, is paramount, he said, and one step is to make individuals aware of resources that could help.

Another crucial step is to address individual habits such as inactivity, poor diet and smoking, he said, adding that Family Health Centers clinics offer exercise classes, smoking cessation and education to help consumers eat better.

"I'm encouraged," Wagner said. "We're beginning to see some seeds of change. Is it enough? No. But it's a start."

Priscilla Ewing, a 61-year-old African American who lives in the Chickasaw-Shawnee area, said she decided to make a change in her own life seven years ago — when she smoked two packs of cigarettes a day and had borderline high-blood pressure.

"I coughed incessantly," she said. "I was overweight and couldn't walk from here to there."

She said she felt the environment encouraged unhealthy behavior, with ever-present advertisements for tobacco and alcohol, and beer, cigarettes and snacks much easier to find in neighborhood stores than fresh produce.

"We as African Americans are targeted in every way," she said. "We're fighting a losing battle."

But she said she took her health into her own hands, attended a smoking cessation class with her husband at Family Health Centers-Portland, and later became a class instructor. Since then, she's adopted a vegan diet and makes sure to exercise regularly.

"Now, we are healthier than we were in our 20s and 30s," she said. "It doesn't come all in one day. But you can do it one step at a time."

Reporter Laura Ungar can be reached at (502)582-7190. Follow her on Twitter @lauraungarcj.

By the numbers

11.2 years

— Life-expectancy gap between St. Matthews and Downtown-Old Louisville-University

69.8

— Average life span of a black man in Louisville

79.3

— Average life span of a white woman in Louisville

3.6 times

— Diabetes death rate in Portland compared with Jeffersontown

52.7 percent

— Proportion of adults 18-64 living in poverty in the Russell neighborhood

Health Equity Summit

Thurday, 7:30 a.m. to noon at the Muhammad Ali Center, 144 North Sixth St. People who want to attend can register by calling 629-1234, or show up at the Ali Center and they will be admitted.

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1gNzVct