More Video...

The Latest on the 2016 presidential caucuses in Kansas. (all times Central Standard Time):

12:15 p.m.

Kansas Republicans participating in the state's presidential caucuses are split over whether they could support Donald Trump if he is the party's nominee.

Frank Doan, a 59-year-old electrical sales representative from Olathe, voted for Texas Sen. Ted Cruz at the Olathe South High School caucus site. He doesn't believe even Trump knows what his views really are.

But he said he would vote for Trump if Trump is the GOP nominee because a Democratic president would be worse.

Michelle Dombrosky voted for Florida Sen. Marco Rubio, and the 48-year-old fitness center worker from Olathe said she would back the eventual GOP nominee.

But Matt Murphy said he would "absolutely not" vote for Trump. The 30-year-old cigar company sales representative from Gardner and his wife voted for Cruz and don't trust Trump.

11:25 a.m.

A top Kansas Republican Party official says presidential caucus sites across the state are reporting heavy turnout.

State GOP Executive Director Clay Barker said Saturday that even small counties are reporting more voters than they had anticipated. The party printed up 60,000 paper ballots in case the turnout was about twice as large as it was in 2008 and 2012.

But the party has told workers at the 103 caucus sites to be prepared to copy extra ballots.

Hundreds of Republicans waited in line at Olathe South High School in the Kansas City area, and delays in checking computer lists of registered voters were being reported. Barker said at the caucus site in Topeka, extra volunteers began checking paper registration lists.

10:50 a.m.

Donald Trump told thousands of supporters at a Wichita rally Saturday that he had turned his plane around to come to Kansas in advance of the Republican presidential caucuses.

Trump had been scheduled to attend an annual gathering of national conservative leaders but he backed out to visit Kansas on caucus day.

The GOP front-runner said he would focus on getting rid of the Affordable Care Act, reinvigorating the military and building a wall on the U.S.-Mexico border.

About 100 protesters were outside the rally venue.

10:15 a.m. CST

Kansas Congressman Kevin Yoder isn't saying who he's voting for in the state's Republican presidential primaries but he's promising to support the eventual GOP nominee.

Yoder said Saturday that his pledge includes Donald Trump.

Yoder visited the GOP caucus site at Olathe South High School in suburban Kansas City, part of his 3rd Congressional District. Several hundred participants had gathered as voting opened Saturday morning.

He said he wasn't publicly endorsing a candidate because people are tired of hearing politicians tell them how to vote. Other elected officials and conservative activists were split between Texas Sen. Ted Cruz and Florida Sen. Marco Rubio.

Yoder said Trump is bringing new voters into the GOP.

He said, "We're a broad-tent party. We've got room for everyone."

9:50 a.m.

Thirty-two-year-old Eduardo Aguilar drove two hours to attend the Trump rally in Wichita to see the candidate himself. He plans to support whoever the eventual GOP nominee is but is leaning toward voting for Trump during Saturday's presidential caucus.

Aguilar, a soldier from Fort Riley who is Hispanic, says he will be turned off if the Trump rally is some kind of a Klan meeting. But he has lived in Texas and Mexico and supports stricter immigration laws, and he also will consider issues such as opposition to abortion and support for gun rights.

He said the country should elect "anybody but Hillary."

Retired aircraft worker 68-year-old Dennis Perrine also was still trying to decide between Trump and Cruz. He says he's looking for a candidate who will do what he says he's going to do.

Regardless of the nominee, Perrine plans to vote Republican in the general election.

1:20 a.m.

Both Democrats and Republicans are wondering whether their presidential caucuses in Kansas will be rocky soils for their front-runners.

GOP leader Donald Trump was making an appearance Saturday in Wichita just before voting started there. Challenger and Texas Sen. Ted Cruz also was visiting and Florida Sen. Marco Rubio had three campaign events Friday.

In Kansas, the billionaire businessman seemed more the insurgent. Most of the state GOP's top elected officials and rank-and-file activists also were split between Cruz and Rubio.

Clinton had a different challenge. The former U.S. secretary of state is the choice of former Gov. Kathleen Sebelius and other state party establishment figures.

Her supporters worried about a surge of new voters and energized progressives boosting Vermont Sen. Bernie Sanders' challenge.