EAGAN, MN and LAKE ZURICH, IL--(Marketwired - February 16, 2016) - Jump Technologies, Inc., an innovative software company with solutions that improve supply management and Champion Medical Technologies, a privately held healthcare information technology company focused on medical device management, today announced a partnership to help health systems improve tracking and control of supplies, implantable devices and tissue throughout their organizations. With supply chain costs as the second largest expense for healthcare systems, and the Affordable Care Act creating financial incentives to improve the quality of care at provider organizations, improving supply and device management presents a significant savings opportunity.

Today, however, there remain two significant problems in the areas of supply and device management:

With little visibility, supplies and devices can be lost, sit on shelves and expire, or are otherwise wasted, costing hospitals millions of dollars each year.

Hospitals are burdened with limited functionality offered by legacy technology, including Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) or materials systems and Electronic Health Records (EHR). Often these systems have limited capabilities in tracking data elements such as Unique Device Identification (UDI) and Global Trade Identification Number (GTINs); efficiently leveraging mobile technology; and in managing device and tissue recalls.

With gaps in current products and processes, hospitals miss significant cost saving and patient safety opportunities.

Champion Medical Technologies and Jump Technologies are partnering to help provider organizations improve the management of all supplies and implantables, including devices and tissue, used throughout a healthcare system. These organizations offer solutions that bridge gaps in legacy systems, increasing functionality with best-of-breed advances in inventory management, data tracking and reporting capabilities.

Working together, Champion Medical and JumpTech will help healthcare systems gain visibility to all supplies used throughout an organization, regardless of the type of product used or where care is delivered. End-to-end visibility across the entire spectrum of supplies and devices will continually improve inventory management and surrounding business processes, reducing costs, enhancing patient safety and helping ensure regulatory compliance. Solutions from both companies provide efficient tracking and management of all types of supplies -- from disposable and consumable products to implantable devices and tissue -- stored and consumed throughout a healthcare system.

"Champion is delivering new tools to help hospitals with automated tissue and implant management, empowering care givers with the information they need to drive down operating costs, improve regulatory compliance and increase patient safety and overall care," said Peter Casady, CEO, Champion Medical Technologies. "Our partnership with JumpTech will help deliver a more comprehensive solution for hospital executives who need better visibility to what's really being used, where and at what rate. Combined, we can deliver essential information for better supply planning and cost management."

"JumpTech is reducing supply management costs for provider organizations with proven cloud-based mobile technology," said John Freund, CEO, Jump Technologies, Inc. "At the same time, Champion tools are capturing, documenting and sharing medical implant data between EHR and ERP systems, uniquely empowering hospitals with information they need to drive down operating costs, improve regulatory compliance and increase patient safety. Together, we can help provider organizations gain greater visibility to supplies used throughout their system."

About Jump Technologies, Inc.

JumpTech is the first provider of cloud-based supply management solutions for hospitals and healthcare organizations that are easy to implement, adopt and manage, using mobile devices such as tablets and smart phones. Eliminating extensive investments in hardware, implementation time and training, solutions from JumpTech are guaranteed to deliver immediate return on investment. Easy-to-use interfaces and accurate, timely reports help drive compliance, reduce training, save hard dollars and reduce labor. For more information, visit www.jumptech.com or call (888) 373-7226. Follow the company on LinkedIn, Twitter @JumpTechNews and on Google+ at google.com/+JumptechInc.

About Champion Medical Technologies

Champion Medical Technologies is a privately held, healthcare information technology company and leader in medical device management systems (MDMS) for hospitals, with a particular focus on implantable devices. Champion's flagship system UDITracker® captures, documents and shares medical implant information between patient care and supply chain information systems, empowering hospitals with the insights they need to increase patient safety and drive down operating costs. For more information, visit www.ChampionMT.com, call (866) 803-3720 or email sales@championmt.com.

Image Available: http://www.marketwire.com/library/MwGo/2016/2/11/11G082629/Images/Champion_Medical-bde8fc89d271822b860fdf340f6a0d58.JPG