By BEE SHAPIRO The New York Times

On a frigid Saturday morning, Evren Dogancay, 36, and 15 other women clad in stretchy pants, sports bras and shoulder-baring loose tops like those on "So You Think You Can Dance" stood under a giant disco ball at AKT In Motion, a new workout studio in New York.

Led by Anna Kaiser, the owner, a Lilliputian but muscular blonde who wore gold hoop earrings and a lime green bandanna, they ground their hips and flailed their arms like Britney Spears.

"You've got an audience!" Kaiser shouted into her headpiece microphone as Rihanna blared. "Feel the music!"

Dogancay, the buying director for the boutique Kirna Zabête, has been taking AKT classes for four months, something of a feat considering that she was, until recently, a daily smoker whose workouts consisted of runs for coffee.

"It actually feels like you're dancing and not just for fitness," she said. "Time flies."

A mild case of dance cardio fever appears to be spreading, years after it first achieved popularity in the Richard Simmons era.

Aside from AKT, Body by Simone, led by Simone De La Rue, is opening another location in Los Angeles in April. And there is perhaps the mother of all current dance cardio classes, at Tracy Anderson's studio, where clients pay $900 a month and where all the teachers named above have worked at some point.

If there are any real threats to Anderson's dancing-queen throne, they are De La Rue, whose fans include Grace Hightower De Niro, Naomi Watts, Anne Hathaway and Camila Alves, and Kaiser, known for whittling the frames of Kelly Ripa, Sarah Jessica Parker and Shakira. (Both also charge $35 per class.)

A former ballerina, De La Rue, 39, noted dryly that dance cardio "is oversaturated in New York right now."

"I'm kind of happy and feel lucky that I was the second one," she added, considering Anderson to be the first. But she was also quick to distinguish herself from her predecessor.

"My classes, I try to mix it up," she said. "It's not just repeating and repeating."

Kaiser, 34, leads classes jammed with women seeking physiques like that of Ripa, who has promoted AKT on "Live With Kelly and Michael."

"It's about getting sleek and toned," Dogancay said. "I don't want any bulk."

A former professional dancer who performed with troupes in New York and toured with "Fame" and Disney's "Enchanted," Kaiser is a stickler for regimented training and requires all her teachers to have certifications from the National Academy of Sports Medicine, a detail that distinguishes her from many others, including Anderson's, she said.