Topics: Andrea Mitchell, Benghazi, Editor's Picks, elijah cummings, Fox News, Hillary Clinton, Mike Pompeo, trey gowdy, News, Politics News

Early in October, Trey Gowdy, the notorious chairman of the House select-committee investigating Benghazi, sent a letter to Elijah Cummings, the ranking Democrat on the committee, accusing Hillary Clinton of sending an email containing the name of a highly classified CIA source. The email was allegedly forwarded by Clinton to someone on her staff.

If you automatically assumed the story would end up being a great big nothingburger, not unlike nearly everything else the GOP has conjured recently, you assumed correctly. It turns out the CIA investigated the email and determined there wasn’t any classified information revealed after all, a fact which Cummings fired back to Gowdy in a Sunday letter to the controversial chairman.

Cummings wrote, “The CIA [on Saturday] informed both the Republican and Democratic staffs of the Select Committee that they do not consider the information you highlighted in your letter to be classified. Specifically, the CIA confirmed that the State Department consulted with the CIA on this production, the CIA reviewed these documents, and the CIA made no redactions to protect classified information.”

Whoops. But it gets worse for Gowdy.

The tenacious chairman outed the name of the CIA agent in his response to Cummings. In what was clearly a rookie email mistake, the name of the agent was redacted in the body of the email, yet according to Yahoo! News it wasn’t redacted in the subject-line of the note. In other words, while Clinton may have privately forwarded the not-classified name to an aide, Gowdy publicly revealed the agent’s name while simultaneously accusing Clinton of doing the same. Whoops, again.

Again, there’s really no reason to be surprised that Gowdy’s accusation turned out to be wishful thinking. And, no, Cummings’ request for an apology won’t be answered in kind. The GOP’s business model forbids it. Simply put, the model goes like this: make stuff up and never apologize. The calculus is arguably the most cynical brand of politics imaginable. Knowing how a lie can travel halfway around the world before the truth gets its pants on, the GOP has been remarkably successful at unapologetically injecting total hooey into the discourse, only for it to metastasize as reality in spite of countless fact-checks to the contrary.

While the Republican frontrunners, including and especially Jeb Bush, continue to spread falsehoods about the September 11, 2012 Benghazi attacks, there continues to be a steady stream of debunkery that previously or, in some cases, has concurrently accompanied the lies. For instance, on the same telecast, NBC News’ Andrea Mitchell debunked Kansas Republican Mike Pompeo’s claims about the relationship between Hillary Clinton and one of her longtime advisers, Sidney Blumenthal.

POMPEO: Well, we have focused on the central failure. We have focused on the security issues. And we will continue, you’ll see lots of questions about that on Thursday. But let me speak to Mr. Blumenthal. Because directly to the security issue, we see now that former Secretary Clinton relied on Mr. Blumenthal for most of her intelligence. That if she wants to rely– MITCHELL: That is factually not true. POMPEO: No, it is absolutely true. MITCHELL: Relied on Mr. Blumenthal for most of her intelligence? POMPEO: Ms. Mitchell, take a look at the email trails and you will see– MITCHELL: That’s just — I cover the State Department. That is just factually not correct.

Mitchell gets an “A” for effort, but it’s not like it matters to anyone inside the GOP bubble where facts are irrelevant. As long as any junior congressman can invoke the far-right shibboleths “Benghazi,” or “Planned Parenthood,” or “Obamacare,” they continue to score points with the base despite the reality that none of these words mean what they think they mean.