Staff and supporters of Riverwood Healthcare Center held their 68th annual meeting March 17 at the 40 Club Banquet Center in Aitkin. The news was good and strong community support continues, according to those who spoke at the meeting, including administrators, staff and representatives of Riverwood Healthcare Auxiliary and Riverwood Healthcare Foundation.

Chief Executive Officer Chad Cooper welcomed attendees, saying in the annual report he presented, “Riverwood continues to strengthen its services with advanced medicine to meet the health care needs of the communities we serve in Aitkin County and the Garrison and Mille Lacs area.”

He highlighted surveys that showed patient and staff satisfaction continuing to increase and said advanced technology and innovative treatments are advancing patient care. He said the facility has had good success with recruitment, especially with regard to nurse practitioners. An additional family practice physician will join the clinic later this summer and efforts continue to recruit two additional family physicians beyond that. Cooper also added two new orthopedic surgeons will be joining Dr. Erik Severson later this year, as well.

Currently, Cooper said, the staff is working hard on a transition to a more advanced electronic medical records system called

Excellian, an Epic software product that is part of the most widely used electronic medical record system in the United States. Cooper said staff made the transition successful and he formally thanked every Riverwood provider and staff member who has worked to make that possible.

(The transition is expected to be complete April 1 and more details will be provided in a coming article in the Indpendent Age.)

“At the end of the day, it will be well worth the time and energy,” said Cooper.

Auxiliary President Cathy Wilke highlighted the organization’s contributions throughout the year that included two $1,500 scholarships (one each to Aitkin and McGregor seniors) and the payoff of a $100,000 pledge to the hospital’s Better Together Campaign, made in five years instead of 10.

Riverwood Foundation Chair Henry Brucker highlighted contributions made in the past year from donors (including more than 40 percent of staff), local businesses, individuals, volunteers and the community.

“I’m so proud of the all the contributions made in the past year,” Brucker concluded.

Director of Quality and Risk Jayne Anderson echoed Brucker’s expression of pride saying, “The quality of the work of the staff shows in the surveys.”

Anderson introduced Social Worker Val Thompson who highlighted a bedside rounding program launched last fall, enhancing patient and family-centered care. Each day, Thompson explained, team members (including nurses, therapists, pharmacists, dietitians, financial counselors, social workers and family members) meet in the patient’s hospital room. The patient and family members are encouraged to participate in a review of the plan for the day.

Chief of Medical Staff Joselito Burgos presented highlights for the medical staff including the addition of four new providers. He recognized Nurse Practitioner Rebecca May, retiring soon after 26 years at Riverwood.

“Her long-term dedication and expertise in treating patients was a huge asset to the community and to Riverwood,” said Burgos.

Burgos also reported a new 80-slice CT scanner installed in the radiology department this year, saying, “We appreciate the generous donor support from our community that helped support the scanner project.”

“Riverwood’s clinical delivery model is changing,” Burgos said, adding, “Along with other health systems locally and nationally, we are proceeding with the implementation of patient-centered medical home, a coordinated team approach.”

He explained the focus is on wellness and disease prevention while placing control choices in the hands of the patient.

“Together with other Riverwood initiatives, we are working to achieve five-star patient care,” Burgos concluded.

Chief Financial Officer Casey Johnson was the final presenter. In answer for a question he’s frequently asked, he said, the effect of the Affordable Care Act has been neutral for Riverwood.

“2014 and 2015 were great years, driven by real growth in volume but 2016 may be a bit of a transitional year,” Johnson said, adding, “We did not see as severe cuts in reimbursement rates as expected … We’re cautiously optimistic that may continue.”

He said Riverwood’s cash position was very positive, showing steady growth last year.

Riverwood Governing Board of Directors Chair Mike Paulbeck conducted the business portion of the meeting including election of directors. Seats held by Christine Bright, Tim Dirks, Tom Lundberg and Kathleen Ryan were up for election. All four were unanimously re-elected to serve additional three-year terms.