A Fort Myers pastor gave his first-hand account of a Thanksgiving Day murder as police continue to hunt for suspects.

The victim was identified Friday as 24-year-old Samson Morency.

Fort Myers Pastor Maurice Gilmore was inside his home on Barden Street when he heard the unmistakable sound of gunfire.

"It sounded like something you would try to duck, and try and hide being hit by," Gilmore said. "It was something that was capable of doing destruction."

He found out first-hand that he was right, and he watched as Morency took his last breath, and then he tried to comfort a grieving woman on the scene.

"I saw a kid lying there. The young lady was very distraught and screaming ... I took ahold of her, then she kinda just collapsed in my arms. I just tried to encourage her to hold on."

Her identity remains a mystery, but Gilmore believes she had a close connection to the victim.

It's a moment Gilmore said will live forever in his memory.

"At the time, I thought I was gonna just lose myself, but I tried to hold it together for her."

Police are still looking for Morency's killer. They said the car used in the drive-by was a 1980's to early 90's black two-door Chevrolet Monte Carlo, recognizable by its red pinstripes, stock wheels and lack of tinted windows.

Anyone with information is asked to call Detective Al Antonini of the Fort Myers Police Department at (239) 321-7700, or Crime Stoppers at 1-800-780-TIPS or text message C-R-I-M-E-S (274637) Keyword FMPD. Tipsters can remain anonymous.

Fort Myers Councilman Johnny Streets said Thursday the home where the killing happened belongs to his nephew, a Lee County deputy.

Neighbors said they watched the family put shutters over the windows of the home shortly after the shooting.

Many in the neighborhood said Morency was dating someone who lived there and said there was a gathering outside the home before the shooting.

They don't believe Morency was the target, but like police, are fed up with the violence and hope someone comes forward.

"The community is tired of falling for anything, seeing our young men die, it's time out for it," Gilmore said.