Almost half of Wyden’s top 20 donors are in the health care industry. Suddenly, everybody loves Wyden

Leadership has its privileges.

Since taking over the Senate Finance Committee earlier this year, Ron Wyden has not only quickly become one of the chamber’s most influential members. He’s also raising a lot more cash.

Story Continued Below

Fundraising records show he’s raised $1.7 million so far this election cycle, which is more than twice as much as during the previous two years and 70 percent more than he raised in the same period during his previous term in office.

His money increasingly comes from across the country, with health care interests that have little connection to Oregon crowding the list of his top donors. Wyden’s panel has oversight over some of the hottest issues in Congress, from health care to taxes to transportation financing.

( PHOTOS: Who’s leaving Congress?)

“There’s billions upon billions at stake, so everybody wants to make sure Ron Wyden is their new best friend,” said Lee Drutman, a senior fellow at the Sunlight Foundation.

Almost half of Wyden’s top 20 donors are in the health care industry, according to data compiled by the Center for Responsive Politics — a reflection of his panel’s broad authority over Medicare, Obamacare and Medicaid, not to mention the tax provisions that subsidize insurance coverage for millions of Americans.

( Sign up for POLITICO’s Morning Tax tip sheet)

Blue Cross/Blue Shield leads the list of top 20 donors, which also includes biotech giant Amgen, American Health Care Association, Adventist Health Systems, DaVita HealthCare Partners and Hospital Hermanos Meléndez, a hospital in Puerto Rico.

A number of names have also pushed onto the list, the data show, including Anheuser-Busch InBev, Darden Restaurants — which includes Olive Garden and Red Lobster — as well as Dow Chemical and the International Brotherhood of Electrical Workers.

Other big donors who’ve previously supported the Oregon Democrat include Google, Berkshire Hathaway and Massachusetts Mutual Life Insurance.

Many of the donations came as lawmakers debated postponing scheduled cuts in government payments to doctors. For many health care companies, the worrisome question was where senators would find the savings to prevent the bill from adding to the deficit. In the latest round, they ultimately cut payments to skilled nursing facilities, clinical labs and others.

( Also on POLITICO: Full finance policy coverage)

Many also coincided with the panel’s consideration reviving a host of temporary tax breaks, including special depreciation write-offs for restaurants, provisions making it easier for multinational companies to move money among foreign subsidiaries and a tax credit for businesses’ research programs.

Wyden spokesman Keith Chu declined comment.

Few lawmakers have become more influential in the 113th Congress more quickly.

Just a couple years ago, Wyden was a backbencher, patiently waiting to climb the ladder of seniority. He finally took over the Energy and Natural Resources Committee last January, the first panel Wyden had run in what by then had been a 17-year Senate career.

A wave of retirements among his colleagues then cleared the way for him to take over the Finance panel, arguably the chamber’s most powerful committee, with jurisdiction also over pensions, trade and myriad other issues.

“The Finance Committee in general is a cash cow when it comes to campaign contributions,” said Viveca Novak, a spokeswoman for the Center for Responsive Politics. “And being chairman of the committee, that certainly packs a punch because he has so much influence over a lot of issues.”

Anheuser-Busch InBev is concerned about alcohol excise taxes as well as tax reform, according to its lobbying disclosure reports. Darden Restaurants is focused on a package of expired tax breaks that includes more generous depreciation rules for restaurants. Dow Chemical lobbied on international tax issues.

Restaurants in general are also staunchly opposed to the provision in Obamacare that requires employers to offer health insurance to their workers if they work 30 hours per week or pay a penalty.

Wyden’s quick ascent left many on K Street scrambling to get to know a lawmaker they had often ignored, said one lobbyist.

“A lot of them didn’t even know him,” the lobbyist said. “Now people are trying to get to know him, to get their names in front of him.”

Wyden’s newly found influence is only beginning to become evident by his campaign contributions. It wasn’t clear he would take over the panel until December, and he did not formally receive the gavel until February while the latest campaign fundraising records run only through March.

And it’s clear he has a long way to go to replicate the fundraising prowess of his predecessor, Max Baucus, who left to become ambassador to China. Baucus parlayed his chairmanship, as well as good relations with the business community and a constellation of former aides on K Street, into a formidable money-raising operation.

But Wyden doesn’t face reelection until 2016, and senators’ fundraising is highly cyclical, typically dipping after an election before ramping up again as they prepare to again face voters.