On Media Blog Archives Select Date… December, 2015 November, 2015 October, 2015 September, 2015 August, 2015 July, 2015 June, 2015 May, 2015 April, 2015 March, 2015 February, 2015 January, 2015

Ft. Worth Star-Telegram apologizes for Obamacare story

The Ft. Worth Star-Telegram's executive editor apologized to readers this week for a story it published in November about the trouble people were having getting affordable insurance under the Affordable Care Act.

In a column teased on Monday's front page, Jim Witt said the reporter and editor of the story did not do their due diligence to discover the background of the people profiled in the story, some of whom turned out to have tea party connections and were actually able to obtain more affordable coverage through Obamacare.

"Knowing the background of the person quoted can give readers important clues about someone’s motives, but you didn’t learn that from reading our story, because we neglected to investigate the background of the people we quoted. That’s something you learn to do in Journalism 101. I remember my old professor saying, 'If your mother says she loves you … check it out,'" Witt wrote.

The apology came after healthinsurance.org blogger Maggie Mahar wrote a two-part post criticizing the Star-Telegram for doing what she considered a poor job of fact-checking the story before publication.

Though Witt said he disagrees with Mahar's claim that the article was meant to make it "appear that we were part of a conspiracy to paint the Affordable Care Act in a negative light," he conceded that "we did not do our job completely and therefore let our readers down."

Witt also cites the myriad of negative stories about Obamacare in the media as a reason to why the story did not seem out of the ordinary.

"When the story ran, the media were full of stories detailing the myriad problems with the website being used to sign up, so this story didn’t strike the reporter’s editor, Steve Kaskovich, as out of the ordinary," Witt said. "We didn’t have our radar turned on strong enough to spot the hole."

Hadas Gold is a reporter at Politico.