Recent ABC Program winners are, back row, left to tight, Steven Bottenfield (Harrison School), Ryan Mason (Cañon City Middle School), Trinity Gallo (Mountain View Core Knowledge School), and Bianca Gallo (MVCKS); middle row, left to right, Lindsey Woolsey (CCMS) and Jaidyn Trujillo (MVCKS); and front row, left to right, Dominic Bosco (Harrison School), Noah Langston (Harrison School), Kameron Atwood (Lincoln School of Science & Technology), and Samantha DeVries-Voeglein (Cotopaxi School). Not pictured are Jacob Fox and Mason McClaugherty, both of Cañon City High School. (Courtesy Photo)

Wrapping up the 14th year of the ABC Program, Sunflower Bank donated $7,713 to schools and students in the Cañon City area. Add this amount to the previous years' donations and the total since the ABC Program's inception in 2001 is an impressive $80,829 for this area.

More than 300 schools across Kansas, Colorado and Missouri participated in the ABC Program this year, tallying $113,945 in donations from Sunflower Bank. Sunflower Bank has written checks totaling $934,238 to schools and students across the three-state region since 2001.

"We're excited to be able to donate over $7,700 to the schools and students in our bank's communities," said Larry Stringari, Market President Regional Director. "As we see budgets being cut, and technology driving expenses up, we realize how important it is to invest in our schools and the next great leaders of our communities. We're proud of our amazing customers who partner with us and help us make a positive impact for our youth."

During the course of the ABC Program, schools and students benefit in three ways:

1. We engage students by drawing five winners from each Sunflower Bank location to receive $10 for every A on their report card, with a matching donation designated for their participating school.

Advertisement

2. We encourage our customers to designate a participating school which receives 5¢ for every credit transaction completed with their debit card.

3. Additionally, new customers participate by opening a qualifying checking account to earn $50 with a matching donation going to a participating school.

Through this program and others, Sunflower Bank and its local teams demonstrate their commitment to the communities they serve and their mission of "Bringing out the best in the lives we touch...Creating Possibility."