The



The bill was promoted as a way to preserve access for patients who may otherwise not be able to see a physician after previously uninsured state residents gain coverage through the Experienced nurse practitioners in the state of New York will no longer need to be formally tethered to a physician in order to practice medicine starting Jan. 1.The Nurse Practitioners Modernization Act was introduced last year and was included in the state budget enacted last week. The law will allow NPs with more than 3,600 hours of experience to practice without a written practice agreement with a supervising physician. It does not expand NPs' scope of practice or allow them to provide additional services, according to the 3,500-member Nurse Practitioner Association New York State.The bill was promoted as a way to preserve access for patients who may otherwise not be able to see a physician after previously uninsured state residents gain coverage through the health insurance exchange or expanded Medicaid





Seventeen states and the District of Columbia no longer require NPs to have a written practice agreement with a physician. The state of Nebraska's unicameral Legislature is considering a



Proponents of the patient-centered medical home have long advocated for NPs and physician assistants to “practice to the top of their license” to ensure the effectiveness and efficiency of team-based care.



But



Elizabeth Dears, Medical Society of the State of New York senior vice president and chief legislative counsel, spoke against the bill during a



Dears testified that the “MSSNY strongly opposes the independent practice of a nurse practitioner without a collaborative agreement with a physician.” She also cited studies that showed that increasing the use of NPs does not lower costs as the patients of NPs tended to have higher rates of medical service utilization. “Given the education, training and advanced certification of NPs, written collaborative agreements no longer serves a clinical purpose,” stated a memo on the State Assembly website . “Instead, the requirement serves as a barrier to practice and a disincentive to advanced certification, and it restricts access to healthcare for individuals and families in underserved areas of the state.”Seventeen states and the District of Columbia no longer require NPs to have a written practice agreement with a physician. The state of Nebraska's unicameral Legislature is considering a similar bill Proponents of the patient-centered medical home have long advocated for NPs and physician assistants to “practice to the top of their license” to ensure the effectiveness and efficiency of team-based care.But physician associations have pushed back hard against granting NPs and PAs further degrees of independence or scope of practice. They also argue that granting more independence will not increase access because NPs and PAs are no more likely to practice in underserved areas than doctors.Elizabeth Dears, Medical Society of the State of New York senior vice president and chief legislative counsel, spoke against the bill during a legislative hearing (PDF) Dears testified that the “MSSNY strongly opposes the independent practice of a nurse practitioner without a collaborative agreement with a physician.” She also cited studies that showed that increasing the use of NPs does not lower costs as the patients of NPs tended to have higher rates of medical service utilization.

Company payments to docs, teaching hospitals becomes public Sept. 30