ER centers popping up on busy street corners and in neighborhoods has become quite a new trend in the Hub City.

Although with Lubbock’s university health system and large medical presence, the addition of these smaller emergency centers have proven to cut ER time significantly. While the average ER wait time at a hospital may be one to two hours, patients can be seen at one of these newer centers within minutes.

“These new smaller ER are cutting that emergency wait time significantly,” said Dr. Lisa Gittner, Assistant Professor of Political Science at Texas Tech University and Assistant Professor of Public Health at Texas Tech University Health Sciences Center.

“We're the only level one trauma center between Dallas and Albuquerque, and so for emergent-ER kind of things, Lubbock is really where you need to come. However, to get to Lubbock sometimes especially with high winds and what's going on, it can be very very difficult to get people to Lubbock in that critical window for care.”

It was a short wait time that made a huge difference for Lubbock resident, Brian Hambright, who one night woke up in excruciating pain from lacerations caused by radiation. He knew he could not withstand the pain a minute more.

“I just got up 2, 3 in the morning I say to my wife, 'I can't take this anymore,' and actually here's a 76-year-old grown man crying.”

That’s when he and his wife found West Texas ER, a locally owned emergency center located off of Milwaukee. He was admitted into a room within three minutes.

“It was just so fast, it was like they knew the patient was coming,” said Hambright.

West Texas ER is one of the several newer ER centers that have been built in town in the last two years. They are in the process of building a second location off of Quaker.

“This ER is locally owned by two physicians that live and work here. All the physicians tahat wor in this emergency room live in Lubbock, and most of us have lived here for quite some time,” said Dr. Rick Peck, M.D. with West Texas ER. “That along with our staff creates more of a family-type emergency room that people are very comfortable with when they come in.”

Another new, locally owned ER center, Star ER, is currently being built off of Indiana. Like West Texas ER, the physicians who will run and operate the facility are from Lubbock, and even attended Texas Tech.

“What Star E.R. is going to be all about is accessibility,” said Ryan Lewis, M.D. of Star E.R. “That, and we want our patients to know from when they walk in how transparent we will be about our prices.”

“Patients will be seen quickly, they’ll get fast, efficient care,” said Jon Skelton, M.D. Chief Medical Officer of Star E.R.

However, while wait time will be shorter, you do not exactly cut your cost by going to a smaller ER.

“There is a financial incentive for emergency room doctors to go out in their own and open these pop up emergency rooms. Reason is, if they form this consortium, the doctors get the facilities cost, versus if they’re a doctor in a hospital, the hospital will receive the facilities cost,” said Dr. Gittner.

So, is it safe to say Obamacare plays a significant role here, if at all?

“When the Obamacare measures went into place, they changed some of the reimbursement rates for emergency room facilities versus Urgent Care,” explains Dr. Gittner. “Obamacare has changed things that they can now recover these facility costs. Whereas before, they couldn’t recover facility costs, but now with the new Obamacare statutes, they can.”

Dr. Gittner also suggests, depending on your pain or injury, to carefully decide whether or not to go to an ER versus an urgent care center, as that may also impact how much you spend as well.

“There’s a difference between ERs and urgent care, and many people don’t realize that different. You don’t want to go to an emergency room for a cough, a cold or a sprain or a little bump, you want to go for a true emergency condition,” Dr. Gittner advises. “You want to use Urgent Care for those, because your cost is going to be much lower, and your co-pay will be much lower.”

Although you aren’t getting a price cut by visiting a smaller ER, the shorter wait time and convenience of the next one popping up around your neighborhood may just prove to be well worth it in the long run. As for Hambright, he knows where he is going next time, and the time after that.

“You’re not a number, you’re a human being and they take care of you very well.”