Buy Photo The Brown County Veterans Memorial Complex includes, from left, the Brown County arena, Shopko Hall and the Resch Center. Photo was taken in June 2011. (Photo: File/Press-Gazette Media)Buy Photo

The future of the Brown County Veterans Memorial Arena comes down to three choices: Repair it, replace it or raze it.

That’s a challenging question Brown County officials should answer within the next year.

The arena, 1901 S. Oneida St., Ashwaubenon, is 57 years old, and the adjacent Shopko Hall is 29. They’re owned by Brown County but managed by PMI Entertainment Group, which also manages the Resch Center. Over the years, repairs and maintenance have not kept up with the pace of depreciation. Now the county has an aging arena that some consider an eyesore in the middle of an area that many consider the crown jewel of Brown County.

The arena is in a prime location — next to Lambeau Field, the Green Bay Packers training facility and the 13-year-old Resch Center — and it’s real estate the county should hold on to.

With the Packers’ anticipated development around Lambeau, the county needs to tackle the arena’s future now.

The options as we see them are:

• Repair it. This might be easier said than done as a recent tour of the facilities showed that the refrigeration system, plumbing and concession stands need upgrading; elevators need to be installed; dressing and locker rooms need to be improved; and other structural elements need to be looked at.

The county has to consider whether repairing it is a viable option given the cost and extent of the repairs.

• Raze it. This might seem like a viable option for those who don’t want taxpayer money used on repairs or a new arena. But it leads us to two questions: If you get rid of it, what do you put in its place? What happens to all the events that take place there?

Last year 85 events were held at the arena, according to PMI. The arena had about 100 event days last year, not including the times it was used for hockey practice, and Shopko Hall had 140, PMI President Ken Wachter told Press-Gazette Media last month.

Discarding the arena because of aesthetics doesn’t take into account the utility it provides and the money it brings in.

Will the monster truck shows, the Shrine Circus and other events find venues outside of Brown County?

What would PMI do with the events it sponsors, such as the Wedding Show and WBAY RV & Camping Expo, that are too big to host anywhere else in Brown County?

About half of the people who come here for big shows are from outside of Brown County, Wachter said, and when they’re here they spend money at Green Bay-area hotels, restaurants and stores.

• Replace it.

A new, upgraded arena will cost money, but it will have the potential of bringing in more and bigger events.

The big questions with this option are how much would it cost, how long would it take and how will we pay for it?

State Rep. David Steffen, R-Howard, would like to use excess Lambeau Field sales tax money for dealing with the arena. That’s an intriguing idea and one of many that should be considered.

With the Packers’ development around Lambeau, now is the time to address the arena.

You can’t keep delaying maintenance on the arena, as well as the Resch Center. You will reach a breaking point where the fixes become such a huge financial burden that you consider getting rid of a facility, like the arena, despite the money it pulls in by hosting various events.

Or you can bite the bullet and find a way to finance those costs. Sometimes you have to spend money to make money. This is one of those times.

TELL US WHAT YOU THINK

What should be done with the Brown County Veterans Memorial Arena and Shopko Hall?

Tell us what you would suggest. Send your thoughts for forum@greenbaypressgazette.com and put “Brown County arena” in the subject line. Your comments might be used in a future editorial.

Read or Share this story: http://gbpg.net/1Sdv3Cs