By of the

John R. Hoaglund Jr. was always in motion — from swimming at the University of Wisconsin-Madison, where he was a four-time All American and at final tryouts for the 1952 and 1956 Olympics — to training with early versions of military jets as an officer in the U.S. Air Force in the late 1950s, said his wife, Susan.

He later piloted refueling tankers with the Wisconsin National Guard's 128th Air Refueling Wing and flew his private plane, a Beechcraft Musketeer, on long trips across the U.S. and Canada, she said.

"John nurtured his love of flying all of his life," she said, including active roles in the Waukesha Aviation Club and the Milwaukee Chapter of the Quiet Birdmen aviation club.

His resume on the ground included lawyer, school board member, singer and sailor, as well as husband and father. The couple had three children.

Hoaglund, 81, of Pewaukee, died of cancer Sept. 9.

Known as Jack, Hoaglund had a successful career as a trial lawyer in Milwaukee while he engaged in community service across the Pewaukee area. He was a past president of the Insurance Trial Counsel of Wisconsin, a former state chairman of the Defense Research Institute and a member of the Lawyer-Pilots Bar Association.

He served on the Pewaukee School Board from 1974 to 1981 and was a former president of the Pewaukee Kiwanis Club, where he was given its Hixon award for service. He was a past member of the Pewaukee Yacht Club, Pewaukee Chamber of Commerce and Nagawaukee Men's Golf Club. He also served as an elder with Faith Springs Presbyterian Church.

Later in his law career, Hoaglund went into private practice in Waukesha and Pewaukee, but he frequently returned to Milwaukee to sing.

His wife recalled listening to him sing with the Bel Canto Chorus, the Milwaukee Symphony Chorus and the Milwaukee Choristers over 20 years.

He sang with the Choristers up until last year, when he became ill and no longer had the strength.

Susan Hoaglund accompanied her husband, a former president of the Milwaukee Choristers, on two tours in Europe, including Germany and Italy, with the group.

But he never sang at home.

"He didn't have a solo voice," his wife said.

"Over his years with the Choristers, he ranged from bass to second tenor, which is quite unusual," said Harry Williams of Milwaukee, a friend and fellow singer. "He loved music, and he was a very hard worker."

Williams, himself a former Air Force pilot, praised his friend's variety of accomplishments.

"He was an achiever," Williams said of Hoaglund.

Hoaglund was born in 1933 in Rockford, Ill., where he started swimming. He was recruited to swim at UW-Madison, where he met his future wife, Susan Benn. After graduating with a degree in economics in 1955 and completing Air Force ROTC training, he entered the Air Force and began pilot training.

The couple married in 1957 and Hoaglund was discharged from active Air Force duty in 1959. He then enrolled at UW-Madison law school, where he graduated in 1961.

Susan Hoaglund looks back at 57 years of marriage and describes her husband as modest, ethical, gentle and "a little too laid back."

In addition to his wife, Hoaglund is survived by his three sons: Karl of Hawthorne, Calif.; Eric of Brookfield; and John III of Irvine, Calif.; and five grandchildren.

***

Visitation is scheduled at 1 p.m. Sept. 27 at Krause Funeral Home, 21600 W. Capitol Drive, Brookfield. A memorial service will follow at 4 p.m. In lieu of flowers, the family suggests donations to Milwaukee Choristers, Waukesha Aviation Club, Faith Springs Presbyterian Church or AFS Foundation of Greater Milwaukee.