Topics: Divorce, Editor's Picks, Life stories, Love and Sex, Second Marriages, Travel, Life News

I zipped my backpack shut and checked a fourth time to be sure my passport and plane tickets were in my travel wallet. Once I had, I was finally ready for the next morning’s flight — actually, series of flights — to Southeast Asia. Jeff was approaching the trip slightly differently. My husband’s clothes were still stacked in mounds on the bed next to a travel ukulele and an office worth of electronics, all to be stuffed into a backpack the size of a small sports car.

Jeff and I generally live together in the kind of harmony the Beach Boys would envy, but when it comes to travel the dissonance is ear-splitting. I like to be at the airport hours early, he minutes before the flight attendant slams the cabin door shut. I pack minimally and methodically while Jeff’s philosophy is “If I think I might need it, I’m bringing it.” As I watched Jeff count out two weeks’ worth of underwear, I willed myself not to say anything. Divorce is a terrible way to start our first long trip together.

Long before I started packing, I knew this trip would be very different from the last time I’d visited Southeast Asia almost two decades before. Back then, I traveled a lot. After college, I backpacked around the world for months — occasionally years — at a time. My identity seemed forged by the stamps I collected in my well-worn passport. The boy who’d eventually become my first husband and I would buy cheap tickets, strap on rucksacks containing two changes of clothes, a few extra sets of underwear and a toothbrush, and see the world while staying in hostels or huts without electricity. We hitchhiked through New Zealand, bounced along Indonesian roads in crowded buses jammed next to chickens and rice sacks, glided by outrigger through the Sulu Sea in the Philippines and by freighter through the rough South Pacific in the Cook Islands. We were determined to not only see the world, but to sense it fully, too — to smell, hear, taste and touch it. If there was a border, we needed to cross it.

When that relationship ended after 18 years, so did my travel. Like household goods divvied up in the divorce, I got the stainless steel cutlery and he got the plane tickets. But at the time, I didn’t mind that it wasn’t a part of my life anymore. I told myself it was time I tucked away travel and grew up. I had a daughter to take care of as a single mom with sole custody, so at the time I moved on by not moving and was happy staying where I was, content on our own in Brooklyn. But when a year later I began to feel slightly less content on my own, I decided to try to meet someone.

I met Jeff on my first date in almost 20 years. From the beginning, it felt natural and mature in ways that my marriage never approached. We talked things out; we made decisions together, and much later, when I told Jeff I wanted to try my hand at writing, instead of laughing as my husband had, Jeff offered to take on extra work so I could make a go of it without worrying about where the next meal might come from.

Everything about the relationship was thrilling, not only for me but also for my daughter whom he doted on as if she were his own. All I’d read about relationships led me to be wary, though. If ours was this easy, it couldn’t possibly be real. Instead, I was sure it was like the Nigerian email that occasionally made it past my spam folder, messages with a polite greeting that promised a long lost fortune: highly suspect and too good to be true. But after a couple of years, we married and bought a house out in the country in upstate New York.

Although Jeff had traveled some in the past — he’d lived on a kibbutz for a year after high school and backpacked through Europe after college — it didn’t define him in the way it had for me. We took short trips on vacations and enjoyed them, despite some small philosophical travel differences. Jeff worked hard and saw vacations as a way to relax, while I was generally in explorer mode.

Over the years, I convinced myself that I didn’t miss traveling, yet I found myself frequently reading books set in faraway countries. When friends and family posted vacation photos on Facebook, I’d tell myself living vicariously through them was all I needed. I’d say place names out loud — Vientiane or Botswana — to taste them in my mouth. But, like a dieter who tells herself a picture of chocolate cake is just as satisfying as the real thing, they were tasteless and empty. I’d persuaded myself this was enough. Sometimes it’s easier to talk yourself into believing something rather than wading through psychic muck to find out what really makes you happy because the truth can be frightening. Did I need more out of life than I was getting? Namely to be back on the road again, so to speak. “Don’t go there,” I told myself. I didn’t and so I allowed that part of me to get lost. I didn’t even realize it was missing. I stashed away what I thought of as my old life in a box in the far corner of my subconscious.

Travel became something from my youth, like wearing a bikini confidently or meeting friends for drinks at 10 p.m. — an activity I used to enjoy, but had grown out of.