WASHINGTON -- Janet Burman today became the first of eight candidates seeking the Republican nomination in the 24th Congressional District to make public a detailed economic plan.

Burman, a Syracuse economist, is the former district administrator for the state Workers' Compensation Board. She previously made unsuccessful bids for the Syracuse Common Council, Onondaga County Legislature and state Senate.

Here are Burman's answers to five questions from Syracuse.com about the economy and related issues that she might have to address if elected to the House of Representatives.

Syracuse.com: Only 28 House Republicans voted with Democrats last week to pass a bill that increases the federal debt limit until March 2015. Is it reckless of Republicans to threaten the first default on the nation's debt in American history? How would you have voted?

Burman: "The Republican leadership orchestrated that vote so the minimal number of Republicans had to go on record for supporting it. But take a step back: We are going to have to adopt a long-term solution to the debt like the Simpson-Bowles option.

"I'm not endorsing that plan. But it's going to take leadership from the executive office to address this, and a bipartisan approach. As for the vote, you can't say it's OK to default. I would not do anything to threaten the faith and credit of the United States government."

Syracuse.com: A Congressional Budget Office report Tuesday said that increasing the federal minimum wage to $10.10 per hour would raise wages for 16.5 million people and lift 900,000 people out of poverty. But it would come at the expense of 500,000 jobs and higher costs for business owners and consumers.

Do you agree with that assessment? Should Congress go ahead and raise the minimum wage?

Burman: "I absolutely agree with the CBO assessment. This is something free-market economists have recognized since the days of Milton Friedman. Increasing the minimum wage will put pressure on labor markets to eliminate a lot of low-skilled positions. That is why I would not vote for increasing the minimum wage.

"We need to increase human capital for people who currently hold minimum wage jobs and enable them to move up the ladder to higher-skilled jobs and more fulfilling positions. We need to refocus our efforts on job-training. The federal government has more than 50 programs that focus on job training and not a single one has ever been evaluated for its effectiveness. This should be a function of local efforts. This should not be a federal effort."

Syracuse.com: Should unemployment insurance be extended for the long-term jobless? A study from House Democrats on Tuesday said the U.S. economy will lose more than $3 billion in January and February alone due to 1.8 million Americans being cut off from benefits as of Dec. 28.

Burman: "The goal here is to enable people to support themselves and their own families. To that end, we should not be using unemployment benefits to do that. There have been studies showing the longer people remain on benefits, the more they lose their motivation and they lose their edge. They are no longer actively seeking jobs. Some people will need to go on Temporary Assistance for Needy Families when their unemployment insurance runs out. We get jobs by having a robust, growing economy. That is what we need."

Syracuse.com: Your plan calls for replacing, but not a full repeal, of the Affordable Care Act. Do you share the view of other Republicans that Obamacare will be a disaster for the economy?

Burman: "The job losses that have already occurred are a disaster. The shift of jobs from full-time to part-time employment has already changed dramatically. Employers have been warning of this since the original debate before the legislation was passed. It's definitely a job-killer.

"My daughter is a doctor of internal medicine in the Indianapolis area. And in 2013 her hospital system laid off 9,000 employees in anticipation of the lower reimbursement rates and increases in Medicaid coverage.

"My approach to replacing Obamacare is not to abandon the people who were previously uninsured or uninsurable. I expect replacement will have to be incremental."

Syracuse.com: What is the single best thing that Congress could do to help boost Central New York's economy?

Burman: "I think we need to lower corporate tax rates to a maximum of 25 percent so we are more in line with our trading partners. That positions us for much better price competitiveness with our foreign competition. We have producers here who already have relationships in foreign countries, and this will allow them to expand. It's also going to boost start-ups. Lowering the tax rate could be the fine line that crosses a newer company into profitability."

Contact Mark Weiner at mweiner@syracuse.com or 571-970-3751. Follow him on Twitter @MarkWeinerDC