The St. Landry Parish Sheriff’s Office responds to thousands of complaints each year that involve some form of vehicle crash or breakdown. Frequently, these complaints include traffic congestion, blocked roadways and overall confusion prior to the deputy’s arrival. The responding deputy is duty-bound to first assist with any injuries, then to establish traffic control and gradually ease traffic congestion if possible. Impatient drivers who take it personally that their travel has been delayed and decide to pass on the shoulder make the situation worse, endanger lives, and are subject to arrest.

We’ve all witnessed the frustrating sight of a driver attempting to bypass a traffic jam by using the shoulder as his own personal lane, with total disregard for the line of people waiting their turn. Here are the risks:

Ticket. Riding the shoulder and using the shoulder as a lane… if not an emergency or highway vehicle… is illegal. If caught, you could be issued a citation or be arrested.

Collision. Although it is illegal, you may not be the only driver who is willing to take the risk of being caught. Therefore, the shoulder may appear to be clear as you drive down it, but other cars may break the law as well, moving into your path without warning.

Preventing authorized vehicles from getting through. The shoulder is specifically used for emergency personnel to be able to get through at times of traffic jams. If you find yourself blocking the shoulder when an emergency vehicle is trying to get through, you not only suffer the consequences of legal ramifications, but you may also be liable for damages sustained if you prevented or delayed an ambulance, a fire truck, or a police car from getting to a victim.

Jail time. Any officer who has probable cause to issue a citation also has probable cause for physical arrest. A citation is a summons for court, which is considered a form of arrest. So, according to the discretion of the officer, you could find yourself behind bars.

The law in Louisiana is clear. LA R.S. 32:74 states… “… The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass another vehicle upon the right only under conditions permitting such movement in safety. In no event shall such movement be made by driving off the pavement or main traveled portion of the highway.”

“Unless specifically directed to do so by a deputy on the scene… for instance a deputy directing traffic flow onto the shoulder in order to move traffic around a crash scene… passing on the shoulder, even in a traffic jam, is illegal and dangerous," said St. Landry Parish Sheriff Bobby Guidroz.

The above information is intended for information purposes only and not for legal advice. For legal advice, consult an attorney. Questions can be submitted to bguidroz@slpsheriff.com

Read or Share this story: http://www.dailyworld.com/story/opinion/columnists/2016/02/07/passing-traffic-jam-shoulder-illegal/79941560/