Four years after he said "big things" were going to happen after he won the election, in a candid reflection, governor John Kasich steered away from the traditional Republican list of tax cuts, smaller government and regulatory reforms and instead focused on issues traditionally reserved for the political left.

On Kasich’s mind were programs for minorities, children with autism and the mentally ill.

"I think there's also a growing sense that no one gets left behind," Kasich told 10TVs Jim Heath. "I was endorsed by the Call and Post about a week ago. Our friends in the minority community, we're not leaving them behind. Whether it's a significant set-aside in the Opportunity Corridor or whether it's fulfilling the state law and set aside."

The Call and Post, an African American newspaper in Cleveland, praised Kasich in an editorial endorsement for his success in expanding Medicaid in Ohio and his support of set-asides for minority contractors on the Opportunity Corridor project in Cleveland.

Kasich’s support for Medicaid expansion put him at odds with conservative lawmakers, tea party groups and state treasurer Josh Mandel. He has also been battling the Associated Press this week over whether Medicaid expansion was part of Obamacare – he insists it isn’t.

Kasich also reflected on his support of funding for autism programs, saying "we probably need to do a little more" in the next four years.

He then described his push for changes in how the state deals with the mentally ill.

"The mentally ill that have been for too long in our prisons and our jails, we can help them," said Kasich. "The drug addicted, this is an impossible nightmare situation and we're trying to help them. I like to think that everybody is getting a chance to go up. And that's what we're going to do if we should be fortunate enough to win over the period of the next four years."

Kasich disputes statistics showing Ohio lagging most other states in job growth, pointing to the nearly quarter million jobs created in the last four years.

He also points to the unemployment number that has dropped from 9 percent when he took office to 5.7 percent today.

"I think the most important thing is that Ohioans for the first time I think in a dozen years are optimistic about the future," said Kasich. "You know, we can use statistics, some of which we use, but there is a sense in the minds of Ohioans that things are going in the right direction. To me when the citizens for the first time in a dozen years, is what I'm told, say keep it up what can be better than that?”