By Jason Hart | Ohio Watchdog

Taxpayers in Mahoning County, Delaware County and across Ohio will get a clearer look at local government spending starting this summer.

Mahoning and Delaware are two of the first counties agreeing to post their checkbooks at Ohio Treasurer Josh Mandel’s OhioCheckbook.com, where public officials and taxpayers alike will be able to easily sort through county spending.

“We’re trying to be efficient,” Mahoning County Auditor Ralph Meacham told Ohio Watchdog. “The whole thing here is giving taxpayers complete transparency on where money is being spent.”

He said the process of working with Mandel’s office is going well, but added, “Let’s be patient with this; I’d rather get it done right than quickly.”

Noting that Mahoning County — home to Youngstown — is “a bastion of Democratic politics,” Mandel told Ohio Watchdog government transparency “is truly a nonpartisan issue.”

All three Mahoning County commissioners are Democrats. Meacham and Mandel are Republicans.

With cooperation from early adopters like Meacham and the Mahoning County commissioners, Mandel expects to start publishing local checkbooks at OhioCheckbook.com “by this summer.”

“We really don’t need to change anything to make this information public,” Delaware County Auditor George Kaitsa told Ohio Watchdog. The treasurer’s office has developed templates to simplify the process, he explained.

“In our case, about 90 percent of the work is already done,” Kaitsa added. Handing off local data to the treasurer and making sure personal information is redacted are Delaware County’s only real concerns at this point.

Once local governments have worked out the data submission process, upkeep should take a trivial effort, Kaitsa said. And having one online transparency system instead of hundreds will save taxpayers money on web development costs.

Mandel’s transparency project is supported by numerous lobbying groups for local governments, including the Ohio Municipal League, Ohio Township Association and Ohio Association of School Business Officials.

“In this process of signing them up to put their checkbooks online, there’s gonna be leaders and there’s gonna be followers,” Mandel said during a phone interview. “There’s gonna be a tipping point where it becomes uncomfortable to be a straggler.”

But persuading a critical mass of local governments to participate and getting their checkbooks into the treasurer’s system will take time.

Mandel’s office began the process in April, sending letters to 18,000 officials in 3,962 counties, cities, school districts and other local government bodies. More than 100 local governments have signed on, and 400 more have expressed interest.

RELATED: School districts share spending data on Ohio’s online checkbook

The process will be “complicated and laborious” because of big differences in local accounting systems, Mandel said.

“You have some large cities and counties that are on very advanced accounting systems,” he said. “And you have some townships, we learned recently, that are still doing some of their accounting on legal pads.”

The treasurer is optimistic about the benefits taxpayers will see as local data are processed and published. “It’s all about taking everyday citizens who yesterday felt powerless, and today making them feel powerful,” he said.

Citing feedback his office received from an Ohio Department of Developmental Disabilities employee who said OhioCheckbook.com is faster than their internal software, Mandel said he expects the system to help local officials with budgeting, too.

“Not only do I think this’ll be a great tool for citizen watchdogs and those of us who wanna hold politicians accountable, it’ll also be a great tool for elected leaders and fiscal officers to help them make better decisions when it comes to tax money,” he said.

Having local government spending from throughout the state posted in a simple, standardized format will help public officials see where they may be overpaying for products or services or should consider bulk purchasing arrangements, Mandel explained.

Local officials who haven’t followed up with the treasurer’s office by Labor Day can expect “an aggressive follow-up push via phone, email and personal meetings” encouraging them to submit their spending data for publication at OhioCheckbook.com

He doesn’t expect it will be necessary, but Mandel plans to attend local government meetings as needed to remind “defiant” officials, “first of all, this is public information, second of all, it’s public money and. third, taxpayers have a right to see it.”