Confused about the upcoming Affordable Care Act exchanges? Uncertain what coverage you and your family might be eligible for and what that might mean for your monthly bills?

Enter the navigators. These are the healthcare and advocacy organizations awarded federal grants to help families find coverage. They are intended to provide community liaisons and face-to-face interactions once the ACA exchanges open up Oct. 1.

Though the navigators are being trained to answer any ACA queries, their main duty will be to help the more than 600,000 uninsured in Alabama – particularly those who may have no experience choosing and registering for health insurance – navigate the new exchanges.

The U.S. Department of Health and Human Services awarded nearly $70 million in grants to more than 100 organizations in mid-August, including $1.4 million to five Alabama navigators.

The largest grant in Alabama, more than $500,000, was awarded to AIDS Alabama, Inc.

Lauren Banks, director of Policy and Advocacy for AIDS Alabama, said the organization has partnered with several others around the state -- including Anniston's The Right Place, Tuscaloosa's West Alabama AIDS Outreach and the AIDS Action Coalition -- to provide information and assist registrants.

"We're really excited," Banks said. "Through utilizing each of these partners, each will have their own navigators. We're here, we want to help the community and we want them to know who we are."

At AIDS Alabama, the grant money is going toward new hires, 10 in total, who are gearing up for a 12-month haul of community presentations and one-on-one info sessions.

The navigators are full-time and part-time workers who completed 20 hours of mandatory federal training and additional training from the organization, Banks said.

AIDS Alabama recruited people who are "trusted with the community," Banks said, including former Americorps workers and people working toward degrees in public heath.

"We really went after people who are reliable, who could do the best outreach through the community," she said. "We just want people who have a grassroots initiative."

Alabama's navigators will be wading into their local communities as soon as the exchanges open, Banks said, offering public presentations and manning health fairs.

While Banks said many Alabamians would have no problem researching and registering for health coverage on their own, the navigators are also available for one-on-one assistance for those who do.

Alabamians can contact navigator organizations to set up a meeting – anywhere from the local Starbucks to their own home – to go over the exchange application.

"In an objective, non-biased way, we walk them through the plans, let them know what a premium means, if they apply for a tax credit, etc.," Banks said. "We want to help the people who want assistance, who have never done this before or are overwhelmed and have lots of questions.

Nearly $400,000 was awarded to Tombigbee Healthcare Authority in Demopolis, which will place navigators in 18 counties in the Alabama Delta Region, according to their application.

Samford University was granted more than $300,000 and was cited to service the "rural and metropolitan communities" of Northern Alabama.

Catholic Social Services in the Archdiocese of Mobile was also offered a Navigator grant, but Executive Director Marilyn King said the organization declined.

King declined to elaborate why the organization did so, but Banks said AIDS Alabama absorbed the extra grant money.

National organization Ascension Health, the parent company of St. Vincent's Health System in Birmingham, also received a little more than $200,000.

When the grants were announced in mid-August, Alabama's Attorney General Luther Strange joined forces with 12 other states to express concern about privacy protection, co-signing a letter to U.S. Department of Health and Human Services Secretary Kathleen Sebelius.

"The various groups and agencies involved in Obamacare will have significant access to consumers' personal information. Yet HHS rules do not make any clear provisions to protect the privacy of such information," Strange said in a press release after the letter's release.

When contacted earlier this week, Strange's office said he had taken no further action than the Aug. 15 letter and had no further comment on the subject.

Florida Governor Rick Scott has banned ACA navigators from operating the state, according to The Miami Herald.

But several counties are actively ignoring the ban, including Miami-Dade, whose mayor says he doesn't see "any problems" with helping people navigate the laws.

Banks encourages anyone with questions or concerns about the program to get in touch with a navigator, and let them do their job.

"People need to know there are a lot of myths out there and a lot of misinformation," she said. "So, if they want the facts, they can go on healthcare.gov or call our office. We will be glad to answer any questions, because this is a program to help people."