Evelyn Starner, 79, became the only confirmed victim of the Larimer County flood when her body was found on the bank of the Big Thompson River west of Loveland on Sept. 21

Good Samaritan Village employees Melissa Riehl, left, Kristina Kramer look at photographs of Larimer County flood victim Evelyn Starner Saturday at the Chapel at Good Samaritan in Loveland. ( Jessica Maher )

Occasionally, Evelyn Starner would be asked when she was going to retire from her job in the rehabilitation department at the Good Samaritan Village in Loveland.

She'd answer, 'I'm thinking about it,' but friends say the 79-year-old loved her work as a restorative aid. She showed them all up by never missing or being late for work, despite her trip there from her home at Cedar Cove in the Big Thompson Canyon.

"We all took from her that our work ethic should have been like hers," said Betty Padilla, who works in purchasing at Good Sam. "Her residents were her world."

Those residents, along with co-workers -- past and present -- filled the chapel at Good Samaritan on Saturday morning to join Evelyn's family and friends at a memorial service to celebrate her life.

Evelyn became the only confirmed victim of the Larimer County flood when her body was found on the bank of the Big Thompson River west of Loveland on Sept. 21. Sixty-year-old Cedar Cove resident Patty Goodwine is missing and presumed dead.

After being injured when the floodwaters took her home, Evelyn was pulled to an embankment by her friend, Joyce Kilmer. When Kilmer's strength gave out, Evelyn made a decision that the Rev. Dr. Craig Henningfield said exemplifies everything about her character.

"What strikes me about her story is this: she looked at her friend and said, 'you go save yourself,'" Henningfield said at the service. "Can you think of a more self-sacrificing, self-giving love?"

Advertisement

Evelyn started working at Loveland's Good Samaritan Village in 1990. Those she worked with -- both residents and coworkers -- shared their memories of her during the memorial service, describing her as gentle, compassionate, patient. With Evelyn, it was the little things -- the fluffing of a pillow, wiping crumbs from a shirt -- that made the difference with the residents.

As for her co-workers, Kristina Kramer said 'den mother' was an accurate way to describe Evelyn.

"She took care of us," Kramer said.

In 2000, Evelyn was selected among thousands from Good Samaritan centers across the country as Good Samaritan Society's CNA of the Year. Former administrator Randy Fitzgerald said that Evelyn's family could be proud of that remarkable achievement.

"Evelyn truly was a unique woman and she was an angel," he said.

Evelyn is survived by her three children, 10 children and five great-grandchildren.

Jessica Maher can be reached at 669-5050, ext. 516, or maherj@reporter-herald.com. Follow her on Twitter: @JessicaMaherRH.