As the largest reproductive health care provider and advocate in the region, Planned Parenthood Northern New England has always supported policies that expand women’s access to birth control, including making birth control available over the counter.

Yet over-the-counter birth control should not come at the cost of women losing their insurance coverage, being forced to pay several hundred dollars more out-of-pocket each year, or preventing women from accessing the best birth control method for them. ...

Please sign up for as low as 36 cents per day to continue viewing our website.

As the largest reproductive health care provider and advocate in the region, Planned Parenthood Northern New England has always supported policies that expand women’s access to birth control, including making birth control available over the counter.

Yet over-the-counter birth control should not come at the cost of women losing their insurance coverage, being forced to pay several hundred dollars more out-of-pocket each year, or preventing women from accessing the best birth control method for them.

Unfortunately, this is exactly what a Republican proposal co-sponsored by U.S. Sen. Kelly Ayotte, R-N.H., last week would do. Ayotte’s bill is an insult to New Hampshire women and women across the country. They would be wise to read the fine print and see it for the empty promise it is.

Sen. Ayotte and the other anti-women’s health politicians who introduced this bill have repeatedly voted to take away insurance coverage for contraception, defund health programs that provide family planning services and deny women access to birth control.

Their records demonstrate clearly that they aren’t truly interested in expanding women’s access to contraception and this new bill that proclaims to expand access to birth control would actually harm women’s access to contraceptive care and cost women more money.

Planned Parenthood opposes this bill because it will ultimately make birth control less accessible and less affordable, rather than make it available to more women who need it. As a leading women’s reproductive health provider in New Hampshire, serving nearly 15,000 patients each year, we know firsthand that 1 in 3 women has struggled to afford birth control at some point in her life.

In Ayotte’s bill, “over-the-counter” birth control actually means “out-of-pocket” costs for birth control. This legislation would erase the gains we’ve made to make birth control more accessible, including the no-cost-sharing insurance coverage requirement provisions in the Affordable Care Act.

What’s even worse is that the bill does not protect insurance coverage for birth control once its available over-the-counter, eliminating the groundbreaking no-copay birth control benefit in the Affordable Care Act that has expanded access to birth control for over 144,000 New Hampshire women.

In 2013, the average American woman saved $269 in out-of-pocket costs because of this ACA benefit. This amounts to more than $37 million back in the pockets New Hampshire women, savings that Ayotte is all too willing return to employers and insurance companies at the expense of hard-working women.

This is the very opposite of expanding access to birth control.

In reality, Ayotte’s bill would make women pay twice for their birth control – first they’ll pay for insurance coverage that includes birth control coverage, and then they’ll pay out of pocket for it, too.

Ayotte also misleads New Hampshire women by quoting the opinion of the American Congress of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG) to imply that these trusted medical experts support her legislation.

In fact, ACOG actively opposes Ayotte’s proposal, stating that “this bill would actually make more women have to pay for their birth control, and for some women, the cost would be prohibitive.”

ACOG also points to the significant gains the ACA has made in increasing access to birth control for women, “decreasing unintended pregnancies, and allowing women to better plan their futures” in warning that the bill would be a setback for women’s health.

Accessing birth control isn’t a one-size-fits-all pursuit and some of the most effective forms of contraception, including IUDs and implants, cannot be available over-the-counter because they require the involvement of a trained health care provider.

Truly increasing access to contraception requires a multi-faceted approach to meet the needs of all women throughout their reproductive lives. Making birth control available over the counter can be part of the solution, but not at the expense of the no-cost contraception provided by the ACA, something Ayotte wants to repeal.

Her bill amounts to little more than lip service to an issue that is central to women’s health and economic security. Women seeking access to affordable, accessible reproductive care deserve better than this misleading effort. New Hampshire women should be insulted.

Jennifer Frizzell is vice president of public policy for Planned Parenthood of Northern New England and the Planned Parenthood New Hampshire Action Fund.