David Brown, chief market strategist at Sabrient Systems, said the company’s annual Baker’s Dozen stock picks for 2014, includes well-rounded companies that have “lots of cash, lots of cash-flow, and … earnings over the next year, every quarter, where the analysts following them expect every quarter to be better than the quarter before … almost without exception.”

For the first time in the six-year history of the list, the company did not number its picks and select a top stock for the year ahead, Brown noted, “because, basically, they are all Number One.”

In an interview airing Wednesday on MoneyLife with Chuck Jaffe, MarketWatch senior columnist, Brown notes that the decision to not number stocks also comes from the success that the “last stock” on previous lists has had, including finishes in the top five in each of the last three years.

On average, in its first five years, the Baker’s Dozen outperformed the Standard & Poor’s 500 Index by more than 50 percent; in 2013, the selections gained more than 54 percent from their release in mid-January through year-end.

Investors can now purchase a unit investment trust built around the methodology; for 2014, that UIT, offered by First Trust, will trade under the symbol .

Sabrient looks for “the most growth we can get quarter-over-quarter over the next year, for the least price,” Brown said.

This year’s list — released to First Trust on Monday — includes issues from seven different sectors, and four stocks that were on the 2013 list, but that still offer enough value to top Sabrient’s forward-looking research.

Those four include Jazz Pharmaceuticals , which was the top performer on the 2013 list, gaining more than 125% from the list’s release date through year-end. Also returning to the list was Express Scripts – “If anybody is a winner in Obamacare, it’s them,” said Brown — Marathon Petroleum Corp. and NXP Semiconductor .

The other nine stocks on the list are Actavis PLC , Archer Daniels Midland , ARRIS Group , Huntington Ingalls Industries , Southwest Airlines , Marvell Technology Group , NetApp NTAP, Prudential Financial and Ternium SA .

You can listen to the interview on Wednesday at www.moneylifeshow.com.

– Chuck Jaffe

Follow The Tell @thetellblog

Follow Chuck Jaffe @mktwjaffe and @moneylifeshow

More from MarketWatch:

Beer goggles crack from Boockvar hits home with Dallas Fed\’s Fisher

Jeffrey Gundlach says Treasurys are under-owned, bitcoin is a \’mirage\’: live blog recap

Bank of America, Fastenal, CSX are stocks to watch