Instead of calling an ambulance, a 37-year-old Idaho woman took matters into her own hands when a teen drinking party went awry. After a 14-year-old girl consumed several shots, vomited, and lost consciousness due to alcohol poisoning, Jennifer A. Phippen administered an IV to the unconscious girl at a party she supplied alcohol for last month.

Boise resident Phippen has been charged with two counts of felony injury to neglecting the juvenile’s dire medical situation at the Aug. 24 birthday party, according to police. She’s now being held in Ada County jail on $300,000 bail for not wanting to end the party because of the life-threatening situation of the young girl. After Phippen administered an IV of approximately 400 to 500 cubic centimeters of fluid to the girl herself, she threw her in the shower to wake her up. That’s equivalent to more than a standard 16-ounce water bottle pumped into the girl without consent from her or her parents.

When the girl regained consciousness the next morning, she walked home and a warrant was issued for Phippen’s arrest. She was arrested not long after and taken into custody with a $300,000 bond, currently facing up to 10 years in prison. Flushing alcohol out of the system and replenishing fluids by drinking plenty of fluids is commonly used to prevent hangovers. Alcohol is a diuretic that ultimately dehydrates your system, and in severe cases hospitals will administer an intravenous (IV) therapy for hydration.

The 1984 National Minimum Drinking Age Act prohibits anyone under the age of 21 from purchasing or publicly possessing alcoholic beverages unless administered by a licensed physician, pharmacist, dentist, nurse, hospital, or medical institution. Phippen certainly wasn’t a doctor or authorized to perform IV therapy on the young girl, and moreover not within legal bounds to provide alcohol to someone who was seven years shy of her 21st birthday.

Alcohol is developmentally dangerous for an adolescent’s brain. It slows down the cerebral cortex, where information forms from the five senses, slows down the central nervous system that allows a person to clearly think and speak, and inhibits the frontal lobes where planning, forming ideas, making decisions, and implementing self-control occurs. According to the Surgeon General, long-term alcohol abuse can permanently damage the frontal lobe and memories are erased due to damage in the hippocampus where memories are formed, knowledge is withheld, and black outs are caused.