Dear Savvy Senior,

Can you recommend any advocacy organizations for seniors other than AARP? I cut up my AARP card a few years back when they supported Obamacare, and am now looking for another organization that better represents me.

--Conservative Senior

Dear Conservative,

There are actually quite a few senior advocacy organizations out there promoting themselves as conservative alternatives to AARP.



While AARP, with a membership of almost 38 million, is by far the biggest and most powerful advocacy group for people age 50 and older, there are millions of older Americans that don't like or agree with their stance on various issues. Many believe AARP leans to far to the left despite its stated nonpartisan nature.

For seniors that are anti-AARP, there are numerous conservative leaning groups that you can join that may better represent your views, and most of them offer discount benefits too. Here are several to look into.

The Seniors Coalition: Established in 1990, this nonprofit organization has around four million supporters. Their key issues are to protect Social Security benefits, save Medicare, repeal Obamacare, eliminate the death tax and reform the Social Security COLA system. Members also get access to deals on travel, shopping, car insurance and a discount healthcare program. Annual membership fees to join run $10 for one person per, or $13.50 per couple. To learn more visit Senior.org, or call 202-261-3594.

60-Plus Association: Established in 1992, this nonprofit group that claims over 7.2 million supporters, believes in smaller government and lower taxes. Their top priorities include the fight to end the inheritance tax, and taking steps to help save social security for future generations. There's no membership fee to join 60 Plus, but they do take donations for those who want to support their effort. They also don't offer discounts to their members. 60plus.org, 703-807-2070.

American Seniors Association: Open to all ages, this for-profit group stands on what they call the five foundations of security for America's seniors. These include rebuilding the national values respecting seniors, Social Security and Medicare reform, tax code reform, and control of government overspending. Fees to join run $15 per year, and members receive access to a variety of discounts on travel, health care, office supplies and more. AmericanSeniors.org, 800-951-0017.

Association of Mature American Citizens: With more than one million members, this for-profit organization was started in 2007 for people age 50 and older. Their mission is to help seniors fight high taxes, reduce excessive government involvement in our day-to-day lives, and preserve American values. They also offer member discounts on auto insurance, travel, vision, dental, prescription drugs, and much more. Membership fees run $16 per year, or less if you join for multiple years. Amac.us, 888-262-2006.

The National Association of Conservative Seniors: Founded in 2012, this for-profit organization emphasizes two key missions. One is to provide members, age 60 and older, with services and benefits that include discounts on travel, quality of life opportunities, better insurance and financial programs at competitive prices, and savings on household goods, food, and fun. And the second is to uphold conservative values in the United States.

Membership is free the first year, but costs $12 the second year. Or, for $5 per month you can become a "Gold Patriot" member and receive their "Click to Call" feature, which gives members direct connection to government officials. Naocs.us, 800-570-7769.

Send your senior questions to: Savvy Senior, P.O. Box 5443, Norman, OK 73070, or visit SavvySenior.org. Jim Miller is a contributor to the NBC Today show and author of "The Savvy Senior" book.