Democratic presidential candidate Bernie Sanders continues his West Coast campaign swing with a rally in Portland on Sunday night.

Here's a summary of his remarks from our live updates:

8:30 p.m.: And we're out. Bernie Sanders has left the Moda Center. The crowd begins to file out as well. Final crowd count from Blazers official: 19,000 inside the Moda Center, 9,000 outside.

8:23 p.m.: Sounds like Sanders is beginning to wrap this up. He urges the crowd to "think big" about "what this great country can be."

"When we stand together, when we say that enough is enough, this country belongs to all of us," he said.

8:19 p.m.: Turns to 11 million illegal immigrants. "We need comprehensive immigration reform and a path toward citizenship." He segues to Iran, keeping it from getting a nuclear weapons and not going to war. "I believe that war should be the last resort, not the first resort."

He says the nuclear deal with Iran may not work, but that the U.S. should give the process a chance "before we go to war."

8:12 p.m.: Health care, he says, is a "right for all people, and that is why I believe we must move toward a Medicare for all single-payer programs." Sanders talks about his work on the budget committee and what he says is GOP budget work to remove millions from the Affordable Care Act.

"We are not going cut Social Security," he says, "we are going to expand Social Security. We are not going to cut benefits for veterans, we are going to make sure veterans" get the benefit they are entitled to.

8:09 p.m.: Next up: education and student debt. Sanders talks about the opportunity education brings, free tuition and crippling student debt and high interest rates. "It makes no sense to me," Sanders says, "that we have people who are paying 20-25 percent of their limited income on student loans."

8:02 p.m.: Speaking of elections, Sanders addresses Civil Rights and the 50th anniversary of the Voting Rights Act. He says legislatures and governors are putting up barriers to voting for people of color. "It has never occurred to me that the way to win an election is to deny the people who disagree with me the right to vote." Politicians who would do that, he says, "are cowards."

7:57 p.m.: Returning to politics and the Citizens United decision by the U.S. Supreme Court. "The American political system has been totally corrupted." Mention of Koch brothers greeted with boos. He says his nominees to the Supreme Court would have a litmus test: nominees would have to pledge to overturn Citizens United. Says the United States must move to public funding of elections.

7:52 p.m.: Sanders returns to economic issues: decent paying jobs, a national jobs bill, infrastructure building and repair. Says he'll lead the effort against President Obama's trans-Pacific trade deal.

On the economy and the Great Recession: "The truth is today that most of the financial institutions are bigger now that they were when we bailed them out because they were too big to fail." Sanders says it's time to re-instate Glass-Steagall and break up the big banks.

7:45 p.m.: Sanders says he supports $15 minimum wage not only in Oregon but at the federal level. Moves on to living wage and pay gap between men and women.

He moves on to other social issues and family values. Women's choice, same-sex marriage, guaranteed paid medical and family leave, says "I will fight for 12 weeks of paid family leave. That's a family value."

7:31 p.m.: Opening theme -- jobs and education, not incarceration. Turns to a favorite theme: Income and wealth inequality, says the U.S. belongs to "all of us, not just a handful of billionaires." Says the gap is worse today than any time since 1928. He calls this "the great moral issue of our time."

"This campaign is sending a message to the billionaire class: Yes, we have the courage to take you on," Sanders says. He continues: "The middle class — the envy of the entire world — has been disappearing for the last 40 years."

Turns to unemployment and the number of people who have stopped looking for work or are working part-time. He says real unemployment is more than 10 percent, when those groups are taken into account. For youths, "real unemployment" is three to five times that. "We cannot turn our backs on an entire generation of young people."

7:28 p.m.: Cue the Neil Young. It's time for Sen. Sanders. The candidate notes that the campaign is only about three months old. Lists the cities where they've drawn the biggest crowd, says "Portland, you've done it better than anyone else."

7:21 p.m.: Tone of rally grows somber, briefly, as campaign spokeswoman Sanders turns the attention to the subject of Michael Brown's death at the hands of a Ferguson, Missouri, police officer. Simone Sanders goes on to list the names of the people of color who were the victims of recent police shootings. She moves on to address, item by item, Sen. Sanders' stand on civil rights. In Portland, two people were arrested during a protest marking anniversary of Brown's death.

7:08 p.m.: Sanders campaign spokeswoman Simone Sanders trains crowd on how to pre-empt any disruption by Black Lives Matter activists. On to more of the introductory speakers. Dina Foley, a union member, is one of the first of the speakers to help warm up the crowd. Next speaker hits on Sanders' stand on immigration and a path to legalization and the rights of farm workers to unionize. Next up, a climate justice activist, Mia Reback. Crowd roars when she mentions Portland as the setting for the protest against Shell Oil. Greenpeace climbers dangled from the St. Johns Bridge to prevent the Shell icebreaker Fennica from leaving Portland and head to the arctic to aid in oil drilling there.

7 p.m.: Waiting for Sanders. From the looks of things on Twitter, many, many people did not get in.

From reporter Jeff Mapes: Michael Briggs, Sanders communications director, just came by to say he heard the capacity was closer to 19,000. We might want to add that there's some confusion about the capacity. There's a lot of seats missing on the floor that the Blazers normally use, plus the boxes are empty.

6:55 p.m.: Five minutes before Sanders speaks. Twitter discussion is raging about Sanders civil rights record the Black Lives Matter movement.

The Bernie Sanders campaign says the Moda Center is set up in a configuration that will allow about 17,000 in the seats and just over 1,000 on the floor. With the event scheduled to begin at 7 p.m., the building is not quite full but people are still streaming in.

It certainly appeared that it will be the Vermont senator's largest crowd of his presidential campaign -- the record being the 15,000 he attracted in Seattle Saturday night. Sanders has been attracting much larger crowds than the other presidential candidates.

Part of it is by design. The large rallies build a buzz for Sanders among voters and attract media attention. They also help him build a grassroots network.

-- from Oregonian senior political reporter Jeff Mapes

6:51 p.m: All is calm at the Moda Center.

6:48 p.m.: Live Stream on YouTube from Sanders campaign. Music is a hoot.

6:30 p.m: Here's the view from the pressbox. It looks like it's a full house. The venue capacity is 19,980.

6:22 p.m.: The crowd looks the crowd at the Moda Center will rival or exceed the 15,000 in Seattle last night.

The doors open at 6 p.m. at the Moda Center, and the event begins at 7 p.m. It's general admission, so if you're not there now, you may not get a good seat. The entire event will last about an hour. There might be a warm-up speaker, but Sanders' campaign hasn't decided who it will be.

Sanders spoke to a packed crowd Saturday night at the University of Washington campus about his commitment to criminal justice reform as well as addressing income equality. Sanders was shouted down earlier Saturday at a rally at Westlake Park in Seattle by several Black Lives Matter activists.

-- Sue Jepsen

#berniesanders Tweets