Last year, six million tourists visited Crimea — almost four million Ukrainians, and the bulk of the rest Russians. About 12 percent were Westerners from more than 200 cruise ships that docked in 2013, according to tour operators. Virtually all of those dockings have been canceled this year.

It doesn’t help that Yalta — indeed, much of Crimea — fell prey first to the Soviet penchant for concrete and then to the more modern plague of endlessly homogeneous chain stores and apartment blocks. The place needs a little work, and many here hope that the Kremlin will provide it.

Photo

In April, Mr. Putin announced that he had ordered the price of round-trip airplane tickets for vacationers from Russia slashed to $214, compared with a normal fare of about $385 from Moscow, and subsidized train tickets. State-run companies like Gazprom and Rosneft said they would underwrite vacations for tens of thousands of employees.

Some Russians who work for government-owned companies have told their friends that they were ordered to vacation in Crimea this year. State-run television inaugurated a relentless campaign plugging the peninsula: Caves! Waterfalls! Palaces! Yuri Gagarin vacationed here! (Gagarin, the first man in space, remains a Russian archetype, used to plug almost any state goal.)

But even Mr. Putin spoke bluntly about the limits of its attractions.

“If we don’t offer cheap tickets, people simply won’t go,” he said in announcing the subsidies. “Given its current infrastructure, Crimea is designed for people with small incomes.”

Sunshine, agriculture and the dilapidated Black Sea fleet are the three main pillars the Kremlin expects to exploit in its push to transform Crimea into an economic success story that proves the benefits of Mother Russia’s embrace. There has also been talk of casinos.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Propping up Crimea will be a difficult, expensive effort. Russia has earmarked $5 billion just to save the Black Sea fleet from the scrap heap. Agricultural exports face transportation issues because the peninsula is geographically remote from Russia.

But tourism presents some of the biggest challenges. After being the playground of royalty, Crimea remained a cherished summer vacation destination in the Soviet Union, as few Soviets were allowed to travel abroad. It offered some of the only warm beaches available. So tourism has long been a cornerstone of the economy.

Traditionally, a vast majority of tourists arrived by train, with most Russians crossing through Ukraine. For the past two months, however, television news in Russia, monopolized by the state, has depicted Ukraine as brimming with neo-Nazis bent on shedding Russian blood. The threat was largely invented, but it frightened potential visitors.

Initially, Russia and its allies running Crimea vowed to match, if not increase, the number of tourists from last year, but they then began to scale back expectations. The acting head of Crimea, Sergei Aksyonov, was recently quoted telling local reporters that the government expected at least three million tourists.

As if to hedge their bets, Mr. Putin and his allies wasted no time in accusing Ukraine of benign neglect. Ukraine received Crimea from Moscow in 1954, then ruled the area for 23 years after the 1991 collapse of the Soviet Union. Moscow blames Kiev for every flaw, from the decrepit ships Russia seized to low agricultural exports, which Mr. Putin said dropped 60 percent under Ukrainian rule.

Russian government inspectors, the president lamented during a recent national television broadcast, found Crimea’s hotels and resorts terribly shabby.

BELARUS RUSSIA Kiev UKRAINE Dnieper River MOLDOVA CRIMEA Yalta Black Sea TURKEY

“Some of these, if not all, cannot be used under Russian sanitary and epidemiological standards,” Mr. Putin said. (This in a place once famous for sanitariums.)

He went on: “When they asked how former vacationers could have put up with this sort of quality, they heard this odd, and shameful, answer: ‘It’s O.K., we mostly had miners as guests here. It made no difference to them; they’d down half a glass of vodka and go to the beach.’ But we can’t take this approach with Russian vacationers.”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Tour operators said the legions of Russian tourists wanting to lounge could find far nicer beaches, bigger buffets and better hotels in convenient, inexpensive destinations like Turkey or Egypt, safely distant from the urban unrest in those countries.

“The whole idea of tourism in this area is a little different,” said Sergei V. Ivashin, the young general director of a Moscow franchise for Pegas Touristik, a major Russian tour operator. “Crimea is not for people who want to lie on the beach in Egypt and eat eight meals a day, but people who want to see the culture and history of their own land, their own country. We are aiming for those kinds of nationalist tours.”

There is plenty of Russian history here. The biggest draw, with 782,000 visitors in 2013, according to the Tourism Ministry, is Livadia, the Italian Renaissance palace the last czar, Nicholas II, erected in 1911.

But Crimea has definitely seen better times.

Take Chekhov’s home. The writer settled here in 1898, drawn, like so many, to treat his tuberculosis. He built a modest white house.

He wrote “The Cherry Orchard” and “Three Sisters” here, among other works. Sergei Rachmaninoff accompanied the opera bass Fyodor Chaliapin on Chekhov’s black upright piano. Leo Tolstoy visited. Unlike many Russian museums ransacked during the 1917 revolution, this one still has authentic furnishings because Chekhov’s sister and his widow lived here for decades after his death in 1904.

But giant apartment towers have encroached on Chekhov’s unbroken view of the sea and have badly affected the house itself. When cracks developed about 18 months ago, museum officials went to court to stop the construction of a nearby apartment building, guides said.

The heady mix of literary, political and military history helped Mr. Putin win wide support among Russians for taking Crimea back. Peddling its beaches, however bedraggled, could lift that support even further. And experts cite another factor in Crimea’s favor: warmth.

In oft-frozen Russia, no ruler can really do wrong by adding hundreds of miles of warm beachfront property, said Natalya V. Zubarevich, a professor at Moscow State University who specializes in social and political geography. “The result would not have been the same if he had added Alaska.”