Learn more Watch a 19-minute video as Marvin Hatami reflects on his career and the importance of architecture at http://youtu.be/AZUJfCN1TYg

In 1969, the organization Boulder Tomorrow staged a design competiton for a new Civic Center. Models were shipped from architects in Colorado and other parts of the country for the chance to re-create the center of the booming city of Boulder.

Identification was removed from the project models for blind judging by the team of Boulder architect Charles Haertling, Boulder Mayor Robert Knecht, Dr. Walter Orr Roberts, M.I.T. Dean of Architecture Lawrence Anderson and Roger Montgomery, professor of architecture from the University of California at Berkeley. According to a newspaper report, Montgomery was delighted by the quality of entrants but could not explain why the Boulder competition attracted such high-caliber submissions.

A submission by Marvin Hatami, of Denver, was unanimously declared the winner of the $9,000 prize. Boulder's Roger Easton, of Easton-Grabow & Associates, placed third.

Boulder Tomorrow, formed by a group of businessmen and civic leaders, began in 1966 as the Committee for the Exploration of the Core Area Potential (CECAP). At the time, the municipal building (1951) and the Boulder Public Library (1961) were frimly established in the core area. But Boulder's downtown was termed "decaying," and by 1968 Central Park had become a hangout for hippies and transients.

Hatami's design was a bold and blocky cluster of modernist structures. His plans included a second municipal building, an exhibition hall and conference center, a 1,500-seat auditorium, a science museum and a small theater.

Hatami was already an award-winning architect, known nationally and internationally. Born in Iran, Mohamad Hatami came to the University of Colorado in the 1950s to study architecture. In 1956, the CU student legally changed his first name to Marvin in Boulder County Court. After completing his degree at CU, Hatami went on to earn a master's in architecture at Yale University. He worked with noted modernist Philip Johnson before setting up his own firm in Denver.

Boulder Mayor Robert Knecht won a third term, and in January 1970 he declared the Civic Center development a top priority, according to newspaper reports. A special election was set for June 23, 1970, and the ballot included the $7.47 million Civic Center bond issue, a charter amendment on bond indebtedness and a Vietnam War moratorium.

Many letters to the editor, news stories and editorials were published in the weeks before the special election supporting the project. The Daily Camera was in favor, as was the Boulder League of Women Voters.

Some residents expressed concerns about the amount of paving of the area and the fact trees might be removed. Hatami reassured Boulder citizens he was in favor of preserving the natural environment, telling the Daily Camera "the entire complex requires a minimum of tree removal on the site."

Nevertheless, in a heavy voter turnout, the Civic Center redesign was overwhelmingly defeated by Boulder voters. All three issues on the special-election ballot were turned down in what the Daily Camera later termed a "pocketbook" vote.

Organizers were back at the idea in 1974 with "Citizens for a Boulder Cultural Center," chaired by Charles Haertling.

Meanwhile, also in 1974, Arvada residents rallied around a proposed cultural complex. Voters passed a $3.6 bond issue authorizing the creation of the Arvada Center. The facility has been hosting award-winning exhibits and performances ever since it opened in 1976.

Hatami designed Fiske Planetarium at CU in 1975, as well as the award-winning St. Francis Conference Center on the Auraria campus in Denver. Hatami never had an opportunity to realize his vision of Boulder's Civic Center, but he had a long and distinguished career, earning the distinction of Fellow of the American Institute of Architects.

Carol Taylor and Silvia Pettem write about history for the Daily Camera. Email Carol at boulderhistorylibrarian@gmail.com, Silvia at pettem@earthlink.net, or write to the Daily Camera, 5450 Western Ave., Boulder 80301.