BOULDER — Sefo Liufau’s father is a career Army man who made his son as comfortable on military bases as he was on football fields.

When he combined the two, you have what you will see at noon Saturday at Folsom Field: the beginning of the Sefo Liufau era.

In grade school, Sefo would go with his dad to Fort Lewis near their home in Tacoma, Wash., and play football with the Army guys. He learned a lot more than the proper grip for maximum spiral velocity.

“A lot of my leadership came from that and just learning from all of those guys as they all took me under their wing, it has just been with me my whole life,” Liufau said. “It’s not something that I am faking or just trying to show.”

Colorado (2-3, 0-3 Pac-12) needs someone to reverse a tailspin in which the Buffaloes have lost their three conference games by a combined 106 points. Providing what’s perceived as the perfect trampoline for a rebound is Charleston Southern, an FCS team that dropped its bye week for a paycheck from a Pac-12 school.

However, hidden in Charleston Southern’s relative anonymity is a 7-0 record, a No. 24 national ranking in FCS and the confidence of a team that is having a season for the ages. This is a better team than Sacramento State, which beat the Buffaloes in Boulder a year ago.

First-year CU coach Mike MacIntyre said it’s a better team than the Central Arkansas team that led the Buffs in the fourth quarter Sept. 7 before losing 38-24.

To prep for a demanding Pac-12 schedule, not to mention avoiding national humiliation Saturday, Mac- Intyre has turned to a true freshman quarterback. Leadership is not a problem. Three of Liufau’s uncles played college football — including Jack Thompson, the “Throwin’ Samoan” from Washington State.

Liufau (pronounced LEW-fow) has impressed MacIntyre with his maturity as much as his accuracy.

“It’s pretty rare,” Mac- Intyre said. “It really is. He said his family means everything to him and that’s why he is as mature as he is. He has great parents and he has a great brother and a great sister that he cares about deeply so he’s kind of a little bit ahead of his time I would say, maturity wise.”

The question is, can he excel at the Pac-12 level? He’s probably CU’s fastest quarterback and has shown he can rip off big yardage in the read option in practices.

He showed signs of an arrival last week at Arizona State, when he debuted off the bench with an 80-yard TD drive. But he also had two interceptions, a lost fumble and an intentional grounding for a safety.

“I have definitely forgotten my mistakes in the game,” Liufau said. “I still remember them as a teaching point for myself on what I could have done better. But I have a short memory. I threw a pick. Think about it for a second for what I could have done better then move on to the next play.”

John Henderson: jhenderson@denver- post.com or twitter.com/john- hendersondp