Bernadine Knittel, a counselor at Thompson Valley High School, talks Monday with Becca Risenhoover, 17, a junior at the school, about colleges Becca wants to attend and classes she can take that will transfer to those colleges. ( Jenny Sparks )

On an average day, the counselors at Thompson Valley High School handle a plethora of issues that go beyond academics and students' plans for college.

"The No. 1 issue we deal with is poverty and what is systemic coming out of that issue," said Jaymie Cruickshank, assistant principal at the Loveland school.

The school's five counselors, a part-time social worker and a part-time school psychologist, are on the forefront of handling a variety of social-emotional issues that range from homelessness and lack of transportation to drug and alcohol abuse, cyberbullying, cutting, depression and family problems, such as divorce.

"Even when our kids have issues outside of school, when they come here, we support them through their crisis or problem, so they direct their focus on being successful academically," Cruickshank said. "We care about our kids. They are the No. 1 reason that we do everything we do."

High School CounselorsThompson Valley, along with the other high schools in Thompson School District, has a counseling staff on the ready to help students deal with the daily issues they bring in from their home life or that arise from their social interactions in school. The high schools staff 29 counselors, including some who work part time.

Advertisement

"The needs of our families and the needs of students who are coming to school have definitely increased in severity," said Liz Lindly, social worker at Mountain View and Loveland high schools, about the five years she has worked in the district.

Lindly works with students who are struggling academically or face a barrier to education, such as behavioral issues or family concerns.

When needed, she connects the students' families with resources and community agencies, she said.

Lindly counsels students individually and in groups, often co-facilitated with a member of the counseling staff, on topics such as substance abuse, grief and loss, anger management and motivation.

The top concerns Lindly sees include homelessness, financial instability at home, and

behavioral and mental health issues, such as depression, bipolar disorder, anger, anxiety and substance abuse, she said.

"The number of kids that come to school from different locations because they are homeless has increased," Lindly said. "The stress and instability outside of school definitely impacts their ability to be successful in school. It's hard to focus on an English paper if you don't know where you're going to be sleeping."

Social-Emotional

Issues

Counselors are facing more social-emotional issues than they did in the past, said Marc Heiser, assistant principal at Loveland High School, which has five counselors on staff, plus a part-time social worker and part-time school psychologist.

"It becomes our jobs as administrators to create systems that create a support system for each individual student," Heiser said. "We have lists of students coming in at risk for various reasons. They're on our radar."

Starting this semester, staff members are checking in with certain students during study hall to make sure they get help if they are facing any major issues, Heiser said. The check-ins expanded from the freshmen class to the upper classmen to keep the older students on track academically, he said.

At Ferguson High School, an alternative school in Loveland, 20 to 25 percent of the students are homeless and nearly 80 percent receive free and reduced lunches. The school has a part-time counselor, who meets with students dealing with a variety of issues, including teen pregnancy, addiction recovery and other social-emotional issues.

"They want a diploma. That's their No. 1 goal," said Sheila Pottorff, principal at Ferguson High School. "Other issues become a barrier. We become an outreach to them, so they stay motivated."

The barriers become evident in the ABCs, or a student's attendance, behavior and classroom performance, which can result in disengagement in school if not addressed, Pottorff said.

Counseling helps the students work through their personal issues, so that they have the self-confidence to achieve graduation, she said.

Academic, Career

Counseling

"Counseling still entails academic advising and post-secondary planning," said Deanna Dykstra, assistant principal at Loveland. Since 2011, high school students are required to have an Individual Career and Academic Plan, or ICAP, a flexible outline of academic and career plans and explorations, intended to increase graduation rates. Counselors regularly meet with the students on anything related to academics, including scheduling, and post-secondary planning.

Though the ICAPs are time consuming for counselors, they help provide a focus for students' futures, Cruickshank said.

Counselors also are involved in academic assessments and college prep testing, she said.

"When you look at what the kids experience outside of our building, it's pretty remarkable that a lot of them are here on a regular basis and trying their best to earn a diploma," Lindly said.

Shelley Widhalm can be reached at 669-5050, ext. 531, or swidhalm@reporter-herald.com. Follow her on Twitter: @ShelleyWidhalm. Read her blog: shelleywidhalm.wordpress.com.