Transcript for San Diego Comic-Con Fans Rewarded With New 'Star Wars' Video

? Breaking "Star wars" news this morning. You're looking at just released behind-the-scenes footage from the new "Star wars" which is called "The force awakens" and is due out, I believe in December. Wish we could take your pulse and your voice went up on octave. At comic-con we saw Harrison Ford otherwise known as Han solo in his first major appearance since that plane crash several months ago and ABC's kayna Whitworth is on the story from our L.A. Bureau. Kayna, good thing you're not here because Dan is totally geeking out. I would switch places with you in a heartbeat. I was wondering what it's like to work with him. I love it, I do. Fans at San Diego's comic-con it was the celebration of a lifetime. Han solo, princess Leia and Luke skywalker for the latest installment "The force awakens." Disney and Lucas films making the decision to bring back all the main characters from the original trilogy and delighting fans both young and old in doing so. Han solo. Reporter: The smuggler. Chewy tells me you're looking for passage to the alderon. Laugh it up fuzz ball. Ladies and gentlemen, Harrison Ford. Reporter: That's right, Harrison Ford making his first appearance since crash landing his vintage airplane in March speaking Friday at comic-con in San Diego. I just walked here. All good. I really appreciate it. Thanks for asking. Reporter: The 72-year-old star says he's excited to be reprising his iconic role as Han solo. I was proud and grateful to once again be involved. I will tell you that it felt great. It felt -- Reporter: This just one of a long list of surprises all part of a "Star wars" frenzy. Fans of all things galaxy and far, far away lining up for hours even days just to get in. I slept out for two nights in a row for this and it was all worth it. Reporter: Fans everywhere treated with new behind-the-scenes footage from the set of J.J. Abrams' highly anticipated "Star wars," "The force awakens." New alien life forms and crashed fighters. I'm Luke skywalker. Reporter: Even hearing from the greatest jedi the galaxy has ever known. Nothing affordable care act has changed really. Everything has changed but nothing's changed. Reporter: Plus Han solo returning to the cockpit of the millennium falcon. Who wants to see a live "Star wars" concert right now? ? Reporter: And those 6,000 fans who waited in line, they were treated with a surprise secret concert, the "Star wars" soundtrack played by the San Diego symphony. Always may the force be with you. ? Reporter: Oh, it is so exit suing. Dan, unless you plan on making that run and smuggling this movie in for us we have to wait journal December 18th to see it. I draw the line at breaking the law but I will say and by the way, thank you, kayna, when I was 7 when that movie came out, I saw it so many times my parents would bring us to the theater no matter what time of day we would just go in in the middle and watch it from the middle back to the middle again. Loved it. You can quote it. I can quote it and Paula revealed she thought it was Han solo -- Hans solo. I'm not probably the only one. Han solo. Thanks for having my back. Coming up on "Good morning America" -- and throwing me

This transcript has been automatically generated and may not be 100% accurate.