Millions of Americans are about to enter the second annual open enrollment period under the Affordable Care Act, commonly known as Obamacare. While many will be using a public insurance exchange for the first time, others will return to switch or renew policies. Renewing should be easy, consisting of logging in and updating your personal information, because you have already made the major decisions.

Those entering the marketplace to downgrade, upgrade or buy insurance for the first time will have to give it a little more thought. In addition to the expected complications of switching health insurance, the Department of Health and Human Services reports that consumers will have 25 percent more options this year.

But that’s not the only thing that's changed. Consumers, doctors and insurance agents have all learned a lot over the past year. If you’re getting into the health insurance marketplace for the first time, here’s what’s important to know.

Don’t Panic! This Year Should Go Better

It’s hard to forget the dismal rollout of the health insurance marketplace last year. But according to the official marketplace blog, healthcare.gov, the federal marketplace that serves 37 states is on top of it. The blog reports some sections of the site are down to “make improvements and perform maintenance.”

Idaho is the only state with a new exchange of its own, having relied on the federal marketplace last year. On the flipside, Oregon and Nevada will be switching back to healthcare.gov, but with local assistance through a state-run website. Though they're hybrid exchanges, both are considered state-run.

State-run exchanges generally performed better than the federal exchange last year, but all marketplaces are reporting similar improvements. While it’s too soon to tell how well these changes will improve user experience and decrease wait times, those running them seem optimistic.

Know Those Key Terms

“One challenge I've experienced in the past year is explaining to some consumers what it all means,” says Diana Polyakov, a certified insurance agent with Covered California, that state’s exchange. “My role as an insurance agent switched from selling health insurance to teaching or explaining what certain terms mean.”

That’s part of her job, but the duties of an insurance agent should extend far beyond explaining jargon. Coming to a phone call or agent appointment armed with a knowledge of the terminology will save you both time. Plus, you’ll be able to ask the important questions if you already know what key terms mean. You can find them here or in your current health insurance policy guide.