Everywhere you look in Virginia, Republicans are torpedoing their relationship with women. Let me assure you — it’s going to be an issue in November. From the backward policies discussed in the GOP debate to political temper tantrums here in Virginia, the GOP is burning any bridge it might have to women voters.

In the recent GOP debate, we saw a party hyper-focused on policies that shame and blame women. Nearly all GOP presidential candidates favor taking away the right to choose, and many do not think there should be exceptions for rape and incest survivors. Some even believe there should be no exceptions when the life of the mother is in danger.

It wasn’t just the prime-time players with bad ideas: Even folks who shared the pre-debate stage with Jim Gilmore had anti-women and -families policies to offer.

Carly Fiorina has announced she opposes maternity leave. She shares that position with main-stage candidates like Chris Christie, who opposed family medical leave, and Scott Walker, who tried to nullify a statewide paid sick leave requirement.

Instead of supporting policies that actually help women and families get ahead, Republicans suggest Americans “work longer hours” and want you to believe that income inequality can be fixed by “working harder and selling more things.” Of course, if all else fails, there’s always Jeb Bush’s solution: “Find a husband.”

Quite frankly, after a night like that, was anyone surprised when Donald Trump made openly sexist attacks on moderator Megyn Kelly?

Unfortunately, what we saw on the debate stage is echoed throughout Virginia. Here at home, Bill Howell and Tommy Norment embarked upon a crusade to fire a female Supreme Court justice, one with impeccable qualifications and a high-powered career that included presiding over the D.C. sniper trial.

Nothing says “we value women and their opinions” like firing an extremely qualified woman and replacing her with a man.

But there’s more on the GOP agenda than trying to fire a female judge. While Democrats are pushing forward-looking policies that respect women and will help them get ahead, Republicans’ policies of the past would leave women behind.

Virginia Democrats have strong candidates this fall who support real policies for women and families, not outdated and distracting attacks.

Dan Gecker, a Chesterfield County supervisor, is working for competitive and better teacher salaries to recruit the best and the brightest and improve Virginia schools. Dr. Jill McCabe, an emergency room pediatrician in Loudoun County, knows that thanks to the Affordable Care Act, being a woman is no longer treated as a pre-existing condition. And Gary McCollum, a Virginia Beach businessman raising a 3-year-old daughter, understands that women deserve equal pay for equal work.

In contrast, the Virginia GOP is taking a page from its national party’s book and pushing out-of-touch candidates like Dick Black, who received a “Pants on Fire” rating from The Times-Dispatch/PolitiFact VA for flagrant dishonesty in promoting his anti-choice position.

It’s not just Black, though. Hal Parrish in Manassas has twisted the power of municipal zoning laws to prevent women’s clinics from opening or operating. Nancy Dye in Roanoke served on the board of a so-called “crisis pregnancy center,” where women are routinely misled, intimidated and denied resources when it comes to their health care choices. Bob Marshall questions whether marital rape exists.

The list goes on and on.

Why would women stand by these GOP candidates, when they clearly don’t stand by women? We deserve better, and come November we are going to get it.