My Turn: The trade agreement could easily make America's prescription drugs much more expensive.

Senate Minority Leader Democrat Harry Reid answers questions about the trade deal this week. (Photo: Jim Lo Scalzo, epa)

The Trans Pacific Partnership trade deal is being negotiated among 12 countries and would unite 40 percent of the world's economy. It would have an enormous impact on the American economy and would likely affect prescription drug prices as well as Medicare, leaving seniors on the losing end of the deal.

If Congress gives President Obama Trade Promotion Authority, also known as fast track negotiating authority, then the Trans Pacific Partnership would be implemented without open and full debate, enabling these major economic changes to sail through the U.S. House and Senate.

Now that Senate leaders have reached a deal to move forward with fast track trade legislation, I am extremely concerned that Medicare is being targeted as a possible way to pay for trade adjustment assistance. This program provides displaced workers with job training and assistance, so it is vitally important to those who need it.

EDITORIAL: Arizona Democrats can't afford to fight trade deal

RELATED: Unions warn Sinema on trade deal

MORE: Senate agrees to debate 'fast track' trade bill

Pending House legislation would take $700 million from Medicare to pay for trade adjustment assistance, so it is not hard to connect the dots: Medicare would be cut in order to pay for the adverse conditions that workers face as a result of trade promotion authority. Medicare should not be used as a piggy bank every time the government needs funding for other purposes.

Another reason to be cautious: Negotiations regarding the Trans Pacific Partnership have been held in secret. A lot of what we know has been leaked.

Arizona has important trade and investment ties with Trans Pacific Partnership countries. The partnership is a massive trade agreement impacting many policy areas, including drug pricing, and this could increase costs on seniors in Arizona.

Doug Hart of Tempe is president of the Arizona Alliance for Retired Americans, a non-profit, non-partisan advocacy organization for seniors and retired union members. (Photo: Bill Burke)

Leaked language in the Trans Pacific Partnership shows that pharmaceutical interests are advocating for a 12-year period of patent exclusivity for certain drugs known as biologics. This proposal is contrary to the administration's budget proposal, which contains only seven years of exclusivity, leading once again, to higher costs for seniors.

The Trans Pacific Partnership may also jeopardize the government's ability to list and price prescription drugs in public programs. More specifically, foreign corporations or subsidiaries will be able to challenge a number of public programs under Medicaid, as well as the Medicare drug discounts negotiated under the Affordable Care Act and the Veterans Affairs system, if drug pricing in these programs affect their profits.

Americans already pay the highest drug prices of any industrialized nation, and last year, drug prices went up 13 percent. Congress should be working on ways to reduce drug costs, rather than making this problem worse.

This is not the time to support an agreement that could further increase drug costs to consumers and the government. The members of the Arizona Alliance for Retired Americans will be paying close attention to what our leaders do and so should anyone else who needs Medicare or prescription drugs.

Doug Hart of Tempe is president of the Arizona Alliance for Retired Americans, a non-profit, non-partisan advocacy organization for seniors and retired union members.

Read or Share this story: http://azc.cc/1Hi881a