(Clockwise from top left) Erica Barnas, Kerry Guzman, Barnas’ son Kenneth Townsend, 3, and Emma, 8, the daughter of Guzman, hold signs at Saturday’s anti-violence vigil. Dozens of people gathered at noon near the corner of W. North Avenue and N. Buffum Street to promote peace in the wake of a violent week in Milwaukee. Credit: Mary Spicuzza

SHARE Signs were held at a vigil Saturday to promote peace in the wake of a violent week in Milwaukee. The message: Put the guns down Milwaukee. Dozens of people gathered at noon Saturday near the corner of W. North Avenue and N. Buffum Street for a vigil to promote peace in the wake of a violent week in Milwaukee. Related Coverage Why? No easy answers to Milwaukee’s spiraling violence

By of the

After a startling week of violence in Milwaukee, a group of religious leaders and community organizers gathered for a vigil Saturday on the near north side, calling for people to turn to one another to stop the bloodshed.

"It's crazy," said Derry Groce, 20, as he waited for the vigil to begin. "It just needs to stop."

The gathering drew dozens to a corner near W. North Ave. and N. Buffum St. in the Harambee neighborhood, and it featured passionate speeches by Ald. Milele Coggs, religious leaders, community organizers and others.

There were frequent chants of, "Put the guns down, Milwaukee." Many carried signs bearing the same sentiment. Children clutched white and black balloons.

"The bloodshed that we read about in the papers each day, that we turn on the TV and watch each night — it affects us all," Coggs said. "The question becomes not who do we blame, but how do we stop it."

She called for change, not just from state and city leaders, but from those inside the affected neighborhoods.

"There is a greater power that the people who live on these actual blocks have, that the people who live in these households have, that every resident in the city of Milwaukee has," Coggs said. "And it is when we the people say, 'Enough is enough.'"

Coggs said she's heard from residents who are "sick and tired" of the body counts, tired of organizing memorials and gathering mementos in honor of victims.

Many speakers stressed the importance of youth in the community.

"Elders will continue to dream dreams, but it is the youth who will have vision," said Pastor Steve Jerbi of All Peoples Church. "What is your vision, Milwaukee? What is the vision that you have for your school? What is the vision that you have for employment? What is the vision you have for your community?"

Others acknowledged the grinding poverty plaguing the neighborhoods, but nonetheless called on people to take responsibility and change attitudes.

"The Bible tells us that when the enemy comes on like a flood, then God will rise up a standard. I think we're here right now because we're ready to put up a standard," said Pastor Rodney Campbell of Crossing Jordan Ministries.

"It is not a poverty thing that is going on, it's a lack of love and respect for each other that is going on," he added.

Gladys Rogers, a minister at Greater Bethlehem Temple, told those gathered that "we are better than this."

Community organizer Keya Shumpert, who planned the vigil, said she loves Milwaukee and wants to raise her sons, 11-year-old Justin and 2-year-old Kayden, in the city.

At the end of the vigil, children released their balloons, which the wind quickly swept up into the near cloudless sky.