Brian Adams, who sells fireplaces in Indianapolis, is like many of the nation’s small-business owners. As the cost of providing health benefits has climbed, he has struggled to afford coverage for his employees — a problem the new health care law was designed, in part, to address.

But a year after the law’s introduction of the insurance exchanges, provisions that were supposed to help small businesses offer employee health benefits are largely seen as a failure. And Adams, like many of his fellow business owners, is sending employees to the exchanges to buy their own coverage instead.

Nancy Smith, who runs the Great Arizona Puppet Theater in Phoenix, made a similar decision. Her business employs only a handful of people who need insurance, and she was able to offer only plans with high deductibles. She and her employees decided buying individual policies made the most sense.

“Everyone wanted to do it because our costs were too high,” she said.

Most of the focus regarding the Affordable Care Act has been on whether individuals can find affordable coverage through the online marketplaces. But the law also had the goal of creating a robust insurance market for small businesses by making tax credits available to businesses that provide coverage and creating small-business exchanges where companies could more easily find low-cost plans.

The small-business exchanges were barely functional in most states last year, and it remains to be seen whether the Obama administration will stop the steady decline in the number of employers offering coverage to their workers. The administration is poised to try again when open enrollment begins Nov. 15.

Federal officials say they do not know how many small businesses signed up for coverage in the small-business exchanges, but the numbers are likely to be very small. In California, for example, only 12,000 people were enrolled through the state’s small-business exchange, compared with more than a million who enrolled as individuals there. To date, few businesses have availed themselves of the tax credits available for purchasing coverage for low-wage workers.

“There’s no denying that the program got off to a slow start in the first year,” said Linda Blumberg, a policy expert at the Urban Institute. Federal officials were focused on making sure the individual marketplaces worked, she said.

Experts say it’s an open question whether the program will work. “I think it will take a number of years, if it succeeds,” said Jon Gabel, a policy expert at NORC at the University of Chicago. There remains strong opposition from brokers and some insurers, he said, who view it as a threat to their existing business.

Businesses with fewer than 50 employees are not required to provide coverage. In all, they employ 34 million people, and the smallest employers are increasingly dropping coverage. Only 44 percent of employers with three to nine workers now offer coverage, according to a September survey by the Kaiser Family Foundation.

For the very smallest businesses, sending workers to individual exchanges can make the most financial sense. “You can’t expect those people to continue to offer” coverage, said Gary Claxton, an executive for the Kaiser foundation. While workers who are sent to the individual exchanges must buy their policies with after-tax dollars, he said, many qualify for federal subsidies that bring down the cost of coverage.

Reed Abelson,

The New York Times