The London headquarters of GlaxosmithKline PLC is seen in this July 29, 2013, file photo. Agence France-Presse/Getty Images

A daily roundup of corruption news from across the Web. We also provide a daily roundup of important risk & compliance stories via our daily newsletter, The Morning Risk Report, which readers can sign up for here. Follow us on Twitter at @WSJRisk.

Bribery:

GlaxosmithKline PLC faces new allegations of bribery in Romania. The company said it would look “very thoroughly” into the claims, which were made in a whistleblower’s email. Prosecutors this week also raided homes and offices looking for evidence that drug companies bribed doctors. (Reuters, AP)

Formosa Plastics Group said one of its top executives resigned over a years-long bribery scandal involving a supplier. (AFP)

A member of the Bermudan parliament denied allegations of bribery. (Royal Gazette)

An opposition lawmaker in South Korea is being investigated over alleged bribery, prosecutors said. He didn’t appear to be contacted. (Korea Herald)

Cybercrime:

A report from a cybersecurity firm said Russian government-backed hackers who penetrated high-profile U.S. government and defense industry computers this year used a method combining Twitter with data hidden in seemingly benign photographs. (Reuters, Financial Times)

Hackers attacked NY Magazine after it published interviews with 35 women who accused Bill Cosby of raping them over the past 45 years. The attackers say they knew one of the women. (Poynter, Quartz)

The Internet is the new fraud frontier. (NY Times)

Leaked emails show Hacking Team tried selling spyware to the Myanmar government, though it didn’t appear to be successful. (Irawaddy)

Banks have poured millions of dollars into securing their computer networks, but the number of hacks is rising. (Financial Times)

Researchers managed to hack into an airgapped computer. (Wired)

Hackers are using a Jane Austen novel for an attack. (Global Post)

Money Laundering:

Take an inside look at the de-risking process here. (BBC)

Western Union plans to invest more in its compliance and monitoring systems in a renewed effort to combat fraud and money laundering, a senior executive said. (Reuters)

France’s financial sector regulator fined Italian insurer Generali $5.52 million for failing to have sufficient money laundering controls in place. (Reuters)

Dubai regulators fined a bank for money laundering failures. (Reuters)

Columnists from the U.K. to Vancouver decry money laundering in real estate. (Times of London, Vancouver Sun, Guardian)

Did the FIFA case affect know-your-customer compliance procedures at banks? (MIT, Regulation Asia)

Sanctions:

Daimler is exploring a return to Iran and it may team with Iran Khodro Co., the biggest auto producer in the country. OFAC has an emphatic response to the suspected free-for-all in Iran. Tehran has high demands for foreign investment. (Bloomberg, Sanction Law, Frontiers)

The names of those on the Iran sanctions-removal list continue be revealed. (FDD, Free Beacon)

Doug Jacobson answers Iran questions on his blog. (International Trade Law)

Do sanctions have limits? (Lawfare)

Transparency:

Critics say the U.K. move to fight “dirty money” won’t work. (BBC)

General Anti-Corruption:

Malaysia blocked a U.K.-based whistleblowing website after it reported on corruption allegations involving the premier. Another arrest was made in the case. (The Independent, The Star)

China’s graft push is now targeting low-level officials. (Bloomberg)

Bond traders in Brazil can’t catch a break. (Bloomberg)

The least corrupt African countries are here. (WEF)

Latin American countries are crusading against corruption. (Tico Times)

A former Indian minister received more than four years in prison for corruption. (PTI)

Why did a U.K. liquor giant buy a corruption-prone company in India? (Economist)

The corruption trial of a former Kazakh prime minister has begun. (RFE/RL, OCCRP)

The Mob Museum in Las Vegas is setting up an exhibit dedicated to the FIFA corruption scandal. (AP, NPR)