Course in criminal procedure covers 'bail to jail' processes

Sean Finn, chief deputy district attorney for Boulder County, speaks during a hearing at the Boulder County Justice Center last year. Finn is teaching a course in criminal procedure for the University of Colorado Law School this spring. ( JEREMY PAPASSO / Daily Camera )

This spring students at the University of Colorado Law School will get a chance to learn from one of Boulder County's own prosecutors about criminal procedures, such as bail and plea bargaining.

Sean Finn, Boulder County chief trial deputy, is leading an upper-level law course next semester that focuses on what happens to a suspect after an arrest is made.

"It's basically how cases work or how a criminal defendant goes through the criminal process," Finn said. "From 'bail to jail.'"

Finn said the course materials are applicable to anyone pursuing a career in criminal justice, no matter what side of the courtroom they plan to be on — future defense attorneys and prosecutors alike can benefit from the class.

"It's all the same process," Finn said.

Mark Loewenstein, associate dean for academic affairs at CU's Law School, said mostly third-year students take the course as they prepare for their careers.

Though not a graduation requirement, the course offers students a deeper look at some of the most important pieces of the criminal process — a suspect's rights before, during and after a trial.

Finn expects to cover topics such as an individual's right to bail, right to counsel and right to appeal. Past instructors have asked students to attend local hearings to observe processes such as jury selection, opening statements and sentencing.

Being able to ask an experienced local prosecutor questions about past cases, the daily workload and other aspects of the job should help students gain real-world insights about practicing law, he said.

"It's a practical course," Loewenstein said. "It's going to attract students whose primary interest is going to be in criminal defense work or criminal prosecution. I think the insights (Finn) can give them in that class will be very valuable to them."

It's also an opportunity for students to network with someone from the district attorney's office, which typically employs about six interns at a time.

The course represents a unique partnership between two prominent organizations in the Boulder community, the university and the district attorney's office.

Finn helps train district attorneys in Colorado, teaching classes about trial techniques such as cross-examination and other topics. The chance to work with up-and-coming lawyers felt like a good way to give back to the Boulder community, Finn said.

"I know that sounds cliche but it's true," he said. "I've always enjoyed teaching. I always find it a rewarding experience."

Sarah Kuta: 303-473-1106, kutas@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/sarahkuta