As anyone who needs insulin to treat diabetes can tell you, that usually means regular checkups at the doctor’s office to fine-tune the dosage, monitor blood-sugar levels and check for complications. But here’s a little known fact: Some forms of insulin can be bought without a prescription.

Carmen Smith did that for six years when she didn’t have health insurance, and didn’t have a primary care doctor. She bought her insulin without a prescription at Wal-Mart.

“It’s not like we go in our trench coat and a top hat, saying, ‘Uh I need the insulin,'” says Smith, who lives in Cleveland. “The clerks usually don’t know it’s a big secret. They’ll just go, ‘Do we sell over-the-counter insulin?'”

Once the pharmacist says yes, the clerk just goes to get it, Smith says. “And you purchase it and go about your business.”

But it’s still a pretty uncommon purchase.

Smith didn’t learn from a doctor that she could buy insulin that way. In fact, many doctors don’t know it’s possible. When she no longer had insurance to help pay for doctors’ appointments or medicine, Smith happened to ask at Wal-Mart if she could get vials of the medicine without a prescription. To figure out the dose, she just used the same amount a doctor had given her years before.

It was a way to survive, she says, but no way to live. It was horrible when she didn’t get the size of the dose or the timing quite right.

“It’s a quick high and then, it’s a down,” Smith says. “The down part is, you feel icky. You feel lifeless. You feel pain. And the cramps are so intense — till you can’t walk, you can’t sit, you can’t stand.”

Smith’s guesswork put her in the emergency room of MetroHealth, Cleveland’s public hospital, several times across six years.

The availability of insulin over the counter presents a real conundrum. As Smith’s experience shows, without training or guidance from a health care provider, it can be dangerous for a patient to guess at the best dosage and timing from version to version of insulin. On the other hand, being able to afford and easily buy some when she needed it may have saved her life.