Some call it free speech. Others said it’s too provocative for the public.



Banned billboard Sacramento International Airport Photos The banned billboard (June 12, 2014) Courtesy photo

Either way, a controversial billboard has been banned from the Sacramento International Airport.



View the banned billboard

"The Capitol feels like it was fine but the airport feels like it’s too controversial," said Daniel Zingale, senior vice president of the California Endowment. "So, we are mystified."



Watch report: Controversial billboard banned from Sacramento International

Busy travelers at the airport's Terminal B might not even know there’s anything missing, but a black canvas near Gate 18 is now a placeholder for the banned ad, which featured undocumented immigrants promoting health care for all.



"Thousands of versions of this ad have run all over the place," Zingale said. "It is the first time we have ever run into resistance."



The resistance is because the billboard violates the airport’s advertising display policy.



Airport officials declined to be interviewed on camera, but in a statement sent to KCRA 3, they said, "In-terminal advertising at Sacramento International Airport is managed by Clear Channel Airports under a contract with the Sacramento County Department of Airports. The California Endowment ad was declined because it did not meet the advertising display policy set forth in the agreement we established with Clear Channel, which requires that under no circumstances shall advertising be displayed that would 'involve the country or the airport in controversial, social, moral, political or ethical issues.'"



The folks from California Endowment, a nonprofit health foundation, were stunned their ad was rejected, despite a $40,000, three-year contract for ad space at the airport.



"Ads like this have run in convenience stores and small markets and laundromats," Zingale said. "They have been on billboards all over the state."



The group also has placed similar ads on TV.



But placing messages like that at the airport is a different matter.



Travelers seemed surprised by the ban – and confused by the replacement ad.



"And the thing I don’t understand is, it just says 'health for all.' Great, where is it?" said Kathy Posey, a traveler from Marysville. "I think it should be put up so people are informed. That doesn’t inform me of anything."



Jerry Adamson of Portland, Maine, concurred.



"It should be there because it’s a free country," he said. "This country was founded under God, you know. It’s supposed to be a free country."



Undocumented immigrants can receive emergency care, but under the Affordable Care Act, they are not eligible to receive benefits through Covered California.



The state’s health care exchange is available only for legal residents of the United States.