Zoe Givler, 7, and her father, Todd, spend some time with Remi during a Do Over Dogs adoption event at Muttz Pet Goods and Gifts. Do Over Dogs, which was started in August, is looking for more foster families to care for dogs until permanent homes are found. ( Cliff Grassmick / Staff Photographer )

How to help Do Over Dogs is seeking foster families for dogs, including some with medical problems, until permanent homes are found for them. To find out more about the organization or to volunteer as a foster family, contact Katelynn Bennett at 720-345-2939 or katelynn@dooverdogs.org or visit www.dooverdogs.org

Call it a mulligan, a second chance or a do-over.

Do Over Dogs, a Broomfield-based foster organization, believes every dog deserves another chance to find a forever home, even if they have health problems or have lived part of their lives as strays. The organization, which started in August, is seeking more foster families and volunteers to help house and socialize dogs, some of whom have medical issues.

Since it began, Do Over Dogs has found homes for 45 dogs and puppies.

The organization's founders, Christie Salazar and Katelynn Bennett said they need a little help to move their mission forward. They have plenty of love to give, but have few places where dogs can stay before they are adopted.

Sometimes, their own homes get a little crowded.

Do Over Dogs "takes up about 95 percent of my life," said the organization's president Salazar, who has been known to house four foster puppies at a time on top of taking care of her two dogs.

Before starting Do Over Dogs, she often used her home as an unofficial foster location for birds, rodents, reptiles and ferrets, too.

Advertisement

"You name it, someone would drop them off at my house and I'd find a home for them," she said.

Though Salazar's home has long been used as a temporary place for pets to crash, it's not sustainable for Do Over Dogs, which doesn't have an official headquarters outside the founders' homes.

They rely on eligible fosters or volunteers who can step up and help with the care, feeding and walking of dogs until they can be taken to regular adoption events or connected with their new families, Bennett said.

Broomfield and the surrounding area is an ideal place to find new foster families, she said.

"Colorado, and Broomfield specifically, is filled with kindhearted people, and you don't turn down a street without seeing someone walking their dog," she said.

If those kind-hearted people can open their homes to a homeless pet, even just for a little while, it can help dogs stay off the streets and learn socialization skills, she said.

Bennett said some of the dogs who are fostered and adopted through Do Over Dogs have serious medical problems. One dog had a type of mange that made it look like the dog had third-degree burns.

Do Over Dogs aims to give the dogs better access to medical treatment.

"We want them to be both medically healthy and well-loved," Bennett said.

The goal is to take the dogs out of shelters that do not have the resources or time to help dogs with health problems or minor illnesses, such as worms, she said. In some of those shelters, dogs have a higher chance of being killed before they are adopted.

Another reason for placing dogs in foster care is to help train or socialize puppies and dogs, so they can integrate more easily into daily life. Loud, chaotic shelters cannot always offer those resources, she said.

Salazar and Bennett said they have had great support from foster families in the past, but several of their dedicated foster homes ended up adopting one of the dogs. That means the dogs find a loving, permanent home, but that also means Do Over Dogs needs to find new foster homes for dogs in the future, Bennett said.

Do Over Dogs wants to connect pets with their forever homes, but they are specific about who can take home the dogs, Salazar said. A home inspection is required before Do Over Dogs will approve an adoption, and the organization also asks adoptive pet parents to take a six-week positive reinforcement training class with their new dog.

"You can apply to adopt, but it's not guaranteed to be a good fit," she said.

Megan Quinn: 303-410-2649, quinnm@broomfieldenterprise.com or twitter.com/MeganQuinn2