Topics: Africa, Harvey Weinstein, Idris Elba, Mandela: Long Walk to Freedom, Movies, Nelson Mandela, nikki finke, Race, South Africa, Terrorism, Life News, Entertainment News, News

Nikki Finke, the veteran Hollywood reporter and blogger who founded Deadline.com (and was recently driven out by the site’s owner), got in Internet-trouble this week for tweeting about the death of Nelson Mandela and immediately linking it to “awards buzz” around the Weinstein Co. film “Mandela: Long Walk to Freedom.” That was an idiotic thing to say in public, but no one who knows Finke — or has ever read her work — could have been surprised to learn that she lacks social graces and has a totally blinkered, movie-centric view of the world. Her real sin, in fact, was to articulate what everyone else in and around the film industry was thinking, but was too polite to say out loud: Boy oh boy, Harvey Weinstein has done it again!

This drive to think small, to think in terms of short-term, instrumental results — to capture the swirling contradictions of history in a teacup, or at least in a two-hour movie with awards buzz — is characteristic of our age, and not limited to Harvey Weinstein and Nikki Finke. (Indeed, I would never accuse Harvey Weinstein of thinking small.) We yearn for the tl;dr version of everything, the quick and canny summary; we yearn to understand history before its meanings have begun to settle, and in some sense before it has even happened. All Finke did was frame this desire in a way that struck many people as overly abrupt, or poorly measured. No, we don’t actually know what Mandela’s life, or death, means, because we can’t know that. But we know what it means for the Oscar race!

Thousands or millions of words have been written about Nelson Mandela this week, with more to come, and the best way to avoid empty fanfare is probably to say: Yes, he was clearly one of the most important political figures of our time, and led a remarkable life. But we can only make guesses about the long-term consequences and historical legacy of his extraordinary career, which is open to many readings and conflicting interpretations. Today we look for a one-sentence message of inspiration and uplift, because that’s the natural impulse when a human life has reached its end. Those who come along later, when the rest of us are dead too, may put the picture together quite differently than we do now.

As Joan Walsh has pointed out, it’s ludicrous that contemporary American right-wingers like Sen. Ted Cruz feel obligated to say nice things about Mandela now that he’s dead. Cruz’s immediate forebears in the loony-tunes, Birchian branch of the conservative movement, including Dick Cheney, the entire Reagan administration and the neocon circle around National Review, supported the South African apartheid regime right to the bitter end and consistently portrayed Mandela as a terrorist, a communist sympathizer and a dangerous anti-American revolutionary. Furthermore, it’s a diagnosis that’s at least partly accurate, depending on what you think “terrorist” means, and with the proviso that Mandela made strategic alliances with communists but always opposed both their ideology and their domineering style. The irate Tea Partyers posting on Cruz’s Facebook page actually have a point: If Cruz had a shred of integrity, he’d stick to denouncing Mandela or simply shut the hell up.

As for the inert, semi-hagiographic portrait delivered in “Mandela: Long Walk to Freedom,” with the great British actor Idris Elba boxed into a thankless role, that’s just as ideological in its own way as the right wing’s long-running cartoon version. While the movie is handsome to look at and offers the requisite inspiring episodes at regular intervals — Elba is especially stirring delivering Mandela’s 1964 courtroom speech, during the trial that could easily have led to his execution — its desire to pack everything in leaves you with the curious sensation that everything important has been left out.

We glimpse Mandela in stages as an idealistic young lawyer, an armed revolutionary, a political prisoner, a husband in an irreparably damaged marriage and a senior statesman who repudiates violence and leads his nation into democracy. But there’s little or no sense of how those shifts occurred, unless perhaps through superior force of personality or the agency of the Almighty. Although the movie is based on Mandela’s 1994 autobiography, it’s been reprocessed by William Nicholson, the screenwriter of “Les Misérables” and “Gladiator,” which may tell you everything you need to know. This is the authorized, Western liberal-consensus version of the story, in which a Great Man decides that violence is bad, while those of us out in middle-class audience-land nod along in contented agreement.

Just to be clear, I’m not suggesting that Harvey Weinstein invested all this time, money and care into an impressively staged Mandela biopic for cynical reasons. The secret to being Harvey Weinstein is that he believes passionately in everything he does; he is always shrewd, but almost never cynical. But the man has a justified reputation as a bona fide marketing genius, and it did not escape his attention that he was making a movie about a world-historical personage who was in his mid-90s and in declining health. Much of the film’s highlight-reel character — it feels like a combination of tribute album, historical montage and refresher course — makes sense only in that light.

When I first saw “Mandela: Long Walk to Freedom,” which is directed by Justin Chadwick (of “The Other Boleyn Girl” and loads of British television), I had the naïve reaction of wondering who this movie was supposed to be for. Those who actually knew something about South African politics and history (or who had read Mandela’s terrific book) would find it slight and superficial, and those who didn’t presumably wouldn’t be interested in the first place. Now, of course, everyone is interested, and this honorable, conventional and fundamentally unchallenging telling of the Mandela saga makes the perfect universal catch-up. I’m not even saying it’s a bad movie; it’s probably a good one, in Harvey Weinstein terms, meaning that it’ll fuel lots of earnest holiday-season family conversations.