The president has had every opportunity to improve our national economy since he took office in 2009.

There is no doubt that when he took office he did inherit an economic mess and it was fair to put part of the blame on his predecessor. But, with five years into the job and with Obama pledging that he could turn things around, it is now his record that must be examined.

In 2008 when Barack Obama was running for office he had all the answers for all that ailed us. Sadly as president, none of his efforts have had the positive impact on the economy that was anticipated or realized. If Obama in 2008 had told us what the economy would look like, as it exists today — he would not have been elected. He felt the need to exaggerate and overpromise to get elected.

The American people have given Obama every benefit to succeed. However, the president has never risen to the occasion.

There is no doubt that Obama inherited a bad economy but he made it worse by turning his attention to the creation of Obamacare instead of fixing that which needed immediate attention and action and that is job creation, budget discipline, debt reduction, and tax reform.

A clear an unbiased look at the economic metrics clearly sets forth the across-the-board failures of the Obama administration to improve the national economy to date:

The president is in the midterm of his full tenure as president. He can improve his final grade on the economy — only if he dramatically changes course and turns his attention to working across the aisle to find common ground and compromise on economic solutions to our pressing challenges.

The key to the next three years will be the results of the 2014 midterm elections. Either way the president of the United States gets the credit or the blame for the economic welfare of America.

Mr. President, your legacy will be the economy and Obamacare. Those issues will determine your final grade.

Bradley A. Blakeman served as deputy assistant to President George W. Bush from 2001-04. He is currently a professor of politics and public policy at Georgetown University and a frequent contributor to Fox News Opinion. Read more reports from Bradley Blakeman — Click Here Now.