I received an envelope in the mail a few days ago that clearly was sent to me out of sheer frustration. Inside, was a multi-page disciplinary record of a middle school student in Milwaukee Public Schools. Whoever sent it to me wrote just one simple sentence:

"How do we reach a kid like this?"

After reviewing the student's record and speaking with his mother, I think that's a very good question.

Imagine for a moment that your child was in a classroom with this student. Imagine if you were a student in that classroom — or you were the teacher. How would you learn? How would you teach?

During a two-week period last fall, the student had more than a dozen school violations, including slapping a classmate, refusing to do work, standing on a desk, having verbal altercations and yelling out a school bus window. While attending a previous school, he was suspended for, among other things, drug possession and theft.

The boy has attended a handful of different schools since spring 2010, violating school rules and making threats to both teachers and students.

The student has served several in-school and at-home suspensions; the student's parents have been called repeatedly by teachers and school social workers. The student has been diagnosed with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder and has an individualized education plan.

I am not identifying the student, but I am providing a snapshot of his record to illustrate the kind of challenges some classroom teachers face in MPS.

In a statement, MPS spokesman Tony Tagliavia said MPS could not comment on the case. "We are happy to be a part of a discussion about student discipline and improving outcomes for all students," the statement said. "However, the district does not comment on individual students and their personal disciplinary histories, and, in this case, we cannot be assured the identity of the student would be protected."

It would be easy to look at this one student's behavior and simply write it off as a "bad child" or "bad parenting." But I think that's smug — too easy of an answer. MPS has to educate all students regardless of their ability, and I have a lot of sympathy for teachers who have to deal with chronically disruptive students.

The boy's mother, with whom I spoke, acknowledges the problems but says he is not a bad child. And while that may well be true, the frequency of his troublesome behavior disrupts the classroom and affects other students.

His mother said the school gives her son medication for ADHD but that his anger problems also stem from other students picking on him. "If he feels like he's being picked on, he's going to fight back," she said.

MPS has tried to address disruptive students with the greatest needs. Last year, the district started a grass-roots effort called "Saving Our Sons," which provides mentors for black boys who are struggling in school. It also provides a non-judgmental venue for young people to talk about the trauma they have faced. I think the program works and should be expanded. There is a great need.

The district uses peer mediation and more in-school suspensions so kids don't fall too far behind because of frequent absences and suspensions. The district also has started taking its most disruptive students out of school and placing them in smaller settings. The goal is to make them earn the right to return to a traditional school setting.

But the boy's mother worries that the district's efforts may not be enough to help her son. "Teachers get tired of him because they don't know how to deal with him, and then he gets picked on, so I have to move him," she said. "He does need to be more respectful, and I tell him to watch his mouth. Other than that, I don't know what else to say."

There are indications that the problem of classroom disruption is growing. A new Harris Poll, released on Jan. 23, showed that the level of disrespect toward teachers nationwide is at an all-time high. The pool showed that parents' respect for teachers dropped from 91% to 49%, while students' respect for teachers dropped from 79% to 31%.

Last month, I wrote a column on a Morse/Marshall High School teacher who told me that she was leaving the district after teaching for more than a decade because of the stress. She worries about increasing disrespect and is concerned with her safety and that of her students.

While I like some of the changes MPS has made, the district should consider bolder moves, such as a SEED School or Chicago's Urban Prep Academies approach. Some kids need the extra attention that automatically comes from a boarding school approach. Just hoping that hard-to-educate children eventually will fall in line doesn't prepare them for the future, and it hurts other students who are trying to learn.

About five years ago, a SEED school was proposed for Milwaukee, but that idea went nowhere. That's too bad because more than 98% of SEED students graduate; often, they are students traditional schools had given up on. The SEED concept was started by Milwaukee native Rajiv Vinnakota. As for Urban Prep in Chicago, 100% of its graduating class — all disadvantaged black boys — enroll in college every year.

Traditional schools are not working for some of our most disadvantaged students. We need to plant new seeds for the future. If we allow children with problems to constantly be a distraction, we are robbing other students of their opportunity to learn.

James E. Causey is a Journal Sentinel editorial writer, columnist and blogger. Email jcausey@journalsentinel.com. Facebook: fb.me/james.causey.12 Twitter: twitter.com/jecausey