Limbo is not a comfortable place to reside, but that’s where shortstop Jose Reyes finds himself as the Rockies’ season draws to a close.

Reyes, 32, was out of the lineup again Saturday against the Dodgers because of a sore left Achilles tendon. Although he wants to play again and finish out the season strong, and although he took infield practice Saturday, if the injury doesn’t heal enough, Reyes will sit out the final seven games.

The bigger question is about his long-term future. Traded to Colorado as part of the deal with Toronto for Troy Tulowitzki, Reyes is owed $22 million over each of the next two seasons, making him Colorado’s highest-paid player. There has been a lot of speculation that the Rockies will attempt to trade Reyes in the offeason, even if that means eating a large portion of his salary.

“To be honest with you, I have no idea what’s going to happen in the offseason,” he said. “I’m still part of this team and I have a contract for the next two years.”

Still, Reyes admitted that “it feels weird” being in his situation.

“I don’t want to be up in the air in the offseason and not know what’s going to happen,” he said. “But this is baseball, so nothing surprises me. Nothing is promised as (to what’s) going to happen. But for now, I’m part of this ballclub.”

Said manager Walt Weiss: “As far as I’m concerned, he’s our shortstop. I don’t get caught up in the contract stuff.”

As for his tender Achilles, Reyes is being cautious.

“The Achilles is a very serious injury and you don’t want to (tear) that,” he said. “I want to finish the season. But I don’t want to go out there, try to be tough and make it worse. But if it’s a little sore but good enough to play, I want to.”

In 42 games with the Rockies, Reyes is hitting .253 with three homers, seven doubles, two triples and seven stolen bases.

Arenado won’t back down. Nolan Arenado, who entered Saturday with 39 homers and a National League-leading 117 RBIs, has been hitting the dirt a lot lately as Pirates and Dodgers pitchers have thrown pitches high and tight.

Each time, Arenado has popped back up and got right back to business.

“He sticks his nose right back in there and he doesn’t back off the plate,” Weiss said. “I’ve seen him take aggressive swings on the very next pitch. He’s a great competitor.”

Weiss doesn’t think teams are going after Arenado, or testing him.

“I don’t think it’s been a trend, but we will certainly protect our guys if we feel like we need to,” he said. “Actually, I think it’s a sign of respect. Nolan’s become an elite hitter in this league and (pitchers) are afraid to miss over the plate. When the catcher calls for the ball in against a great hitter, the pitcher wants to make sure he doesn’t leave it over the plate and have it get hit into the seats.”

Praise for Murphy. Rookie catcher Tommy Murphy wasn’t originally pegged to get called up this season, but injuries to Michael McKenry and Nick Hundley expedited his promotion. He has made the most of the opportunity.He entered Saturday’s game hitting .292 with three home runs and eight RBIs in just 24 at-bats. He’s also shown veteran poise behind the plate. “He’s a real hard-nosed kid, very mature,” Weiss said.

Dodgers’ Alex Wood (11-11, 3.60 ERA) at Rockies’ Chris Rusin (5-9, 5.39), 2:10 p.m. Sunday, ROOT; 630 AM

The honor of pitching the final game of the season at Coors Field goes to Rusin, a left-hander who’s run so hot and cold this season. He has two complete games at home this season, yet he’s only 4-3 with a 5.31 ERA at Coors Field. In his past three starts, he is 0-2 with a 10.38 ERA. Wood, also a lefty, dominated the Rockies on Sept. 16 in a 2-0 victory for the Dodgers, allowing just one hit over eight innings, which tied a career high for innings pitched. Of course, that performance was at pitcher-friendly Dodger Stadium. In four career starts against Colorado, he is 2-1 with a 4.35 ERA.

Monday: Off

Tuesday: Rockies’ Christian Bergman (3-1, 4.62 ERA) at Diamondbacks’ Robbie Ray (5-12, 3.53), 7:40 p.m., ROOT

Wednesday: Rockies’ Chad Bettis (8-5, 4.38) at Diamondbacks’ Chase Anderson (6-6, 4.40), 7:40 p.m., ROOT

Thursday: Rockies’ David Hale (5-5, 6.01) at Diamondbacks’ Patrick Corbin (6-5, 3.28), 7:40 p.m., ROOT