Click photo to enlarge «

1

2

»

Camden Burke and Logan Boye, fifth-graders at Boulder's Eisenhower Elementary School

Camden, with help from Logan, decided there needed to be an after-school program for students interested in peer modeling for students with disabilities. Camden met with the principal, recruited 18 peers and four target students and designed and enlisted staff support for the project. As a result of their efforts, the school has a flourishing group of 22 students, who participate in varied activities. Activities are student generated and include working in the school's rainbow garden, a drumming workshop, mural making, friendship skills and drills for soccer and dodgeball.

Why this project?

Camden: I wanted to help kids and make sure they have some friends around school. I wanted them to feel good about coming to school.

Logan: We go to a "Friday Night Fun" program in Boulder with kids with disabilities, and Camden had the great idea of making a program here.

What did you do for the project?

Camden: I talked with the principal and asked about the idea. I went around talking to a bunch of people to help support this. I talked to the kids in the ILC (Intensive Learning Center). I told them this would be a super fun idea.

What have been some of the favorite activities?

Camden: Most kids like playing outside on the playground and playing soccer.

Advertisement

Logan: Aztec drumming. Mario, one of the ILC teachers, taught us how to do it and how to feel the beat. He really reached out to all the kids.

What are you most looking forward to about middle school?

Logan: In seventh grade, we can help with kids with disabilities.

Camden: I'm also really excited about the opportunities and ideas waiting for you, the new experiences.

What are you going to miss about Eisenhower?

Camden: How supportive the school is. Pretty much everybody is supportive. All the teachers are super awesome .

Logan: I'm going to miss all my friends I made here.

What do you like to do outside of school?

Camden: I've played the piano for five or six years. I like to pay jazz, blues, rock. It's really fun, and it just makes you feel good playing for other people.

Logan: I do ski racing and lacrosse. Skiing, I like that you're on the hill just going down the mountain as fast as you can. I like lacrosse because it's a team sport.

What's your dream job?

Logan: I want to do something with a ski program for people with disabilities. It's my two favorite things in the world.

Camden: My dad always told me he wanted me to do something really cool and change the world. I'll probably do that. I might start an EXPAND program and be a piano teacher.