Photo

If you read my magazine article about Senator Mitch McConnell and what may be his final campaign this fall, you’ll learn that he loves Morris’ Deli (check the photo), owns both a BlackBerry and an iPad and has, by Senator Harry Reid’s count, orchestrated 442 filibusters since President Obama took office. Here are a few more facts about the senator, his state and his opponent, Alison Lundergan Grimes, that you may not know:

1. He can win over drunken retirees.

During his first Senate re-election campaign in 1990, McConnell and his opponent, Harvey Sloane, were at a Fraternal Order of Police hall in Louisville. Each had served as judge executive of Jefferson County, which includes Louisville, and each had clashed with the police union over contracts. “There were lots of retirees there, and they had started drinking at about 3 in the afternoon,” McConnell told me. “And I laid out my case, and some old guy in the back just drunker than a hoot owl says” — and at this point, McConnell adopted a bit of a slur — ” ‘Senator, I don’t like you,’ and he said, ‘I don’t like Sloane.’ And I said, ‘Well, you’re gonna be happy, because one of those S.O.B.s is gonna lose.’ ” The group dissolved into laughter and eventually backed McConnell.

2. He’s got serious beef with The Courier-Journal.

O.K., you might already know about this: McConnell complains to anyone who will listen about the gibes he has endured over the years from The Courier-Journal, Louisville’s newspaper and historically the most influential daily in the state. In fact, feuding with the newspaper seems so much a part of his identity that it brings him a sort of gratification. Or at least that was the premise of a story that Hunter Bates, a former McConnell chief of staff, told me. One of The Courier-Journal’s liberal editorial writers, David Hawpe, was a frequent McConnell antagonist. But he seemed to warm to McConnell for a while, at least on the First Amendment issues that McConnell has embraced, opposing campaign finance reform and a flag-burning amendment. After a period of detente, as Bates recalled, Hawpe again became sharply critical of McConnell when they disagreed on an issue relating to the University of Louisville. McConnell’s aides were disappointed: An influential voice was once again on the warpath against the senator. But McConnell seemed pleased, as Bates remembered, because order had been restored. “It’s more comfortable for him,” Bates said. “The world he knows included battling this guy.”

3. He’s buds with Senator Rand Paul. Sort of.

As his state and his party have moved to the right over the years, McConnell has shifted to keep pace. His newfound opposition to federal earmarks, which for decades he bragged about delivering to his poor state, is perhaps the most vivid example of his move. But so was his quick decision in 2010 to rally to the side of Rand Paul, who thumped McConnell’s handpicked candidate in that year’s Republican Senate primary. “Where Senator McConnell excels is that I don’t think he holds a grudge,” is how Paul put it to me. Paul was, however, less effusive when I asked what political lessons he had learned from watching McConnell campaign. “Everybody kind of has their own style with regard to campaigning,” he said, before waiting for the next question.

4. He and Harry Reid have more in common than they might think.

It’s no secret in Washington that McConnell and Reid, the Senate majority leader, do not get along these days. The problem may be less about their differences and more about the degree to which they are alike: septuagenarian political survivors and consummate inside players, each a fierce partisan always looking for the upper hand and showing little regard for how they come across on TV. They also inspire loyalty among their staff members and have a legion of former aides still offering support and advice.

Steve Law, a former McConnell chief of staff and campaign hand who now runs the “super PAC” American Crossroads, recalled running into a former Reid hand during the great Washington blizzard of 2010. Facing impassable roads, Law settled in for the night at a hotel just across the Potomac River, struck up a conversation with the Reid-ite and found much common ground. “When you are stranded at the Key Bridge Marriott, all you can do is drink whiskey and swap stories, and it was amazing how similar our recollections were,” Law told me.

5. He’s not above taking advantage of a little voter ignorance.

In his first Senate bid in 1984, McConnell had, by virtue of his background in Kentucky’s largest city, been targeted as the “urban” candidate by the incumbent Democrat he was challenging. Six years later, running against Sloane, he was immune to that attack: Sloane was also from Louisville. This pleased McConnell greatly. “I’m up in eastern Kentucky campaigning, run into a couple old boys, and one of them said, ‘Senator, you’re going to be re-elected,’ ” he recounted. “I said, ‘I sure am glad to hear that.’ I said, ‘Why is that?’ And he said, ‘Well, you know that feller Sloane, he’s from Louisville.’ I said thank you and moved right along.”

6. In facing Grimes, he’s also facing the Clintons.

Grimes calls herself a “Clinton Democrat,” which is genuine as a reflection of her family’s relationship to the Clintons but also politically smart in a state Bill Clinton carried twice. When I asked her about McConnell’s attempt to link her to the current Democratic president, she tested out a “won’t be long now” line I’ve heard from other Southern Democrats. “Kentuckians know how to do arithmetic, and they realize that the president has two more years left on his term and we are electing a senator for the next six,” she said.

7. Coal isn’t the only crisis in Eastern Kentucky.

McConnell has made coal a central element of his campaign, and there is little doubt that the future of mining is a pressing issue in a state where 90 percent of residents have coal-powered electricity and two regions of the state have coal-based economies. But Eastern Kentucky, the poorest region of a poor state, has a problem just as acute as the future of mining: the abuse of prescription drugs. On the day I traveled to the area with McConnell last month, two local newspapers carried front-page headlines about what has become an epidemic. News of the director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention visiting the region dominated one front page, and an article about the sentencing of the owners of a pain clinic for illegally distributing Oxycodone was spread across another. Over lunch at a stop in Pikeville, an aide to Representative Harold Rogers, who represents the area, related a gripping statistic: In a six-week period last year, 13 children who go to the Harlan Boys & Girls Club lost a parent to a prescription drug overdose, 11 of whom witnessed their parent die.

8. McConnell and Grimes both have reasons for not pressing Obamacare.

It is not exactly a mutual nonaggression pact, but neither McConnell nor Grimes has an interest in focusing on the Affordable Care Act. Grimes has been nudged by some Kentucky Democrats to embrace a law that has nearly halved the state’s uninsured population, but she has so far resisted out of fear of giving McConnell any opportunity to link her to an issue so identified with Obama, who is quite unpopular in the state. McConnell criticizes Grimes for supporting the health law, but he and his allies have been more focused on linking her to what they see as the more culturally resonant issue of coal.

Even if no one is trumpeting its success on the campaign trail, Obamacare has been successful in Kentucky. This is especially true in the impoverished eastern part of the state, where McConnell hopes to cut into Grimes’s margins or even win some traditionally Democratic counties. Most of those now insured under the law in this region (and in much of the state) are receiving coverage through the expansion of Medicaid, which Gov. Steven L. Beshear, unlike most Southern governors, accepted.

McConnell criticized Beshear for accepting the Medicaid expansion, calling it “a mistake,” and said he wanted to repeal the entire law “root and branch.” But when I pressed him about the politics of taking away Medicaid from those individuals that now have it, he suggested that was unlikely – even while still faulting Beshear for the decision. “I don’t know that it will be taken away from them,” McConnell said of the expanded Medicaid coverage. Speaking about Beshear and Kentucky’s state government, he added: “They’ve made the decision to expand it, they’re gonna have to pay for it.”

9. His rivalry with Grimes is bigger than the Senate race.

Some may identify Kentucky with its famous rite of spring, the Kentucky Derby. But the sport that actually consumes most Kentuckians is college basketball. McConnell cheers for his alma mater, the University of Louisville. Grimes lives in Lexington and pulls for the hometown team, the University of Kentucky. These allegiances to U. of L. and U.K., to use the local shorthand, can make for a delicate political topic because of the intense rivalry between the schools. But the astute politician knows how to toe the line. When Bill Clinton visited Kentucky earlier this year, he noted at a Grimes fundraiser in Louisville that he was friends with both John Calipari and Rick Pitino, respectively the head coaches for the men’s basketball teams at the University of Kentucky and University of Louisville.