Topics: cortisone, Physiology, Psychology, Scientific American, Stress, Social News, Technology News, Business News, Life News

This article was originally published by Scientific American

We would all appreciate a healthy work-life balance, but even those of us who try to unwind outside the office are frustrated by the gentle chime of email at all hours. To our delight and horror, smartphones and tablets have given us the flexibility to respond to work from anywhere, practically becoming one of the family. Entrepreneurs and executives are known for a round-the-clock devotion to work, in contrast to the four-day-week gurus, but what toll does availability take for those whose jobs require it?

A recent study links extended work availability with decreased calmness, mood, and energy levels. By looking at industries from technical services to nursing, the study evaluated the effects of being on-call — that is, not at work, but being expected to remain available by phone for questions or customer requests. Participants answered questions in the evening after an on-call day about how often they thought about work or how constrained their activities felt. The next morning, they were quizzed again to better understand how the previous day’s mental requirements affected their mood.

Participants marked lower moods the morning after being on-call compared to mornings after days when they were not required to be available, which the researchers believe occurs because readiness to respond makes it harder to recover from work. The possibility alone impeded recovery from work, as the effects persisted even when no calls came.

These results were strengthened by an association between psychology and physiology. Cortisol is a stress hormone, and changes in cortisol levels are associated with health problems. While hunter-gatherers probably found these changes useful in preparing for predator attacks, today’s consensus is that the unavoidable daily stressors of modern life change cortisol levels in ways more harmful than helpful.

Normally, a person’s cortisol level rises each morning and falls over the course of the day, but stressed people tend to have different cortisol profiles. The baseline levels of cortisol in the chronically stressed remain higher overall, and the natural morning peak is quicker to rise.(“Burnout,” heralded by fatigue and exhaustion, occurs when a stressed person’s baseline cortisol falls from the elevated levels right past the norm to unusually low levels, and the morning peak in the hormone isslower or absent.) In this study, an individual’s morning levels of cortisol increased more quickly when participants would be on call, resembling the higher hormone levels seen in job stress. This may simply be the body’s way of preparing for the anticipated stresses ahead, the authors suggest.