CORTEZ - The fishing boats still arrive nearly every afternoon at the weathered docks behind the old seafood processing plant.

Their daily haul changes with the seasons: mullet roe in November and December, stone crabs in the winter and spring, baitfish year-round.

It has been like this since the late 1960s when the plant opened. Owner John Banyas hopes to keep the operation going for years to come, but rising costs are a constant concern. Banyas had to raise prices recently after packaging costs nearly doubled.

Living and working near the water also comes at a premium price, and soon it will get even costlier for many property owners.

Banyas pays $5,000 annually for flood insurance on his processing plant — coverage that is required by his bank — but rates are set to spike for many homes and businesses.

Premiums will increase exponentially for the riskiest properties — one Sarasota insurance agent calculated that his sister's Casey Key property faces a 400 percent rate surge — costing owners thousands in additional annual payments.

The higher rates will be phased in for existing property owners, but new owners will be hit with the full cost.

A series of major flood events over the last decade sent the National Flood Insurance Program deep into debt, and Congress responded by demanding more money from policyholders.

Florida is ground zero for the rate increases, with more than one-third of all flood policies in the nation, including 109,000 in Sarasota and Manatee counties.

Older properties that were not built to current flood elevation standards will be particularly hard hit. Sarasota and Manatee have roughly 30,000 of these structures in high-hazard zones, and more could be added as flood maps are revised over the next year. They are concentrated in places such as Cortez, a fishing village first settled in the 1880s.

Most properties in Cortez sit near the water, and many were built long before structures had to be elevated.

It is the same story in Siesta Key, the neighborhoods along Hudson Bayou in Sarasota, and other waterfront areas throughout the region.

Spiking insurance costs could fundamentally reshape such communities, driving out longtime residents and businesses while accelerating a shift toward wealthier owners and investors. Pressure to tear down older properties in favor of new, elevated structures will grow. Some worry that older communities will lose their charm in the process.

“Everybody's going to get hit,” Banyas said.

Banyas traces his roots to one of the first families to settle Cortez, fishermen from the Carolinas who came to Florida's Gulf Coast chasing vast schools of mullet.

The Cortez peninsula is ideally situated between the mouth of Tampa Bay and the north end of Sarasota Bay. Commercial fishing has long thrived in the region and remains integral to the local economy. Indeed, this is one of the few traditional fishing communities left in Florida.

But much of the narrow peninsula is just a few feet above sea level, making the area vulnerable to flooding from a hurricane-related storm surge.

A hurricane devastated Cortez in 1921, destroying most of the waterfront fishing operations and washing homes from foundations further inland. The same storm sent six feet of water cascading into downtown Sarasota.

Such disasters — and the private sector's retreat from the flood insurance market — led to passage of the National Flood Insurance Act in 1968.

The federal government agreed to provide flood coverage, but required communities to strictly police construction in flood-prone regions.

Maps were created to assess flood risk. New construction had to be elevated in high-risk areas.

But older, low-lying properties were allowed to purchase coverage at what critics describe as discounted rates given their flood risk.

The rates were largely adequate to cover claims for nearly four decades. But starting with Hurricane Katrina — it submerged large segments of New Orleans in 2005 — a series of devastating flood events pushed the federal insurance program deep into debt.

Total borrowing from the U.S. Treasury could reach $28 billion when all Superstorm Sandy claims are paid.

It will take the program decades to repay that level of debt, leading many lawmakers to declare the flood insurance system fiscally unsound.

Congress approved a bipartisan package of reforms in 2012.

The Biggert-Waters Act targets older, low-elevation properties in high-risk flood areas.

Rate hikes began for second homes earlier this year. New rates for commercial properties take effect after Oct. 1. Premiums for these two categories will increase 25 percent annually until the government decides they are adequate.

The annual cap on rate increases for all other flood insurance policies was increased from 10 percent to 20 percent. So even though owner-occupied properties were spared the large, mandatory increases, they could still get hit with significantly higher premiums.

But the greatest impact may come when homeowners decide to sell.

After Oct. 1, the government plans to strip away any perceived subsidy when older, low-elevation homes in high-risk areas change hands. Rates will rise exponentially for some properties.

Sarasota insurance agent Keith MacFarlane recently ran the numbers on a property his sister bought on Casey Key that is three feet below the elevation where floodwaters are expected every 100 years.

Properties below the 100-year flood level are considered most at risk. All new construction must be above that level.

MacFarlane's sister pays $1,500 annually, but that would jump to $6,600 for the next owner under the “full risk rate.” Lower-elevation homes would see an even larger rate jump.

The new rates also will be charged to older, low-lying homes that are shifted into high hazard zones when federal flood maps are revised, a process that is underway in Sarasota and Manatee counties.

The Manatee map revision is expected to add 9,040 properties to high-risk zones, where owners are required to carry flood insurance if they have a mortgage. Sarasota County does not have precise figures yet.

“It's going to eliminate a lot of potential buyers,” MacFarlane said.

At the heart of the recent flood insurance changes is a long-simmering debate over whether federal policy is heedlessly encouraging development too close to the water.

Coastal development has significant economic benefits that could be diminished without affordable flood insurance. Residents of older communities built along the water also will struggle with affordability issues.

But many believe cheap flood insurance encourages development that is environmentally harmful and economically unwise.

Supporters of the rate increases say they are long overdue.

“The subsidies are a problem,” said R.J. Lehmann, a senior fellow with the Washington D.C.-based R Street Institute, a free-market think tank that has advocated for flood insurance reforms.

Cheap flood insurance puts a burden on the federal government to bail out the program after a major catastrophe, Lehmann said. It also sends the wrong signal about the risks of living near water.

“There are risks associated and those risks should be charged,” he said.

University of Pennsylvania business professor Erwann Michel-Kerjan said higher rates are inevitable if lawmakers want the program to be totally self-sufficient, but there is a legitimate policy debate over whether it should be.

Michel-Kerjan has advised top federal officials on the issue.

“My question back to the White House and Congress was 'What do you want the program to do?' ” he said.

Some wonder whether there's a difference between bailing out the flood insurance program and giving people money through other disaster relief programs. Rate increases could lead more people to drop flood insurance, increasing the need for Federal Emergency Management Agency aid after a disaster.

One solution might be means-tested subsidies to help poorer people afford flood insurance, Michel-Kerjan said. Subsidies also could be targeted to help certain waterfront businesses, such as the fishing industry.

Lehmann supports the idea under the right conditions.

There's also the worry that places such as Cortez could lose their charm if older homes are torn down because they are too costly to insure.

Many Cortez properties are listed on the National Register of Historic Places, which allows them to maintain flood insurance discounts. But not Pat Potts' whimsically decorated home, with its funky lawn art and stained-glass window hangings.

Potts lives in a 1,240-square-foot wood-frame bungalow near the Cortez fishing docks. The 71-year-old retiree pays nearly $4,000 each year for property insurance, including $1,421 for flood coverage.

Potts' insurance payments on the home — built in 1961 at ground level, well below the 100-year flood height — are roughly equal to her mortgage. She has never had a claim in 29 years of ownership.

“It's going to be a real hardship for people on fixed incomes,” said Potts, who lives with her husband on roughly $23,000 in Social Security and pension payments.

Under pressure from property owners concerned about the rate hikes, the U.S. House of Representatives recently voted to delay some provisions of Biggert-Waters. The Senate is debating the issue.

Banyas followed his family into the fishing business, spending years on the water before seizing the opportunity to buy the old processing plant.

The former owner was considering turning the building into an art gallery. Banyas wanted to preserve the traditional use.

On a recent morning, tanned and tattooed fishermen pushed off from the docks in search of thread herring for the Killer Bait brand. Workers in the open air plant enjoyed a view of mangrove islands in Sarasota Bay as they moved frozen bait onto shipping pallets.

Banyas also owns a waterfront restaurant and boat building business. He was quoted a price of $22,000 for flood insurance on the restaurant and decided to go without. He may do the same with the fish plant once the mortgage is paid off.

It would be a gamble, but many property owners may have no other choice.

“Everybody's pretty much rooted in around here,” he said. “They just try to make ends meet as everything goes up around them.”