FLORIDA HOUSE, DISTRICT 12

YEVGENY MOROZOV BIO

Age: 34

Family: Married

Occupation: Real Estate Broker

Education: UNF Bachelor of Business Admin. Major Finance; Juris Doctorate

Political experience: None

1. What are the major issues in your district and how do you intend to address them?

1) No American working full time living in poverty. (Raise the minimum wage from 7.93 to at least $10.10).

2) Fair pay for women. What a woman in Florida makes 83.6 cents overall for every dollar a man makes doing the same job. (According to National Women’s Law Center)

3) Develop high skill jobs such as Technology, Health care, and Education in Jacksonville. (Expanding the depth of the channel to 47.5 feet will be pointless if you have cargo ships leaving from Jacksonville empty.)



Do you support expanding Medicaid in Florida? If not, what is your alternative?

I support expanding Medicaid In Florida because there is a need. Over five million citizens are not covered by any health coverage, the money to cover the cost is there and the solution is long overdue.

What can the state do to improve mental health care in this state?

The legislature moved in the right direction when they expanded the Medicaid coverage to cover some of the mental health costs for 20,000 patients out of about 140,000 that are expected to be eligible for the program in the first year. The issue of mental health is quite complex and overwhelming for the health care industry. I realize that the problems will only increase if we do not provide the urgent help that the patients need.

Do you support deepening the St. Johns River for the port? Describe your environmental concerns related to the deepening.

President Obama has signed the bill that will cover close to 65% of the cost of the dredging. The rest of the 35% will have to come from the State of Florida and local sources. I support the findings of the Army Corp of Engineers that the project should be feasible. We absolutely do not want to have cost overruns exceeding the budget and environmental remediation can be an unexpected burden on the State, not to mention the environmental impact on the St. Johns river.

Should the Florida Legislature have to comply with the same Government in Sunshine law that all other public officials must use?

The legislature has debated this issue on a number of occasions. The legislative process should be transparent, and open to the public, but the access should not be disruptive to the process as a whole.

Campaign Web site, Facebook page and/or Twitter accounts:

www.ymorozov.com

www.twitter.com/yevgenymorozov

www.facebook.com/yevmorozov

REP. LAKE RAY BIO

Representative Ray sponsored the following bills during the 2014 Legislative Session:

 CS/CS/HB 3 Freight and Trade

 HB 117 Public Retirement Plans

 CS/CS/HB 601 Reclaimed Water

 CS/CS/HB 713 Engineers

 CS/CS/HB 947 Fuel Terminals

 HB 7089 Ratification of Rules/Department of Environmental Protection

 HR 9093 Florida Transatlantic Trade & Investment Day

 HR 9111 Republic of China (Taiwan)

He has received the following awards while serving as a State Representative:

 2013 American Energy Award - Florida Natural Gas Association

 2013 Legislator of the Year - Natural Waste and Recycling Association: Florida Chapter

 2013 Distinguished Advocate - Florida Chamber of Commerce

 2012 Friend of Free Enterprise Award - Associated Building Contractors

 2012 Honor Roll - Florida Chamber of Commerce

 2011 Tugboat Award - Florida Ports Council

 2011 International Business Leader Award - Jax USA

 2010 Legislator of the Year - Florida Maritime Council - Associated Industries of Florida

 Top 10 to Watch in 2010 - Florida Times Union

Representative Ray is a former two-term member of the Jacksonville City Council. He served on the council from 1999 until June 2007.

While on the council he served in the following capacities:

 Chairman, Transportation, Environment and Energy Committee

 Chairman, Jacksonville Waterways Commission

 Chairman, Transportation Disadvantaged Coordinating Board

Lake is an eighth generation Floridian and the third generation to be raised in House District 17. He was educated at Arlington Elementary, Ft. Caroline Junior High and Terry Parker High School. He earned an Associates Degree from St. Johns River Jr. College

and holds a degree in engineering from the University of Florida. He is currently President of the First Coast Manufacturing Association.

Ray is involved in the following civic organizations:

 The Exchange Club - Past President

 Northside Business Leaders Club

 Southside Businessman’s Club

 Greater Arlington Civic Council

 Jacksonville Maritime Museum Society

 The Rotary Club of Arlington - Honorary Member

Lake and his wife Brenda have three sons. Two of their three children are Eagle Scouts, as is Lake.

QUESTIONNAIRE



What is your major accomplishment in public life?

Since being elected to the Florida Legislature in 2008 I have focused on resetting how our state views our ports. Not just as a series of individual facilities but as a systematic driver of economic growth. Because of this focus and the Freight Mobility Plan which was my single initiative and policy, the legislature invested approximately $725 Million through 2013 for our ports and freight system. Approximately 130,000 jobs have been created for Floridians in shipping, freight logistics and international trade through our State as a direct result of these initiative. Additionally, the full plan included creating policies to enhance the use of natural gas in trucks and public vehicles, which has been identified as a model for other states.

My major accomplishment in both public and private life is having been married to my wife Brenda for 31 years. We raised three boys in Jacksonville, two of whom have started their own families and one who is an Afghanistan War Veteran.

Have you ever been sued, arrested or filed for bankruptcy? No



What endorsements have you received?

The following is a list below at the time of the TU request.

Florida Chamber of Commerce

Associated Industries of Florida

Jax Biz (Jacksonville Chamber)

Northeast Florida Association of Realtors

Jacksonville Fire Fighters

Fraternal Order of Police

Northeast Florida Builders Association

First Coast Manufacturers Association

Manufacturers Association of Florida

What are the major issues in your district and how do you intend to address them?

Improving our port and creating jobs—The Port of Jacksonville is an important part of Florida’s economy, which supports an estimated 65,000 jobs directly and indirectly in our regional area. I am continuing to work in helping to make the critical investments in the areas listed below:

Improvement of trade through our port system. Utilizing North Florida’s natural geographic logistical opportunities in trade and manufacturing in the State and Southeastern US. The targeted goal is to double Florida’s exports in the next five years. Connectivity to Intermodal Logistic Centers, highways, railroads and airports for movement of freight and consumer goods. Development of Freight logic zones to fund projects, while engaging our private and public sector. Opportunities to expand manufacturing and increase manufactured goods for export. Develop plans for further use of natural gas in the movement of freight and manufacturing, which will minimize CO2 emission and eliminate other air quality concerns such as noxides. Focus on diverse education opportunities for our students that will qualify them for job opportunities in logistics, freight movement, manufacturing and other high skilled and high paying positions.

Upon full implementation our economic drivers of the state will be broadened beyond tourism and development. Upon completion of these, a workforce engaged in port activities, international trade, manufacturing and logistics can be about 22% almost double the current percentage. The salary ranges are about 40% above average.

Improving Education for Florida’s Children---Over the past six years, our students have gone from 31st to 5th nationally in education achievement. We must continue to hire and retain excellent teachers, set rigorous standards for both students and faculty and empower families through school choice.

Reducing Burdensome Regulations—I have owned and operated my own business and understand that most business people are overwhelmed and perplexed by the myriad local, state and federal regulations that they must follow just to stay in business. I will continue to work to reduce or streamline burdensome regulations that force businesses to focus on fulfilling the wishes of their government instead of working at building their businesses.

Keeping taxes low—I believe that individuals should control as much of their earnings as possible, which is why I have consistently fought to keep our tax burden as low as possible.



Do you support expanding Medicad in Florida? If not what is your alternative?

I oppose the expansion of Medicad in Florida for a number of reasons. First, the expansion program is a direct result of Obamacare, which the majority of Americans oppose. This policy is likely to be changed as a result of elections over the next two years. Accepting Federal funds on a policy that is likely to be significantly altered or repealed is not a sound legislative choice, further it embraces a federal program to which I am opposed. Second, assuming the policy is not reversed, there is only a three year agreement to give the State monies to support the program. It is a poor policy to accept funds that may be cut off, as some citizens will become dependent on the program. The State would be left with a very difficult position of eliminating State funding or necessarily raises taxes to support Medicad. Third, the policy set up in Obamacare is driving businesses to necessarily cut working hours to 29 hours per week or less. This means that more citizens will be qualified for Medicad. It was a terrible policy which is counter to every work ethic we have known in this country to encourage the reduction in work hours and drive more Americans into government programs. Fourth Medicad and related programs originally accepted by the State consume almost 30% of Florida’s general revenue funds. Fifth, my constituents in a survey responded overwhelmingly against accepting those dollars.

The solution is to work diligently to repeal Obamacare, stop practices that discourage people from working, and create a vibrant economy with high paying wages.

What can the state do to improve mental health care in the state?

Mental health care is a rising concern in the state. A number of our citizens are suffering from Alzheimer’s and related diseases. This year the legislature has a program to help families and individuals with various housing and medical support. This is the first step to helping find treatment which the state can participate. As other medications come available, the state should evaluate how we can participate in helping our citizens.

Do you support deepening the St. Johns River for the port? Describe your environmental concerns related to the deepening.

I support the deepening of the River. The deepening project provides a greater opportunity for the port to capture more international trade. The deepening is not a stand-alone issue to fully gain the potential opportunities in shipping. It is my belief that in order to best capture the market an integrated system of rail, highway and air is necessary. Northeast Florida is in the logistic keystone of the State and region to make and move products throughout the country as well as internationally.

The deepening project raises environmental issues that need to be addressed. The greatest concern is saltwater intrusion further up the river. Increases in salt water concentration can alter wetlands, vegetation and some species. Some models have been run that show minimal differences in saltwater if the river is deepened. There are other offsets closer to the mouth of the river that can also be implemented to decrease the effects of deepening. All questions should be soundly and reasonable addressed before proceeding with the project.

Should the Florida Legislature have to comply with the same Government in Sunshine law that all other public officials must use?

The question has been asked previously, below is my response from 2012. At the bottom I have added a few additional comments.

Since first being elected to the Jacksonville City Council in 1999 and then the legislature in 2008, I have always followed both the letter and spirit of the Government in the Sunshine (GITS) law that the office respective offices. This also gives me a unique perspective in understanding how both bodies function under each office.

Compared to our year round City Council, our legislature meets for a pre-set 60 day session every year. The City Council considers about 500 ordinances per year. The Legislature by contrast considers about 3000 bills including budgets. My typical day during session and committees begins with a 7:00 AM breakfast meeting, often with other members of both parties in the House and often set the afternoon or evening before and ends with dinner meetings, again, often with other legislators and usually scheduled the same day. These are working meetings that can include staff, constituents and sometimes members of the press. It also is not unusual for me to have 20 or more conversations per day with other members of the house or the senate. In order for the legislature to comply with GITS similar to local guidelines these same meetings would take at minimum of an hour per meeting to arrange and hold. A day would easily equal three to four days of time in session.

Our local GITS requires a 24 hour notice for any meetings for council members to have a meeting to discuss pending bills. Due to the short time that the legislature is in session, this single requirement would force our state government to become a year round legislature, increasing costs, raising the number of staff members needed and lessening our ability to meet with constituents in the districts in which they live and we serve. Additionally, many members share housing accommodations, because of the law members would be required to have individual housing to preclude the chance of violations or the appearances thereof.

The legislative process is built on relationships GITS applied similar to local law would destroy the ability to develop relationships because of the appearances of impropriety. This would clearly hurt Northeast Florida in favor of other regions who could vote on issues without developed relationship but regional interest.

Therefore, while I believe that we should always operate in the sunshine as much as practical and while I believe that we should always seek to make our government as transparent as possible, I do not think it possible for our legislature, as currently constructed to adopt the sunshine rules that our local governments operate under.

Additional:

During the last interview I offered to host a member of the TU editorial board to join me for two weeks to see and observe the process, including inviting them to all of my meetings with any member or chairperson. The offer still remains.