"Over the past two months, the Angrans have emptied their savings account and racked up $50,000 in debt. They signed up for the Affordable Care Act," says the local reporter, "but found it to be anything but affordable. It will cost the couple more than $800 per month, money they just don't have."

The pastor says, "One of the workers came and said let me talk to you. And so I went to talk to her. She says that we found out that your insurance does not include chemo."

"Back in January, Pastor Angran was diagnosed with stage three cancer of the esophagus. He had insurance, but because of a previous heart condition, it did not cover the treatments he needed for his cancer. He found that out just minutes before receiving life-saving chemo," says the local reporter.

"Back in January, Pastor Angran was diagnosed with stage three cancer of the esophagus. He had insurance, but because of a previous heart condition, it did not cover the treatments he needed for his cancer. He found that out just minutes before receiving life-saving chemo," says the local reporter.

The Weekly Standard http://assets.weeklystandard.com.s3.amazonaws.com/tws15/images/logo-large.png

The Weekly Standard

2014

Washington, DC

Politics

http://www.weeklystandard.com/pastor-diagnosed-with-cancer-no-compassion-in-the-affordable-care-act/article/785472

2014-03-18T08:01

2014-03-18T11:13

Pastor Diagnosed With Cancer: 'No Compassion in the Affordable Care Act'

A pastor recently diagnosed with cancer, and who is covered under Obamacare, tells a local Iowa reporter that there's no compassion in the Affordable Care Act. Back in January, Pastor Angran was diagnosed with stage three cancer of the esophagus. He had insurance, but because of a previous heart condition, it did not cover the treatments he needed for his cancer. He found that out just minutes before receiving life-saving chemo, says the local reporter. The pastor says, One of the workers came and said let me talk to you. And so I went to talk to her. She says that we found out that your insurance does not include chemo. Over the past two months, the Angrans have emptied their savings account and racked up $50,000 in debt. They signed up for the Affordable Care Act, says the local reporter, but found it to be anything but affordable. It will cost the couple more than $800 per month, money they just don't have.

Barack Obama, cancer, Daniel Halper, Health Care, insurance, Obamacare

http://cdn.weeklystandard.biz/cache/280x280-.jpg