After two games and seemingly a million lineups, player combinations and headaches that have accompanied it all, Nuggets coach Brian Shaw is considering, well, another lineup change.

This one deals with the starters, and mostly boils down to the power forward spot, where he’s pondering whether it’s time to get Kenneth Faried back among the opening five.

“There’ll probably be some changes,” Shaw said. “At this moment, I’m not at liberty to really say. We’ll have two good days of practice (Saturday) and Monday to kind of figure that out. Definitely (we) are going to have to inject some more energy to start out the games.”

Faried has not started either of the Nuggets’ first two games as he worked his way back from a hamstring injury and got caught up on learning the offensive sets he missed while sitting out practice. Faried has said he’s been ready to go since he was cleared to play by team doctors before the season opener at Sacramento.

Friday night, however, he showed he was at least back to his old self from an energy standpoint as he and Nate Robinson helped spark a comeback that shaved a 26-point Portland lead down to seven before the Nuggets fell to their second defeat.

“He showed that he’s back up to speed, and that’s one of the positions I’ll look at over the next two days of maybe making a change,” Shaw said.

The other position where Shaw might consider a change is small forward, where Anthony Randolph has started each of the first two games. But options there are limited. That’s the position Wilson Chandler and Danilo Gallinari play. Both are out with injuries, but Chandler is eyeing a possible return late this week.

Other than that, ironing out the details is the Nuggets’ charge going into a tough Tuesday matchup against San Antonio.

The team talked about that in a Saturday morning film session.

“When we talk about the perfection of minor details, and once again when we did things the way we were supposed to do them, then we usually got a pretty good result,” Shaw said. “And when we didn’t and went off on our own or kind of did our own thing, we didn’t get a good result.”

Christopher Dempsey: cdempsey@denverpost.com or twitter.com/dempseypost