Ben Potts clutched each of his parents in a bear hug Sunday afternoon in the terminal at Denver International Airport for what seemed a very long time, especially for a 16-year-old.

His mother, Joanne, dabbed at her eyes as her son arrived home from five weeks in Israel, one of 71 Denver-area teenagers who participated in this year’s Colorado Israel Study Tour.

The 42-year-old study program — sponsored by the Colorado Agency for Jewish Education, JEWISHcolorado, the Rocky Mountain Rabbinical Council and area synagogues — had special urgency this year, with escalating violence in the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.

Joanne Potts paused for almost as long as her son’s hug when she was asked how worried she had been.

“Very,” she finally said.

But she never wavered in whether he should make the trip with other students between their junior and senior years.

“We wanted him to go — to see his heritage, to see where he comes from, his homeland,” she said.

For their safety, the students were kept away from Tel Aviv and Jerusalem, said Phyllis Adler, the executive director of the Colorado Agency for Jewish Education.

“They’ve toured, they’ve learned, they’ve been in all parts of the country,” Adler said as she waited in the terminal for the youths to clear customs. “They’ve been living a different kind of life. They’ve lived through some of Israel’s history now.”

The program instills in children firsthand, critical thinking skills about the complexity of the conflict in the region, she said.

Many of the students will talk about their experiences and new-found perspectives during the Israel Solidarity Rally at Temple Emanuel Sanctuary at 51 Grape St. in Denver at 6:30 p.m. Monday.

“We moved around a lot, but we were completely safe,” Ben Potts said. “Everyone was so loving and so caring to look out for us. They treated us like family — with love.”

Sadly, the threat of violence is ingrained into everyday life, said Potts and his friend, Taylor Bernstein, another East High student.

One day they were in the market, and rocket sirens begin to blare, they recalled.

“We start running for the shelters,” Potts said. “The Israelis were just walking around like normal, like this happens all the time.”

Bernstein said Israelis welcomed them into a shelter until the sirens stopped.

“For these guys to do what they did for us to keep us safe was incredible,” Bernstein said.

Michal Uziyahu, an Israeli emissary to JEWISHcolorado, said she hoped the students learned many things, especially that “Israel is not fighting the Palestinian people, but terrorist organizations.”

“These kids can come home to a safe place; our kids are there,” said Uziyahu, who said she would return to Israel in a year. “It’s the only home they have.”

Joey Bunch: 303-954-1174, jbunch@denverpost.com or twitter.com/joeybunch