Advocate Health Care and Aetna are teaming up to offer a plan on the Illinois health insurance exchange, a deal that lured the national insurer back to the online marketplace here after taking a year off.

“We always want to provide a competitive product that offers value to our members,” said Rohan Hutchings, a spokesman for Hartford, Conn.-based Aetna. “Last year we didn't think we had that product. Now we think we'll have a product that will be one of the most competitive in the marketplace.”

This is the second recent deal for Downers Grove-based Advocate, the largest hospital network in the state, with 12 hospitals. Earlier this week, Advocate and Blue Cross & Blue Shield of Illinois, the dominant insurer in Illinois, announced they were creating a plan that could be among the cheapest options on and off the Obamacare exchange.

Aetna was one of six companies selling plans to Illinois consumers and businesses through the health insurance exchange Get Covered Illinois when it debuted in 2014. Then the insurer left the marketplace last year. Now it's among 10 issuers, some of which are part of the same companies, that the federal government has approved to sell plans on the exchange when it debuts Nov. 1.

STILL WAITING FOR INFO

State officials are still waiting for details from the federal government about what types of insurance plans will be available for individuals and small businesses on the exchange and how much they will cost.

Hutchings could not say how much the Aetna-Advocate plan, called Aetna Whole Health Chicago, would cost, but he said it will be available for individuals on the exchange, and fully insured and self-insured businesses off the exchange. The plan is limited to consumers in Cook, DuPage, Kane, Lake and McHenry counties, and to employers in those counties as well as Kendall, Will and Kankakee counties.

“We are excited and thankful for the opportunity to have our physicians working with Aetna on Aetna Whole Health Chicago to deliver a better patient experience,” Don Calcagno, interim president of Advocate Physician Partners, said in a statement. “We believe the foundation of this product aligns well with Advocate's commitment to providing access to high-quality, affordable and well-coordinated care to the communities we serve.”

It's a so-called narrow network plan, where only Advocate facilities and doctors would be in-network for patients. In return, they would pay less than if they had a broader plan with more options. Advocate has more than 4,000 doctors.

ACO COMPONENT

As part of the Aetna-Advocate partnership, they also are creating an accountable care organization, where doctors and other providers wrap services around patients to better coordinate their care. The idea is to help patients avoid expensive hospital stays and procedures and thus lower costs. Advocate has an ACO with Blue Cross.

Advocate physicians will be financially rewarded for meeting certain quality measures, such as better managing patients with chronic conditions like diabetes and heart failure and decreasing emergency room visits that could be avoided.

Aetna also recently announced an ACO with Rush Health, a four-hospital system anchored by Rush University Medical Center on the Near West Side.

The Illinois exchange was born out of the Affordable Care Act. It launched in 2013 with the goal of creating a competitive marketplace where consumers and small businesses could shop for health insurance.

Illinois is among 37 states that route consumers to the federal platform, HealthCare.gov, where those who fall below certain income levels can use federal subsidies to buy health plans.