Beaches across Southwest Florida are filling up as college kids and tourists make their way to the Sunshine State.

But our water issues combined with major construction projects have not only slowed down traffic, but business as well, meaning money made during this year's spring break will be more important than ever to Fort Myers Beach's bottom line.

"It's getting busier. I hope it stays like this for the rest of the month," said Graham Belger, owner of The Goodz, a one-stop shop.

He said this season has been anything but a walk on the beach.

"People are definitely hurting from everything. The lake, the water issues..."

Which means money from spring breaks is more important than ever.

"You need this money right now to hold you over for the rest of the year," Belger said.

His business also sells building supplies, so they get business year-round from locals, but he knows that his numbers, as well as other local businesses, are going to rely heavily on spring break this year to hold them through the summer months.

Even Devyn Hingson, who works on the water in Cape Coral, knows this month could make or break business.

"Last year it wasn't like this. It picked up a lot quicker and we're finally starting to pick up in March," Hingson said.

"Definitely last year it was a lot sooner in the year than it has been this year."

Lisa Adrian at The Beach Pub said despite the major roadwork along Estero Boulevard, traffic has been tolerable.

"The traffic coming onto the beach has not ben the same as it was last year," Adrian said.

But around the beach, heavy traffic is a good thing.

"It's a good indicator of what's not happening down here," Adrian said.

"I'll deal with the traffic," Belger said. "We need the people here."

Belger hopes they just don't hear the negative because spring breakers NBC2 spoke with said once your feet hit the beach, Lake O is the last thing on people's minds.

"Once you start having some fun and stuff, you kind forget about the whole water issue," said Ryan Bero.

An update on the Lake O releases: NBC2 checked with the Army Corps of Engineers on Sunday. They said the numbers have trickled down, but there is still no timetable for when releases will be back to normal.