U.S. Rep. Dave Joyce visited Euclid Fish Company in Mentor on Tuesday to observe and learn about the fourth-generation family business and hear about how the company continues to grow.

Joyce, R-Russell Township, is an avid fisherman who was pleased to have the opportunity to see firsthand what goes into the business’ operations.

“While we have large corporations, it’s really the small family businesses that make this country go,” Joyce said. “I’m well aware of the need to sustain the fish (industry) in this country and I’m well aware of the hard work you have put into this.”

Joyce heads back Wednesday to Washington where Congress will continue negotiations to pass legislation that would provide funding to keep government operations open or risk shutting the federal government.

The U.S. House of Representatives passed a continuing resolution last week that would fund federal government operations by extending current funding levels through Dec. 15.

With his vote, Joyce also supported language that would fully defund spending for the Affordable Care Act, commonly known as Obamacare. The U.S. Senate will begin discussions on the matter.

“I went to D.C. to shake things up, not shut them down,” Joyce said. “I think we all need to roll up our sleeves and get back down to the table to figure what it takes to get this done because shutting down the government is not an idea of getting something done.”

Euclid Fish Company was established in 1944 and is now owned by third-generation family member John C. Young.

“We are very passionate about seafood as well as making sure our customers’ experience is exceptional,” Young said. “We pride ourselves on having the widest variety of fresh and frozen seafoods weekly, providing quality food specialities, natural, wild, and farmed and sustainable.”

One of the most popular items the company sells is clambakes, which for a typical meal consists of steamed clams and chicken, and customers also can add on items like king crablegs or other items.

Locally clambakes are at the height of their popularity starting after Mothers Day and peak in October through December, Young said.

The company originally was located on East 185th Street where one side of the street was in Cleveland and the other side was Euclid, where the fish company was located.

The business now is located in Mentor and employees 44 people. The company also has a facility in Pittsburgh.

Euclid Fish Company provides fresh fish and seafood to restaurants and retail locations from the east coast to Chicago, as well as in the southern part of the country.

The tour with Joyce was hosted by the Mentor Area Chamber of Commerce and the Council on Small Enterprises or COSE, which works to help small businesses grow and maintain their independence.

“Small businesses are an integral part of the local economy,” said Sante Ghetti, director of governmental relations for COSE. “It really is. Creating wealth and most importantly creating jobs.”



Advertisement