The cost common flu strain this year in Colorado is influenza A, or H3N2 virus, which is a severe one.

It is known to lead to more hospitalizations and deaths than other strains, according to the state health department, especially among the elderly, young children and people with certain chronic medical conditions.

“We tend to have more severe seasons when H3N2 viruses predominate,” Dr. Lisa Miller, state epidemiologist at the Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment said in a recent release.

Reported influenza hospitalizations and outbreaks in long-term care facilities in Colorado increased in early December. There were 24 outbreaks by Dec. 6.

The health department said the best defense in getting a flu vaccine. Even though, this this year, it won’t be as effective. About half of the H3N2 viruses circulating are different from those included in this season’s vaccine, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention reported. Viruses change and present a moving target for virologists.

Besides getting a flu shot, the health department says, cover coughs and sneezes, stay away from sick people and wash hands often. “If you’re sick, stay home from work or school so you don’t spread the virus to others,” the health department advises.

Get updates from Colorado’s weekly flu report .

For the week ending December 6, influenza activity continued to increase. State

laboratory surveillance shows that almost all influenza viruses currently circulating in Colorado are the H3N2 virus, the health department reports.

There were 153 additional hospitalizations reported during the most recent week for which data are available (compared to 57 the previous week ending Nov. 29). Of these reported cases, 51 were from the previous week and 102 were new.

The state’s cumulative total is 248 hospitalizations in 23 counties.

Update: An influenza-associated death of a child was confirmed in Larimer County Monday, Dec. 16. An 18-month-old Loveland girl died from the flu at McKee Medical Center Dec. 9.

CDPHE surveillance for the 2014 –2015 influenza season officially began on September 28 and will run through May 23. Current surveillance activities include: reporting of hospitalizations due to influenza, reporting of influenza-like illness

visits by selected sites, reporting of influenza testing activity by sentinel hospital labs, monitoring circulating influenza viruses through molecular typing at the state public health laboratory, outbreaks of influenza in long-term care facilities (LTCF), and reporting of pediatric deaths due to influenza.