Buy Photo Gov. Mike Pence says his plan to expand health care coverage to uninsured low-income adults, called HIP 2.0, is as affordable for citizens, fiscally sound for the state and a better, consumer-driven alternative than expanding traditional Medicaid. (Photo: Danese Kenon/The Star 2014 file photo )Buy Photo

Hoosiers who buy government subsidized health insurance plans on the federal marketplace might have to repay hundreds of dollars to the federal government if Gov. Mike Pence’s Medicaid alternative is approved.

Open enrollment for 2015 health plans on Obamacare’s federal marketplace, healthcare.gov, begins tomorrow. But some customers could be in for a surprise if Pence’s proposed expansion of the Healthy Indiana Plan is approved.

Right now, people with incomes between 100 percent and 138 percent of the federal poverty level are among those who can receive tax credit subsidies toward their premiums when they buy insurance from the federal marketplace.

But if Pence’s plan, dubbed HIP 2.0, is approved, then those people would no longer qualify for subsidies. Instead, they would qualify for HIP 2.0, an alternative to traditional Medicaid that requires participants to contribute a small amount to their health-care costs.

As a result, they would have to pay back any tax credit subsidy they received toward their 2015 health insurance plan, state officials said, which could add up to as much as $600 per policy.

“Governor Pence has communicated to (the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services) that time is of the essence and that vulnerable Hoosiers should have certainty about their health care options for 2015,” said Christy Denault, a Pence spokeswoman.

So far, the Pence administration and the federal government have not been able to agree on HIP 2.0, presumably because of its requirement that enrollees pay for a portion of their costs. Traditional Medicaid does not require participants to pay anything.

Federal officials had not responded to questions from The Star as of 4 p.m.

About 25,000 Hoosiers earning between 100 percent and 138 percent of the federal poverty level signed up for government-subsidized federal marketplace plans last year, state officials said. That equates to individuals who earn $11,670 to $16,105 a year, or households of four with an annual income of $23,850 to $32,913.

Michael Gargano, a deputy secretary with the Indiana Family and Social Services Administration, said the state is ready to implement HIP 2.0 as soon as possible.

If federal officials approve the plan soon, he said, “we stand ready to begin taking applications in January.”

Call Star reporter Tony Cook at (317) 444-6081. Follow him on Twitter: @indystartony.

Read or Share this story: http://indy.st/1uuSihv