3954290

Former MSNBC host Dylan Ratigan doesn’t like how President Barack Obama’s health care law is caring for him.

Ratigan, who hosted MSNBC’s “The Dylan Ratigan Show” before abruptly quitting in 2012 to become a farmer, took to Twitter Friday to blame Obamacare for his health-care plan being cancelled and his new monthly insurance rate tripling.

I bought a catastrophic health policy for $170/mo when I left MSNBC. Obamacare cancelled the policy. New rate $600/mo. Thnx Mr. President! — Dylan Ratigan (@DylanRatigan) November 8, 2013

After receiving pushback from some of his Twitter followers, Ratigan further explained his problem with Obamacare:

Interestingly core healthcare cost drivers were left intact. I.e. fee-for-service. Insurance monopolies etc. — Dylan Ratigan (@DylanRatigan) November 8, 2013

“@12jc: You're just trying to protect against crippling medical expenses but willing to accept normal medical costs” This is illegal now? — Dylan Ratigan (@DylanRatigan) November 8, 2013

I have been a long time advocate of catastrophic with a transparent mkt for routine. Struck me as interesting that that is illegal now. — Dylan Ratigan (@DylanRatigan) November 8, 2013

From any perspective we still haven't addressed the underlying COST of healthcare. All of this will get more screwy until we do. — Dylan Ratigan (@DylanRatigan) November 8, 2013

Fortunately for Ratigan, he gets a consolation prize for having to pay more than three times more per month for his health insurance: a presidential apology. In an interview with NBC News’ Chuck Todd Thursday, Obama apologized to Ratigan and the millions of other Americans he lied to when he promised, while flacking for his health care law, “if you like your plan, you can keep it. Period.”

“I am sorry that they are finding themselves in this situation based on assurances they got from me,” Obama said Thursday. “We’ve got to work hard to make sure that they know we hear them and that we’re going to do everything we can to deal with folks who find themselves in a tough position as a consequence of this.”

Despite the apology, Obama continued to downplay how many people will be forced off the insurance they like as a result of Obamacare, saying it was a very small number. Other estimates suggest that more than 129 million Americans may not be able to keep their previous health care plan if Obamacare is fully implemented.

Follow Jamie on Twitter