BUFFALO, N.Y. (WIVB) — New federal guidelines will soon require many restaurants nationwide to post calorie counts for food and drinks on their menus. The menu labeling rule is part of the Affordable Care Act.

The FDA wants to make you more aware of the calories that you are not only eating, but drinking.

At Gramma Mora’s- a Mexican restaurant on Hertel Avenue, the message is: “It’s fun to go out to eat- and it’s even more fun to have a margarita with your meal,” says Owner, Liz Giovino.

Come December, many restaurants nationwide will be required to post calorie counts on their drink lists. It’s something some restaurant go-ers say they plan to ignore.

Irinia Arias from Buffalo says, “I think they put it there for a reason, but i don’t think anybody is really going to pay attention to it.”

The regulations will apply to all chain restaurants and bars with at least 20 locations. But Giovino doesn’t believe it will impact Buffalo’s restaurant industry.

“There are going to be people who are watching calories, but when most people go out to eat they are going to realize there are going to be calories they are going to have. You just have to be smart to decide what choices you’re going to have,” she said.

Health experts say these new requirements will help combat the country’s obesity epidemic by showing just how many calories lurk in your favorite food and drinks.

Owner Charlie Giovino says the impact should be minor, since people who eat out already know they’re indulging.

“If people are going to go out to dinner and they are going to come to our restaurant, I don’t know if they’re really going to be interested in that,” he says.

New York City began requiring chain restaurants to post calorie counts on menus in 2006, and now the rest of the country will soon follow suit.

Whether menu labeling has any effect on health is still an open question; some studies have shown it has no impact. But a 2008 study at Starbucks showed a drop in average calories purchased after calorie content was posted.