Informatica plans to announce next week new products designed to help healthcare entities speed data analysis and make better use of aging applications, the company revealed to Healthcare IT News.

The news comes on the heels of the data management vendor stating that it has agreed to a private equity buyout by Permira Funds and Canada Pension Plan Investment Board potentially valued at $5.3 billion.

Next week at HIMSS15, in fact, Informatica is slated to unveil Healthcare Analytics Accelerator as well as the Application Retirement for Healthcare Solution.

The Analytics Accelerator enables healthcare organizations to access and trust data from a variety of sources and formats, according to Michelle Blackmer, Informatica’s healthcare industry marketing director.

“Healthcare organizations can extract the data from all these applications and bring it together in its raw form, but integrated,” Blackmer said. “Now analysts can have access to that data through any kind of query tool, whether it’s Microsoft Sequel Server, Excel, or a business intelligence tool.”

As healthcare organizations increasingly rely on data analytics to treat patients, monitor disease trends, and improve operational efficiencies, they must confront challenges regarding data quality and the length of the analytics process.

What’s more, as providers modernize or consolidate their IT systems, many implement new applications while still running older software.

“Healthcare providers may have every intention of retiring old applications, but then they fall behind or get so focused on implementing new applications that they don’t circle back,” Blackmer explained. “But that means they’re paying maintenance and they’re supporting an application that they might just need for analytics purposes.”

Informatica’s Application Retirement for Healthcare Solution aims to eliminate the cost of maintaining these legacy applications while enabling easy access to retired data that can be used for reporting, analytics and operations.

“The solution allows them to archive those applications and maintain access to the data from a reporting standpoint but retire paying maintenance on it,” Blackmer said.