Entertainment

Sara James at Nieuw Amsterdam Photo: Ken Irwin

The bill, please

Nieuw Amsterdam, 106–112 Hardware St, Melbourne

12pm-late; 9602 2111





The game on the scorching hot day was over, and in the grand tradition of social tennis, the moment had arrived for the ladies’ light lunch. When she opened the fridge in the country clubhouse, the scene that confronted Sara James seemed innocuous enough.



James, newly-arrived from New York and desperate to fit in, had prepared a plate of sandwiches, which she grabbed. She was also delighted to see another plate of sandwiches. Once a waitress, she expertly carried both across to the table.

So far, so good. As were the sandwiches on the other plate. The unravelling began when another group of players from the next court arrived for their lunch, followed by the sinking realisation that James and her team had, in fact, been scoffing the sandwiches of another team.

New York Clam Chowder, Leeks, bacon, potatoes, clam veloute at Nieuw Amsterdam Photo: Ken Irwin



In the hierarchy of gaffes in the carefully-choreographed world of social tennis etiquette, stealing someone else’s sandwiches was a serious offence. When the mistake was realised, James immediately confessed. “I’m an American,” she offered.

Advertisement



That helped the international incident soon dissolve into laughter, and some good natured ribbing of James, the sandwich stealer. “They were giving me a hard time in the most you’re-in-the-club way, which I really like about Australia,” James says.



“It broke the tension, it broke the newcomer status. But I couldn’t believe actually that I said, well you know, I’m an American. How bad is that? I threw my whole country under the bus.

It’s like their fault that I screwed up the sandwiches.”

Sara James and Shane Green at Nieuw Amsterdam. Photo: Ken Irwin



James has recovered from the sandwich incident, enough not only to laugh about it over our lunch, but also include it in her book, An American in Oz. The mid-week social tennis player (with an unreliable serve) is . an Emmy-award winning correspondent and anchor for NBC. She's a

long way for from her her New York home and the Rockefeller Centre headquarters of NBC. So for a New York state of mind, she has chosen Nieuw Amsterdam in Hardware Lane, with a distinctly Big Apple ambience.



We are seated underneath wall art of the New York skyline, and James is directly below the Empire State building. Even the street scene outside is evocative: the light, the trees, the city life. ‘‘You turn the corner, and say, I could be one of those little lanes near Gramercy Park,” says James. She understands the dichotomy of the traveller: the quest for the new, the more secret search for the familiar.



And then there is the menu. We decide to share, and she chooses New York clam chowder, and in a nod to her Virginian roots, grits fritters. She toys with the idea of a Reuben, but it is probably a good thing that we pass, given her experience with sandwiches. Coffee fuels the conversation.

Grits Fritters, Variety of sweetcorn, heirloom beetroots.at Nieuw Amsterdam Photo: Ken Irwin



James had built a formidable career in the US. Always a storyteller - she was writing novels at 8 - she began her career as a 22-year-old. She travelled the country in search of a job, having worked the night shift at CNN in Washington DC, and with a resume tape that included a “teeny tiny” piece of anchoring - “It was dreadful,” says James. “I think I burnt that tape.”



She would ring ahead to TV news directors, could she see them? She had no actual plans to be there, but it was a good opener: if she was in town, they would feel honour-bound to see her. Five minute conversation would often turn into an hour.



That turned into a job as an anchor of 9 Alive News on WTVA in Tupelo, Mississippi, birthplace of Elvis. The job paid $14,000 a year. “But they let me report, and it was great,” says James.

After other reporting jobs, her career took off with NBC in New York. She filled in on the Today Show, for Katie Couric, often for the newsreader Ann Curry, and anchored other shows. She also carved out a reputation as a go-anywhere correspondent - within the US, stories of the magnitude of 9/11 and the Oklahoma bombing. Abroad, the job took her from Sarajevo to Somalia.

SARA JAMES AT SARA JAMES AT NIEUW AMSTERDAM Photo: KEN IRWIN



But there was another enduring love. In 1994, on a cold February night in, she met Australian journalist Andrew Butcher at a journalists’ dinner. The romance began, turning into marriage in 1998, after Butcher returned to New York following time in Japan, and took the job of spokesman for Rupert Murdoch. They have two children, Sophie and Jacqui.



In 2007, their New York world was turned upside down. Butcher, born in Muckleford, population 1100, near Castlemaine, was longing for home. And so the remarkable Australian adventure began. When looking for a place to live, they drew a circle around Melbourne, and stacked the deck to the north and west - near Butcher’s family, and the airport for James. “It was pretty close to throwing a dart at the map,” says James.



That ended up as the Macedon Ranges, and a farm at the end of a dirt track. There was, says James, an uncanny sense of belonging.

NIEUW AMSTERDAM Photo: Ken Irwin



The adjustment from Manhattan to Macedon is big enough in itself, and James went through the range of emotions that are common with such a dislocation: the initial novelty of it all, and longing for the place from which you had come.



But part of their new life had an added complication. They needed to find the right school for Jacqui, who had a seizure just after she was born, and was eventually diagnosed with special needs. The remarkable Port Phillip School was the perfect place. But the distance between the Macedon Ranges and Port Phillip meant that it felt like she and Jacqui were living in the car. She had moments, she agrees, when you think “I’m going to take my ball and go home.”

“And they didn’t last very long, you know. They didn’t. I would kind of pick myself up in the morning, and would have to remind myself: Would it really be that much easier?”

Receipt for lunch with Sara James at Nieuw Amsterdam Photo: none



Going back would be a known world, and family and old friends would be closer. But she knew the underlying questions were these: “Are we just talking about changing the backdrop, or are we just talking about the fact having a child with complex special needs is going to be difficult wherever you are?”



James was also determined not to be the kind of person and makes a big move and whines about it. “I just don’t want to be that person.”



The book captures many of the daily struggles, and plenty of the joy of family life in a beautiful setting, wrapping stories around interactions with the bush’s flora and fauna. Snakes, emus and peacocks feature. Her older daughter Sophie, raised in Manhattan, particularly thrived. James was determined not to make it a “Moaning Myrtle memoir”, because that’s not how she feels. “Special needs are a part of our family’s picture. That was something Jacqui has. It’s not who she is, and it’s not who our family is.”

SARA JAMES AT NIEUW AMSTERDAM Photo: Ken Irwin



Of course, Sara James, reporting for NBC, was never far from the picture. Two weeks after moving in, NBC needed an update on a story she had filed for Dateline NBC. Her recording “studio” had to be the quietest place in the house - the wardrobe, under blankets and a doona.



These days, she has a soundproof studio in a shed on the property. A career as the NBC’s correspondent in the region has also taken shape. The girls are older, they have the support of incredible babysitters, and Butcher has the flexibility that comes from running his own PR firm. She also has a fortnightly guest spot on ABC News Breakfast TV, appropriately called an American in Oz. Her father used to tell her she was like a dalmatian on a fire truck. “When the story’s happening, you’re out the door.”



Always the storyteller, she is keen to write fiction, thinking about something in the young adult genre. She has a ready audience in Sophie, telling stories to her each night, with a couple of running narratives.



Seven years after that life-transforming move, James says she is really enjoying life.

“Australia is not a backdrop to me,” she says, “it’s my home.”



An American in Oz is published by Allen and Unwin.