AP

Though home prices are generally rising nationwide, lower-value neighborhoods have a concentration of homeowners who still owe more than their homes are worth. For the past few years, researchers have been following a related trend: The foreclosure crisis, while healing, is still ongoing in many parts of the country where homeowners are predominately black or populated by other minority groups.

A number of factors could be contributing to that trend.

For one, says Georgia Tech professor Dan Immergluck, who has studied the issue in Atlanta, during the crisis many black neighborhoods saw values drop the most sharply. Some researchers have said lenders targeted such neighborhoods during the boom with high-cost, and sometimes predatory, loans. That led the to a greater concentration of foreclosures in many minority neighborhoods, leading to a cycle of vacancies, decaying housing stock and more foreclosures.

Immergluck notes that homeowners in such places who haven’t been foreclosed on but are still underwater are less likely to invest in their homes and make repairs, which can lead to degradation of the homes.

Unemployment and slow wage growth also hit some minority groups harder than whites, increasing the chances that owners in such neighborhoods would default. Immergluck says some lenders still seem wary of lending to lower-wealth borrowers with weaker credit histories. That can affect minority communities more than others.

Now, some groups claim that mortgage lenders are taking worse care of properties in neighborhoods with high minority populations. A report by the National Fair Housing Alliance last year said lender-owned properties in minority communities were more than twice as likely to have trash and debris on the property as those in white communities. The report said that such homes in minority communities were also twice as likely as those in white communities to have damaged or boarded up windows.

On Tuesday, a group of Democratic senators sent a letter to government officials including U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development Secretary Julian Castro and Federal Housing Finance Agency Director Mel Watt calling on them to investigate the claims of disparate treatment of bank-owned properties between predominately minority and white neighborhoods.