Regulations: Here’s a headline that should scare anyone who has been following ObamaCare: “As time runs out, the Obama administration races to reshape health care.” Hasn’t it done enough damage reshaping health care already?

The story appeared Tuesday on STAT, an online news site produced by Boston Globe Media that focuses on health issues.

It reports that with time running short, administration officials are rushing to put in place “major new initiatives that will take full effect just weeks before the president leaves office.”

Among the efforts: trying to clamp down on drug prices, “revamping how primary care is provided,” and “significant new efforts when it comes to paying for surgeries and preventing disease.”

And just how do they plan to do all this? As the article explains, ObamaCare created a little-known agency called the Center for Medicare and Medicaid Innovation with the mission of testing “innovative payment and service delivery models to reduce program expenditures.” The law pre-funded the center with $10 billion over a decade, and gave it wide latitude to mandate changes in how Medicare and Medicaid pay providers.

Kathleen Sebelius, who ran the Health and Human Services Department when ObamaCare was put together, said this center “is probably the most potentially impactful element of the Affordable Care Act.”

For Sebelius, this is a good thing, for doctors, hospitals and patients, it’s a frightening prospect, particularly since the center is already racking up failures.

Just last month, the center ordered almost 800 hospitals in 67 regions to accept bundled payments for knee and hip replacements. If the total cost of a procedure — including follow-up physical therapy outside the hospital — exceeds a certain cap, these hospitals face a penalty. If the bill comes in below the cap, they get a bonus.

But these bundled payment schemes have a very checkered history, and the new one is likely to force hospitals to scrimp on follow-up treatments, since doing anything more than sending patients home will likely push costs over the cap. An analysis by Avalere Health, for example, found that 60% of hospitals will face penalties this year.

The center has also been pushing “Accountable Care Organizations,” which is just a new name for HMOs. But the first stab at this — the Pioneer ACO program — was a bust. So now the center is pushing “Next Generation ACOs.” Whatever they call them, these ACOs are merely an attempt to force seniors into the kind of HMOs that consumers rejected in the 1990s.

Now, as STAT reports, the center is getting ready to impose price controls on drugs that have to be administered in doctors’ offices — to treat things like cancer, arthritis or other chronic conditions. Currently, Medicare reimburses doctors for the average cost of these drugs, plus a small markup to cover overhead costs.

This payment system has worked remarkably well since it went into effect in 2005, balancing patient needs with cost control. But the center wants to clamp down further by forcing doctors to use the cheapest drugs available, even if they aren’t the best treatment. The proposed payment changes set off a firestorm of protests from patient advocacy groups, which called it “misguided and ill-considered.”

But given the power wielded by this new bureaucracy, these groups might as well be shouting into a hurricane.

No matter what happens to the rest of ObamaCare, the grossly misnamed Center for Medicare and Medicaid Innovation has to go … before it can do any more harm in the name of “reshaping health care.”