“There’s no such thing as a shift on a farm,” he said.

And Bustos knows, having grown up and worked many long days on a large farm in Unicoi County. These days Bustos works on the farm in Unicoi, but in a different role. He works for the Johnson City Community Health Center — with its main location at 2151 Century Lane. But Bustos works as part of a mobile unit that offers free health care to workers by bringing it to them.

East Tennessee State University’s College of Nursing helps back the JCCHC’s efforts. When the mobile unit heads out to the farms — often on rainy days when workers aren’t in the fields — its operating with a team consisting of an interpreter, nurse practitioner, nurse and office worker.

Among other roles, Bustos serves as an interpreter, a job that keeps him busy. Much of the JCCHC’s work is propped up by grant funding, which, if removed, would cut back the amount of health care access granted to people who keep the grocery store shelves full.

The farms visited by these mobile health care units operate with the labor of workers who are holders of H-2A visas, which allows them temporary legal status to operate as seasonal agricultural workers. But that’s not everyone who’s served, said Maria Ramirez, coordinator Outreach Activity for the JCCHC. Word of mouth travels quickly and undocumented works from other neighboring farms seek out the free primary care medical services.

Being “undocumented” doesn’t mean health care isn’t offered, as the goal is to get care to those who need it most, regardless of their legal status. As a Federally Qualified Health Center, service is not denied to anyone under any financial circumstance. This comes with their reimbursements from the Bureau of Primary Health Care and the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.

Ramirez constantly fights the misconception that a certain level of income is needed to attain health care, and through community outreach and the spread of correct information, they can share with migrant workers and low-income families that they have a sliding fee scale, based on income.

“We’re here to care for any and all patients, and they won’t be turned away,” she said. “We’re very flexible.”

Mexico is most often the location from which many migrant workers come, and with them, Bustos said, comes a stubbornness that a paycheck and a full day’s work is the top priority. With that mentality are many ailments missed or ignored.

“They never want to report anything,” he said. “It’s their mentality, maybe coming from something of how it was in the old days, that they don’t want to be sent home.”

Sometimes the results of this are horrific, as Bustos recalls one worker who refused to come in, despite being pushed by his co-workers to seek medical treatment for his foot.

After ignoring the pain for too long and telling everyone, “it was fine,” gangrenous necrosis set in and he ended up needing his toe amputated.

High blood pressure, diabetes and work-related joint pain are most typically the ailments suffered by migrant workers, the interpreter said. The first two come about because of cultural differences over nutrition, and are common in Hispanic populations. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention said Hispanics are nearly twice as likely to get diabetes and have higher risk of heart disease — often caused by high blood pressure — than U.S. males.

Bustos said it starts at home — a mother doesn’t want to see a child with an empty belly and will fill it with food regardless of the nutritional value. The result of that kind of fill-at-all-costs menu is high blood pressure and diabetes.

Joint pain is often suffered because of the kind of work in which these migrants populations engage.

ETSU recently announced that it had secured a $40,000 grant through the Tennessee Board of Regents to study and address occupational issues faced by migrant workers.

Dr. Ken Silver, an associate professor in the Department of Environmental Health in ETSU’s College of Public Health will be a part of the research team heading the efforts. Over the past years, they’ve studied and looked for solutions to back, neck, shoulder and joint pain, but will use this batch of money to look into pesticide safety issues.

Bustos said it’s very rare that they come across any rashes or ailments caused by pesticide, because of the duration of exposure needed to cause physical damage.

Worker safety precautions are in place at the two large farms visited by the JCCHC mobile unit, but that’s not across the board. When some of the other migrant workers come from other, smaller, not as viable farms, they hear about less safe operations.

This makes access to health care even more important, and another crucial role at the JCCHC, that conducted by Trish Aniol becomes a top priority. Aniol, a certified patient advocate, helps connect patients with insurance options. During the open enrollment periods for the Affordable Care Act, she actively helps make sure as many eligible people as possible are covered. She does the same with TennCare — Tennessee’s Medicaid program — but there are many who fall into the income gap between those two options.

On Thursday, May 19, from 10 a.m. to noon at the ETSU Quillen College of Medicine, there will be a legislative task force meeting to discuss statewide options for those in this gap. State Rep. Matthew Hill, R-Jonesborough, is one of the members of the task force tasked with helping find an option to expand health care to those who fall into the gap.

Email Tony Casey at tcasey@johnsoncitypress.com. Follow Tony Casey on Twitter @TonyCaseyJCP. Like him on Facebook at www.facebook.com/tonycaseyjournalist.