Barack Obama entered the White House vowing to end the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan and transformed his predecessor’s “global war on terror” from a sweeping boots-on-the ground effort to a targeted-killing operation, with drones and small teams of Special Forces leading the way. But with his decision to authorize a new military campaign against Islamic State militants rampaging across Iraq and Syria—and Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Gen. Martin Dempsey’s statement today that he might eventually ask the president to send ground troops to the region—Obama, whether he likes it or not, seems to be hewing closer to George W. Bush’s broader anti-terror strategy.

The president himself initially called the mission a “counterterrorism campaign,” which Secretary of State John Kerry echoed last week, insisting that the United States is not fighting a “war” with the Islamic State (also known as ISIL) but instead is engaged in a “major counterterrorism operation.” But in the days since, the administration seems to have changed its tack, with White House press secretary Josh Earnest and Defense Secretary Chuck Hagel declaring that the United States is “at war with ISIL” just as it is “at war with al Qaeda.”

Story Continued Below

So how should we think about America’s campaign against ISIL? Is it a new “war on terror”—or even a “war” at all? We asked top defense and intelligence thinkers to weigh in.

***

A war. Full stop.

By Michael Chertoff

If this isn’t war, what is? And that’s as it should be.

As I understand the Obama administration’s new strategy, among other things, the United States will engage in lethal air strikes against ISIL leaders and fighters, acting in some instances in support of allied ground troops—including Iraqis and Kurds—with the aim of dislodging, degrading and destroying an enemy. While we will not put large massed infantry in the fight, our rules of engagement will be set by the laws of war, and the president will be invoking his commander in chief authorities. Indeed, if this is not war, then we will be seriously circumscribed in the kinetic activities we can undertake.

Although the enemy does not possess the instruments of a real state, no matter how ISIL describes itself, that does not take us out of the category of warfare. Historically, wars have included insurgencies, guerrilla conflicts and revolution. ISIL has ousted the Iraqi government from part of its territory and avows its intent to overthrow legitimate governments throughout the region. Fighting back easily fits within the historical construct of warfare.

If some of our leaders seek to minimize the risks of the new strategy by characterizing it euphemistically, they are making a mistake. We need to be completely candid about the seriousness of this endeavor and the fact that we will need to see it through to success—the degradation and destruction of an evil enemy. Temporizing about this effort only shakes the confidence of our allies in our commitment. Worse, it leaves the American people unprepared for the scope of the challenge that lies ahead. Remember, as well, that our enemy also has a say in how this goes, and we should expect that they will try hard to strike back at us, which might further escalate the conflict.

I think the president is taking steps in the right direction, but to maintain support for the long haul, we will need to be unflinching about what we are doing—waging war.

Michael Chertoff, executive chairman and co-founder of The Chertoff Group, was secretary the Department of Homeland Security from 2005 to 2009.

***

A hostage crisis, too.

By Bruce Riedel

Al Qaeda declared war on America in 1998 with a fatwa signed by Osama bin Laden, and since then, the United States has been in multiple interrelated wars with al Qaeda and its allies and offshoots. The enemy has demonstrated remarkable resilience and adaptability. For example, three different leaders of al Qaeda in Iraq, the predecessor of today’s Islamic State, were killed by U.S. forces, yet the group has not only survived but thrived. Franchises and offshoots have repeatedly shown a capacity to regenerate after major setbacks. (We should expect the same in Afghanistan and Pakistan as we depart by next year.)

Now, the group calling itself the Islamic State poses a number of challenges for the United States, including potential threats to the homeland in the future, an immediate regional and ideological threat and an insurgent threat.

Importantly, ISIL is also a hostage challenge. In general, the American people want hostages rescued, not grand strategic plans that take years to succeed. But some 35 years ago, two presidents—Jimmy Carter and Ronald Reagan—found it extremely difficult to handle hostage-taking. Carter lost his bid for reelection in 1980 with Desert One, his failed mission to end the Iran hostage crisis, and Ronald Reagan foolishly traded arms for American hostages held in Lebanon by Iran-backed Hezbollah and narrowly escaped impeachment. Both presidencies became consumed with hostage crises.

The United States has not confronted as significant a hostage/counterterrorism problem as ISIL since 1991. That year, George H. W. Bush found a winning strategy because he had something to give Iran and Hezbollah (blaming Iraqi President Saddam Hussein for starting the Iran-Iraq War after it was long over) and because Hussein had inadvertently freed Shia captives in Kuwait, for whom Hezbollah wanted to trade hostages. President Obama has no such negotiating options. He has also learned that hostage rescue missions are almost always long shots.

ISIL’s next move is probably to seize more hostages while it continues to execute those it already holds—including more than 40 Turkish hostages the group is using to keep Ankara sidelined in the regional war and at least four remaining American and British hostages. And it can easily acquire more. The American public is likely to find a disconnect between a three-year or longer strategic response and images of horror that will continue on the nightly news.

It could easily get worse. Al Qaeda’s old core in Pakistan has one American hostage (completely forgotten by the media) and could easily take more in Pakistan. Al Qaeda in the Islamic Maghreb, based in Northern Africa, is basically a kidnap/extortion machine but has avoided Americans until now. That could change. And al Qaeda’s offshoot in Egypt is well-placed to take tourists hostage and has already beheaded captives. To add to the horror, ISIL cynically uses the symbols of the Guantánamo Bay detention camp—waterboarding and orange jump suits—to signal to its own constituency why the group takes and kills innocent journalists and aid workers: for revenge. No doubt ISIL hopes this will incite copycat violence in the West.

Obama could face two-plus years of hostage-taking and executions that seem to underscore the limits of American power. It will be easy for critics to charge him as weak and ineffective without, of course, providing a policy that stops hostage-taking. He says we need to fight smarter against our enemy. The president has that right.

Bruce Riedel, senior fellow and director of the Brookings Intelligence Project at the Brookings Institution, served for 30 years in the CIA.