Independence Day will be here soon, and many are purchasing their fireworks and stocking up on groceries for a backyard party. But if you're looking to take the family out for a full day of fun and fireworks, we've got a list of 4th of July celebrations happening right around the metro.

Oklahoma City “Red, White & Boom” –July 3

Celebrate Independence Day at Red, White & Boom in Oklahoma City. Pack a picnic, grab some lawn chairs and bring the whole family out to State Fair Park to enjoy a free concert presented by the Oklahoma City Philharmonic.

Enjoy free parking, on-site concessions and fireworks after dark at Red, White & Boom, which is guaranteed to be entertaining for all ages. No pets.

Blanchard's "Independence Celebration" - July 3

From 6 to 10 p.m. at 10th and Highway 62, the celebration features the Oklahoma City Symphonic Band and Banana Seat on Stage, food, games, kids zone, helicopter rides, mobile game stop, pony rides and fireworks. News 9's storm trackers Marty Logan, Alan Broerse, Val and Amy Castor, and Hank and Patty Brown will be at the celebration and will be available to meet with celebration guests.

Bricktown 4th Fest - July 4

Nicnos free concert takes place on the Lower Bricktown Plaza at 8 p.m.. Visitors can enjoy fireworks following the Oklahoma City Dodgers game.

Yukon "Freedom Fest" – July 3 & 4

Freedom Fest 2015 starts the evening of Friday, July 3, with a tribute to veterans and continues all day on Saturday, July 4. The annual celebration is held at Yukon City Park, 2200 S. Holly, and Chisholm Trail Park, 500 W. Vandament. Both parks interconnect, creating a 100 acre fun zone. Giant fireworks shows start at 10 p.m. on July 3 and July 4, so bring your family, lawn chairs or blankets and enjoy.

Moore “A Celebration In The Heartland” – July 4

A Celebration in the Heartland is an outdoor festival that attracts spectators from Moore and the surrounding Oklahoma City metro communities. This fun-filled 4th of July celebration features a variety of activities for kids, live music, craft vendors and plenty of food booths. A Celebration in the Heartland also features a children's art tent, giant sand pit and more. Bring the kids and watch as they enjoy a wide variety of inflatables, or enjoy perusing vendor booths and tasting local wines provided by area vineyards.

Midwest City “Tribute To Liberty”- July 4

Head out to Joe B. Barnes Regional Park in Midwest City for Tribute to Liberty. This Independence Day celebration will feature tasty food, great music and a stunning fireworks display. Tribute to Liberty begins at 6 p.m. with live musical entertainment. Pick up a hot dog and set up a spot in the park where you can get comfortable and enjoy the company of family and friends, then stick around to watch the sky light up with a fireworks show at 9:45 p.m.

Piedmont “Freedom Festival” – July 4

The Piedmont Freedom Festival is a family friendly event where everyone can celebrate the 4th of July. There are activities and food for everyone to enjoy. Bring the whole family to have dinner from one of the delicious food vendors and let the kids play on the inflatables or get their face painted. There will be pony rides, free watermelon. The evening ends with a parade full of patriotic floats, a fireworks show at dusk for the finale to the Independence Day celebrations in Piedmont.

Edmond “LibertyFest” – June 25 through July 4

Celebrate freedom with Edmond's "LibertyFest," which has been hosted in Edmond more than 40 years. This citywide festival features a variety of great, family-oriented events including a concert, road rally, kite fest, rodeo, car show, food fest, parade, fireworks and entertainment.

This week-long patriotic celebration honors the birthday of the nation, as well as the heritage of Oklahoma. LibertyFest draws an annual attendance of over 125,000 and plays host to Oklahoma's largest hometown July 4th parade with over 100 entries.

See a complete list of July 4 celebrations across Oklahoma on Travel OK's official website.