Cowboys quarterback Tony Romo celebrates a touchdown against the Lions during the second half in Arlington, Texas. The Packers will host the Cowboys in a divisional playoff game Sunday. Credit: Associated Press

By of the

Arlington, Texas — Packers vs. Cowboys at Lambeau Field.

It meant something back then and it means something today.

Forty-seven years ago it featured the two best teams in the National Football League and when it was over and the Packers had pulled out a 21-17 victory in minus-48 degree wind chill temperatures it became a classic.

Not once in the nearly half century since has a postseason game between the two teams been played at Lambeau Field. Not an Ice Bowl II anywhere in sight.

Until now.

On Sunday, two teams almost as evenly matched as the ones who met on Dec. 31, 1967, will meet in a divisional playoff game at noon at Lambeau Field. The winner goes to the NFC Championship Game and the level of attention the game gets should be enormous.

The Cowboys, who hosted the Packers seven consecutive times during the 1990s, including postseason games in '93, '94 and '95, earned the right to play at Lambeau Field with a 24-20 come-from-behind victory Sunday over the Detroit Lions in a wild-card game at AT&T Stadium.

"We all respect Green Bay," Dallas owner Jerry Jones said, when asked about the significance of playing in Green Bay in the next round of the playoffs. "You can't be in the Dallas Cowboy organization (and) not be indoctrinated in the Ice Bowl.

"We've had some good experiences and some not-so-good experiences, some trying experiences up there in Green Bay. I rather them come here, but we sure feel good right now (about) being in Green Bay."

Jones wasn't talking as much about the impending matchup Sunday as he was the joy the Cowboys felt after avoiding a one-and-done for the sixth time in their last seven playoff appearances.

Now, the Cowboys get to regroup instead of go home.

Now, the story line is about a Packers team that was 8-0 at home this year going against a Cowboys team that was 8-0 on the road.

It's about No. 1-rated quarterback Tony Romo of Dallas dueling No. 2-rated quarterback Aaron Rodgers of Green Bay; about Green Bay's sometimes maligned defense in the same spotlight as Dallas' sometimes maligned defense; about the NFL's leading rusher, Cowboys' DeMarco Murray, competing on the same field as the seventh leading rusher, Eddie Lacy.

"There aren't a lot of teams playing right now," Cowboys coach Jason Garrett said. "There's four teams playing in the NFC and there's four teams playing in the AFC, so to be among those final eight is something to feel good about it."

The Cowboys came into the playoffs as the No. 3 seed, so after the No. 4 seed, Carolina, won on Saturday it guaranteed them a date with the No. 2-seeded Packers if they won. The Panthers will travel to Seattle to face the No. 1-seeded Seahawks on Saturday.

The Cowboys don't have the luxury of a bye week to heal like the Packers, who especially needed the time with Rodgers nursing an injured left calf he strained in consecutive games against Tampa Bay and Detroit.

After the game Sunday, Romo, who has had two surgeries on his back and missed the Arizona game on Nov. 2, admitted that after enduring six sacks and four knockdowns that "he'll probably be a little sore tonight."

But it will be a good sore.

And while Green Bay will be rested, the Cowboys, and Romo, come in on a roll, having won five straight games.

"We don't want a bye," said Cowboys end Jeremy Mincey. "We just want to take care of business one game at a time. We have to get prepared for these Packers. It's going to be a tough challenge. A-Rod is one of the best quarterbacks in the league. He's preparing right now. We just have to be one step ahead with our preparation.

"We definitely have momentum. But every week is a fight."

Much will be made of the cold and the Packers' advantage living and playing in it.

The forecast for this week calls for temperatures mostly in the single digits with a slight increase to a high of 11 Sunday with a 50% chance of snow in the evening. The game starts at noon, so both teams won't feel the worst of what the night has to offer.

"It's going to be cold more than likely," kicker Dan Bailey said. "It will be a little different. It's all stuff we've played in before. We played in Chicago last year when it was really cold. Usually it's really chilly in New York and Philly when we play there late in the season.

"We just have to get our mind right and understand what you have to get done."

The temperature this week in Dallas, according to the forecast, will range from a high of 55 degrees on Tuesday and a low of 37 on Wednesday with things warming up to the low 40s at the end of the week.

It's possible Garrett will take his team to Green Bay a day early to get them acclimated to the cold weather, but that would mean a change in routine and so it's hard to imagine him doing that. The Cowboys played Chicago in 34-degree weather several weeks ago and performed without a problem.

"I don't think weather is going to be significant factor for this team," Mincey said. "We're mentally tough. We've played in cold, hot, domes, outside, didn't matter. We just come to work. We have one goal and that's to win the game."

More than weather and anything else, the Cowboys talked about facing Rodgers and the Packers offense. Dallas allowed Lions quarterback Matthew Stafford to complete 28 of 42 passes for 323 yards and a touchdown, but intercepted him once and made the Lions settle for field goals on a pair of drives inside its 25-yard line.

More so, the Cowboys added to their reputation for being the most turnover-greedy team in the NFL, causing the Lions to cough the ball up three times, including fumbles on their final two series of the game. It's different facing Rodgers than Stafford, but the Cowboys already know that.

"It's going to be tough going against them," safety Barry Church said of the Packers.

"They have one of the best quarterbacks in the game in Aaron Rodgers and his supporting cast with Jordy Nelson and Eddie Lacy and those guys, they're one of the best offenses we've played against, if not the best offense we've played against.

"We have to have a great game plan going into this week."

As for how special this game will be for some Cowboys with Wisconsin ties, don't expect a lot of sentimental feelings going around.

"To me, it's not that big of a deal," said center Travis Frederick, a former Wisconsin Badger and a native of Sharon, which lies on the Wisconsin-Illinois border. "I was always a Chicago fan growing up. To me, it's just another game.

"It's going to be cold up there, obviously, but I love being in Wisconsin. I don't think I've ever actually been at a game in Lambeau. This will be my first time."