Stanford University has been named the best business school in the country, according to the 2016 Best Grad Schools rankings from U.S. News and World Report.

The California school tied with two other universities for the top spot last year, but they hold the top spot alone this year.

Harvard University and the University of Pennsylvania (Wharton), moved down from No. 1 last year to No. 2 and No. 3 this year, respectively.

University of Chicago (Booth) remained at No. 4 and Massachusetts Institute of Technology (Sloan) remained at the No. 5 position.

The top ten 2016 Best Business Schools are:

Stanford University Harvard University University of Pennsylvania (Wharton) University of Chicago (Booth) Massachusetts Institute of Technology (Sloan) Northwestern University (Kellogg) University of California, Berkeley (Haas) Columbia University Dartmouth College (Tuck) University of Virginia (Darden)

The 2016 Best Grad Schools rankings also included some specific categories, like Best Executive MBA and Best Part-Time MBA programs.

University of Chicago (Booth) did well in both categories, ranking No. 1 for Best Executive MBA and No. 2 for Best Part-time MBA.

University of California, Berkeley (Haas) topped the Best Part-time MBA rankings.

The Best Graduate Schools are chosen using a measured combination of expert assessments of the programs and quality-measured statistics like test scores and the achievements of graduates.

For the business category, specific rankings factors include graduates’ starting salaries and whether they are able to find employment after getting their degrees.

The part-time MBA category has its own methodology, focusing on peer assessments, average undergraduate GPA, GMAT and GRE scores, work experience and the percentage of overall business school enrollment that is part-time.

The print edition of the Best Graduates Schools will be available on April 7, 2015.

Get Free Updates! Stay in the loop with a weekly newsletter, with all our news from the previous week. We will never give away, trade or sell your email address. You can unsubscribe at any time.

Please follow and like us:

Please Leave A Comment

comments