By Times Record, Fort Smith, Ark. McClatchy-Tribune Information Services

June 22 -- Rheem has promoted Mike Branson to vice president and general manager and Randy Roberts to vice president of sales for the Air Conditioning Division in Fort Smith .

Branson joined Rheem in 2010 as director of advanced technology integration where he managed the development of integrated HVAC and water heating solutions. In 2013, he was promoted to corporate vice president, product development. As vice president and general manager, Branson oversees manufacturing, engineering, logistics, sales and marketing, customer-facing activities and human resources for the Air Conditioning Division.

Roberts joined Rheem in 1997 as a district sales manager and was most recently promoted to vice president of sales for the Air Conditioning Division from the director of sales position. In his new role, Roberts is responsible for the direction and management of all sales and business development operations for the division.

Justin Luebker has been named senior president for Arvest Bank of Fort Smith . Luebker has been with Arvest since 2001 and serves as regional in-store administrator. He holds a bachelor's degree in finance and an MBA from the University of Central Arkansas . Luebker has completed the Barret Graduate School of Banking and Barret Commercial Lending Programs .

Chris Williamson has been named vice president for Arvest Bank in Fort Smith . Williamson has been with Arvest since 2012 and serves as commercial lender for the 74th Street location. He holds a bachelor's degree in business administration from the University of Arkansas and an MBA from George Washington University . Williamson also serves on the board of directors for Western Arkansas Tennis Association and Hobson Preschool.

Wells Fargo Advisors announced that Larry Todd , a financial adviser with the Fort Smith branch of the firm, has been named vice president-investment officer. Todd has been with Wells Fargo Advisors for six years. He holds a bachelor's degree in finance from Arkansas State University , an MBA from Henderson State University and is a licensed, non-practicing CPA. Todd is also president-elect of the Fort Smith Noon Exchange Club and president-elect of Military Officer Association of America , General William O. Darby Rangers Chapter . He is a member of the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants , the Arkansas Society of Certified Public Accountants and the College for Financial Planning . He attends West-Ark Church of Christ and lives in Fort Smith with his wife Suzette.

Wesley Rhea of Uniontown was recently honored for achieving 1 million miles of safe driving at J.B. Hunt Transport . Rhea, a J.B. Hunt truck driver for 11 years, drives for the company's Truckload business unit.

The Arkansas Pharmacists Association recently named Fort Smith region pharmacists as officers at the 132nd annual convention in Fayetteville . John Vinson of the University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences West in Fort Smith was named president-elect of the association and C.A. Kuykendall of Village Pharmacy in Ozark was named District 7 president. The Arkansas Pharmacists Association , founded in 1882, is the statewide professional association representing 2,200 pharmacists in Arkansas .

KHBS/ KHOG-TV 40/29 News has named Ben Wagner news anchor for the station's News Sunrise weekday program alongside anchor Kelly Johnson and meteorologist Laura Huckabee . Wagner previously was weekend evening anchor position and general assignment reporter. Wagner, who joined 40/29 News in August 2012 , is a graduate of the University of Missouri School of Journalism and previously was a reporter/anchor at KOMU-TV in Columbia, Mo.

Send new hires, promotions, retirements and employee awards to Times Record Business News , P.O. Box 1359, Fort Smith, AR 72902, or email [email protected].

___

(c)2014 Times Record (Fort Smith, Ark.)

Visit Times Record (Fort Smith, Ark.) at www.swtimes.com

Distributed by MCT Information Services

Wordcount: 594

[jetpack-related-posts]