Soccer star and Ballon d’Or favorite Cristiano Ronaldo is injury free and ready to head back out on the pitch for Real Madrid, he announced Monday.

Ronaldo injured his hamstring in Real Madrid’s 5-0 win in La Liga action at Almeria on November 23. As a result of the muscle strain, Cristiano missed Real Madrid’s next two games, a 4-1 win over visiting Galatasaray on November 27 and another home win on November 30, a 4-0 victory over Real Valladolid. As previously reported by The Inquisitr, Gareth Bale filled in against Galatasaray in Cristiano Ronaldo’s absence.

“I no longer have an injury,” Ronaldo said at an awards ceremony in Madrid, via Reuters.

“I have been fine for a couple of days,” Cristiano added.

Ronaldo explained he did not want to his luck by returning early against Real Valladolid; Cristiano insisted he would be ready for Real Madrid’s next match, a King’s Cup match against Olimpic de Xativa on Saturday, December 7.

On the strength of his year, Cristiano Ronaldo is one of the favorites to win the coveted Ballon d’Or awarded by FIFA for the year’s greatest footballer. Ronaldo was the last person to win the annual award before Argentina’s Lionel Messi started sweeping the prize the past 4 years.

The winner is scheduled to be announced on January 13, 2014, in Zurich, but Cristiano Ronaldo may not be in attendance. Rumors that the Portuguese superstar may boycott the ceremony have been swirling through the soccer scene amid Ronaldo’s spat with FIFA honcho Sepp Blatter over mocking comments the president of world soccer made. When asked to compare Ronaldo and Messi, Blatter made the verbal blunder of saying he preferred Messi because Ronaldo spent more time at the hairdresser.

Blatter has since explained and apologized for his remarks, stressing “it is my opinion that Cristiano Ronaldo is at the same level as Messi and that both are extraordinary players, each in his own way.”

For his part, Ronaldo has neither confirmed nor denied the idea that he might boycott the Ballon d’Or.

What do you think about Cristiano Ronaldo’s chances for the Ballon d’Or? Is Cristiano right to be upset? Should Ronaldo boycott the ceremony?