Topics: Abraham Lincoln, Books, Civil War, Editor's Picks, excerpts, john wilkes booth, Lincoln's last speech, Robert E. Lee, News, Politics News

Through the cool evening mist of Tuesday, April 11, 1865, darkness gave way to light. The White House was “brilliantly illuminated” and the reflection revealed a “vast throng” assembled to hear the president speak. Throughout the city bonfires blazed and celebratory rockets whistled.

Crowds had gathered outside the White House the previous day, expecting a triumphal speech in the aftermath of Robert E. Lee’s surrender to Ulysses S. Grant at Appomattox on April 9. A procession of some two thousand Navy Yard workmen, dragging six boat howitzers, trekked through the city. The gathering had swelled on its march to call on the president. Bands played and people sang the “Star-Spangled Banner,” “Hail Columbia,” and other patriotic tunes. First to be sighted at the mansion’s second-floor window was not the president, but his twelve-year-old son. Tad couldn’t resist the parade and, encouraged by the crowd’s cheers, he waved a captured rebel flag. Quickly, according to one reporter, “he was lugged back by the slack of his trousers by some discreet domestic.”

Abraham Lincoln had appeared twice on the 10th. In the early afternoon “an agitated sea of hats, faces and men’s arms” greeted him. “I am greatly rejoiced that an occasion has occurred so pleasurable that the people can’t restrain themselves,” he said, to boisterous cheers. “I suppose arrangements are being made for some sort of formal demonstration, perhaps this evening or to-morrow night.”

“We can’t wait!” the crowd roared.

“If there should be such a demonstration, I, of course, will have to respond to it and I will have nothing to say if you dribble it out of me.”

Many in the throng laughed and someone shouted, “We want to hear you now!”

Lincoln used the occasion to ask the band that had assembled to play a song. His choice was “Dixie,” and he joked that the Union would reappropriate it as a captured prize of war. Some listeners may have wondered whether, in selecting the song (“one of the best tunes I ever heard,” he announced), he was signaling eventual reconciliation with rather than mocking the defeated Confederacy. In any case the band played “Dixie” with “extraordinary vigor.” “The President understands well the power of national songs,” observed the Daily National Intelligencer, “and what is better, he uses it in the right time and for a good purpose.” Lincoln proposed three cheers for General Grant and his forces, and three more for the navy, and retired from the scene to work on his remarks for the following day.

At 5:30, again on the 10th, another crowd called on Lincoln to speak, but again the president demurred, saying that he planned to wait until the following evening, when he “would be then that much better prepared to say what I have to say.” After all, he observed, everything he said found its way into print and he did not want to make a mistake that would create confusion.

“You have made no mistakes yet!” someone shouted. One reporter thought Lincoln’s remarks as “unresolvable as the riddle of Sphinx . . . so carefully did he restrain from any opinion.”

The next day, people were waiting “anxiously for the speech which the President has promised to make.” The afternoon edition of the April 11 Daily National Republican announced that the event was planned for eight o’clock. The notice presumed that bands again would be present. “But the music most desired by the nation at this hour of the country’s trial,” noted the writer, “is a speech from the president. If he speaks tonight he will speak to the people of the whole country who are anxiously listening to hear something from him.”

As darkness fell, lights illuminated the city. At the War Department, every window was “ablaze with light” and the building decorated with large flags. A transparency with the word “Grant” flapped beneath a wreath of evergreens. The Treasury Department featured a sign that read, “U.S. Greenbacks and U. S. Grant—Grant gives the greenbacks a metallic ring.” The State Department, “brilliantly lighted and festooned with flags,” displayed a banner that read, “the Union saved by faith in the Constitution, faith in the people, and trust in God.”

The north portico of the White House was also brightly lit. Men and women gathered and stood in ankle-deep mud from the April rains. They not only filled the grounds in front of the White House but spilled over onto the sidewalks from Fifteenth to Seventeeth Streets. Banners streamed and bands played. At last Lincoln appeared and was greeted with “tremendous and continued applause.” Mrs. Lincoln and some friends could be seen in an adjoining window. Noah Brooks, the Washington correspondent for the Sacramento Daily Union, observed later that “there was something terrible about the enthusiasm with which the beloved Chief Magistrate was received—cheers upon cheers, wave after wave of applause rolled up, the President modestly standing quiet until it was over.” Writing several years afterward, Elizabeth Keckley, Mary Todd Lincoln’s black seamstress, recalled a vast mass of heads like “a black, gently swelling sea. . . . Close to the house the faces were plainly discernible, but they faded into mere ghostly outlines on the outskirts of the assembly; and what added to the weird, spectral beauty of the scene, was the confused hum of voices that rose above the sea of forms.” Lincoln chose to read from a prepared manuscript, “evidently so that there should be no chance for misconception of his views enunciated,” thought one reporter.

“We meet this evening, not in sorrow, but in gladness of heart,” he began. Petersburg and Richmond had been evacuated. Only a week earlier, the president had walked through the streets of Richmond and had sat in Jefferson Davis’s chair at the Confederate White House. Lee’s army had surrendered. “Hope of a righteous and speedy peace” now abounded.

The word “righteous” invites attention. It was not a word Lincoln employed frequently, but its appearance here echoed earlier usage. In the speech that helped make him a candidate for president, Lincoln told the crowd at Cooper Union on February 27, 1860, that those who seek to preserve the Union by yielding to those who were clamoring for disunion reverse the divine order of things and call “not the sinners, but the righteous to repentance.” He repeated the formulation several times in his speaking tour through New England that followed.

The cause of Union was the righteous cause; the next time he would use the word in his writings, it was for the cause of emancipation, also deemed “righteous.” In response to a letter from two Iowa Quakers commending him for issuing the Emancipation Proclamation on January 1, 1863, Lincoln wrote, “it is most cheering and encouraging for me to know that in the efforts which I have made and am making for the restoration of a righteous peace to our country, I am upheld and sustained by the good wishes and prayers of God’s people.”

The religious overtones of the righteous cause, and by extension all measures necessary for victory, were made clear in Lincoln’s second inaugural address on March 4, when he quoted Psalms 19:9, “‘the judgments of the Lord, are true and righteous altogether.’” Following that line, Lincoln memorably concluded with a sentence calling for “a just, and a lasting peace.” Perhaps he did not say “righteous” because he had used it in quoting Psalms. More likely, in keeping with the overall content of a soaring conclusion that begins “with malice toward none, with charity for all,” Lincoln wanted to signal fairness and even-handedness. On March 4, the war still was not over; on April 11, it essentially was.

Lincoln not only sought justice, he also desired mercy. His generosity and magnanimity would come to distress his party’s radicals, though he never wavered from what he declared in his second inaugural: “judge not that we be not judged.” Indeed, he repeated the injunction several times in April 1865. There would be occasion to debate how best to unify the nation, but Lincoln began that speech on April 11 by reasserting the righteousness of the Union cause and calling for a day of national Thanksgiving. “He, from Whom all blessings flow, must not be forgotten,” he said.

Lincoln then turned to the subject of his speech: reconstruction. This word, too, is not without its ambiguities. It is common to contrast “reconstruction” with “restoration,” and to suggest that the former entailed a more or less radical remaking of southern society whereas the latter simply meant returning the states to full political membership in the nation. Some Democratic newspapers in 1865 were careful to distinguish between the two words. Some historians argue that Lincoln’s ideas shifted from “restoration” to “reconstruction,” but the president’s uses of the words suggest something different. He told the crowd on that misty night, “the re-inauguration of the national authority—reconstruction—which has had a large share of thought from the first, is pressed much more closely upon our attention.” Here, Lincoln defines “reconstruction” simply: the states submitting to federal authority and returning to the nation.

When Lincoln used “restoration,” he tended to do so in the context of the return of peace or, as he put it in 1862, “the speedy restoration of our Union.” But the terms were fluid. Either “restoration” or “reconstruction” could signify simultaneously the process of establishing civil government in the states themselves and the process of the states returning to the nation. Lincoln himself acknowledged the fluidity and imprecision of the nomenclature when, in his Annual Message to Congress in 1863, he spoke of “maintaining the political framework of the States on what is called Reconstruction.” Nearly three months earlier, in a letter to Andrew Johnson, then still the military governor of Tennessee, he declared, “let the reconstruction be the work only of such men as can be trusted for the Union.”