Topics: From the Wires, News

PHILADELPHIA (AP) — A veteran congressman’s son awaiting trial over $200,000 in bank loans that fueled his image as a self-proclaimed “entrepreneur, socialite (and) lifestyle mogul” calls himself collateral damage in the Justice Department’s long-running probe of his father.

The FBI believes Chaka Fattah Jr. misspent loans and some of the nearly $1 million in federal education funds he snagged — despite never finishing college — as a 27-year-old school management subcontractor living in a $600,000 Ritz-Carlton condo, spending lavishly on cars for himself and his girlfriend and racking up $33,000 in casino gambling debts.

And when tax time came around, authorities said, he was lax about filing returns annually and instead filed a batch of them in late 2010. IRS agents, finding the returns suspect, raided his luxe bachelor pad a year later. In a 38-page trial memo last month, prosecutors said Fattah’s companies were merely a shell for business loans he spent on “extravagant personal living expenses.”

But rather than cower in the midst of FBI stings that have netted his college roommate and two advisers to his father — U.S. Rep. Chaka Fattah Sr. — the younger Fattah has instead fought back, acting as his own lawyer.

Some question that confidence in the face of a sweeping federal indictment. But “Chip” Fattah, now 31, scored an early victory this month when a U.S. appeals court agreed to delay the case and review one of his countless legal challenges.

“If I was still represented by counsel, then the trial would have started two weeks ago,” the younger Fattah said.

As he spoke, he was working on a 55,000-word legal brief due Tuesday in the 3rd Circuit Court of Appeals.

“The government has no idea what they’re talking about in terms of most of the trial memo. Just in terms of details. Details that turn innocent conduct into criminal conduct,” said the son, who insists he worked long hours for two years on the education contract.

Chip Fattah — reed-thin and always smiling — can talk a blue streak. But he paused, atypically, when asked how long he had lived with his father, a 10-term Philadelphia Democrat, before his parents divorced. His sister, Fran, is a lawyer running for city judge. Fattah Sr., 58, also has two young daughters with his third wife, local TV anchor Renee Chenault-Fattah.

“I’ve grown up at my mom’s house. But my dad’s always around. I’ve spent summers and stuff in D.C.,” he said.

Fattah studied business at Drexel University, but never earned a degree, citing financial difficulties and a college debt he says has grown to $120,000. (An entry on his LinkedIn page listed a B.S. degree, though he calls that “a mistake.”)