The latest government report on rates of reportable sexually transmitted diseases has good and bad news for the Peninsula and Hampton Roads.

In its summary of 2013 rates for chlamydia, gonorrhea and syphilis in 50 metropolitan areas, the U.S. Centers for Disease Control pegs the region as having the second-highest rate for chlamydia infections in the country, after Memphis

"It's an issue we've been dealing with for several years. I haven't seen a significant drop-off and there've been no significant increases. For me, I'm happy with that," said Nzinga Teule-Hekima, director of the Peninsula Health District.

However, the region dropped significantly in cases of gonorrhea, where it previously ranked third in the nation.

The metropolitan statistical area, which includes Newport News, Norfolk and Virginia Beach, held the same spot for chlamydia four years ago.

"There are a lot of factors at play. There's no single one that's dominant," said Jeff Stover, director of STD prevention for the state. "It's hard to tell. The military has an influence. … Higher poverty rates and minority populations are disproportionately impacted. People who don't have insurance."

Nationwide, the number of chlamydia cases decreased overall for the first time since national reporting began in 2000. The prevalence is highest in the South among adolescents and young adults. Just 70 localities accounted for almost half the cases, according to the CDC report.

Chlamydia is the most common of the three reported. "It always leads the way. It's the number one reportedinfectious disease nationally and in Virginia, and gonorrhea is always number two," according to Stover.

Chlamydia can also facilitate the transmission of HIV, according to the CDC. It recommends that all those age 26 and younger who are sexually active have an annual screening for the infection, which is particularly prevalent in women and asymptomatic in as many as 90 percent of cases. Untreated, it can lead to pelvic inflammatory disease and ectopic pregnancy. It can also be passed on during childbirth, causing neonatal ophthalmia, a form of conjunctivitis, and pneumonia.

"Access to care is what's really important," said Teule-Hekima. The numbers of those re-infected isn't reported, but she said, "We do see a lot of people in that target range, ages 16 to 24, who are engaging in behavior that's not protected."

In an attempt to reach more people more effectively, Peninsula clinics have expanded their hours and are looking at opening in the evenings; offer urine screening as an alternative to a physical; distribute free condoms; and have stepped up education efforts, she said.

Gonorrhea comes a distinct second to chlamydia in incidence with 333,000 cases reported across the nation in 2013 compared to more than 1.4 million cases of chlamydia. Virginia scored in the middle of state rankings and showed an annual decrease since 2009. Adolescents and young adults are again disproportionately affected, and the incidence in blacks is more than 12 times than in whites.

Though the South recorded 40 percent of the syphilis cases nationwide, the West had a higher rate of incidence for the first time in 2013. Virginia, where homosexual activity accounts for the greatest number of cases, landed in the middle range among states.

Though free STD screening has been available for years at local health departments, the state is launching a more targeted approach, according to Stover. As more people become insured through the Affordable Care Act, he said, the state's CDC funding for STD prevention can be focused on high-risk populations and areas.

"We can ensure heightened screening efforts through community based organizations," he said.

With the recent Food and Drug Administration approval of a rapid syphilis test, Stover anticipates targeting high-risk populations in bars and nightclubs.

Salasky can be reached by phone at 757-247-4784.