David Beasley, shown in a 1997 file photo, proposed to remove the Confederate flag from the South Carolina capitol grounds in 1996. Associated Press

When he was governor of South Carolina, David Beasley proposed removing the Confederate flag from the Capitol dome. The proposal was widely seen as costing him his re-election in 1998, and it brought death threats to his family.

On Tuesday, Mr. Beasley, a Republican, took a triumphant lap around the State Capitol, a day after the current GOP governor, Nikki Haley, and other state officials called for the flag to be removed from the statehouse grounds. It had been relocated from the dome to a nearby spot in 2000.

“I didn’t mind the threats against me,’’ Mr. Beasley said in an interview Tuesday. “The threats against the family were difficult. We got letters, calls, some of it all. You cannot believe how vitriolic, how intense it was.

“But that was then. This is now.”

Mr. Beasley’s 1996 proposal to remove the flag was thwarted in a nasty political fight. Ku Klux Klan members came to the Capitol. The battle paralyzed the rest of the state’s political agenda. Voters overwhelmingly wanted the flag to stay, polls at the time showed, and Mr. Beasley was sharply attacked by political opponents.

After he left office, Mr. Beasley, the descendant of a Civil War soldier, left politics and returned to his home in Darlington.

South Carolina has changed in “an amazingly wonderful way,” he said, after meeting with Ms. Haley.

Many legislators who opposed him 18 years ago, he said, now have a different tune. “They want to act quickly,” he said. Some of those who opposed him have left the Senate. Rep. Mark Sanford, a South Carolina Republican, said one of the reasons he decided to support bringing the flag down was that his phone had blown up with residents wanting it gone.

Mr. Beasley said many people had come around to his position.

“They aren’t just saying this to me because I’m the governor who lost because of the flag. They see me with their heart, with emotions. They’re saying it’s time. I’m just telling them, `You’re right, it is time,’ ” Mr. Beasley said.

“It was my opinion a long time ago, but that was just my opinion