Topics: Barack Obama, Dick Cjeney, Editor's Picks, evildoers, ISIL, isis, Karl Rove, Rachel Maddow, Sun Tzu, The Art of War, Politics News

For all his vaunted love of nuance, President Obama’s recent speech announcing our new war against ISIS (or ISIL, to the White House) denounced them in terms strikingly similar to George W. Bush’s language waging war on “evil doers,” and that’s a development that should trouble us all. Yes, Obama avoided the word ‘war,’ but the rest of his team soon embraced it, and the logic of his address made that move virtually inevitable, whatever he may personally and privately have wished.

“We can’t erase every trace of evil from the world, and small groups of killers have the capacity to do great harm,” Obama said — a typical, and laudable, example of his nuance and restraint. But unfortunately, its main purpose was anything but nuanced: to firmly establish the black-and-white evil enemy frame: “ISIL is a terrorist organization, pure and simple,” Obama continued. “And it has no vision other than the slaughter of all who stand in its way.”

No one can doubt that ISIS is murderous — just like Syria’s President Bashar al-Assad, last year’s No. 1 candidate for America’s wrath. But it’s simply untrue that ISIS has “no other vision” than slaughter. Their vision of an Islamic state — a new Caliphate — may be many things: delusional, presumptuous, contrary to true Islamic values and obviously cruel. But it certainly is a vision of sorts, and it has some appeal, if only to a tiny, disaffected fragment of the world’s Islamic community.

If we don’t understand that vision — and what people find attractive in it — then we really have very little chance of effectively fighting against it, even though ISIS now commands only a few thousand fighters. We may win lots of battles, but not the war. Even if we defeat ISIS itself, but don’t understand its appeal, it will only a reappear in another, potentially even more deadly form, just as ISIS now appears more malignant than al-Qaida. This is particularly true if we ignore the multilayered network of historical grievances which ISIS seeks to exploit.

On the other hand — and this is crucial — if we do take the time to try to understand “pure evil,” we will inevitably discover things about it, which can ultimately help us defeat it.

This is not, as some might would suggest, a namby-pamby liberal view of the world. It comes directly out of Sun Tzu’s “Art of War“: “If you know the enemy and know yourself, you need not fear the result of a hundred battles. If you know yourself but not the enemy, for every victory gained you will also suffer a defeat. If you know neither the enemy nor yourself, you will succumb in every battle.”

Neocons have always relentlessly mocked those who questioned their knee-jerk resort to mindless violence. Predictably, the most toxic form this accusation took was at the hands of Karl Rove, back in 2005, when he said, “Conservatives saw the savagery of 9/11 in the attacks and prepared for war. Liberals saw the savagery on 9/11 attacks and wanted to prepare indictments and offer therapy and understanding for our attackers.” As is usual with Rove, there are multiple threads of lies and misdirections contained in this statement. What’s tragic about Obama’s most recent actions is how deeply they reflect Rove’s wildly dishonest worldview, even though he would surely reject it consciously.

Perhaps the easiest lie to point out is that conservatives were preparing for war before 9/11 — not against bin Laden, but against Saddam Hussein, as revealed in the planning agenda of Dick Cheney’s energy task force, which Rachel Maddow highlighted in her documentary, “Why We Did It.” As for 9/11 itself, it presented nothing like a classic case for war: we were not attacked by a military, or by anyone with a military. Simply put, there was no state for us to attack, except by threatening Afghanistan for not turning over the criminals who attacked us. The situation now remains unchanged: ISIS is not a state, despite its claims, and adopting the framework of war only plays into its deluded fantasy. It helps strengthen, legitimate and perpetuate the evil we face, not defeat it.