Longmont charter principal pleads '#BelieveTPCA'

The principal of Longmont's Twin Peaks Charter Academy — under fire for preventing the senior class valedictorian from delivering a graduation speech in which he planned to announce he is gay, before later outing the student to his parents — emailed the school's parent community on Friday asking for donations to cover anticipated lawyer fees and other unspecified items.

"As a school, we are incurring non-budgeted costs associated with the recent graduation controversy that you may have seen in local media," Principal BJ Buchmann wrote. "We are asking your support of Twin Peaks Charter Academy by helping us cover legal and other costs associated with preserving and protecting the rights of all of our students."

But the school's present mess arose out of accusations that the rights of valedictorian Evan Young, 18, were neither preserved nor protected when Buchmann reportedly rejected the speech Young had submitted, and then called the 18-year-old's father to discuss the matter, and in doing so, told him his son is gay.

As the charter school now scrambles to defend itself and Buchmann's decision on Young's speech, a GoFundMe page, titled "Help Support Our School" seeks to raise $50,000. As of Saturday evening, the campaign had brought in $1,000 from 17 different donors.

"Remember any amount helps," Buchmann wrote in his email, which linked to the fundraising page. "Your one time gift will go a long way to preserve our budget for educational purposes."

Advertisement

Buchmann also asked parents to share the page link on social media, and encouraged the use of the hashtag "#BelieveTPCA".

The principal has not responded to numerous interview requests by the Camera, so further details on what, exactly, "legal and other" means in this context remain fuzzy.

However, Young's family has already stated its disinterest in pursuing legal action against the school. "No, we would never go there," Don Young said last week.

Out Boulder and One Colorado, the two local advocacy organizations most closely involved in supporting Young, have also stated no plans to file lawsuits.

And while U.S. Rep. Jared Polis, D-Boulder — the first openly gay parent in Congressional history — has criticized the school and called for third party to investigate Young's silencing, there's no indication that his office will bring forth a suit.

Surely, some of the $50,000 Twin Peaks hopes to raise would go toward fees charged by Denver attorney Barry Arrington, who is representing the school. Arrington has said that the school is hiring a law firm to look into the case, a step Polis feels isn't sufficient.

Polis has also recommended the ousting of Arrington, who is the former head of the Rocky Mountain Family Council, a group that champions "family values", and the former treasurer of Michele Bachmann's political action committee.

In a 2014 blog post, Arrington wrote that "A man's body is designed to be complementary with a woman's body and vice versa. All of the confusion about whether same-sex relations are illicit would be swept away in an instant if everyone acknowledged this obvious truth."

Arrington isn't keen on Polis, either, and asked the Congressman to back off in a fiery exchange last week.

"What's next, a Maoist-style thought reform camp for everyone who has the temerity to disagree with you?" Arrington wrote.

"In this instance it appears as if some political agenda that I don't understand might be clouding the quality of your advice to the Twin Peaks board," Polis wrote back.

At Wednesday's St. Vrain Valley School District board of education meeting, a vote is expected on whether to send a letter to Twin Peaks affirming the school's choice to hire "an outside independent law firm" to investigate the action against Young.

The proposed letter notes that the district board has limited legal authority over the school's internal operations, but is obligated to weed out discriminatory practices.

"This Board commends TPCA for taking prompt action on this matter," the letter reads. "We hope that the investigation will be sufficiently broad to determine if there is a pattern or practice of discrimination towards students or faculty based upon sexual preference."

Alex Burness: 303-473-1389, burnessa@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/alex_burness