A dozen part-time village of Orland Park employees have seen their hours cut in response to a provision of the Affordable Care Act that would otherwise require Orland Park to provide them with health benefits, village officials said.

The Affordable Care Act requires larger employers to offer insurance to any employee working at least 30 hours per week, or face penalties. But because some of Orland Park's part-time employees averaged longer workweeks, a proposed 2015 budget continues reductions that keep part-time workers under the cutoff and includes a few new part-time positions to make up the lost hours.

Reductions for 12 employees, primarily in the Recreation and Parks Department and Police Department, averaged five to nine hours per week, village spokesman Joe La Margo said. An additional 18 employees were identified as being close to the threshold, but village officials felt they could avoid making formal adjustments and simply monitor their hours, he added.

At a recent budget hearing, Village Manager Paul Grimes told trustees the village strives to keep head count low. He attributed some requests for new part-time hires to the implementation of the Affordable Care Act's provision requiring large employers to offer health benefits to full-time employees.

"To avoid that, we've kept hours down for part-timers," he said. "We've had to bring down hours for some and add staff."

According to the village, medical benefits for a single employee cost between $6,500 and $8,100 per year, depending on the plan, and family medical benefits cost between $19,100 and $24,300 per year. Even if all 12 affected employees chose the cheapest individual plan, it would cost the village an extra $78,000 per year, La Margo said.

No part-time village employees have received health benefits in the past, he said.

Since the village's obligation to offer employees health insurance in 2015 is based on the number of hours employees worked this year, reductions are already in effect, La Margo said.

To pick up the slack, the proposed 2015 budget calls for three or four new part-time positions in the Recreation and Parks Department and some additional hours for part-time community service officers, who assist the Police Department's patrol officers with tasks including traffic control and enforcing parking and village ordinance violations, he said.

A February Congressional Budget Office report on the Affordable Care Act's effect on the labor market said to expect the total number of hours worked in the U.S. to decline after its full implementation, but said the reduction would primarily come from workers choosing to work less, not employers cutting jobs.

Dan Black, a professor at the University of Chicago's Harris School of Public Policy who studies labor economics, said it's too soon to say whether the changes Orland Park is making are happening on a wider scale.

For positions where employees are easy to find and little training is required, avoiding health care costs by relying on more part-time workers may be a smart business move, Black said. But if suitable candidates are tough to find or training is long or costly, particularly for higher-paid roles, employers may decide it's better to pay for one employee with benefits than two without, he said.

"When any one employer does this, it's in the news, but how it plays out in the market as a whole is up in the air," Black said.