Republican presidential front-runner Donald Trump on Wednesday used Chicago's failure to secure the 2016 Summer Olympics to critique President Barack Obama's foreign policy, saying it has created a lack of international respect for the U.S.

Delivering what his aides billed as a major foreign policy address a day after sweeping five state primary contests, Trump maintained Obama should never have traveled to Copenhagen in October 2009 to speak to International Olympic Committee members voting to award the event without knowing the outcome or being assured that Chicago already had a winning bid.

"Do you remember when the president made a long, expensive trip to Copenhagen, Denmark, to get the Olympics for our country? And, after this unprecedented effort, it was announced that the United States came in fourth. Fourth place," Trump said at the Center for the National Interest in Washington.

"The president of the United States making this trip, unprecedented, comes in fourth place. He should have known the result before making such an embarrassing commitment. We were laughed at all over the world as we have been many, many times. The list of humiliations go on and on and on," he said.

Trump had presaged the line of attack at a rally a day earlier when he said Obama was "totally incompetent" for traveling to lobby IOC members when "you don't know the answer beforehand."

The Summer Games were ultimately awarded to Rio de Janeiro and will begin Aug. 5. Given the financial pressures facing Chicago today, some initial supporters of the bid have questioned whether the city would have been able to pay for the Olympics.

During his daily briefing, White House spokesman Josh Earnest defended Obama's foreign policies.

"When it comes to this president's foreign policy, there is no denying that the United States is safer and stronger than we were when President Obama took office back in January of 2009," said Earnest, who added the White House welcomes a debate on foreign policy as part of the presidential campaign.

Though Trump ridiculed Obama for not knowing the final city selection in advance, comments from White House advisers at the time indicated none of the four finalist cities — Rio, Madrid, Tokyo and Chicago — had locked up the needed votes as leaders aggressively courted top Olympic committee officials.

Obama's Copenhagen trip, in the first year of his administration, was the result of intense lobbying by then-Mayor Richard M. Daley and the group of civic leaders assembled behind the bid, though the president initially was reluctant to go because of his heavy workload.

Valerie Jarrett, senior White House adviser, had said that information from the U.S. Olympic Committee and the Chicago team indicated the voting would be "very close" and that a "personal appeal" from Obama could make the difference.

"It's a secret ballot. You can't necessarily be certain that the people who tell you they'll vote for you ultimately will," Jarrett said then. "So I'm sure they did the very best they could do to get the intelligence they had."

At the time, Obama also was working Congress on his hallmark Affordable Care Act and was hesitant to leave Washington if the debate over his legislation was giving way toward a vote.

In the days leading up to the trip, it became clear there would not be a vote on Obamacare during his time overseas, and the White House prepared for the trip. Jarrett said Obama was unfazed by the loss and was already "talking about health care" when Air Force One returned.

On Wednesday, as Trump was labeling U.S. foreign policy as a "complete and total disaster," first lady Michelle Obama was in Times Square in New York to mark the 100-day countdown for the Olympics, where she called herself "a real, lifelong die-hard Olympics fan."

"To this day, I still remember the excitement that I felt as a little girl growing up on the South Side of Chicago when Olympic season would roll around," she said, adding how her friends would gather with her to watch the Games on TV. "I mean, these times meant the world to kids in neighborhoods all over the country," she said.

rap30@aol.com

Twitter @rap30