More options: Share, Mark as favorite

My AEI colleague Ramesh Ponnuru offers a good summary of the Jeb Bush health reform plan and smartly notes how it reflects an emerging GOP consensus on the issue:

All these plans aim to change federal tax, spending and regulatory policy to enable almost everyone to get insurance that covers, at a minimum, catastrophic health expenses. People who don’t have access to employer-provided plans would receive a tax credit that they could use to buy coverage — and that coverage would no longer have to comply with all the mandates in President Barack Obama’s Affordable Care Act. In Bush’s version of the plan, older people would get a larger credit. The tax break for employer-provided coverage, meanwhile, would be capped, both to keep the tax code from rewarding the most expensive plans and to raise some of the money needed for the credits. People with pre-existing conditions would be protected by a regulation that requires insurers to offer coverage on the same terms to sick people and healthy people, so long as they had maintained coverage. That proviso is there to keep people from waiting until they’re sick to get insurance. Meeting that condition would be easier than it has been in the past, thanks to the tax credit.

But the consensus is far from unanimous. Apparently Bobby Jindal, who has a reputation as a healthcare expert, doesn’t like the Bush plan or general approach. Phil Klein explains:

His beef is with proposals that are based around providing tax credits to individuals to purchase insurance, which are more like government spending, because they are given to individuals even with little or no tax burden. Jindal himself proposed a plan that’s based on providing a standard tax deduction for the purchase of insurance, which critics argue wouldn’t do enough to expand coverage because low-income individuals wouldn’t have a high enough tax burden against which to take advantage of the deduction. Jindal has countered that focusing on expanding coverage is a concession to liberal ideology, and that he instead prefers to emphasize cost.

Center-right healthcare policy should enable all Americans who want health insurance coverage to get it. Plans that would intentionally fall short of that goal, much less reduce coverage, seem like bad policy and politics. I think the debate on the wisdom of moving toward universal coverage has been decided and decided correctly. The debate now should about what that coverage should entail , how best to provide it, and how to pay for it. As Avik Roy has written , “Ensuring that every American has access to quality health coverage is a legitimate goal of public policy, and it can be done in a way that expands freedom and reduces the burden on American taxpayers.” My AEI colleague Mike Strain has some thoughts:

The insurance system should be designed to financially protect people from low-probability events, rather than provide comprehensive coverage for all health events, as Obamacare envisions. People should be free to pay for whatever care they like, but the government should not take money out of their paychecks to subsidize small-scale events that will happen with near-certainty (such as my annual sinus infection) or truly elective procedures ( some states choose to cover acupuncture and most cover chiropractic care under their interpretations of the law). Instead, universal coverage should concern itself with the catastrophic expenses associated with serious medical events that will affect a minority of the population. People who can afford such coverage should be incentivized to purchase it, and those who can’t should receive a government subsidy to do so.