Topics: From the Wires, Entertainment News, News

Wayne Rooney scored and then was ejected from a Premier League game for the first time in 5½ years as Manchester United defeated West Ham 2-1 Saturday.

Rooney put the hosts in front with a deft volley in the fifth minute, and Robin van Persie doubled the lead in the 22nd minute with his 50th goal for United. Diafra Sakho scored on a header for the Hammers in the 37th.

Rooney was ejected by referee Lee Mason in the 59th minute for kicking Stewart Downing high on the leg, which would result in a three-game suspension if the ejection is deemed to be violent conduct by the English Football Association. That would cause the United captain to miss games against Everton, West Bromwich Albion and Chelsea.

“I could imagine why he did it, but I think you have to do it more friendly,” United manager Louis van Gaal said.

Rooney had not been ejected from a Premier League match since receiving two yellow cards against Fulham on March 21, 2009.

United (2-2-2) won for the second time in seven matches overall under Van Gaal.There were the two sides of Wayne Rooney, scoring before being sent off for a reckless challenge as Manchester United held on to beat West Ham 2-1.

First-place Chelsea (5-0-1) defeated Aston Villa and American goalkeeper Brad Guzan 3-0, with Diego Costa heading in his eighth goal in six league games for his new club between goals by Oscar and Willian.

Frank Lampard made it four goals in three games for third-place Manchester City (3-1-2) to complete a 4-2 win at Hull after the defending champions wasted a 2-0 lead.

In the day’s derbies, Arsenal and Tottenham tied 1-1, as did Liverpool and Everton. Nacer Chadli scored in the 56th minute for visiting Spurs and Alex Oxlade-Chamberlain six minutes later for the Gunners. At Anfield, Everton’s Phil Jagielka scored on a half-volley from outside the penalty area in second-half stoppage time after Steven Gerrard put the Reds ahead on a 65th-minute free kick that went in off a hand of diving American goalkeeper Tim Howard.

Southampton (4-1-1) beat Queens Park Rangers 2-1 on second-half goals by Ryan Bertrand and Graziano Pelle to remain three points behind Chelsea. Sunderland remains winless after drawing 0-0 with Swansea, while Crystal Palace beat Leicester 2-0.

___

SPAIN

Neymar scored his first Spanish league hat trick in a 6-0 rout of Granada, and Lionel Messi got two goals to raise his total for club and country to 40 — 359 for Barcelona and 42 for Argentina. The 27-year-old Messi has 248 Spanish league goals, three shy of matching the La Liga career scoring record set by Telmo Zarra from 1940-55.