SALT LAKE CITY, Nov. 19, 2014 /PRNewswire-USNewswire/ -- On Saturday, November 15th, the health insurance open enrollment officially began, marking the second year of the Affordable Care Act. The yearly period when individuals can sign up for or change their health insurance plan. This year brings change, and innovation to Arches Health Plan.

Healthcare.gov enrollment is running smoother than last year according to HHS Secretary Burwell. For those who are daunted by enrolling themselves, Arches' has multiple methods to help. "Arches recommends working with a local independent health insurance broker and has a call center with dozens of agents ready to get you enrolled," said Aaron Quarnberg, VP of Member Services.

With open enrollment comes changes to Arches Health Plan. One of four founders of the company, Brad Kuhnhausen has moved on to start an independent health insurance enrollment call center. Kuhnhausen had been an integral player in the early days of Arches Health Plan. His dream of payment reform can be seen in the products, and culture of Arches.

"I am honored to have been part of the extraordinary team that started Arches Health Plan. I am proud that in its first year of enrollment over 25,000 Utahns have chosen Arches to protect themselves and their families. For me, the point of starting a new health plan was to make healthcare better through member driven payment reform. Arches is well on its way to fulfilling that remarkable and important vision," Kuhnhausen said of his time with Arches Health Plan.

To commemorate the time Brad has spent with Arches the company has commissioned a portrait of the founders: John Wunderli, Shaun Greene, Brad Kuhnhausen, and Dr. Doug Smith. The portrait was painted by McGarren Flack out of St. George.

About Arches Health Plan:

Arches Health Plan is a member-governed, non-profit health insurance option for Utah residents. The company offers individuals, and groups lower-cost, high-quality care with a focus on developing cost transparency, increased efficiency, and its unique member-governance structure. Plan members may directly participate by electing the board of directors, become board members themselves and provide input for quality improvement, cost management, and service delivery. Arches plans are marketed through ArchesHealth.org, appointed brokers, the Federal Marketplace Exchange, and Utah's Shop Exchange Avenue H.

Photo - http://photos.prnewswire.com/prnh/20141119/159673

SOURCE Arches Health Plan