Building on the success of last year’s Healthcare IT session track, the upcoming Citrix Synergy conference, May 12-14 at the Orange County Convention Center, Orlando, FL, brings even greater value to healthcare attendees. Synergy will deliver more networking opportunities and showcase customers’ stories of how Citrix technologies strategically helped them to enable clinician mobility, streamline workflow, protect patient information, and mitigate costs while improving operations, said Nitin Sharma, Healthcare Solutions Marketing Manager.

The healthcare Birds of a Feather features IT leaders from Humana, Orlando Health and Southcoast Health interacting with attendees in a moderated roundtable discussion and Q&A session. The three healthcare customers will talk about how their implementation of Citrix mobility, virtualization, networking and cloud solutions helped them resolve challenging clinical and business issues as they transformed to become more value-based, patient-centered, cost-efficient healthcare organizations. Following the session, attendees continue to network and engage with their peers at the post-session networking reception where everyone is encouraged to grab a drink, socialize and connect.

The Fireside Chat, an inaugural activity last year, will have its own dedicated space, which will encourage more interaction between attendees and speakers. “The Fireside Chats, a set of 20-minute Q&A sessions with industry leaders, were designed for attendees trying to find solutions to issues that they’re dealing with in their organization from Citrix customers who may have already solved those problems,” Sharma said. Customers Adventist Health, Children’s Hospital of Los Angeles and St Francis will be on hand to guide attendees on, for example, using technology to reduce the cost of operations while at the same time finding new paths to revenue.

Located in the Citrix Booth Experience, the Citrix Real World Pavilion’s healthcare mobility demonstration follows a doctor’s typical workflow – securely launching an electronic medical record (EMR) from a mobile cart; viewing patient information on an EMR and then roaming that information to an iPad, where the EMR is not native to the mobile device; and moving to the patient bedside and being able to update and show patients and their families real-time health information. “Doctors are in the business of caring for their patients, so these are all the tools that they’re leveraging to ensure that they’re providing the highest quality of care and giving accurate information to their patient and the patient’s family,” Sharma said. “These are things our customers are doing right now.”

Sharma pointed out that the speakers are not using Citrix for a simple EMR access from a thin client anymore. “They’re being more strategic with their Citrix deployment,” he said. “Whether attendees are existing Citrix customers or not, or looking to expand or invest in Citrix’s other offerings, this is their chance to see what their peers in healthcare are doing so they can bring those ideas back to their own organization.”

The value to attendees of Synergy bringing together a wide range of audiences from multiple industries and titles is the ability to connect with players outside of healthcare, such as networking, security and innovative IT firms, and share relevant challenges and solutions. “There are a lot of opportunities for cross-pollination in terms of ideas,” Sharma said. “At the same time, they’re expanding their professional network.”

To learn more about the sessions and other activities offered within the Healthcare program at Synergy visit www.citrixsynergy.com. Plus, if you register today and use registration code HIMSS, you save $500 off the regular registration fee.