Christmas — or "the holidays," as it's called by people who watch MSNBC — brings families together to celebrate all they have in common while arguing noisily about all that sets them apart.

Of all the yuletide dividers, none is more powerful than political ideology, so it's crucial that you prepare for the big day by scrubbing Christmas carols of language that could prove offensive to liberal or conservative relatives.

I presented the concept of ideologically pure Christmas carols in a column last year, noting, for example, that liberals would find "White Christmas" to be racially insensitive while conservatives would insist that "Feliz Navidad" be sung only in English.

That column is said to have saved more than 153,490 Christmas celebrations. Today I continue this deeply important service to humanity by suggesting changes to a different set of carols.

You're welcome.

For liberals:

"We Three Kings": The first line of this song — "We three kings of Orient are" — uses an outdated term that many find offensive. It should be changed to read, "We three kings of Asia are," or to be more direct, "We three kings are from Asia." Also, the song details how the kings are "following yonder star" yet gives no mention to the likelihood that smog from carbon emissions is at least partially obscuring the star. Skip that part and just say they're riding camels to reduce their carbon footprint.

"You're a Mean One, Mr. Grinch": This song is totally unacceptable in its promotion of mean-spiritedness and bullying. You're a bad banana with a greasy black peel? What kind of hurtful message does that send? The whole piece needs to be recast to show support for the Grinch. Example: "You have good in you, Mr. Grinch. I really admire your gumption. If you could recast that energy in a direction of greater positivity, I would definitely touch you with a thirty-nine-and-one-half-foot pole!"

"Rockin' Around the Christmas Tree": The "Christmas tree" part of this song is problematic because it leaves out those who don't celebrate Christmas. To be more open to other beliefs and cultures it should say, "Rockin' around the nondenominational holiday hedge of spiritual harmony." Later in the song there is a reference to pumpkin pie. That could be hurtful to the gluten-intolerant, so it should say, "Later we'll have some unsweetened pumpkin puree and we'll do some caroling and/or drum circles."

For conservatives:

"All I Want For Christmas Is My Two Front Teeth": This song might as well be called, "All I Want for Christmas Is Widespread Socialism and the Collapse of American Society As We Know It." An entitled child — likely from a family of takers — threatens not to wish anyone Merry Christmas unless the government provides him or her with costly dental implants. A more acceptable version of this song would say, "All I want for Christmas is my two front teeth, and to get them I will go out and find a job and hoist myself up by my bootstraps, all while wishing everyone a Merry Christmas instead of Happy Holidays because this is a Christian nation."

"Jingle Bells": When dashing through the snow, one should not ride a "one-horse open sleigh" like some kind of Whole Foods-loving hippie. A Christmas song that truly embraces the American spirit would involve: "Smashing through the snow, in a muffler-less M1097A2 military Humvee." Also, lose the "bells on bobtail" part. Bells might warn the snow that the Humvee is approaching.

"All I Want for Christmas Is You": — This anti-capitalist screed borders on being unfixable. For starters, "I don't care about the presents underneath the Christmas tree" is an affront to job creators everywhere. If we don't care about the presents and think the love of another human being is a perfectly acceptable alternative, our economy will collapse. What's next, a nice handmade card for Valentine's Day? Please. The only plausible fix would be to change the opening to: "I DO want a lot for Christmas/but there is one additional thing I need/I care greatly about the presents underneath the Christmas tree/but I also would like you for my own, blah blah blah …." Another concerning element of this song is, "I just want you here tonight, holding on to me so tight." There is no indication that the couple is married and of opposite sexes. That potentially sinful error can be corrected by singing, "I just want you here tonight, assuming you are heterosexual and we have exchanged wedding vows, holding on to me in a tight but nonsexual, unless for procreative purposes, manner."

Hopefully, these suggestions will put you on the path to a pleasant and argument-free Christmas. (If not, just shout, "What do you guys think about Obamacare?" and then flee in the ensuing chaos.)

To all of you, those who like me and those who wish I would to stop writing and go live under a damp and spider-filled overpass, I hope the Christmas season brings you and your family great joy and laughter. Even you, guy who always calls me "a puke."

Thank you all, truly, for reading.

rhuppke@tribpub.com