Dr. Peggy Naleppa, MS, MBA, FACHE

President & CEO

Peninsula Regional Medical Center

Dr. Peggy Naleppa is president and CEO of Peninsula Regional Medical Center, the 10th-largest hospital in Maryland with 275 acute care beds, 28 newborn beds and nearly 1 million square feet of space.

About 3,400 staff, physicians and volunteers are caring for more than a half-million patients annually at the medical center and within the Peninsula Regional Medical Group of family medicine and specialty care offices.

The medical center itself, with about 2,900 employees, is Wicomico County’s largest single-site employer.

As CEO of one of the 48 acute-care hospitals in Maryland, Naleppa said she believes “we collectively can significantly influence change in Maryland’s health care.”

She also serves as chair of the state’s Council on Financial Policy for the Maryland Hospital Association, is a member of the Executive Committee of the MHA and chair the Advanced Health Collaborative, an LLC comprised of five health systems and 11 hospitals.

Currently, she said, the medical center is at the forefront of a major changes in the traditional role of the hospital.

“The mechanics of the Affordable Care Act and the cost of healthcare at 18 to 19 percent of the gross domestic product require that hospital administrators now take a very different focus on the type and level of services provided in their communities,” she said. “We must focus on reducing the cost of care in Maryland as we now work under capitated global budgets. As we become more efficient and recognize that resources are limited, we can no longer be all things to our communities.”

She envisions a future focused on improving the general health of the population and reducing the growth rates associated with chronic diseases.

Peninsula Regional Medical Center will continue its acute care services, including trauma, open heart and neurosciences services.

Future plans include providing value through extending the hospital’s outpatient ambulatory footprint deeper into the community. Naleppa said the hospital also will continue to align itself with like-minded and similar-size facilities to further its mission.

She pointed to recent partnerships with the Advanced Health Collaborative LLC in the Maryland market and HealthPartners Delmarva, with Bayhealth in Delaware.

“Our choice is to align with like-minded systems that are contemporary in bringing together both a regional and state wide approach to healthcare services,” she said.