Ohio's 131st General Assembly opens for business next month. Its premier responsibility, arguably, is to write and approve a balanced state budget for the two years that begin July 1. The 132 legislators, led by Republicans, will be guided, though not bound, by the budget recommendations Republican Gov. John Kasich makes.

A key budget issue, as it was when the legislature wrote the state's current budget in 2013, is Ohio's expansion of Medicaid coverage under the Affordable Care Act. That's something Kasich wanted, and accomplished – but by winning a state Controlling Board vote when the legislature itself refused to act. The state Medicaid Department reported Nov. 15 that, so far, 450,992 Ohioans had Medicaid coverage thanks to Kasich's expansion. Of those patients, 74,128 lived in Cuyahoga County.

Also high on the legislature's to-do list must be improved funding to Ohio's poorest public school districts and to hard-hit local governments.

Ohio's 2013-14 General Assembly, whose life ends Wednesday, calls to mind words from the Anglican prayer book. Legislators left undone some things they ought to have done (Exhibit 1: charter school reform) and did some things they ought not to have done (Examples: freezing the state's modest renewable-energy and efficiency standards while whittling down home rule powers the Ohio Constitution gives cities and villages).

Led by Sen. Keith Faber of western Ohio, the 33-seat Senate will, as it did this session, have 23 Republicans and 10 Democrats. Republicans will also continue to rule the 99-seat House, with a new House Speaker, Cliff Rosenberger of Clinton County, replacing term-limited William Batchelder of Medina. The House will have 65 Republicans and 34 Democrats, the most Republicans since Ohio set the House's membership at 99 in the mid-1960s.

About our editorials Editorials express the view of the Editorials express the view of the editorial board of The Plain Dealer and Northeast Ohio Media Group -- the senior leadership and editorial-writing staff. As is traditional, editorials are unsigned and intended to be seen as the voice of the newspaper. • Talk about the topic of this editorial in the comments below. • Send a letter to the editor, which will be considered for print publication. • Email general questions or comments about the editorial board to Elizabeth Sullivan, opinion director for the Northeast Ohio Media Group.

Kasich begins his second term Jan. 12. He's required to propose a 2015-17 budget no later than Feb. 5. Its preparation is well underway. Kasich will also outline policy goals in his annual State of the State address, likely delivered late in February. He has already said that his budget will propose tightening the state's oversight of charter schools.

Another key legislative matter, unresolved during the 2013-14 session, is Kasich's quest to reform Ohio's laughably low tax rates on oil and gas extraction. The tax is now 10 cents per barrel of oil, 2.5 cents per 1,000 cubic feet of gas. Production of both commodities is growing in east-central Ohio, thanks to horizontal hydraulic fracturing ("fracking") of the Utica shale. Kasich is 100 percent on target in seeking to increase the two taxes. But he's wrong-headed to want to use some of the resulting new revenue to further cut Ohio's state income tax.

The General Assembly also failed this session to pass effective legislation to fight algal blooms and other threats to Lake Erie, many of them the results of farm runoff in western Ohio's Maumee valley. What had been a promising plan to protect the lake, Substitute House Bill 490, was so junked up with special-interest riders – including, incredibly, utility legislation – that Kasich threatened to veto it. The bill died Dec. 9 when Faber said there wasn't enough time left in this year's session to repair the measure.

During the 2015-16 session, General Assembly members of both parties must make Lake Erie's protection a priority. The lake is one of Ohio's most precious resources. It is also one of Ohio's most endangered resources.

The session that's now ending did, remarkably, reach bipartisan, virtually unanimous agreement on a constitutional amendment to reform how Ohio draws districts for the state Senate and Ohio House. Voters would have to approve the proposal next November before it could become part of the state constitution. Faber and Batchelder deserve applause for helping usher that proposal through the Statehouse; they'd have deserved even more applause had they accomplished something equally important -- reforming how Ohio draws congressional districts. That's something the 131st General Assembly must tackle, and do.