The fate of Obamacare’s next enrollment push may be decided in places like Ben’s Chili Bowl.

The renowned D.C. eatery will serve up health insurance along with its half-smokes late at night as part of the drive to sign up many of the remaining uninsured — particularly the so-called young invincibles amid signs that Obamacare enrollment is trending older and sicker.

Story Continued Below

Recruiting younger, healthier people is a make-or-break issue as the health law’s third open enrollment season gets underway Nov. 1. While the administration is tempering expectations by projecting only modest sign-up growth, it is intent on recruiting healthier and therefore less-costly people in a bid to keep a lid on rising premiums and ensure the new insurance marketplaces thrive.

To that end, advocacy and community groups plan to make person-to-person pitches at hipster hangouts like Ben’s, not to mention at sports bars during college championships and at movie theaters for the openings of the new Star Wars and the next installment of The Hunger Games.

The economic and political stakes could not be higher. In several states, insurance premiums will rise by double digits this year, though most people eligible for Obamacare health plans receive federal subsidies (though not everyone understands they are eligible.) Many middle-class families make too much money to qualify for the federal tax breaks yet struggle to afford health insurance, leaving them vulnerable to potentially high medical bills from an emergency.

Some eye-popping rate hikes by dominant carriers have already sparked outrage from Republicans and concern from consumer advocates. BlueCross BlueShield of Tennessee will raise individual rates by more than one-third, while the Blue plan in Minnesota will jump by nearly 50 percent.

But those examples could ultimately prove to be aberrations when everything shakes out. Three of the largest states — Florida, New York and California — will see average premium hikes of less than 10 percent for next year.

Polls show that affordability remains a major barrier even for people with Obamacare coverage. Forty-four percent of people surveyed by the nonpartisan Robert Wood Johnson Foundation described paying their premiums “difficult,” while a majority (56 percent) said they might consider dropping their insurance if the costs rose over the next few months.

Cristina Calvillo-Rivera, who manages outreach for Young Invincibles, a millennial-focused advocacy group, says her group will promote benefits like free preventive care and birth control for women.

“They want to know, ‘Why am I paying $50 to $100 a month for health insurance?’” she says.

But the law’s critics remain skeptical that will make a difference.

“Why wouldn’t the uninsured jump on this? Because it is not a good value for the money,” says Chris Conover, a critic of the law and a research scholar at the Center for Health Policy & Inequalities Research at Duke University. “Only people with lowest income will get pulled in and enticed by the subsidies.”

For backers of the law, the politics of this enrollment season are more urgent than ever against the backdrop of a presidential campaign in which every Republican is vowing to repeal the law. The more people who benefit from Obamacare, the harder it becomes for Republicans to undo or weaken it, even if the GOP wins the White House. And Republicans on the campaign trail, as well as some in Congress are not backing down from their pledges to repeal the law.

The Democrats “know it will take us into bankruptcy if we don’t watch it, and they know the additional costs are just about to alight on people’s desks,” says Republican Sen. Orrin Hatch of Utah, chairman of the Senate Finance Committee.

In the face of that opposition, advocacy and community groups say they plan to work hard not just to reach the uninsured but to make sure the more than 9 million paying Obamacare customers re-up during the three-month open enrollment season.That includes Americans who will lose their insurance plans at the end of this year, thanks to the failure of nine co-ops. Other enrollees will contend with rising premiums, or changes in their income and are being urged to shop around for alternative plans. Critics argue that people may simply drop out of Obamacare rather than deal with the bureaucratic hassle of finding another plan.

"We’re getting really focused,” says Jodi Ray, project director of Florida Covering Kids and Families at the University of South Florida in Tampa, one of the many groups signing people up. “We’re not doing the cast-the-wide-net thing anymore.”

The administration and advocacy groups plan to concentrate their efforts this year in a handful of cities: Dallas, Houston, Chicago, Northern New Jersey, and Miami, which have large concentrations of people eligible for subsidized coverage

They’ll also lean on “theme weeks” to reach out to particular groups. The week of Nov. 16, for instance, has been designated LGBT and Native-American outreach week, says Calvillo-Rivera.

For Latinos, much of the outreach effort this year hinges on digital media, advertising, texting, and in-person service — a very targeted strategy that blends lessons learned from both political campaigns and marketing. In Austin, Texas, a not-for-profit called Insure Central Texas plans to do a bilingual phone bank and call the 12,000 individuals they’ve enrolled in Obamacare so far to ensure that they keep their coverage.

“The focus on renewal will be stronger this year,” says Rachelle Rubinow, with Community Catalyst, an advocacy group based in Boston that works with Latinos. “We’re promoting the benefits of coming back to the marketplace.”

Insure Central Texas’s data from the first enrollment season showed that only 12.6 percent of the people they originally enrolled in 2013 signed up for a second year of coverage. The messages about re-enrolling in insurance plans confused many people in Texas, says Elizabeth Colvin, director of Insure Central Texas.

Her clients mixed up paperwork, or made mistakes on applications about re-verifying their income, leading to confusion and dropped coverage. Colvin expects the same amount of churn this year during open enrollment season.

The National Health Alliance for Hispanic Health, with a $1.3 million grant, will take the notion of one-on-one help a little further this year by incorporating text messaging that allows Latinos to make sign-up appointments to get help enrolling.

The Obama administration has also made clear that it won’t be shy about pointing out that the penalty for not having insurance has risen for the second year. The hammer that began as $95 in 2014 will now be $695 for an individual, or 2.5 percent of household income, whichever is higher, in 2016.

Research from Enroll America found that one-third of consumers who enrolled in Obamacare the first year did so because of the penalty.

“We need to make sure we’re very clear and explicit about that $695 penalty, so that people understand the choice that they’re making,” says Lori Lodes, communications director for the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services.

Paul Demko contributed to this story.