Supporters of the pro-Kurdish Peoples’ Democracy Party celebrate the party's success in parliamentary elections in Ankara, Turkey, on Tuesday. (Photo: AP)

For all the attention and money poured into them, our elections can be pro forma affairs: Contests between two parties in which no one too far left or right stands much chance of winning, the power of money trumps all else and sacred cows go untackled. To add to that, this year both parties’ apparent standard bearers are also from political dynasties.

But an election in the 76 million population, part-European, part-Asian nation of Turkey last Sunday is a welcome reminder of how fundamentally a landscape can shift when the underrepresented feel empowered to take on a leader considered undefeatable. Voters delivered a firm rebuke to the former three-term prime minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan and his Justice and Development party (AKP), which has held majorities in Parliament since 2002. This time it got only 41 percent of the vote, too little to form a government.

The momentum instead was with the pro-Kurdish Peoples’ Democratic Party (HDP) led by a charismatic young former human-rights lawyer referred to as the “Kurdish Obama.” And though with 13 percent of the vote, it also doesn’t have enough seats to form a government, this is the first time Turkey’s 18 million Kurds have a party representing them in Parliament.

Its leader Selahattin Demirtas, who will lead 79 members of Parliament, was supported by women, young people, ethnic minorities including non-Muslims, gay people and leftists. Even Kurdish religious conservatives opted to side with the feminists, gay people and atheists over Erdogan, who had warned them not to vote for “such people who have nothing to do with Islam.” He had dismissed Demirtas an “infidel,” a “pop star,” and a “pretty boy.”

“Even by his shaky standards,” wrote a columnist for Britain’s Guardian newspaper, “Erdogan’s behaviour during the campaign was exceptionally boorish.”

Most significantly, opposition voters turned out with the sort of exuberance that both idealistic new voters and disenchanted old ones showed for Barack Obama in 2008, when his “Yes we can” campaign promised broader representation and a new agenda.

Erdogan was rebuked for a sluggish economy and jobs, but also for measures to consolidate his own power by running last year for president, after party rules prevented his seeking another term as prime minister. After winning, he pushed for constitutional changes to expand the power of the president, which was mostly ceremonial. But much of the backlash against him was over his suppression of a popular uprising in 2013 known as the Gezi Park protests. They began in opposition to the park’s planned demolition for a shopping center, but spread quickly around the country, galvanizing discontent over Erdogan’s growing authoritarianism. Protesters were met by violent evictions, riot police, tear gas, arrests and deaths.

Erdogan called the protesters “riff-raff,” “terrorists” and “foreign agents.”

Although Turkey’s population is overwhelmingly Sunni Muslim, it is a secular state without a state religion. Women enjoy broad freedoms, and Islamic-style head scarves are barred from government offices and schools. Erdogan’s base is devout Muslims, and he has favored limited Islamism. But a record number of women were elected to Parliament this year through the HDP, prompting a Turkish feminist activist to observe: “This is the first time that feminists in Turkey actively supported a political party. ... We ran a campaign supporting the HDP because we believed in their sincerity when it comes to defending the rights of women, LGBTs and ethnic minorities.” The HDP set a quota requiring half of its politicians to be women and all party offices to be chaired by both a man and a woman. Openly gay HDP candidates also won seats.

“In essence, what we are now witnessing is a changing of the guard, a switching of hats between political Islam and the Kurdish political movement, the two driving forces of Turkish politics that have been empowered since the end of military rule in 1983,” wrote Cengiz Aktar, a columnist for the English-language newspaper, Today’s Zaman.

The election outcome should be cheered by the United States and not just because it represents a triumph for moderate Islam and a pluralistic society. Kurds have been allies in America’s war on ISIS, and during the campaign, they suffered more than 70 violent attacks which were not condemned by Erdogan — even after 200 Kurds were killed at a rally. On the other hand, our Republican congressional majority probably has a hard time embracing a party whose leader calls this “the victory of the left,” and of workers, farmers and the unemployed.

It really is a victory for democracy. As I write this, an email from Minnesota Green Party member Gary Kohls arrived: “Proponents of true democracy have come to realize that the so-called ‘Two Party System’ ... has been increasingly co-opted by the wealthy ruling elites who have been ‘purchasing’ the blind allegiance (and later voting patterns) of both Republicans and Democrats. But the stench from this system is getting overpowering, and sooner or later real patriots will have to stand up and start choosing candidates that are the least influenced by money and power and the most committed to a sustainable future for our increasingly poisoned nation, planet and children.”

That could be a while, or maybe not. No one predicted the outcome in Turkey.

Read or Share this story: http://dmreg.co/1S9xLch