Jeremy Nichols may not be the official stand-up comic of green activism, but he seems to be auditioning for the role. How else to explain his risible claim in a recent Denver Post report on the struggling economy in northwest Colorado that WildEarth Guardians isn’t trying to shut down the Colowyo coal mine and throw 220 people out of work?

“We want to have an honest discussion about the impact of coal and find a way to come together to figure out the next step,” Nichols, the group’s spokesman, maintained.

Why, of course. A group militantly opposed to fossil-fuel production files a lawsuit challenging the validity of a coal mine plan approved years ago — but does so only to provoke an “honest discussion.” Please.

WildEarth Guardians is opposed to all fossil-fuel extraction in the West, and makes no bones about it. In the winter 2013-14 edition of Wild Heart, Nichols outlined the group’s position on those other big fossil fuels, oil and natural gas.

“As communities in Colorado and elsewhere have learned well,” Nichols wrote, “it’s not enough to make oil and gas development cleaner or safer. For the sake of our health, our quality of life, and our future, it simply has to be stopped.”

“In some cases,” Nichols explained, “we can stop it cold … . In other cases, we can raise the cost of drilling to make it economically infeasible.”

Now that’s honest talk. Can anyone doubt that a group committed to the suppression of drilling for natural gas, which emits far less carbon dioxide than coal, would be doubly eager to shut down Tri-State’s Colowyo coal mine in Moffat County? When a federal judge in May faulted the mine’s environmental analysis for not considering the effects of coal combustion and gave the Interior Department a mere 120 days to try to rectify matters, Nichols naturally hailed the ruling.

Now, throwing people out of work on short notice is a delicate matter — and has spurred everyone from Gov. John Hickenlooper to Colorado’s U.S. senators to express alarm. No wonder WildEarth Guardians maintains it is only in favor of candid talk.

The same federal judge last year issued a similar ruling stopping expansion of the West Elk mine in Somerset because federal officials hadn’t considered carbon costs. After the Forest Service announced it would seek to comply with the judge’s demand, Nichols accused the agency of “hatching a scheme to give away” land, plotting to “restore a loophole” and “bending to the demands of big coal,” among other lurid claims, in an op-ed in the Daily Camera.

Whether you approve of the mine or not, “honest discussion” would be helped by a few facts. For starters, the mine was within the Colorado Roadless Rule, a collaborative product of three state administrations (one Republican and two Democratic) and their federal counterparts, and became effective in 2012.

The rule protected 4.2 million acres of National Forest roadless areas, with limited exceptions totalling 30,000 acres. The mine was an exception.

The carve-outs were obviously included not because officials were intent on pleasing out-of-state companies but because of concern over local economies.

It’s fine to argue the North Fork Coal Mining Area exception was a mistake. It is not remotely fair, however, to characterize it as a cynical giveaway hatched by pliant servants of industry. Unless, of course, you’re mainly trolling for laughs.

E-mail Vincent Carroll at vcarroll@denverpost.com.

To send a letter to the editor about this article, submit online or check out our guidelines for how to submit by e-mail or mail.