Robert Hughes, the president and CEO of the Missouri Foundation for Health is a public health strategist committed to partnering with organizations to reduce conditions and behaviors leading to poor health in communities – such as infant mortality, childhood obesity and smoking. At the same time, increasing oral health care getting more Missourians signed up for health insurance coverage and educating on public health and health policy issues are important target areas as well.

In 2012, Hughes moved from New Jersey to head the MFH, after serving as a visiting professor at the Center for State Health Policy at Rutgers University and leadership roles at the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation, including vice president and chief learning officer.

Since then, the foundation has become a more visible partner with grantee organizations in the communities they serve.

Hughes sat down with The American recently to talk about the Foundation’s new strategic plan.

The American: Tell us about the Missouri Foundation for Health and the direction you are going.

Robert Hughes: A good place to start is our mission, because that really drives everything we do and really is focused on the underserved – the people who don’t have access to health care; and really trying to make Missouri healthier, and the communities healthier and individuals and neighborhoods healthier. It’s an ambitious mission, and we are fortunate to have resources to wrestle with. That’s the work that we do in conjunction with folks all across the region.

The American: Tell me what you have done differently in the past few years.

Robert Hughes: I think we really built on what was there previously. So, one of the things we learned, for example, from work that had been done for almost a decade was working on reducing tobacco use. The lesson there was – when you stick with something over a period of time, you have a greater change of it having an impact on it at a systems level.

And so, we felt it was important to choose a small number of things that we felt we could have an influence on over a five- to 10-year period and make a commitment to those things. Choosing those were a big part of our strategy planning; choosing things where we thought there was some evidence that activities we could support could make a difference; that they are important health problems for our region.

Childhood obesity is a great example of that. Across the country, there has been some progress, some analysis, some lessons learned, and we felt we could build on the work we had done here previously in ‘Healthy Communities,’ but also bring in evidence from across the country and some practices that have really informed our work now, ‘Healthy Schools, Healthy Communities.’”

The American: What are the things you are focusing on now?

Robert Hughes: “Preventing childhood obesity. Expanding insurance coverage – that one, we really saw that opportunity there with the passage of the Affordable Care Act and have really tried to take advantage of those opportunities that reinforce and accelerate the progress.

The American: How about Medicaid Expansion? Are you advocating for that?

Robert Hughes: Well, our goal is to get people health insurance coverage and the more, the better. That’s the legislature’s and the governor’s responsibility. Our role there is really one more of education and support, so if we can help, for example, provide insight and analysis about how does Medicaid actually work; what have other states done; and what could we learn/adopt from the models of other states when they have gone about it; when other states have made those changes, what have the results been in terms of health outcomes; those are things we have a role in educating the state.

Through supporting the Cover Missouri coalition; working very much in partnership with several hundred partners now in that coalition – they are all working together and collaborating to really get as many people who are eligible signed up for insurance.

The third one is infant mortality and reducing infant mortality. There, we’ve really zeroed in on two regions where the problem is the worst; and that’s the St. Louis region and the Bootheel. So, in all of our programs, we really try to target the most underserved – sort of a common thread in all of our work is health equity and if we can really help the folks that are at the bottom of the curve, that’s what we want to do so that’s where we target our resources.

Then last is oral health care and increasing access to basic oral health care. As a region and a state, we don’t do as well compared to other states. We think there is some real progress and we are fortunate to have a new dental school in Missouri at A T Still, and we really focused on serving the underserved and partnering with Federally Qualified Health Centers. We think there is a really opportunity there to strengthen the system that provides care to the underserved.”

The American: “Out of these four areas, what are your shining star programs?”

Hughes: “Each one has a different change strategy and I think they are all doing well, in different ways. And the goals that they have, some of them are more easily measured in the short-term and then some of them are going to take a longer time.

So, if we look at insurance coverage and getting more people to have health insurance coverage, that’s pretty clear, and as a region, we are doing well and we think we are contributing to that, but there are a lot of folks involved in that, but we are pleased with that work.

I think the work on childhood obesity has been incredibly well-received by the communities we are working in and by the schools. They’ve been very receptive; they’ve stepped up and they are seeing changes … programmatic design is to work with them to develop their own plans, with advice and counsel from folks who have done this elsewhere. The actual on-the-ground work may be different in each school and community, but it’s all toward the same goal.

Infant mortality – in many ways, it’s helping the communities be organized in a different way; working together; figuring out how the work that community organizations are already doing can reinforce each other’s work … all in the interest of helping the new moms and their babies. In both places, the program design is to work with a key organization; and in the Bootheel, two key organizations, to be the backbone of the work … and strengthen their capacity and their ability to play a leadership role. Here, it’s the Maternal Child Family Health Coalition; in the Bootheel, it’s the Bootheel Consortium as well as the organization of the six health departments.

Oral health, there are two really important health issues that just for historical reasons have been treated separate. One is oral health and the other is behavioral health –

substance abuse and mental health.

With the coming of AT Still, that was really helpful and we, as well as a lot of other folks, have contributed to the new clinic that will be opening here and the training for the students, I think that’s going to make a big difference. And, where those students go – we hope that when, because of the training and orientation, they will be much more likely to both stay in Missouri and also take care of the underserved. Another part of it is working with existing FQHCs around our region to both give them the capacity to provide oral health care. We’ve also helped in bringing in experts in how to run and effective and efficient clinic and work with them, do an assessment and give them some advice in changes they can make so that they can be more efficient and see more patients and be more productive in their clinics.

The American: Where do you see things going for the MFH in the next few years?

Robert Hughes: We feel it’s really important that we listen to the communities and that we support the broader health issues that communities are wrestling with across our region.

Those four issues are hugely important, but we recognized that health is a broad construct and we think of it as much more than just clinical care.

Behavioral health is a part of that, but there are a number of other dimensions of health that we know are important, and we know communities think are important, and we have tried to set up programs and opportunities so that we can get the best ideas from across the region.

Again, what we are about is, how can we help make things better.”