For years, the Spartanburg resident was treated by a doctor at Spartanburg Regional Healthcare System.

Now that she has a shiny new health insurance card in her pocket, she will have to find somewhere else to receive care.

“I have to find a different health care provider,” she said. “It's frustrating.”

West, who struggles with diabetes and high blood pressure, was a client at AccessHealth, a non-profit that links lower income patients to affordable options. Through AccessHealth, she was seeing a primary care doctor at Spartanburg Regional.

Then, she bought an insurance plan via healthcare.gov.

She chose Consumers' Choice, one of three insurance providers with plans on the exchange. BlueCross BlueShield (which has two plans) and Coventry, which was acquired by insurance giant Aetna last year, are the other two. Consumers' Choice has sold more plans than any other provider on the marketplace, according to a company spokesperson.

What West learned after she bought insurance caught her by surprise.

“Consumers' Choice (representatives) told me I could go to Regional, but I was going to have to pay out of pocket,” West said.

Of the insurance providers with plans for sale on healthcare.gov, Spartanburg Regional, has a contract only with Coventry. It will accept patients with the other plans, but those patients must pay out-of-pocket expenses.

Spartanburg Regional did not respond to questions about why it contracts only with Coventry, whether it is losing patients and about the need for patients it has served for years to go elsewhere.

Spokeswoman Maria Williamson did issue the following statement: “Spartanburg Regional Healthcare System is committed to helping patients navigate the complexities of health plans.” Williamson said there is a phone line patients can call with questions they may have regarding their health plans. She said that while the hospital is currently contracted with Coventry, it is in negotiations with the other providers. The extent of the negotiations is unclear.

A Consumers' Choice spokeswoman said the company had discussions with Spartanburg Regional, but has not been able to reach an agreement.

A BlueCross BlueShield representative said the hospital opted out of its exchange network.

Coventry spokesman Walt Cherniak said Regional is part of a high-performance network with the insurance provider. In a high-performance network, Coventry collaborates with one health care system, he said.

“The focus is on better management of a patient population across the health care system and increased member engagement,” he said. “It is designed to improve quality and deliver care more efficiently and cost-effectively.”

What it means for patients who aren't in the Coventry network is that they will be denied full coverage at the Gibbs Cancer Center. Their insurance won't cover the delivery of a baby at Spartanburg Regional Medical Center. And patients, like West, will have to leave their favorite doctor and seek a new medical home.

“Things were better before I had to get insurance,” West said. “I didn't have these headaches.”

Big Flaw

Lynn Bailey, an independent health care economist in Columbia who specializes in strategic management and planning for health care providers, calls the situation one of the big flaws of Obamacare.

During a phone interview, she said other patients across the state and country are experiencing similar challenges.

In fact, consumers in Spartanburg who purchased a plan with Coventry are likely to recognize issues as well, if they haven't already.

Mary Black Health System, a private, for profit hospital located only a few miles from Spartanburg Regional, has contracts with three of the four health exchange companies that provide coverage in South Carolina. The exception is Coventry.

Cherniak said Coventry does not have an exclusive arrangement with Spartanburg Regional. Members who buy the CareLink Health Plus plans can obtain care from other doctors or hospitals, but for a cost.

“They will pay higher out-of-pocket costs and receive reduced benefits if they access care from other providers,” he said.

Bailey said the insurance networks (places that accept a certain insurance) are narrow, thin and inadequate.

“As people have gotten insurance and tried to use their insurance, they are understanding that they can no longer go where they used to go. It's not fair at all, and people who buy insurance don't know this going in. Many enrollees in exchange plans already face barriers to care, and now they are finding that locating a new provider for themselves or their families to be yet another barrier.”

Bailey added that this issue should have been anticipated and health plans need to honestly inform enrollees that their local hospital is not in their network.

Adrian Grimes, spokeswoman with Consumers' Choice, said the company is transparent with customers, but agrees that there is still a lot of work to do with education.

“Our provider directory is on our website and we have summaries of plans online. We also have our customer service number available, and customers should call before they purchase,” she said.

Certified application counselors are working in each county to help patients understand, apply and enroll for insurance on healthcare.gov.

ReGenesis Health Care is one of several health facilities in Spartanburg with these counselors, and that is where West went for help when it was time to enroll.

Ann Roberson, a spokeswoman with the S.C. Department of Insurance, said these counselors should tell patients which health care providers are in each network.

But West said she didn't find out Regional wasn't in Consumers' Choice network until after she had already bought the insurance.

Changing market

Shalama Jackson, with the South Carolina Hospital Association, which oversees both Mary Black and Spartanburg Regional, said the health care market is changing.

“We won't be able to go to anybody we want when we want to. “It's going to be a much more narrowly defined marketplace,” she said. “Where we go is being defined by our insurance carriers.”

Jackson said one of the hospital association's priorities has been to help South Carolinians gain access to coverage and affordable care.

“The marketplace is one avenue for South Carolinians to get access to affordable care and coverage. With insurance, individuals and families gain access to preventive care and a medical home. It can also allow individuals and families to receive the most appropriate care in the most appropriate setting outside of the hospital emergency department.”

But she said contracts at hospitals are likely to change over time.

“Could more insurance providers be added for Regional? It's possible,” she said. “The networks that we have today may not be the networks we have next week or tomorrow. Contracts are still being worked out.”

The South Carolina Department of Insurance encourages people to know what providers are in their networks before they buy insurance from the exchange.

“It is important when reviewing plans to check the individual policy language and review the Summary of Benefits and Coverage, provider networks, prescription/drug formularies as well as other information before making a final selection of coverage,” Roberson said. “Those plans offered through the federally facilitated marketplace tend to have more narrow networks than what we saw prior to 2014.”

As for Mary West, she said she is going to miss her doctor at Spartanburg Regional. He was good, she said.

She is going to start seeing a doctor at ReGenesis Health Care. ReGenesis Health Care is a federally qualified health system and is required by law to accept insurance from every provider on the marketplace.

“I'm just going to pray and hope it works out,” she said. “I'll give it a chance.”