Otto Longhenry, 86, of Longmont, has written a book called "Second Shadow." The novel allowed Longhenry to acknowledge his anger at the atrocities of war and explore the complexities of re-entering civilian life through Alvin Bane Charles, the main character, he said. ( Lewis Geyer / Longmont Times-Call )

His five long-since grown kids once listened to him share bedtime stories about a boy with a magic knapsack, a boy who pulled inflatable boats, ladders, and the like out of it to overcome obstacles along his thousand-mile journey.

But given Otto W. Longhenry's 58-year career not as a writer, but as a pilot — for the U.S. Army Air Corps during the World War II era, United Airlines, oil and mining companies, and as a crop duster out of Platteville — the likelihood of him celebrating his first novel at 86 seems just as strewn with fairy dust.

Or is it?

"I feel more relaxed now," the freshly minted Longmont author said after getting the first shipment of his book, "Second Shadow" (Outskirts Press), in August.

Part of Longhenry's relief comes from working out feelings stirred by a Times-Call story that featured homeless veterans living under bridges in Longmont.

The novel allowed him to acknowledge his anger at the atrocities of war and explore the complexities of re-entering civilian life through Alvin Bane Charles, the main character, he said.

The 230-page book that retails for $13.95 is set in Longmont and opens with this Vietnam veteran living in a hidey hole underneath the old flour mill.

Though Charles sustained an accidental head injury working at his family's greenhouse after completing his tour of duty, his unsettling role and reaction to skirmishes along the Ho Chi Minh trail fuel how deranged and alienated he feels in American society.

Longhenry wrote this story to send a message between the lines, he said.

"Forgive yourself. Under stress, we don't all react the same. This is where the second shadow idea comes in," Longhenry continued, referring to Charles' out-of-character dark deeds in combat. "... When we do transgressions, I can forgive you. You can forgive me. But the hardest person to forgive is yourself."

Otto W. Longhenry had a 58-year career as a pilot for the U.S. Army Air Corps during the World War II era, United Airlines, oil and mining companies, and as a crop duster out of Platteville (Lewis Geyer / Longmont Times-Call)

Despite that agenda, the copy is unstilted, according to Brandi Sanchez, the former home services director at Hover Community Senior Independent and Assisted Living where Longhenry lives with his wife, Karen.

"I'm only 12 chapters in, but this book is incredible," she wrote in an email.

Part of the tension comes from Charles trying to do the right thing under the pressure of survival.

Early lessons he learned from his grandparents, both full-blooded Native Americans who adopted him, guide him throughout.

For instance, many times Charles "hears" his grandfather's voice advising him on how to listen to nature as he navigates the jungle and how to manage escalating conflicts without violence through shrewd calculation.

Longhenry added that growing up in rural Wisconsin outside of Janesville he learned to hunt and to observe nature — a focus he admires in Native American culture.

When he met a local Native American artist who goes by "Coyote" in the Longmont Walmart's hardware and paint department, he settled on that identity for his grandfather character.

The grandfather's wholesome values and level-headed wisdom grounds Charles in the midst of his angst and combat fatigue.

"Alvin (Charles) didn't want adventures. That was the furthest thing from his mind. But being in the war, I had to put him in different situations that caused him to evolve, to be more self-reliant and not dependent on other people for his survival," Longhenry said.

Pam Mellskog can be reached at p.mellskog@gmail.com or 303-746-0942.