Geelong veteran Corey Enright, a mainstay of the club's modern success was a third-round pick. Photo: Getty Images

All the focus of this year's draft is already on clubs' first-round picks – but a new analysis reveals players taken in the second and third round are actually far more important to a club's success.

Clubs which enjoyed success in the second and third rounds of the draft dominated the last decade, none more so than Geelong, who managed to pick up Corey Enright, Darren Milburn, Cameron Ling and Steven Motlop in the third round.

Melbourne have been the most unsuccessful club, with their third-round picks between 1994 and 2008 snaring only two players who played more than 50 games. Over that same period Geelong drafted 12. At the same time, teams that have picked well with their first-round picks have found that hasn't translated into a better ladder position at year's end.

Fremantle, for example, have done very well with their first-round picks, snaring five players who played over 190 games, including the great Matthew Pavlich. But their choices at rounds two and three have been poor.

Advertisement

A data analysis of all clubs' picks between 1994 and 2008 compared to a team's win-loss record between 2000 and 2009 shows the more games players picked in the second and third round play, the more likely a team is to have a better win-loss record. There is a negative correlation between the number of games played by first-round players and a team's winning percentage – that is, the more games a first-round pick plays the worse-off the club is likely to be.

The reason for the importance of late picks on a team's win-loss is complex. One theory is this: getting a good first rounder doesn't make a team any better than average. In the 2008 draft, for example, four out of the first five picks (Nic Naitanui, Stephen Hill, Hamish Hartlett and Michael Hurley) could be considered to have been successes.

&amp;nbsp;

However, despite getting their picks right, those four teams didn't improve relative to each other – because they all added an elite player to their list. Players picked in the first round play an average of 113 games.

In the second and third rounds, a lesser number of successful picks are made (second rounders average 76 games, third rounders only 63). That means teams which get those picks right are much more likely to improve relative to other teams, due to the addition of a quality player to their list when other clubs are likely to pick failures.

In 2008 West Coast got their first pick right, but then picked Tom Swift and Ashley Smith with their second and third round picks. Both are now delisted, and West Coast missed finals this year.

Port Adelaide got their first pick right, then snagged Jackson Trengove and Matthew Broadbent with their second and third round picks – both are key players in a team expected to challenge for a premiership.

Gold Coast recruiter Dom Ambrogio, who has assembled one of the finest young lists in the competition, agreed with the theory – but cautioned a club's recruiting was only a small part of what made a team successful.

"I think that's reasonable on the face of it. There are some difficult factors that come into that though that need to be considered. It comes back to resources and timing. Recruiting is one plank of what would make a club successful, and what would make a draft selection successful.

"Some recruiters have an understanding of timing, better than others. Some have picked the right player for the right time for their club. They may understand that a certain player would fit and suit the club's demographic particularly well in a certain year, but in another year they might not, and they need to have that player available at that time."

Between 2000 and 2009, four teams stand above the pack on overall winning percentage – Sydney, Brisbane, Geelong and Adelaide.

Sydney, Brisbane and Geelong have all picked very well in second and third rounds. Sydney's second and third rounders average 95 and 83 games respectively, well above the league average.

Adelaide and Port Adelaide are the exceptions to the rule – because their pre-season and zone selections, on which much of their success has been built, are not included in the model.