The OSBI said Cusic had purchased programs and software used to erase files and hard drives after he discovered he was under investigation.

A former Oklahoma State Bureau of Investigation agent is facing felony and misdemeanor charges in Oklahoma County.

In September 2013, the Oklahoma City Police Department alerted OSBI of possible criminal activity involving former agent, Jerry Cusic, who has worked with the Bureau since 1998.

According to the OSBI, Cusic was assigned with other computer forensic investigators to the OSBI Computer Crimes Unit housed at the University of Central Oklahoma Forensic Science Institute to investigate computer-related crimes.

Cusic, along with an OCPD officer and a UCO forensic examiner, was working on the International Association of Computer Investigative Specialists computer forensic certification process. The deadline for the test was August 31, 2013.

According to the news release, on August 31, 2013, the OCPD officer arrived at his office and noticed someone used Cusic's alarm entry code to enter the building that morning. While watching surveillance video, the officer saw Cusic plug a thumb drive into the officer's computer. He then saw Cusic remove a hard drive from the UCO examiner's computer.

The OSBI said the OCPD officer and UCO examiner had just completed part of the testing on their computers.

During an examination of Cusic's computer, OSBI confirmed a memory device had been inserted into the OCPD officer's computer, and electronic files were found containing the officer's answers to part of the certification test and answers copied from the UCO examiner's computer hard drive.

The OSBI said Cusic had purchased programs and software used to erase files and hard drives after he discovered he was under investigation. The examination also revealed Cusic deleted and attempted to remove the copied files.

"Integrity is one of the core values embraced by the OSBI, so we were extremely disappointed when it was discovered one of our investigators had violated the law," said OSBI Director Stan Florence. "At the end of our investigation, it was clear this case should be forwarded to the district attorney for prosecutorial purposes."

The OSBI has requested two felony counts of violation of the Oklahoma Computer Crimes Act and two misdemeanor counts of destroying evidence be filed.

Cusic submitted his resignation on November 5, 2013.