School buses arrived to pick up Bloomfield students on Monday afternoon after 14 drivers and 12 aides called out sick, disrupting the morning bus schedule.

Buses line Park Avenue following Bloomfield High School's dismissal on Monday afternoon. According to the school district, 14 drivers and 12 aides called out sick during the morning commute.

It was unclear who all the Monday afternoon drivers were. One person at the wheel, however, was Business Administrator James Verbist, a certified bus driver, Interim Superintendent Nicholas Dotoli said.

Normal bus schedules and routes should resume on Tuesday, according to a spokesman for the bus drivers and aides.

Monday morning's missing drivers and aides accounted for about two-thirds of the transportation staff, said George Penn, a bus driver speaking on behalf of the others.

Penn declined to say if this was an organized attempted. Drivers and aides are intimidated and could be fired, he said.

Penn said bus drivers were surprised to find less money in their paycheck than what was previously agreed to late this summer. Dotoli said he hoped to talk to Penn to "communicate with the unit."

Bus drivers and aides in the district are not unionized. The district reduced working hours for drivers and aides because of Obamacare, Dotoli said.

"Is it unfortunate that people are losing money? Yes, but they're working a shorter work week because [the drivers] are getting less hours," he said. "They're hard workers, and I hope over the next few hours, we can communicate with the unit."

Penn said the drivers were never aware of those changes. A contract they were presented with on Aug. 29 kept salaries at last year's rate. But when bus drivers opened their paychecks last week, they received less money - which will come to about $5,000 less a year, Penn said.

"I made it known to them that this would have an impact on the people who can least afford it," said Penn. "They made all kinds of excuses."

'Chaos'

Parent Wanda Gonzalez-Castillo said she received a school district reverse 911 call about the problem at 7:15 a.m., which she said was too late for most parents to adjust. Noting that some kids opted to take public transportation to school, she said the district needs to plan better in emergency situations.

"We're upset with what's going on. Those parents that go to work, they leave their kids and put there trust in the Board of Ed," she said. "It was chaos this morning. I'm blessed my husband was home and took the van, my daughter and two other girls to the middle school.

Gonzalez-Castillo said she took her daughter and the two friends out of Bloomfield Middle School early, because her family only has one car and her husband works evenings. Another daughter who goes to a special needs school out of district was picked up at 4:45 p.m., she said.

"It's sad our kids are suffering. I don't blame the bus drivers," she said. "They want to get paid and make money. My daughter loves her bus driver."

The following message was posted on the district's website Monday morning: "Due to a transportation issue this morning, student bus routes may not be serviced. Bus pick ups for BHS and BMS students will be delayed or may be skipped altogether. Special Service bus routes will be a priority.

"Therefore, it is advised that arrangements be made for alternate student transportation to the middle and high schools. Late arrival will be excused. Your cooperation is appreciated. Contact the administration office for additional information."

Email: frankel@northjersey.com