DOVER, Del. (AP) - Diane Doyle has a youthful air about her. Whether it is selling lemonade outside of NASCAR races or driving nine miles to get to the post office during Firefly, the 78-year-old is always looking for the positive and fun side of things.

“Or else you grow old and cranky,” Doyle says.

Doyle moved to Dover as part of a migration of retirees to Delaware’s capital city. But as Dover continues to be an oasis for East Coast retirees, city officials are pondering how they can welcome and celebrate seniors while also attracting young professionals as the city approaches its 300th anniversary in 2017.

“Dover is at a crossroads,” said Mayor Robin Christiansen. “We’re going to have to really look at how to develop a lifestyle that is both good for generation X’ers and the baby boomers who are beginning to retire.”

“It’s been done in other communities and I think it can be done here,” he added.

Overall, Delaware has seen gray wave overtake the state. The state is second only to North Dakota in the number of per capita move-ins from other states, and the majority of them are coming from surrounding states like New Jersey, according to to Census Bureau migration flow records.

In the first decade of the new millennium, Kent County became one of the most popular destinations for retirees in the U.S., ranking among the top 5 percent of counties for in-migration of residents over 55, according to a University of Wisconsin study.

Central Delaware had less luck attracting younger residents. Ten percent of 25-29-year-olds living in Kent County between 2000 and 2010 were new to the area, according to the same study.

“We need fresh paint, and we need fresh faces,” Doyle said, adding that Boomers and younger residents can co-exist. “If you don’t have young people moving in, it becomes rather stodgy, it will just be the same old same old.”

Christiansen said Dover is trying a variety of different things to attract a younger generation. The mayor said Dover’s downtown district needs more upscale living options for a younger generation. More entertainment options off Loockerman Street, the downtown thoroughfare, would help, he says.

Marcia Scott, a policy scientist with the University of Delaware’s Institute of Public Affairs, said Thursday that research is showing that millenials and baby boomers actually want the same things from where they live: walkable communities with interesting downtowns that provide a sense of place and an authentic experience.

“People used to go to the mall, that was their social place,” Scott said. “Well, there is a shift away from that and people want to be at more authentic places that maybe have greater character.”

Dover, she said, has character through the city’s long history as a the capital of the first state. It also has incentives for businesses to come downtown, as well as the Downtown Development District designation.

“They have everything going for them, it is just keeping the momentum going,” Scott said. “Dover is going to be a great destination in the future, it is just going to take time.”

Dover already has some advantages. Its low tax rate is attractive, and it is relatively close to major metropolitan areas. The location and low taxes are what landed the city on Money Magazine’s June list of best places to retire.

But infrastructure upgrades, like a road directly linking Delaware to the Baltimore and Washington area, could make Dover a more attractive place to settle - not just visit for NASCAR races, or the Firefly music festival, Christiansen said.

The city’s central location on the Eastern Seaboard is already attracting retirees like Alan and Janice Gaddis. He has a daughter in Philadelphia and she has a son in Silver Spring, Maryland. The couple relocated from New Jersey after a friend suggested Delaware. During a drive back from Silver Spring, Gaddis said Janice drove through Dover.

“We did look at Wilmington, but when I came down to Dover I said, “Dover is it, never mind Wilmington,’” said Alan Gaddis, a retired teacher, adding that his wife described downtown Dover as “pretty as a postcard.”

But they have noticed the lack of younger energy around the city.

“It would bring in some new ideas and it would be nice to see kids running around,” he said.

Zach Barrington, 25, is a pilot with the Air Force. When he moved to Dover from California, he said, he had no idea what to expect. He found Dover enjoyable and quiet. The beaches are nice, as is Fifer Orchards in Wyoming, Governor’s Cafe, and the musical festivals, he said.

But it’s not the best spot for younger members of the Air Force.

“There are probably a lot better stations where young guys could go,” he said. “When I found out I was coming to a capital city, I was thinking Annapolis or something like that where there was going to be cool trendy places.”

“There’s not a lot of variety here, I guess,” he added.

Dover City Councilman Fred Neil, 81, said there is an effort to capitalize on the success of Firefly and Big Barrel, the country music festival, and attract younger residents.

But with that is a balance with the needs for Dover’s growing gray wave, Neil said.

Neil lives in Wild Meadows, a 55-plus community nearby The Woodlands, which hosts the two music festivals. The way the senior living community has been able to work with the festivals’ organizers offers a perfect example of how the two generations can co-exist, he said.

Noise from Firefly, the rock music festival attended by 90,000 people this year, and traffic problems, caused headaches in the first year. New traffic patterns and acoustic adjustments have helped solve those issues.

Plus, Big Barrel, the new country music festival that attracted about 30,000 people, has proven to be popular with the Wild Meadows crowd.

“When you’re dealing with seniors, we have a tendency to become extremely grouchy,” Neil said. “Our life has kid of settled into where we’re comfortable with and when you disrupt that comfort, the annoyance comes out.”

Neil said the city has a tremendous opportunity to attract young professionals and families. Many of the same reasons that brought himself and other seniors to the area, low taxes, nearby healthcare, and no sales tax, are the same reasons why young people would want to come here.

“We have to exploit it,” he said. If the city and state can do it for the retirees, than why not the younger crowd, Neil added.

___

Information from: The News Journal of Wilmington, Del., http://www.delawareonline.com