In Florida, insurance premiums are going up for families who use Florida Healthy Kids Full Pay insurance options , affecting nearly 36,000 families. The changes are slated to go into effect Oct. 1.

Affordable Care Act mandates have resulted in a substantial increase in the cost of the full-pay plan. While the new full-pay plan will include some additional benefits required under the law, it will cost families more than twice as much per month for a Platinum-equivalent plan, Florida Healthy Kids representatives said.

Melania Garcia is a mother who uses Florida Healthy Kids to help keep her kids going to the doctor regularly. She is concerned about the price hikes.

"I have four kids that you have to try and budget when you can take them," Garcia said.

Families with children enrolled in the full-pay plan pay the entire premium. Under the current full-pay plan, the monthly premium per child is $140. Under the new contract, full-pay coverage will cost $284 per month per child for a Platinum-equivalent government plan and $205 for the Silver-equivalent plan. Full-pay dental is a separate coverage at $15 per month per child.

But doctors say with higher premiums comes better coverage. The U.S. Department of Health and Human Services recently expanded the scope of these benefits for purposes of the Affordable Care Act in rules that required the Florida Healthy Kids Corporation to:

Remove all annual and lifetime dollar limits on essential health benefits

Include habilitative benefits (benefits that assist children with developmental skills)

Cover all essential benefits at least equal to that of the State of Florida benchmark plan, with the exception of pediatric dental care

Change the limit on eyeglasses from one pair every two years to one pair each year for plan years.

"The majority of our patients will not be impacted negatively with the changes and, actually, they'll be feeling some of the benefits," said Dr. Faisel Syed, a family physician with Tampa Family Health Centers.

Tampa Family Health Centers leaders said one plan won't be a universal fit for every family. They urge you to come into any of their 15 facilities and work with an insurance enrollment assister . They can help families price out different insurance plans through Healthcare.gov, the federal exchange marketplace, private insurance options as well as Florida Healthy Kids options.

"It's what's happening in your home that's going to really determine what subsidies you qualify and don't qualify for," said Sherry Hoback, chief clinical services officer for Tampa Family Health Centers. "And what brackets you're in ultimately what you're able to afford on a month to month basis."