F-Squared Investments Inc., an investment firm that failed earlier this year following a dispute with the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission, is hoping to move closer to wrapping up its bankruptcy case.

On Monday, F-Squared will ask Judge Laurie Silverstein of the U.S. Bankruptcy Court in Wilmington, Del., to authorize it to put its plan to repay its debts to a creditor vote.

The plan sets up a liquidation trust for unsecured creditors, who have submitted more than $2 billion in claims. Unsecured creditors can expect to be paid with cash brought in by the sale of the firm’s assets plus whatever else the company has left after paying professionals and administration costs.

In December, F-Squared agreed to pay $35 million and admit wrongdoing to settle charges brought by the SEC that it defrauded investors by falsely advertising the performance of its flagship portfolio of exchange-traded funds.

After filing for chapter 11 protection July 8, the firm pursued a $5 million offer from Broadmeadow Capital LLC for its assets, but the purchase agreement included provisions that could cause that figure to adjust down if F-Squared’s assets under advisement continued to fall. Adjustments eventually cut the sale price down to $1 million.

Tuesday, Walter Energy Inc. will ask a Birmingham, Ala., bankruptcy judge to approve its plan to pay bonuses to some of its employees, confronting union workers who say the payments aren’t fair.

Walter is proposing to pay about $2 million in retention bonuses to 26 “key employees” at its core Alabama mines, coking operations or corporate headquarters. The company says the payments are necessary to prevent further attrition and to ensure the employees help it through its ongoing sale process.

But the United Mine Workers of America, whose more than 1,280 active and laid-off employees face the termination of their bargaining agreement, is objecting to the proposal. In court papers, the union said the proposed bonus recipients should share in the sacrifices needed to improve the health of the business.

Walter Energy says its continued operations are dependent on freeing itself from burdensome union obligations. The bankruptcy court is scheduled to take up the fate of the union and retiree benefits later this month.

Walter Energy sought chapter 11 protection in July.

Quirky Inc., a defunct invention startup, on Monday will ask for court approval of a deal to place its remaining assets in the hands of a new owner.

Q Holdings LLC emerged as the top bidder for the assets with a $4.7 million offer, following an auction last month. Quirky has already received court approval to execute a $15 million sale of its Wink smart-home platform, its primary asset, to Flextronics International

The $4.7 million sale, which must win U.S. Bankruptcy Judge Martin Glenn’s blessing, must overcome resistance from both unsecured creditors and General Electric GE partnered with Quirky to create co-branded smart-home products, but now says the failed startup has damaged its reputation and wants to prevent the company from selling any inventory that includes its trademark.

Quirky was founded in 2009 as a crowd-sourced invention platform, whereby inventors could pitch their ideas and solicit help. Quirky would develop the products it believed were hits and pay royalties to the inventors, a strategy that ultimately proved unprofitable. It filed for bankruptcy in September.

-Stephanie Gleason and Jacqueline Palank contributed to this post.

Write to Tom Corrigan at tom.corrigan@wsj.com