If you’re a founder or an aspiring founder, Startup Soiree is something you need to know about.

For founders, by founders, Startup Soiree is a monthly meetup focused on meaningful networking and inspiring conversations with Baltimore’s startup leaders.

Startup Soiree also has a weekly podcast which has featured numerous Baltimore technologists. Now Technical.ly Baltimore wants to bring those inspiring voices right to your voicemail.

Sign up for our newsletter and type code “voicemailcontest” into the “Organization” field for a chance to have your voicemail message recorded by your choice of one of the seven technologists highlighted in the article. (Shoutout to Carl Kassel!)

Curious as to who might be leaving words of wisdom on your phone? Check out their podcasts below:

1. LeAnne Matlach, Director of Communications and Marketing at Smartlogic

For Startup Soiree’s first non-founder podcast, Matlach talks about going from journalist to marketer. “In news, it’s ‘This person had a political scandal, so why don’t you go to their house and knock down their door?'” the communications director explains during the podcast. “I have no problem reaching out to someone and being like, ‘Hey, you should hear more about Smartlogic.'”

A prominent fixture in the Baltimore tech community, Tillett is the executive director of the Emerging Technology Centers. “I trace my career here in Baltimore to one degree of separation from Kermit the Frog, to Mick Jagger, to Sid Meier and Bedouin tribesman,” Tillett says in her Startup Soiree podcast. “That’s the kind of opportunity and level of activity this city has to offer.”

If you want to learn about the inner workings of the business side of the ETC, Albright is your woman. The community manager creates the space for over 100 startups to grow.

You know how your stomach drops when you realize you forgot something essential to your day? Well, Myers and his startup hope to make sure that never happens again. “We have developed a smart bag that is designed to alert users and owners of the quantity of items in their bag,” Myers explains in Startup Soiree Podcast #23. Tune in to hear about the inspiration behind the innovation.

Being in the know is important, so why shouldn’t following the news be fun? NewsUp is a trivia game site that aims to make current events more engaging and fun. “You can dive into your favorite topic, and it ranges anywhere from Obamacare to the Oscars,” Anderson explains in Startup Soiree Podcast #13.

Another news-focused episode comes from Snyder, who is “trying to provide more a of personal tone and voice to the news that gets lost these days.” Hear about how his journalism career lead him to this new venture, a daily email newsletter called Baltimore Rex that we at Technical.ly read religiously.

Listen to Sachse discuss his history and his company in Startup Soiree Podcast #22. “From our perspective our primary focus is on the cooperative model,” Sachse says, describing his company, which serves highly regulated industries like credit unions and healthcare.

Advertisement

-30-