It is no surprise to anyone with school-aged children that the back-to-school season is big business.

According to the National Retail Federation, the average family is expected to spend about $670 on school supplies and clothing for their K-12 youngsters, a total of about $26.5 billion. Add $48 billion to the mix for college students and the math is simple: back-to-school spending is expected to reach nearly $75 billion this year in the U.S.

But even with back-to-school spending in the billions, the retail trade organization said parents have begun looking for bargains earlier in the summer in recent years, weeks before the school bell rings. That’s no surprise to Karen Shaffer, owner of Mommy and Me, a children’s consignment clothing store that’s been open at 3703 S.W. Burlingame Road since 2007.

“People are just more wise about how they spend their money and why,” Shaffer said. “Generally they’re on a budget and they’re looking at the sales.”

Beginning in late July, right around the time of early enrollment for area schools, Shaffer said she sees more traffic in her store that sells name brand, second-hand clothing and shoes for infants through early teens.

“That’s when we’re really busy,” she said. “They’re out looking for jeans, shoes, clothes, just things to get started with for school.”

Clothing is secondary for many families, said Angela Hammer, an executive team leader for logistics at Target in Topeka. They saw a “high demand” for the classroom essentials several weeks before school begins, she said.

“It’s more about ‘What do I need to start school with?’ ” she said. “Then it’s the clothes.”

For most retailers, the late summer/early fall weather plays a big role in the kind of back-to-school clothing shoppers will buy. Both Hammer and Shaffer said having transitional clothing like short-sleeve shirts, shorts and warm-weather dresses still available for the start of the school year is important given that the temperatures are still generally higher.

“You can probably get by with spring and summer things before you need to head into winter clothing,” said Elizabeth Kiss, a research and extension family resource management specialist at Kansas State University. “That means you have an opportunity to plan ahead, watch the sales, and look for coupons and other bargains.”

While savvy shoppers are looking for those bargains, regardless of the time of year, Hammer said providing the best customer service with adequate staffing is key to getting through the back-to-school season.

“We do bring on additional people so everyone knows service and in-stocks are our priority,” she said. “We want to make sure we have what our guests are looking for. We try to be strategic with where we place our team members, whether it’s in our school supply or clothing section.”

For Shaffer, who has been in the clothing consignment business for 23 years, a robust back-to-school shopping season usually has translated into brisk holiday sales and she expects that to hold true this year.

“I’m anticipating the fall to be bigger,” she said. “It seemed people this year had a larger budget for clothing, more than other years, especially on the bigger name brands.”