A look at the John C. Fremont sculpture created by local artist Sheldon Roberts at Pathfinder Park. ( Carie Canterbury / Daily Record )

Local artist Sheldon Roberts stands next to his John C. Fremont sculpture during a dedication ceremony Saturday at Pathfinder Park. (Carie Canterbury / Daily Record)

He stands 20-feet tall and weighs 4,000 pounds. He's resting on a 32,000-pound sandstone base. The steel sculpture at Pathfinder Park is larger than life.

The sculpture depicting the founder of Fremont County was constructed in six months, but not without the community coming together to make it happen — and it was just in time for Fremont's 200th birthday earlier this year.

More than 100 people turned out Saturday to dedicate the sculpture at Pathfinder Park. Artist Sheldon Roberts had one remark when asked how he felt now that the project was completed.

"Whew," he said.

However, he said he is pleased that the individuals and governments in Fremont County came together to make the project a success.

"It really bridged Cañon City, Florence and Penrose," he said. "Now I have a different faith in this group of people in this area."

Fremont County Commissioner Tim Payne said John Howard Sr. of Howard Disposal helped haul and mount the sculpture; Siloam Stone provided the stone base; and Mannie Colon transported the rock. With monetary contributions and in-kind donations, Roberts said nearly $40,000 was raised.

The Fremont County Board of Commissioners, the City of Cañon City and the Cañon City Area Parks and Rec. District each contributed $2,5000 toward the project, and the Cripple Creek & Victor Gold Mine donated $5,000 to get the project off the ground.

Advertisement

Fremont County Commissioner Ed Norden said, several years ago, he heard Fremont referenced during a baseball game in Fremont, Neb.

"I thought then and there that Fremont County should do something to honor our namesake," he said.

Local artist John Alderman is the conceptual designer who met with the Fremont County Heritage Commission to learn about John C. Fremont, so the rendering would be historically accurate.

"I think it turned out really well," he said. "It's good to be part of a project that's worth doing."

Mike Madone, chairman of the FCHC, has done much research on the man, whom many people say he closely resembles, and portrays the founder during special events.

"He did a lot of different things," Madone said. "What he did best was exploring and documenting paths westward."

Fremont was a U.S. Senator, American military officer, son-in-law to Sen. Thomas Hart Benton and the first presidential candidate of the anti-slavery Republican party.

"We are very proud that Fremont is our name and county," said Carol McNew of the FCHC. "The courage and intelligence and ambition of John C. Fremont was legendary. His name has been remembered all over the United States — there are Fremont towns, Fremont parks, Fremont rivers and Fremont peaks."

She said she hopes everyone will tell their children and grandchildren to "come out and remember who this was and why he is here."

Two permanent history panels near the sculpture display the names of donors and contributors and more information about Fremont. The sculpture soon will be illuminated at night.