The group known as Dude Perfect — twins Coby and Cory Cotton, Garrett Hilbert, Cody Jones, Tyler Toney and their panda mascot — started in 2009. The Texas A&M roommates enjoyed trying crazy trick shots in their backyard, and decided to video some of their stunts for friends and family and upload it to Youtube. Then, ABC's "Good Morning America" asked to feature their video on the show.



"I think it's more than the trick shots that appeal to people," said Toney. "I think it's just the friendship that we have with the five guys, the comradery and the happy, clean fun."

Four videos later, General Motors' inquired about signing the five guys for an ad deal. They got their first television commercial, which was shown during the NBA All-Star game and the FIFA World Cup.

"This kind of thing is reflective of what the future of modern marketing will look like," said Anne Bologna, chief strategy officer for digital agency iCrossing. "I'm not one for hyperbole, but the disruption that is going on in digital marketing today has not been seen since the invention of the television set. The consumer world is turning into C-to-B, where the consumer is the disruptor, and they have the tools to be in charge."

YouTubers can now make five- to-seven-figure deals for a brand partnership, depending on their audience size and how what they do fits in with their client's products, Bologna said.

Whistle Sports, a digital media company focused on creating sports content for millennials, made Dude Perfect their first brand ambassador in mid-December. The deal allows the company to facilitate more sponsorship deals for Dude Perfect, as well as allows them to expand into more original series online outside of stunt-based shows.

"You don't need to be right in the middle of the stadium kicking a point to have millions of fans," said Brian Selander, executive vice president of Whistle Sports Network. "You can find fans all over the world, and you can do it in a way that's inspiring and engaging — and you can do it across platform."