To be sure, Steve King is far from the first Republican to talk this way about President Obama. Where to begin? Well, how about with the most recent Republican presidential nominee and newly crowned "party elder" Mitt Romney. On December 7, 2011, he said: "I don't think [President Obama] understands America." On July 17, 2012, Romney stated of the president that "his course is extraordinarily foreign." That same day one of his top surrogates, former New Hampshire Governor and George H.W. Bush Chief of Staff John Sununu, more directly attacked Obama's Americanness, saying: "I wish this president would learn how to be an American." This from the candidate and campaign that bore the standard of the Republican Party in the last election.

What about those over whom their party chose Romney? Oh, they got into the muck on this as well. On September 11, 2011, Newt Gingrich condemned Barack Obama's "Kenyan worldview." The New York Times op-ed board rightly criticized both Romney and Gingrich for their 2011 shots on Obama's Americanness, scoring Romney's remarks as being not quite as offensive as Gingrich's, but "close" nevertheless.

Another 2012 also ran, Rick Santorum, had this to say on June 28, 2010: “Obama is detached from the American experience. He just doesn’t identify with the average American because of his own background. Indonesia and Hawaii." Matt Bai characterized this as, “a dubious remark, heavy with racial implications.” Additionally, on December 31, 2011, less than a week before his victory in Iowa, Santorum accused the president of having engaged in “absolutely un-American activities.”

One who didn't run in 2012, but may in 2016, is Mike Huckabee. On March 2, 2011, the former Arkansas governor asserted: “[President Obama] has a different worldview and I think it is, in part, molded out of a very different experience. Most of us grew up going to Boy Scout meetings and, you know, our communities were filled with Rotary Clubs, not madrassas.” Huckabee was then asked whether he believed that there “may be some fundamental anti-Americanism in this president,” and answered “that’s exactly the point I make in [my] book.” Huckabee may have a reputation as a genial guy, but this is among the worst things any politician of national stature has uttered about the president, and that's saying something.

The parallels between Steve King's remarks from this past week, and those of Romney, Gingrich, Sununu, Santorum, and Huckabee are all too clear. It is important to note that some Republicans, including John McCain and Jon Huntsman, specifically rejected the idea of questioning Obama's patriotism or Americanness. All too many Republicans, however, were happy to do so.

Going beyond Republican candidates for national office opens up a whole universe of truly awful things right-wingers have said. But the most awful was this, written by former Washington Times editor Wesley Pruden:



It’s no fault of the president that he has no natural instinct or blood impulse for what the America of “the 57 states” is about. He was sired by a Kenyan father, born to a mother attracted to men of the Third World and reared by grandparents in Hawaii, a paradise far from the American mainstream.

Pruden here clearly defined Obama as outside the circle of America because of his “blood” and “natural instincts,” and painted him as foreign and exotic, “outside the mainstream.” The use of “sire,” a term typically used to describe the breeding of horses or, in popular culture, the process by which vampires reproduce, suggests something unnatural or even nonhuman about Obama. Pruden’s highlighting of Ann Dunham’s two “third-world” husbands plays on old racial tropes, whereby women in interracial sexual relationships must be somehow morally suspect. In sum, the statement is a bald attempt to 'other' Obama. The cryptic-seeming mention of “the fifty-seven states” alludes to a verbal slip Obama made on May 9, 2008: “It is wonderful to be back in Oregon. Over the last fifteen months, we’ve traveled to every corner of the United States. I’ve now been in fifty-seven states? I think one left to go. Alaska and Hawaii, I was not allowed to go.” The context of the remark makes clear that Obama meant to say forty-seven states (fifty minus one other unnamed continental state plus Alaska and Hawaii). Pruden’s mention of the remark is almost certainly a dog-whistle reference to a rumor, spread via email during the campaign, that Obama’s “fifty-seven states” comment unwittingly revealed that he is, in fact, a 'secret' Muslim because there are fifty-seven member states of the Organization of the Islamic Conference.

I've written about these particular slurs of Pruden's elsewhere Not only does Obama lack American blood, apparently also he's a Muslim vampire. Words fail.

The question remains: why do Republicans come back, over and over, to this kind of thing, to peddling a cocktail of fear mixed with hate? They've got nothing else. They can't sell their right-wing policies as actually working because there's no data to back that up. They can't even sell their policies as logical because, well, they aren't.

So what can Republicans do? Get people afraid. Afraid of "them," the brown president and the brown hordes at the border. In reality the people at the border are refugees and children. To Republicans, that doesn't matter and it certainly doesn't inspire compassion. Steve King's anti-immigration ally Rep. Louie Gohmert (R-TX) has been harping about the supposed "diseases" these children are carrying.

This is all about fear, about making people afraid of what America is becoming, of what America already is. Republicans are counting on the fact that fear makes people do stupid things. Like voting Republican.