The question hanging over Ben Carson isn’t so much about the inconsistencies in his life story. Much more important is how he dealt with questions about them, and he hasn’t exactly been cool under fire.

He whined that the mean, evil liberal media is picking on him in a way it never did with Barack Obama or Hillary Clinton. Well, if the good doctor can’t handle the fallout from a story on Politico about his non-application and non-scholarship to West Point without lashing out, how will he handle real pressure?

I’m talking about the kind where thousands of lives are involved, where it’s hard to tell the good guys from the bad, and the generals in the situation room need an order right now from their commander in chief. Or when overturning the Affordable Care Act goes from a campaign talking point to an action that actually takes medical care away from people who need it most.

Carson was upset because the story he told about an attempt to stab another person when he was young hasn’t been verified. Man, that’s tough — having those terrible media libs say they can’t prove Carson actually tried to mortally wound someone like he claimed. Those devils.

What Carson apparently did not know when he announced he was running is that everything he ever said, thought or did is fair game. When he complains that Obama didn’t get that same kind of grilling when he ran in 2008, uh ... really?

As they say on TV, let’s go to the videotape.

Obama faced questions about his patriotism because he didn’t wear an American flag pin on his lapel. I haven’t checked every photo of him taken recently, but the flag seems to be there now. It’s still not enough to convince some people that their president loves his country.

People asked if he was a secret Muslim, sent to destroy America. There was legitimate grilling about his relationship with the Rev. Jeremiah Wright and how that might shape his presidency.

He was badgered so much about his birthplace that he finally had to release his long-form birth certificate, proving he was born in Hawaii.

When Hillary Clinton was First Lady, conspiracy theorists implied she had a role in the suicide of friend Vince Foster — a charge that made it into widespread media. This grew out of a story about a suspect real estate transaction that came to be known as Whitewater. That deal was first reported in the bastion of conservative media, The New York Times.

She has faced multiple hearings about what she did or didn’t do as secretary of state in the Benghazi attack. In the recent Democratic debate, the first two questions dealt with her penchant to change positions on issues depending on which crowd she was addressing.

That’s the way the game is played, especially when you rise in the polls the way gentle Ben has. When Ben Carson says he thinks Joseph may have built the pyramids as a grain storage facility, that’s a big deal. Explain yourself, sir.

Dealing with the fallout from all that is small potatoes compared to the scrutiny he would get in the Oval Office, where every gesture is dissected and every word is studied for nuance.

Ben Carson says he doesn’t mind being vetted, but clearly he does. It’s tough when every statement, even from 20 years ago, is fact-checked and analyzed, but that’s the media’s job.

The media isn’t just NBC or Fox. It’s all the websites, newspapers, cable channels, radio stations, bloggers and any other place where news and opinion is distributed.

They ask, you answer. You’re applying for a big job here.

That’s what we call vetting in the modern political era, and neither Ben Carson nor anyone else seeking the most powerful office in the world gets to define how it’s done.