There’s no place like Wisconsin, even for son who hasn’t lived in state for more than 25 years

Buy Photo Bill Bollom Oshkosh Northwestern Columnist 2014 (Photo: Oshkosh Northwestern Media, Joe Sienkiewicz / Oshkosh Northwestern Media)Buy Photo

My son, Mike, and his family were in Oshkosh this summer. He has not lived in Wisconsin for over 25 years. They live in Malaysia. He suggested I write an essay on Wisconsin. He’d offer some thoughts too. I liked the idea, and I was curious as to what he’d write.

Mike agreed with the often heard observation that we don’t appreciate what we have, at least until we don’t have it anymore. He felt this was true of himself, in regard to his very own home state of Wisconsin. Perhaps because of our family frequently living abroad when he was growing up, or perhaps because he was just a dissatisfied youth, he did not think much of Oshkosh and Wisconsin, other than he wanted to leave. He believed that there were so many other places in the world that were so much more beautiful.

But when he had kids, he was drawn back home for annual summer visits. It was during these summer holidays – walking along the lake in the park, fishing at my sister’s farm, going to farm markets, riding bikes on trails – that he started to realize that Wisconsin is a very beautiful place.

Although not stunning like the Grand Canyon, Wisconsin has a softer beauty. Last week, he and his wife road bikes on the Elroy-Sparta Trail, with its wildflowers and long, cavernous tunnels. They loved the rolling hills of the Driftless area. On the drive back home, they skirted the Dells, with its gentle sandstone cliffs and glanced at many huge old oak trees soaring in the middle of undulating rows of corn.

Mike has finally come to see Wisconsin as I see it. In the north, we border Lake Superior with some of the most beautiful scenery in our state. The northern half of our state is mostly pine and birch forests, lakes and rivers, many with waterfalls. Two falls that I particularly like are Dave’s Falls in Marinette County, which has a 15-foot high upper falls and a 30-foot lower cascade. The other is Big Manitou Falls in Pattison State Park, 13 miles south of Superior. In late September the park is ablaze with reds, oranges and yellows.

To the east is Door County, bordered by Lake Michigan, where people have enjoyed hunting and fishing since 100 BC. Now it’s dotted with apple and cherry orchards and grape vineyards. There are five state parks, white limestone cliffs, sand beaches and, at the tip of the peninsula, Washington and Rock Islands, which can be reached by ferry. Door County is the most beautiful part of Wisconsin. My bride and I go there for a long weekend twice a year; once around Oct. 23, for the color. We walk the northern trails of Newport State Park, visit Bea’s for jams and dips, Charlie’s Smokehouse for smoked fish, Seaquist’s Farm Market for apples and cherries and the Shoreline Restaurant for dinner while watching the sun set.

Southern Wisconsin has beautiful farms, with their bright red barns and steeple-like silos. rolling hills, cheese factories and Madison, our capitol and most beautiful city – the UW campus, Lakes Mendota and Monona, The Farm Market on The Square and Paisans, our favorite pizzeria.

In the west we border the St. Croix and Mississippi Rivers. A river road rolls past magnificent river bluffs and little towns.

And, finally, there’s Oshkosh, On the Water – The Roxy, Pie on the Porch at Saturday’s Farm Market, the Menominee Park walking/bike trail and Trail’s End (Van’s) hot dogs. When I was a kid, my mother paid $1 for 20 of them. I can still conjure up the smell emanating from that bag of hot dogs on my lap as we headed home – steamed buns, meat sauce, mustard and a ton of onions. Nothing has changed – except the price.

People have often asked me, “Of the many places you’ve lived, which is your favorite?” I was never explicit in my answer, but from now on, I’m going to say, “Wisconsin; beautiful Oshkosh, Wisconsin.”

Reading my comments, Mike couldn’t agree more, Oshkosh and Wisconsin are beautiful places, even if he didn’t realize it as a kid.

Northwestern Community Columnist Bill Bollom is a retired professor from the University of Wisconsin-Oshkosh. In 1989 he received the UWO Distinguished Teaching award.

I

Northwestern Community Columnist Bill Bollom is a retired professor from the University of Wisconsin-Oshkosh. In 1989 he received the UWO Distinguished Teaching award.

Read or Share this story: http://oshko.sh/1mSsUdm