Editor’s note: Information in this column was obtained from the Wagoner County Court Clerk’s database and other public documents for the period ending November 25, 2015.

Not every incident leads to a charge under the law. If charges are filed, guilt, innocence of other liability is determined by a court of law.

Login required We have used your information to see if you have a subscription with us. So far we have not found one. If you feel you are currently subscribed please click on the button to attempt to find your account. Screen Name or Email Password Forgot? Remember me on this computer Login Screen Name or Email Now I remember! Need an account? Create one now. Back Thank you for reading and relying on TulsaWorld.com for your news and information. You have now viewed your allowance of free articles. Login

You must login to view the full content on this page. Screen Name or Email Password Forgot? Remember me on this computer Login Screen Name or Email Now I remember! Need an account? Create one now.

Some names may be similar or even identical to those individuals not involved in these cases.

FELONIES

Joseph Adam Martin, of Wagoner, second-degree robbery. Outstanding warrant.

Donald Shumate, of Wagoner, DUI and driving with a cancelled, suspended or revoked license.

Jeffrey A. Terrell, of Broken Arrow, unauthorized use of a credit card.

Joseph Adam Martin, of Wagoner, second-degree robbery. Outstanding warrant.

Andrew Michael Crowels, of Tulsa, possession of a controlled, dangerous substance — methamphetamine, leaving the scene of an accident involving damage and driving with a cancelled, suspended or revoked license. Outstanding warrant.

Timothy Ladew, Riverton, Illinois, acquiring proceeds from drug activity, possession of a controlled substance — marijuana and possession of paraphernalia. Outstanding warrant.

Trent Christian Massey, of Coweta, larceny of controlled, dangerous substance and larceny from house. Outstanding warrant.

MISDEMEANORS

Robert Douglas Morgan, of Coweta, violation of compulsory education act.

Misty Pham, of Fort Smith, Arkansas, DUI, unsafe lane use and failure to have driver’s license in possession.

Leslie James Robertson, of Wagoner, threaten to perform act of violence. Outstanding warrant.

Shane Lewis Gaasch, of Catoosa, domestic abuse — assault and battery. Outstanding warrant.

Johnny Dale Tucker, of Wagoner, assault and battery. Outstanding warrant.

Connie Marie Galyen, of Okay, obstructing an office and interfering with emergency medical technician. Outstanding warrant.

Sarah Jean Morris, of Wagoner, assault and battery. Outstanding warrant.

SMALL CLAIMS

Pitchford Storage vs. Kim Mada, et al., forcible entry and detainer.

Southwind LLC vs. Lonnie Batterfield, forcible entry and detainer.

Universal Loan Co. Inc. vs. Majic Fink, money judgment.

Supreme Loan Company Inc. vs. Majic Fink, money judgment.

BA Estates vs. Ramon Miranda, forcible entry and detainer.

Steve Hubbard vs. Lynn Witt, forcible entry and detainer.

Patrick Chisamore, et al. vs. Andrew Aldridge, replevin.

CIVIL CASES

Discover Bank (Discover) Card vs. Greg R. Watkins, breach of agreement or contract.

Discover Bank (Discover) Card vs. Jerry L. Read, breach of agreement or contract.

Discover Bank (Discover) Card vs. Mary E. Owen, breach of agreement or contract.

Portfolio Recovery Associates LLC vs. Renee Rubert, indebtedness.

Synchrony Bank vs. Brad McClary, indebtedness.

Jamisha Current vs. Wagoner County Commissioners, et al., negligence.

Discover Bank (Discover) Card vs. Jerry Hensley, breach of agreement or contract.

Norma Goodnight vs. Susan Crimmins, negligence.

JP Morgan Mortgage Aquisition vs. Buck Shaw, foreclosure.

Nationstar Mortgage LLC vs. Cindy Roberson, foreclosure.

WILDLIFE

Domitilo Antonio Macareno, of Porter, headlighting.

Domitilo Antonio Macareno, of Porter, hunting without a license.

MARRIAGE LICENSES

Richard Dean Redner and Nichole Elizabeth

Eli Kale Turley and Windi Monika Ronnell Clark

FAMILY AND DOMESTIC

Kimberly Dawn Wartson vs. Kevin Charles Wartson, divorce.

A.E. Wayne Fuller II vs. Amy L. Fuller, divorce.

PROTECTIVE ORDER

Ariel Lane Wheeler, et al. vs. Gavin Gregory Wheeler