Patents and biosimilars again will be important issues for the life sciences industry in 2015, as will health information technology and Food and Drug Administration oversight of laboratory developed tests (LDTs), a new survey predicted. This survey of Bloomberg BNA’s Life Sciences Law & Industry Report ’s Advisory Board members highlighted a number of patent issues, which was not surprising given recent court decisions and the Patent and Trademark Office’s guidance on patent eligibility that was just revised in response to comments from life sciences attorneys and companies. The board members also predicted that biosimilars, which have appeared intermittently on previous top 10 lists since the Biosimilar Price Competition and Innovation Act of 2009 (BPCIA) was enacted as part of the Affordable Care Act, finally will become a real and not just an anticipated issue when the FDA approves its first biosimilar under the BPCIA's abbreviated approval pathway in 2015. But, while not named, personalized or precision medicine is an underlying theme for the court decisions and others of the top issues listed. The top life sciences issues for 2015 are:

Your HR and Payroll compliance and policy solution! Comply with federal, state, and international laws, find answers to your most challenging questions, get timely updates with email alerts, and more with our suite of products.

STANDING ORDERS

All Bloomberg BNA treatises are available on standing order, which ensures you will always receive the most current edition of the book or supplement of the title you have ordered from Bloomberg BNA’s book division. As soon as a new supplement or edition is published (usually annually) for a title you’ve previously purchased and requested to be placed on standing order, we’ll ship it to you to review for 30 days without any obligation. During this period, you can either (a) honor the invoice and receive a 5% discount (in addition to any other discounts you may qualify for) off the then-current price of the update, plus shipping and handling or (b) return the book(s), in which case, your invoice will be cancelled upon receipt of the book(s). Call us for a prepaid UPS label for your return. It’s as simple and easy as that. Most importantly, standing orders mean you will never have to worry about the timeliness of the information you’re relying on. And, you may discontinue standing orders at any time by contacting us at 1.800.960.1220 or by sending an email to books@bna.com.

Put me on standing order at a 5% discount off list price of all future updates, in addition to any other discounts I may quality for. (Returnable within 30 days.)

Notify me when updates are available (No standing order will be created).