Pueblo — The Cañon City Tigers suffered a heartbreaking 51-50 overtime loss to Pueblo Centennial on Friday night at Dutch Clark Stadium.

The Tigers led late in regulation and in overtime, only to watch Bulldogs' star quarterback Quincy Kindred will himself into the end zone.

The loss dropped Cañon City's overall record to 3-2 and evened its league mark at 1-1. The Tigers will take on Pueblo West on Friday night in Foothills League action. Pueblo Centennial improved to 5-0 and 2-0 in league play.

"That kid, you look at him physically and he's not a tall kid but from the waist down he has tree trunks and he spins and he moves and he breaks tackles; he's a good one," Tigers coach Tom O'Rourke said. "That's how the game ended; he kept spinning and making yardage."

Kindred finished with 245 yards on 30 carries and five touchdowns.

The Tigers rallied from a 20-7 deficit in the first half to take a 21-20 lead into intermission. An interception and long return by Trey Owen and a fumble recovery by Josh Jones set up the Tigers' late second quarter scores.

Pueblo Centennial went up 28-21 with 7:52 to go in the third quarter, but the Tigers responded with their running game as Tyler Templeton and Trenton Stringari ran over and past the Bulldogs defense for much of the second half.

Stringari, who finished with 135 yards on nine carries, scored twice on long runs which put the Tigers back on top 35-28 with 7:35 left in the game.

"He made some great moves, just pausing a little bit and then getting to the outside and hitting the speed," O'Rourke said of his junior running back.

The Tigers kept the 35-28 lead and had Centennial facing a fourth-and-1 inside the Tigers' 10-yard line with a little more than 2 minutes left in the game. The Bulldogs were able to make the first down by less than a half a football. From there, Kindred scored and then converted the 2-point conversion to put the Bulldogs ahead 36-35 with 2:07 left.

On the ensuing kickoff, the Bulldogs kicked it over the front line of the Tigers and Centennial recovered the ball at the Cañon City 20-yard line. It was the second time that the Bulldogs were able to recover a kickoff in the game.

With the Tigers out of timeouts, all Centennial needed to do was to have Kindred kneel down with the ball, but instead he rambled 13 yards into the end zone to put the Bulldogs up 43-35 with 38 seconds left.

Still a one-possession game, the Tigers took the kickoff back to the 47-yard line. With 26 seconds left, Tigers quarterback Logan Nethercot hit Trystan Hinton on a long play down the middle of the field to set up a 2-yard touchdown run with 4 seconds left. Nethercot, who finished 14 of 22 for 138 yards and a touchdown, ran in the 2-point conversion.

In overtime, Cañon City scored on an 18-yard pass play from Nethercot to Gunner Javernick to go up 50-43.

Centennial then had their chance in overtime. On fourth down from the 4-yard line, Kindred powered his way off tackle into the end zone. Moments later, he converted the 2-point conversion on the same play.

"Our kids responded extremely well," O'Rourke said. "They knew we were going to go to Javernick some time and boy he just fights for the ball and goes and gets it. Great throw to Trystan down the middle; we made plays when we needed to and our kids fought hard. Their kids fought hard, too. Just a darn good ballgame."

Centennial coach Mike Palumbo said Cañon City and Centennial always play great games.

"We've had so many years in a row that's it's come down to the wire," Palumbo said. "For us, it's good to be on the winning side for a change. Those Cañon kids played their hearts out. I think they were banged up and we were missing a ton of kids. It's sad someone had to lose.

"This is our second biggest rivalry. We are blessed to play in Bell Game but this is next. It'll be sad if they go back down (to 3A)."