SHARE © Nick Filoso Larry White, decked out in an “In Control” T-shirt, pounds the drums at a Stalag 13 gig. Contributed photo The members of Stalag 13 pose for a recent shot. Clockwise from top left are drummer Larry White, singer Ron Baird, bassist John Morris and guitarists Blake Cruz and Dave Casillas. Baird lives in Australia now and won’t be able to make Saturday’s Nardfest show. Stepping in for him will be John Crerar from the Missing 23rd. Stalag 13’s debut album, “In Control,” was released in 1984. AllMusic.com calls the record “a time capsule of post-hardcore, pre-grunge punk rock.” Contributed photo Fans go crazy as Stalag 13 guitarist Larry Casillas rips into a solo.

By Bill Locey

The music will start early and end late because they do it nice when they do it twice. That would be Nardfest 2, the largest all-local music festival of 2014, happening Saturday at the Majestic Ventura Theater. It’s all in celebration of 30-plus years of punk rock straight out of Oxnard.

The most populous city in Ventura County was originally known for Henry T. Oxnard’s expansive sugar beet fields on the coastal plain where the topsoil is 40 feet deep, making it a prime component of Ventura County’s booming agriculture industry. But over the last few decades, Oxnard has been known for paving some of the best farmland in the world for no apparent reason. The last election has hopefully reversed that sorry situation and just as there are no more orange groves in Orange County, tuned in local politicians might perhaps prevent a future Strawberry Festival that would be forced to honor pictures of strawberries on the walls of a museum.

So while Oxnard has farmed and Oxnard has paved, Oxnard has also rocked. Hard. Since the ’80s, Oxnard has been the home of Nardcore — Oxnard + hardcore — and despite its typical omission from all those punk rock documentaries, the Oxnard scene is alive and well and the Ramones are mostly still dead, despite the fact that they sell more T-shirts than ever.

Nardfest 2 The second annual concert celebrating Oxnard’s punk scene will take place at 3 p.m. Saturday at the Majestic Ventura Theatre, 26 S. Chestnut St., Ventura. Agression member “Big Bob” Clark will kick things off by getting married onstage at 3:30 p.m. The Boxheads perform at 4:15 p.m., followed by Last Priority (5 p.m.), Circle One (5:45 p.m.), Burning Dog (6:30 p.m.), Agression (7:15 p.m.), False Confession (8 p.m.), Stalag 13 (8:45 p.m.), In Control (9:40 p.m.) and Ill Repute (10:35 p.m.). Tickets are $22.50 advance, $27 at the door. Call 653-0721 or visit venturatheater.net or facebook.com/nardfest.

Last year’s Nardfest was a standing room-only hit. At this weekend’s Nardfest II, “Big Bob” Clark, one of the surviving members of Agression, is kicking things off by getting married on stage. Ill Repute, the most successful of the Nardcore bands, is the headliner and they’ll be selling a video and a book recounting their long and loud career.

Core values

The Nardcore scene burst forth three decades ago — before the Internet, smartphones and Facebook, Iraq, Afghanistan and 9/11 and before millions of Muslims wanted us dead. Punk rock took off in the late ’70s and early ’80s, fueled by kids who weren’t feeling the slightest bit groovy. They hated disco, any sort of authority figures and especially dreaded the notion of Ronald Reagan in 1984. Those kids, just like any generation, were convinced that what is supposed to be cool is actually totally lame, so they went about creating something of their own.

Enter the DIY (do-it-yourself) mentality and punk rock. The Sex Pistols from Scary Olde England upset many but inspired even more. CBGB’s was the place to be in NYC, Bad Brains came blasting out of D.C., and El Lay had plenty of gnarly punk bands such as the Germs, the Dils, Black Flag, Fear and the Weirdos. From behind the Orange Curtain, TSOL, Agent Orange and the Adolescents weren’t playing any slow ones.

In the beginning up here in the 805, there were four local bands sharing the blame for all this and three of them — Stalag 13, Ill Repute and Agression — are playing Nardfest on Saturday. Only Dr. Know is knowingly sitting this one out. The Big Three will be ably assisted by the likes of Lost Priority, Burning Dog, In Control, False Confession, Circle One and the Boxheads, who will play a tribute to RKL and the Rat Pack.

But it wasn’t the music that first put Oxnard on the map outside the 805, it was the Hernandez brothers. Jaime and Gilbert Hernandez created “Love and Rockets,” an underground comic that made its debut in 1981 and was a smash hit and predated the band of the same name. Before that, however, they made Nardcore band flyers.

Flyers like these helped raise Nardcore's profile in the 1980s.

“Everyone skipped over us — “The Decline of Western Civilization” and all those hard-core movies. It always seemed like it went New York, D.C., San Francisco and Los Angeles. It went everywhere and it went right by us,” recalled Stalag 13 drummer Larry White. “The first real recognition I noticed of the Oxnard scene was a book about the art behind the flyers from the ’80s (the title of which we can’t repeat in a family newspaper). What was unique is that they have a section with Gilbert and Jaime Hernandez’s artwork. So, Oxnard had its artists who were putting out those great flyers. So we’re thankful for that because that artwork has outlived anything that I can think of and it was recognized as an art form.”

Lucky 13

As for the music, a revitalized Stalag 13 is still pounding out authentic Nardcore riffs

Not to be confused with the gnarly World War II flick “Stalag 17,” for which William Holden won an Oscar, Stalag 13 the band is not so serious. While almost as loud as WWII, the group got its name from the POW camp in the 1960s sitcom “Hogan’s Heroes” (still running on MeTV).

Stalag 13 has lasted five times longer than World War II and, with plenty of breaks, they’re back with four of the five original guys — White on drums, Blake Cruz and Dave Casillas on guitars and John Morris on bass — and an able replacement rather than a really long extension chord.

“Yeah, man — we’re back,” Cruz said. “We took some time off and then we were only able to do certain shows because Ron (Baird), the singer, lives in Australia — halfway around the world. We were doing a few little things like the Gnarmageddon Fest a few years ago. He flew out for that. But it just got to be a little too much for him being so far away. Ron is definitely our singer and always will be and when he can come out, his microphone is always waiting for him.”

So, just as Dave’s not here, neither is Ron, but he wanted to be. Baird almost made it to Nardfest last year, but he’s definitely a no-show this weekend. So a band without a singer is, by default, an instrumental band, right? Never even an option with Stalag.

For last year’s Nardfest, they drafted Ryan Fredette from In Control to handle the vocal chores. Fredette turned out to be a one-gig wonder.

“Ryan from In Control was just dynamite,” at last year’s Nardfest, White said. “When we were rehearsing he was a fit like a glass slipper. After that show we had this huge amount of steam behind us … but Ryan had a lot of stuff going in his personal life and so we went dormant again. Then John Crerar from the Missing 23rd came along and Blake said, “You’re gonna trip out — I think he’s the right guy.’ So he comes in and he tries on both glass slippers and they fit.”

Crerar will wield the mic on Saturday. So is Stalag back? Sort of. But after Nardfest, stay tuned.

“We did a bunch of shows this year,” said White, Stalag’s loquacious, busy and self-proclaimed “drum whore.” “We did Punk Rock Bowling, and we played with Gang Green, and now we’ve got John with us. I don’t think there’s going to be another change. John will be our guy, with of course, the blessings of Ron. So now we’re just gonna run with it. We’ve done some shows — maybe not as many as some would like — but we don’t want to overplay our welcome. I see a lot of bands playing right now that are from the ’80s and good for them, but we all have careers. I have a career in the motion picture industry and I’d love to commit more time to the band right now, but it’s fun when it’s not so frequent. That’s kind of where we are with this.”

‘This crazy journey’

Thirty years ago, a bunch of kid bands were playing for a bunch of kids, and now the kids of those kids will be coming out for Nardfest. Time really does fly.

“I had just turned 14 and I was still in junior high,” said Cruz, reflecting on the early days of Stalag 13. “I showed up at E.O. Green Junior High School with a mohawk and an Agression symbol and the school kind of tripped out a little bit. I was asked to join the band — I think they were getting ready go do some shows — so I kind of bailed out of E.O. Green and started hitting the road with Stalag. That’s where this crazy journey all began. Crap, man, that was ’82? Somewhere in there — a long time ago.”

Stalag’s first show must’ve been a classic — one of those “you had to be there” affairs.

“Our first gig was at Camarillo High School,” Cruz said. “It was in the gym and they made everybody take their shoes off. Everybody was slipping and sliding in their socks and the school was tripping out. It was Agression, Ill Repute, Dr. Know and Stalag 13 — it was almost like the first Nardfest. It was way back in ’83 or something like that. I remember people started slamming and scuffing up the gym floor, so they made everyone take their shoes off. And then it got real interesting.’’

Stalag 13's debut album, "In Control," was released in 1984. AllMusic.com calls it a "time capsule of post-hardcore, pre-grunge punk rock.

Punk rock back in the day seems to be inextricably connected to angry bald people exchanging elbows in the manic mosh pits. There were lots of fights. And why not? Everyone was mad about something. Whenever the Oxnard punks took a road trip south to Hell-A, they had to prove that they were nuttier than the southers, which they did time and again. But that was then and this is now. So what’s the biggest bummer these days? The smartphone needs a charge? It’s all kinder, gentler these days, according to Cruz.

``What was the craziest gig? Man, there were so many that it’s hard to say which one was the craziest,” he said. “Back then, it was a little different and definitely not what it is today. The kids today, you know, they’re into it but it’s a little different — it’s not as crazy. Back then, it was a different lifestyle, you know? It’s not like it used to be. The hippies used to get beat up left and right when they’d go out there. It’s not like anymore.”

“Oh, here’s a crazy one,” Cruz said. “We played on the front lawn of the Federal Building in Los Angeles. I don’t think you can do that today, but we do have a good video of that one.”

Punk rock rocked up here in the 805 in Oxnard at the Casa Tropical, a once upon a time Quonset hut down on Fifth Street by the airport, but also at other places such as the Alano Club, or over in Ventura at the Mayfair Theatre and Mogz and up the coast at La Casa de la Raza, the Anaconda and the Goleta Valley Community Center and all the rest of those places that aren’t there anymore — mainly due to the One Knucklehead Who Always Screws It Up. Then there were the countless (and short) house parties: one song, then the cops show up.

“You know, the place I miss the most would have to be the Casa Tropical down on Fifth Street — that little Quonset hut,” Cruz said. “That was a good one that is no longer around.’’

Nardcore lives

Playing for one’s friends and now one’s friend’s kids has helped to perpetuate the legacy of Nardcore. Most of the original bands are still around and succeeding generations of groups kept sprouting up. On any given day at any high school in the Oxnard Unified District, a couple of kids will be wearing a Nardcore band T-shirt.

“When I did the first recordings with Agression,’’ White said, “Nardcore hadn’t really formed yet. It kind of started around ’84 or ’85. That’s when we started first seeing the diamond shape with the “x” through it. I think Ismael Hernandez of Dr. Know came up with the name ‘Nardcore,’ so then that symbol took on a whole new meaning. Punk rock never died in Oxnard. It went dormant in a lot of cities but not in Oxnard for some reason. It never slowed down. There was just such a pride in the music and the bands coming out of Oxnard, and I just think people saw there was a scene that would survive and they supported each other. I think the Nardcore scene is stronger than ever.”

Cruz is stoked about the reception Stalag 13’s receives now.

“When we go up to San Francisco or wherever we’re at there’s all these kids who weren’t even born when we started,” Cruz said. “But you can hear them singing louder than the singer, and here they are knowing every word — more than I do, even. It’s pretty funny and it’s pretty cool, man, that all that is still going on.”

The legacy of Nardcore and Stalag 13 seems secure but is there a future for these local icons? You betcha. In addition to the usual 25 songs in the band’s repertoire, the well-rested guys in Stalag may be up for some new music.

Contributed photo

The members of Stalag 13 pose for a recent shot. Clockwise from top left are drummer Larry White, singer Ron Baird, bassist John Morris and guitarists Blake Cruz and Dave Casillas.

``We did some recording last time Ron was here about two years ago and we’ve been wondering what to do with it,” Cruz said. “We need to mix that thing down and take it to Dr. Strange Records and we’ll have them release it. So we have that in the works and maybe what we’ll do is keep that and write some new material with John on it and come out with a flip side CD.”

And with a new album, we all know what that means, right? Another of those endless, mindless, senseless (and darn fun) road trips.

“The goal now is to take it over to Europe, man, maybe next year or the year after that,” Cruz said. “If Stalag 13 gets over there maybe we can meet Ron — maybe he can come halfway.”

These days, the Nardcore scene is like a big, loud high school reunion with a bunch of old pals busy creating some new good old days.

“What’s cool about this Nardfest thing is that it’s all just one big family,” White said. “We’ve all been around for a while and been able to still play some music. Besides Agression losing a bunch of their guys (Mark Hickey and Henry Knowles have died), everyone else seems to be still going pretty strong. Ill Repute has really taken off, you know? They’ve got a good little thing going on. It’s just good to be with all these bands again.”

So what’s Nardcore 2 all about? Plenty of loud and fast music and a chance to take some pride in your local musicians who will be more than happy so sell you an affordable T-shirt.”

“All the bands are great and I think it’s going to be another fun night,” White said.