The Republican Party of Texas brought out big GOP stars Thursday night for a panel discussion that encompassed energy policy, national security issues, but most prominently, victory for GOP candidates during the Nov. 4 and 2016 elections.

Sen. Ted Cruz, conservative businesswoman Carly Fiorina, and Louisiana Gov. Bobby Jindal assured local GOP supporters that the Republican Party is going to come out on top, whether it’s the state’s gubernatorial election between Republican Greg Abbott and Democrat Wendy Davis, or the potential control shift of the U.S. Senate on Nov. 4.

The discussion was a fundraiser for the Republican Party of Texas’ campaign to help Republican candidates secure wins on Nov. 4. The Texas Victory 2014 event was moderated by Texas Railroad Commission Chairman Christi Craddick, who gave the panelists ample time to voice their minds in front of an audience that paid $100 each for the lengthy, 90-plus minute discussion.

Cruz literally and figuratively stood out from the other panelists, sitting at the edge of his seat when he spoke, using his charisma and humor to make the audience laugh and capture their attention.

On the first topic about energy and the oil and gas industry being safe from the “liberal agenda,” Cruz spoke about the “energy renaissance” that is happening in Texas and the legislation he has worked on to further enable the industry’s operations.

“Your question is how do we get any of this done?” Cruz said to Craddick. “It’s real simple. We vote the Democrats out of power and put people with common sense in.”

Fiorina, also charismatic and mindful of the Permian Basin audience, said it should be states that dictate how, when and where resources for this country are developed, which received applause.

And Jindal, who kept referring to the American Dream in his answers, said energy can be a big part in restoring the American Dream, the vision that he believed has been destroyed by President Barack Obama’s policies. He said the left has an agenda to manipulate the economy via energy.

“Make no mistake, the left, President Obama, wants energy to be scarce and expensive,” Jindal said.

And on national security, the three panelists slammed Obama for his foreign policies, as during his presidency, Russia under President Vladimir Putin has invaded Ukraine, the Islamic State has proliferated, and cases of Ebola continue to appear domestically.

But on elections, as referenced in the event’s name, the panelists called for the end of the Democrats’ power on Nov. 4.

“It’s remarkable now that Democrats realize they’re going to lose in 12 days, and they will lose,” Fiorina said “(U.S. Senate Majority Leader) Harry Reid will lose his job.”

Fiorina added that in addition to Reid losing power and Abbott winning the race for Texas governor, there is an opportunity to show that conservative principles is what lifts people up.

Jindal looked at the discontent people are having with both the Democratic and Republican parties, especially in instances when people are told nothing can get done such as a balanced budget. He called for the Republican Party to not be just “anti-Obama” and show consistent governance with conservative principles.

And Cruz, confident Republicans will seize the Senate majority from Reid and Democrats on Nov. 4, noted that control of the Senate alone will not get things done. When a Republican-majority Senate rolls into action, Cruz said the Senate will have meaningful oversight “of the abuse of executive power and lawlessness” from the Obama administration. The second big shift Cruz envisions with a Republican-majority Senate will be having bills passed, most of them bi-partisan.

Cruz’s vision of GOP control did not end with the Nov. 4 elections. He, and possibly some of the others sitting next to him at the event, were looking years away.

“I am convinced, come January 2017, with a Republican president in the White House, we’re going to sign legislation repealing every single word of ‘Obamacare,’” Cruz said.