Topics: 9/11, Afghanistan, Bill O'Reilly, Bowe Bergdahl, Conservatives, Editor's Picks, Far-right, Fox News, John Bolton, Oliver North, Richard Grenell, Rush Limbaugh, Sarah Palin, Taliban, Media News, News, Politics News

With all due respect to the folks at Aeon, none of us can say with confidence how we’ll be remembered. Still, unless the world soon devolves into a nightmarish hell of famine, death, pestilence and war, I think it’s fair to presume that future generations will not remember President Barack Obama’s tenure as a second era of good feelings. The country’s political system has been through worse, of course. That whole Civil War thing, for example, was not great.

If I had to guess which moment future Americans will regard as the low point of our recent past, I’d imagine the time we came thisclose to causing yet another global financial panic will be a strong contender. But as bad as that was, it’s not the episode I’ll remember most bitterly. No, when I think back on this weird, disordered time, the memory most likely to make me wince won’t have to do with austerity or health care or Wall Street reform. It will be, instead, the controversy surrounding Sgt. Bowe Bergdahl, who was charged by the U.S. Army with desertion and misbehavior before the enemy earlier this week.

For those who don’t remember, Bergdahl is the young man who spent five years in Afghanistan being tortured as a prisoner of the Taliban, and who became a figure of enormous controversy after the White House decided to “swap” him for five Taliban militants held at Guantanamo Bay. At the time of the deal, Bergdahl was thought by most Americans — especially conservatives eager to attack Obama — to be a prisoner of war. Taking a step toward closing Guantanamo once and for all, while simultaneously bringing an American boy home, seemed, at first, like a moral and political no-brainer.

It was not to be. Soon after reports that the Bergdahl transaction was real went public, murmurings started popping up in the press intimating that the POW wasn’t a victim. It turned out that rather than being captured while fighting heroically for democracy and freedom, Bergdahl fell into the Taliban’s hands while wandering, without permission, from his base. The reasons why he did so were unclear, but a narrative soon formed on the far-right — courtesy of Richard Grenell, a Fox News yakker and former advisor to neoconservative “death walrus” John Bolton — that Bergdahl was a coward who’d grown disillusioned with the U.S. mission in Afghanistan and wanted to join the other side.

Once they had decided that Bergdahl was a traitor, one that other soldiers had died trying to save, conservatives were overcome by a spasm of bloodthirsty nationalism and belligerent tribalism like few I’ve ever seen. Sarah Palin, who’d only months before slammed Obama for leaving Bergdahl behind, railed that the swap gave “Osama Bin Laden’s partners in evil crime” cause to “joyfully celebrate.” Fox News published an inexcusably shoddy report alleging Bergdahl had converted to Islam in hopes of becoming a jihadist. Rush Limbaugh argued that his release was an “excuse” for President Obama to do what he always wanted and let terrorists “run free.”