Hillary Rodham Clinton has considered picking her husband, former President Bill Clinton, as her running mate but admits it isn't allowed.

Taking her campaign to the TV entertainment show "Extra," she told Mario Lopez, "He would be good, but he's not eligible, under the Constitution he has served his two terms and I think the argument would be as vice president it would not be possible for him to ever succeed to the position, at least that's what I've been told…it has crossed my mind."

She also praised Kim Kardashian just weeks after the reality TV star attended a Clinton fundraiser. She left the meeting inspired by Kardashian, married to rapper Kanye West.

I got my selfie!!! I really loved hearing her speak & hearing her goals for our country! #HillaryForPresident pic.twitter.com/zGpdcGSZBD— Kim Kardashian West (@KimKardashian) August 7, 2015

Stay abreast of the latest developments from nation's capital and beyond with curated News Alerts from the Washington Examiner news desk and delivered to your inbox. Sorry, there was a problem processing your email signup. Please try again later. Processing... Thank you for signing up for Washington Examiner News Alerts. You should receive your first alert soon!





"You know I just met her for the first time, she came to one of my fundraisers in Los Angeles and I really enjoyed meeting her, I really found her to be warm and very personable, she had a nice way of introducing her husband, as if I didn't know who he was, right, and I enjoy seeing her with her daughter. So I think all of us in our own ways can be inspirational or aspirational for people.. and I certainly think many people see her as someone who gets up every day and tries to figure out how to make that day successful," said Clinton.

West recently said he planned to run for president in 2020, which some saw as a slight to Clinton who, if elected in 2016, would be running for reelection. Clinton's reaction: "Well, if I'm going for my second term to wait four years, but if I'm not, to be sure he has comfortable shoes because there's a lot of walking involved."

Paul Bedard, the Washington Examiner's "Washington Secrets" columnist, can be contacted at pbedard@washingtonexaminer.com.