Hillary Clinton is making bad corporate management a campaign issue, saying the CEOs of public companies are so focused on short-term results they undermine their companies’ long-term growth. In a speech Friday, she signaled that she’ll try to roll back a provision of the tax code which she referred to as “an effort in the 1990s to tie executive compensation to corporate performance, including through the use of stock options.

If she was being a bit delicate about the origins of that provision, there was a good reason: it was Bill Clinton’s policy.

In 1992, then-candidate Bill Clinton blasted sky-high executive salaries and promised to curb them. One idea was to use the tax code as a tool. Once elected, Clinton and a Democratic Congress passed an amendment to the tax code – technically known as section 162(m) – that limited companies’ ability to deduct CEO pay in excess of $1 million, unless the pay was related to the company’s performance, like a stock option or a bonus.

The idea seemed sound: only those CEOs who genuinely improved their companies’ performance would earn the stratospheric pay that had become all too common. CEOs who failed would have to content themselves with their lower baseline salaries, bringing CEO pay back under control. Ideally, performance pay would even create better corporate performance, incentivizing CEOs to work harder and smarter so they could collect those big paychecks.

Unfortunately, the plan didn’t work as Bill Clinton hoped. Instead of keeping CEO pay under control, the new policy saw public companies pile on even more pay in the form of performance incentives like stock options and restricted stock. CEO compensation grew more than twice as fast in the 90s as it had during the 1980s.

Higher pay might be just fine if it led to better performance, but that didn’t happen either. One problem was that the rule had an exceptionally broad definition of what counted as performance pay. Stock options counted even if there was no performance hurdle before the CEO got the options. And bonuses counted even if the trigger was that the company did not decline in performance.

More importantly, when we look at the results the new policy was supposed to produce – faster earnings growth for public companies – it turns out that piling on performance pay did nothing to improve corporate performance. Corporate earnings per share of the S&P 500 actually grew more slowly on average in the 1980s, 1990s, and 2000s – when companies used lots of performance pay – than in the 1960s and 1970s, when companies paid executives mostly in salaries. Many factors influence corporate earnings, and in fact they’ve been growing much more quickly the past few years, but it would be hard to argue that performance pay improved earnings growth. The problem is not just that performance pay was sometimes poorly designed. Econometric studies that compare companies that use more performance pay to those that use less have repeatedly found that performance pay does not improve performance.

Scholars have debated the role Bill Clinton’s tax amendment played in companies’ increased reliance on performance pay. The trend was already quite strong before the change in the law. But it certainly sent a message that tying executive pay to corporate performance was the goal, and directors, shareholders and even executives embraced that goal wholeheartedly in a quest to help companies become more profitable.

Fast-forward to today and Hillary Clinton’s attempt to combat short-term management, or what she calls “quarterly capitalism.” She argues that investors who jump in and out of stocks are forcing companies to goose corporate earnings and share prices at the expense of investments in capital and research, not to mention workers’ salaries. In Friday’s speech, she strongly implied that CEOs were susceptible to shareholder pressure in part because of their stock-heavy pay packages.

When Bill Clinton pushed his tax policy, a lot of management thinkers were behind it. Starting in the late 1970s, scholars and economists began pushing corporate boards to change the way they paid CEOs, away from guaranteed salaries and toward performance pay, especially stock options. The dominant view of the time was that performance pay would supercharge corporate growth. Now that we’ve had the benefit of several decades of data, we can see that this view was based more on intuition than insight. But even now, shareholders and directors are reluctant to abandon their deeply held belief that good corporate governance means using lots of performance pay.

Hilary Clinton did not specify what she plans to do about 162(m). She might have some understandable concerns about the optics of reversing one of her husband’s policies, but the right thing to do is to repeal it outright. Companies should go back to paying their executives with salaries. That’s what they did from the 1940s through the mid-1970s, when earnings grew quickly and CEO pay stayed essentially flat in real terms, at a fraction of the amount companies pay today. Salaries would give control over pay to directors, not the stock market, and would end the warping of CEOs’ incentives from stock options and restricted stock. Repealing 162(m) wouldn’t force companies to shift back to salaries, but it would send a clear message that performance pay has failed, and it’s time to think differently about how CEOs are supposed to earn their pay.

Michael Dorff is a professor of law at Southwestern Law School and the author of Indispensable and Other Myths: Why the CEO Pay Experiment Failed and How to Fix It (University of California Press 2014).