Strider "Arkansas" Benson talks about the civil rights movement

Strider "Arkansas" Benston (Matthew Jonas / Longmont Times-Call)

Longmont resident Strider "Arkansas" Benston joined the civil rights movement in 1964 after witnessing a vigil lead by the Mississippi Freedom Democratic Party.

If you go What: Honoring Dr. King through Action community celebration When: 2 to 4 p.m. Monday Where: Silver Creek High School, 4901 Nelson Road, Longmont More info: Contact Carmen Ramirez at 303-651-8444 or email carmen.ramirez@ci.longmont.co.us

Benston, now 70, was inspired by the story of fellow activist Fannie Lou Hamer, who spent 18 years picking cotton for $2 a day and was thrown out of her home for trying to register to vote, Benston said.

Eventually, Benston joined the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee and moved to Selma, Ala., that winter, where the locals nicknamed him "Arkansas," because he came from that state.

Benston quickly learned of the dangers of his new position when he was arrested by the local police chief on his first day in town for his affiliation with the movement.

"From that moment I was committed to the struggle for human rights," Benston said. "I always believed in truth, justice and dignity. It was time to learn about the world I was living in and stand up for my beliefs."

Benston will speak at Longmont's Martin Luther King Jr. celebration from 2 to 4 p.m. Monday at Silver Creek High School. He shared some of his stories with the Times-Call in the following Q&A.

What was the reaction of your friends and family?

My only supporter from my home town was my minister, who was soon fired for driving me to the edge of town to begin my journey. My Southern mother was buried the day before I entered college. My dying Yankee father and my minister signed a letter disowning me when I was in jail in Mobile in October 1965. Malvern, Ark., was rigidly and totally segregated. Twenty-five years later I found friends in my home town.

What marches are the most vivid now, almost 50 years later?

I was clubbed unconscious on the (Edmund Pettis) Bridge on "Bloody Sunday." I made it back into Selma through the horse charge. That night in Brown's Chapel the singing began again, bringing courage and determination back to the people. I led the internal security force at night for the March on Montgomery. I was severely beaten at later marches for the right to vote in Wilcox County, and later for the right for employment opportunities in Demopolis, which is described in the 2001 book, "If White Kids Die."

Were you constantly afraid for your life?

A Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee pin is seen on Strider "Arkansas" Benston's vest Wednesday. Go to timescall.com for a video. (Matthew Jonas / Longmont Times-Call)

My emotions ran the gamut, from terror and loneliness, to determination and fortitude, to profound joy and sense of the beloved community in our historic struggle for freedom, justice and dignity. I experienced profound love both from and with the local people and with many of the movement workers. The laughter and the tears were worth dying for.

Who were your greatest influences?

My greatest mentors and partners were Fannie Lou Hamer; Annie Lee Cooper in Selma, who is portrayed by Oprah Winfrey in "Selma" ...; Stokely Carmichael, who invited me into the movement and saved my life when I was being held in Mobile, Ala.; the Rev. C.T. Vivian, who truly lived the Christian brotherhood of which he spoke; Sheyanne Webb, the 8-year-old girl who marched with us every day; Alice West who nurtured us all along with her seven children; the great Harry Belafonte, who was our guide and benefactor; Ella Baker, who made the movement happen; and Dr. Martin Luther King, who pointed the way with his courage and his eloquence. Some I dialogued with in great depth and length, some I followed. All, I learned greatly from, and built my life from that teaching.

What was your greatest lesson from the civil rights movement?

I have carried the light of freedom, which I learned in this great struggle, in every step that I have walked since. As a rank and file labor organizer on the docks in Chicago, where I raised my daughters, some of the time as a single parent, as a poet, a historian, an educator, an activist for peace and democracy, this light has always been my guide. The freedom songs still bring me courage and inspiration. "Guide my feet, Lord, while I run this race. For I don't want to run this race in vain."

Whitney Bryen: 303-684-5274, wbryen@times-call.com or twitter.com/soonerreporter