President Barack Obama's absence from the Oval Office to attend Democratic fundraisers or his failure to appear where children are entering the United States illegally doesn't matter a jot. He can play golf from sunup to sundown as far as I care.

After all, anything he can do in the Oval Office he can do equally well on the road — which, as far as foreign policy goes, is practically nothing.

The real problem with the president's failure to appear somewhere is his absence on the international stage. Iraq, Libya, Syria, Iran, Afghanistan, Russia, Ukraine, Somalia, Crimea. … His critics' ridicule of his "reset" with Russia, his proclamation of a chemical weapons "red line" and his nutty "leading from behind" concept have become cliches, but like most cliches, there's some truth in it,

(One could only hope that he was as missing in action on domestic policy matters, e.g. the disastrous Obamacare, as he is on the international stage.)

As Madeline Albright, President Bill Clinton's former secretary of state, said, "To put it mildly, the world is a mess." She might not agree that it's Obama's fault, but some part of the blame is the president's creation of a global leadership vacuum, allowing the would-be Russian czar, Vladimir Putin, to fill it. As it is so inelegantly put in Chicago, "Putin smells the meat a cookin."

And so a small portion of the blame for the 298 gruesome deaths from the downing of Malaysian flight MH17 must land in Obama's lap, as Putin's rolling up of Crimea and his arming of Ukrainian rebels with high-tech anti-aircraft weapons went virtually unchallenged.

Obama fails to recognize that America's traditional and justifiable role as the guarantor of the fundamental international right of freedom of the seas also applies to freedom of the skies. The MH17 war crime should serve as a bitter reminder of the isolationist folly now popular among some progressives, populists and libertarians.

Obama's problem is the absence of a clear strategy. To have one, you must clearly identify the enemies of world peace and American interests: Putin's unchecked craving for an empire and radical Islam. Without such recognition, no coherent, realistic plan for combating radical Islam and the kind of nationalist hunger that caused two world wars can be formulated.

Historically, American presidents have had identifiable foreign policies (e.g. the Truman and Kennedy doctrines). But Obama has no doctrine, no guiding principle, no clue. You can't even accuse him of being pragmatic.

Rack it up to a couple of factors: (1) He's the spawn of Chicago and Illinois politics, so governing wisely is a complete mystery to him, as it is to most pols here. He was little more than a lackluster, inattentive senator in the most incompetent lawmaking body in America, the Illinois General Assembly. (2) He has no executive or administrative experience beyond organizing a classroom syllabus, if that.

But there's this: Even if he were totally competent, he has been carrying out the inherently impractical, destructive and naive progressive policy agenda. Its failure is insured by a catechism that tolerates not even reasonable foreign involvement.

It all amounts to a deadly combination that ought to persuade Americans to try something else. In that, don't expect too much from Republicans, who, just three months short of the election, are offering little more than "we ain't Obama." Speaking of the absence of a coherent, workable and courageous policy, it's hard to top Obama, but Republicans seem quite capable of it.

So, what's to be done? Well, Obama has missed so many opportunities, it's hard to list them all. For starters, he should re-energize the Eastern Europe missile defense system that he hurriedly scrapped to appease Putin. If Russia can stage "defensive" anti-aircraft weapons on its borders to shoot down another country's planes, why can't NATO take similar defensive action? Stronger support of Ukraine is clearly in order. If Russia can stage troops on a sovereign nation's borders, so should NATO to protect Poland, the Baltic states and any other nation in Putin's cross hairs.

And on the other front, the minimum that Obama could do is publicly confess that Islamist terrorists are "not on the run." And then do something to put them on the run.

No, I'm not advocating sending in American troops, but our choices are not simply doing that or doing nothing, as the White House would have it.

Dennis Byrne, a Chicago writer, blogs in The Barbershop on chicagonow.com.

dennis@dennisbyrne.net

Join in the discussion on the Chicago Tribune Editorial Board’s Facebook page or on Twitter by following @Trib_Ed_Board.