After a battle with cancer some 20 years ago, Jeff Schwartz knows the value of health insurance.

“The one thing in my life I worried about the most was having an insurance policy, because I know what it was like to go from being really healthy to really sick," he said. “So whether I am here in Phoenix or in New York or Florida, if something happens to me, I get to pick the doctors I get to go to," he said.

After the Affordable Care Act passed, Schwartz said he was able to find a plan that fits all of his needs, which is why he was shocked to get a message just months after finding that plan.

"We recently mailed you a letter regarding the termination of your health insurance plan on Dec. 31, 2015," Schwartz said, recounting the phone message.

The insurance company canceled the policy, not because of his past health condition, which is not allowed. Instead, the company said it simply no longer offers that plan.

“And there are no options to have the same sort of polices and coverages that I had with the current policy, “ Schwartz said.

Joel White with advocacy group Council for Affordable Health Coverage said it is not uncommon, as insurance companies find their premiums did not match their risk under the ACA exchanges.

“They came into the marketplace with a lower price point. They were hoping to capture market share by offering lower premiums, and then based on the experience or the relative health of the people who signed up for their plans, they realized the premiums were not matching the experience or the actual claims they had to pay on the medical side to the doctor and the hospitals," White said.

Insurance broker Lisa Whitehead with United Insurance Consultants said part of the problem is companies cannot base rates on actual risk.

“If you are going to community rate, and say because you are 25 and you live at 85018 and you are a male, this is your rate. And it doesn't matter if you work out and you take care of yourself as opposed to another 25-year-old who is a drug addict, or overweight or unhealthy. It doesn't matter. You are going to pay the same rate," Whitehead said.

If you are canceled the only thing you can do is choose another plan. However, Whitehead said people are finding choices limited.

“People used to have PPOs and were able to go to their doctors and have in- and out-of-network benefits. Companies have pulled those for 2016. There are only two companies offering one PPO plan each," Whitehead said.

White said rates are also up and that benefits are limited.

“The other things they had to do, the levers that were available to them to lower program losses were making the benefits a little less generous. That included increasing deductibles, increasing cost sharing and really creating access barriers to certain prescription drugs," White said.

The exchanges have added comparison tools to help, White said. You can also use a broker. A new website called healthcare.com is one place to do that.

“So if you go to a website like healthcare.com - not .gov, but .com - that will facilitate a broker arraignment. You can either enroll on the website or it will put you in touch with a broker in your area on the telephone or you can set up a meeting face to face," White said.

Whitehead said going through a broker can also increase your chances of finding a plan that still includes your doctor.

“When I call and check on doctors for my clients, I ask them, 'Are you contracted with so and so and so?' And they say, first question nine times out of 10, 'On or off the exchange?'” Whitehead said.

Since brokers are not necessarily buying off the exchange, that helps. Schwartz said the whole thing is not what consumers were promised.

"We were promised to be able to go where we wanted, be in control of our own healthcare [with] costs coming down, but that is not the case. It has done exactly the opposite of that," Schwartz said.

Whitehead was able to find a plan for Schwartz, but without as much freedom of choice and with higher out-of-pocket costs. Still, Schwartz said that is better than he would have been able to do on his own.

“You need to find somebody that really understands the insurance markets, somebody you can trust that is going to give you good advice," he said.

The official exchange site is healthcare.gov. You can find out more about brokers at healthcare.com. Whitehead is with United Insurance Brokers.

Copyright 2015 KTVK (KPHO Broadcasting Corporation). All rights reserved.