When it comes to the battle of bans – the FDA has reached across the aisle to slap a ban stick on trans fat. Millions of Americans cheered at the decision, others groaned, wondering why people need the government to determine what foods are bad or good for them. In the realm of this ban, people will no longer enjoy cheat days that surround ordering enhanced fried goodness. There are still some grocery favorites like frozen cream pies that have trans fat, these items will have to replace the artificial oil with a more natural substitute. Will the next ban battle hone in on sugar?

Why Ban Trans Fat?

Artificial trans fat is delicious for many; it enhances the flavor of food like bad American staples, pizza and cookies. The problem do not center not on the minor good items trans fat is in, such as dairy products but what is being done with the product. The trans fat is artificially produced by manufacturers when hydrogen is mixed with vegetable oil. This movement for banning is not something new, already hundreds of large and small retailers have removed artificial trans fat products from store shelves. This in turn has forced producers to remove the chemical from foods.

McDonald’s and Burger King no longer have trans fat in their foods, for those curious. Many fast-food franchises removed trans fat from their menu well over a year ago, does that make the food suddenly healthier? No. Any logical consumer should be able to surmise that a whopper, big mac and fries are not on the heart healthy list from your doctor – trans fat inclusive or not. The ban to many is necessary to remove it from commercial items that may be shipped to schools, resulting in early health issues with children. The overall simplistic translation? The ban on trans fat will make frosting harder to spread but will maintain its delicious taste and overall not-so-good remaining properties.

Is Sugar Next After This Trans Fat Ban?

Refined white sugar is the need for many to get through another work day. May it be inserted in coffee, a bar of chocolate or a freshly baked cookie – sugar is a hidden monster. Dr. Zelman wrote an article for Medicine Net outlining the sugar rush in America. It amounts to each individual eating 31 five-pound bags of the white addiction annually. Individuals may debate they never drink a can of soda and limit junk food. Sugar is within much more than meets the eye.

Consider ketchup, canned veggies and fruit, peanut butter, toppings, cereal bars, energy drinks and so much more have sugar levels that when consumed in excess can be deadly. Care 2 detailed that continued consumption of high sugary foods can lead to heart disease, diabetes, immune system issues and cancer. Is it only a matter of time the FDA will focus their ban stick on the white refined addiction of Americans? Considering the amount of sugar consumed on an annual basis, many Americans fear that will happen soon – especially as fructose continues to receive attention over the past few years.

Trans Fat Trade-Up

Artificial trans fat isn’t good for any one person; it leads to a continued lifestyle of bad eating and health issues. Should it have been banned? This writer contends regulation for slapping a sticker on items and allowing consumers the power of choice. When it comes to banning, it can become a slippery slope what next item will be on the list. As the Affordable Care Act fires up over the next few years, it is predicted more items of controversy may receive a kick for good.

Individuals should seek natural fat sources that stem from items like nuts, organic meats and selective dairy items. There are also natural simple sugars within fresh fruit, potatoes and dates. Logic contends a banana is more healthy than a chocolate chip cookie. Adults have a blue-print of what is considered healthy versus what is bad. Will banning trans fat suddenly revert bad eating to good? Not necessarily, but it is a path many in the medical field hope to see happen. Following through with healthier selections and exercise can save considerably on medical bills. Is sugar the next item of interest to the FDA? Only time will tell if the ACA is affecting the overall review of bans, following the ban of artificial trans fat.





By Angelina Bouc

Sources

Care 2

Medicine Net

Live Science

Share this: Print

LinkedIn

Pinterest

Pocket

Reddit

Email

Twitter

Google

Facebook

Tumblr