Phyllis Schlafly is my ideological twin. We are totally in tune regarding conservative issues, the Pro-Life movement, traditional marriage, family values and limited government -- Mike Essen

Conservative Icon, mother of six, American constitutional lawyer, founder and president of the Eagle Forum, anti-feminist, pro-family activist, devoted member of the GOP, Doctor of Humane Letters, Phyllis Schlafly and Internet talk show host Mike Essen discuss Mrs. Schlafly's decades of dedicated work defeating the Equal Rights Amendment, her advocacy for the Pro-Life Movement and how she believes limited government advocates will roll back ObamaCare and Common Core standards, Monday, November 18, 2013 at 2:00PM EST on the mikeessen.com podcast.

Eighty-nine year old, Phyllis Schlafly is a highly respected conservative icon that continues to attract Americans to the GOP. She speaks at the Conservative Political Action Conference (CPAC) annually and supports issues conservatives believe in - the pro-life cause, traditional marriage, family values, limited government and an America she thinks we can all be proud of. Phyllis Schlafly now brings her decades of experience to new issues - ObamaCare and Common Core, in this podcast interview on, The Mike Essen Show titled, “Phyllis Schlafly Fights Against ObamaCare and Common Core.”

According to Mike Essen, the host of the show, “Instead of caving in to feminist peer pressure to be one of the boys, Mrs. Schlafly has spent decades telling women how to be women, not how to be men. Phyllis Schlafly is still telling the world why it's OK to be a woman instead of a feminist. And, she is still not caving in to peer pressure on important issues.”

About Mike Essen - Michael Jay "Mike" Essen is a Miami, Florida Internet talk show host, very opinionated commentator on social change and arch conservative. He has appeared on numerous radio and TV programs including "Something on 17" - WRLN TV and "The Mike Thompson Show" – WNWS Radio. He co-hosted "The Steve Kane Show" with Brian Craig and hosted Kane's Friday morning show. For the past five years he has hosted “The Mike Essen Show”.

For more information, visit http://mikeessen.com/?p=6329.