Former Milwaukee Bucks center Larry Sanders: He’s discussed the effect of having big money suddenly come into a person’s life. Credit: Associated Press

By

With the 15th pick of the 2010 NBA draft, the Milwaukee Bucks select...Larry Sanders.

As I watched highlight clips from his just completed junior year at Virginia Commonwealth University, I saw in Sanders intriguing length, raw athleticism and plenty of emotion. I'm a lifelong Milwaukee Bucks fan, so I watched over the next four NBA seasons as Sanders developed a set of post moves, a ferocious ability to block shots and a growing control over his emotional outbursts.

Sanders always has been a bit of an enigma, a self-styled artist in a world of superstar athletes. For me, this was part of his appeal. He seemed as proud of his graphic novel ("Fallen" was the working title), as he was of his athletic accomplishments. And his athletic accomplishments were impressive. He was featured in a 2013 presentation at the MIT Sloan Sports Analytics Conference as "one of the most effective interior defenders in the (NBA)." The same year, the Bucks committed to Sanders with a four-year, $44 million contract extension. Sanders, with his epic wingspan, was soaring.

And then, like the mythic Icarus approaching too close to the sun, things fell apart.

Sanders missed time due to an injury suffered in a nightclub fight, followed by more missed time due to an on-court injury to his eye socket. The choice to "self-medicate" with marijuana after that injury led to further suspensions. Finally, in February, the Bucks waived Sanders after agreeing to buy out the remainder of his contract. Sanders released a video to explain, in his words, "Why I Walked Away From the NBA."

Much of the focus has been on mental health issues, including anxiety and depression, which Sanders reportedly sought treatment for at Rogers Memorial Hospital. Nevertheless, the impact of sudden wealth as a result of his major contract extension should not be ignored.

The primary evidence for sudden wealth as a triggering event comes from Sanders himself. From his explanation video — "You come into the league and they drop a whole lot of money on you out of nowhere. People automatically change around you."

This experience is not uncommon and can lead to feelings of isolation, as detailed by Susan Bradley in her book, "Sudden Money: Managing a Financial Windfall." "You and your circle of friends and family are similar and you change in a way they are envious of, their perception may be that you have lost your connection with them. When the ones you have been most at ease with now treat you like someone else — maybe someone better than they — you have lost your home base."

A further indication of Sanders' complicated relationship with wealth comes from a 2014 article by Ben Golliver in Sports Illustrated. In that interview, Sanders talked about his idealized self, the person he aspires to be, as his "hero." According to Sanders, "My hero understands true value. We're bombarded with so many things, like money and luxury, which may look like happiness or fulfillment, but my hero knows that's false." In his departure video, he contrasts money with "real riches," when he says "The relationship with the people around me, that's real riches, that's my lasting wealth."

On one hand, I can appreciate the focus on relationships over money. On the other hand, I sense we are being given a false dichotomy, as if the choice is between money and relationships. Many people successfully accumulate significant wealth and maintain healthy family and friend relationships. Wealth is an expression of what we value, not a definition of what we value. Wealth is a tool, not an end in itself.

I wish Sanders all the best in his efforts to find and maintain a healthy balance in his life. The process will likely involve a dedicated effort by Sanders with the help of competent professionals and the support of friends and family. I remain hopeful that any future monetary wealth, whether generated by basketball, his talents as an artist, or some other yet undetermined path, may be seen as the fruits of his labor to be enjoyed and shared with those he cherishes.

In the end, character is not defined in how often we fall, but how often we rise again.

Robert J. Holton is a vice president at Cleary Gull in Milwaukee.