WASHINGTON -- Sen. Ted Cruz, R-Tex., followed up his dramatic 2013 reading of "Green Eggs and Ham" last fall with an impersonation this week of Dana Carvey impersonating former President George H.W. Bush.

The reading of Dr. Seuss's book came during his 21-hour plus filibuster last fall in protest of the Affordable Care Act. His impersonation of Carvey impersonating the 41st president on Saturday Night Live came Tuesday night as he spoke against a pending Democratic constitutional amendment to overturn a Supreme Court ruling allowing unlimited corporate contributions to political advocacy groups.

Cruz said the amendment could endanger political satire shows run on corporate-owned TV networks and threaten sketches like Carvey's, which poked fun at George H. W. Bush with this phrase: "not going to do it."

The Cruz impersonation of that line, in the opinion of non-TV critics in the Capitol press corps, wasn't half bad. You can watch -- and judge -- it here.

Democrats said Cruz is engaging in hyperbole to make his case against their efforts to re-impose limits on corporate campaign contributions that the Supreme Court ruled 5-4 violated the Free Speech clause of the Constitution.

Sen. Al Franken, D-Minn., a Saturday Night alum now seeking a 2nd term in the U.S. Senate, said political satire isn't threatened by the amendment, only corporate domination of politics.

"We can restore the law to what it was before Citizens United (case) was decided and more to the point, we can restore a voice to millions upon millions of every day Americans," Franken said.

The Democratic proposal is almost certain to fail in the face of near united Republican opposition.

But it's given an opportunity for Cruz and Sen. David Vitter, R-La., to make some political points on their favorite subjects. Vitter said he'll seek once again to use the Democratic campaign finance proposal to try and get a vote on his amendment to require members of Congress, their staffs, as well as the president, vice president and their staffs to get their insurance from Affordable Care Act exchanges, without government subsidies.

"Senate Democrats are unbelievably out of touch with reality," Vitter said. "Instead of focusing on big problems like the rising costs of healthcare, the border crisis or foreign policy, they're inventing a campaign issue - just two months before an election. If Washington has to experience Obamacare like the rest of America, maybe they'll get their act together and focus on all the problems with it."

Democrats, and some Republicans, contend that Congress isn't getting any special treatment under the Affordable Care Act.

Cruz seemed to be enjoying himself as he spoke about some of his favorite sketches on Saturday Night Live, which first aired in 1975.

"Who can forget portrayals -- Dana Carvey's George Herbert Walker Bush, 'not going to do it? Who can forget Bill Clinton, Ronald Reagan, Al Gore? Who can forget in 2008 Saturday Night's Live's wickedlhy funny characterization of the Republican vice-presidential nominee, Sarah Palin? It was wickedly funny and also had a profoundly powerful effect on people's perception of Sarah Palin, a friend of mine."