"This common sense legislation provides essential support to caregivers who are safely helping older Pennsylvanians remain at home," said AARP Pennsylvania State Director Bill Johnston-Walsh. "The bill also recognizes the critical role family caregivers play in keeping loved ones out of costly institutions and will reduce the likelihood of unnecessary hospital readmissions."

Sponsored by Representative Hal English (R-30), HB 1329 was developed with input from the Hospital and Healthsystem Association of PA and the PA Nurse's Association, and features three key provisions:

That a caregiver be designated upon a senior's hospital admission.

That the facility notify the caregiver of the discharge plan.

That the facility provide an explanation and live instruction of all medical tasks – such as medication management, injections, wound care, and transfers – that the family caregiver will perform at home.

AARP studies show the CARE Act is needed because:

Most care recipients (69%) did not have a home visit by a health care professional after discharge from the hospital.

Almost half (46%) of family caregivers perform medical or nursing tasks for their loved ones with multiple chronic physical and cognitive conditions.

Three out of four (78%) who provide these medical or nursing tasks manage medications, including administering intravenous fluids and injections.

Most family caregivers report that they received little or no training to perform these tasks.

"If you aren't a caregiver now, chances are you were one in the past, or you will be one in the future," said Johnston-Walsh. "Approval of this legislation will help all those who are working tirelessly caring for aging parents, spouses, and other loved ones so those older adults can continue living independently, with dignity, at home—where they want to be."

AARP has 1.8 million members in Pennsylvania. Follow AARP Pennsylvania on Facebook at www.facebook.com/AARPPA and on Twitter @AARPPA.

AARP is a nonprofit, nonpartisan organization, with a membership of nearly 38 million, that helps people turn their goals and dreams into real possibilities, strengthens communities and fights for the issues that matter most to families such as healthcare, employment and income security, retirement planning, affordable utilities and protection from financial abuse. We advocate for individuals in the marketplace by selecting products and services of high quality and value to carry the AARP name as well as help our members obtain discounts on a wide range of products, travel, and services. A trusted source for lifestyle tips, news and educational information, AARP produces AARP The Magazine, the world's largest circulation magazine; AARP Bulletin; www.aarp.org; AARP TV & Radio; AARP Books; and AARP en Español, a Spanish-language website addressing the interests and needs of Hispanics. AARP does not endorse candidates for public office or make contributions to political campaigns or candidates. The AARP Foundation is an affiliated charity that provides security, protection, and empowerment to older persons in need with support from thousands of volunteers, donors, and sponsors. AARP has staffed offices in all 50 states, the District of Columbia, Puerto Rico, and the U.S. Virgin Islands. Learn more at www.aarp.org.

Contact: Steve Gardner, AARP PA

(717) 237-6481 or sgardner@aarp.org

or

Jacklyn Isasi, AARP PA

(267) 825-9928 or jisasi@aarp.org

To view the original version on PR Newswire, visit:http://www.prnewswire.com/news-releases/legislative-approval-of-care-act-praised-by-aarp-pennsylvania-300250405.html

SOURCE AARP Pennsylvania

Related Links

http://www.aarp.org