Entertainment

NBC really, really wanted Jon Stewart to host "Meet the Press."



Sources told New York Magazine that the network would have given the "Daily Show" host "anything" to succeed David Gregory, who was ultimately replaced by Chuck Todd.



NBC was apparently attracted to Stewart's youth appeal and his "devastatingly effective" interviewing skills.



"It makes sense that NBC would make a run at Stewart. The comedian-cum-media-critic possesses something that broadcast executives covet: a loyal, young audience," wrote NY Mag's Gabriel Sherman. "... Though not a traditional journalist, Stewart can be a devastatingly effective



interrogator, and his 'Meet the Press' might have made a worthy successor to Tim Russert's no-bulls- interviews. During the home stretch of the 2012 campaign, Stewart grilled Obama for his wan presidential debate performance, asking: 'Do you feel you have a stronger affirmative case for a second Barack Obama presidency or a stronger negative case for a Romney presidency?' And last October, Stewart's clinical dissection of HHS Secretary Kathleen Sebelius laid bare the disaster of the Obamacare rollout, from which Sebelius never recovered."



Indeed, Stewart has proven he can be as brutal as he can be funny, although the "Daily Show" is seemingly more suitable than "Meet the Press" for his particular psyche.



"There are certain people that are able to think musically or artistically, and I think, for me, for as long as I can remember, I've always processed things through punchlines and pratfalls," Stewart said in an interview with the Hollywood Reporter last month. "It just feels like the natural mechanism through which my brain works."



However, he added, "I did not grow up aware that show business or that type of thing was a possibility. I think Kurt Vonnegut probably would be the closest thing to it. I loved these explorations of dystopia and humanism and Huxley and those authors. I think they're probably closer to what informed that worldview, more than a comedian."