SIGN UP FOR OUR NEWSLETTER

The Force Awakens breaks box office records nationwide, my Ted Cruz Star Wars video satire, Asbreaks box office records nationwide, my Ted Cruz Star Wars video satire, The Constitution Strikes Back: The Cruzade , is going viral on You Tube. The three-minute video features Ted Cruz as a Jedi warrior whose mission is to unite Republicans and reclaim the Constitution of the United States. The video opens with the following text crawl:

IT IS A DARK TIME FOR THE REPUBLIC. A DECEPTIVE AND RADICAL DONKEY HAS SEIZED THE CAPITAL AND SHREDDED THE CONSTITUTION. A POWERFUL REBEL WARRIOR MUST ARISE TO UNITE THE ELEPHANTS AND SAVE THE NATION….

SIGN UP FOR OUR NEWSLETTER

In September of 2013, I watched transfixed as Senator Cruz stood before the US Senate for almost 24 hours as he filibustered against “Obamacare.” Cruz argued eloquently that the law was blatantly unconstitutional and would cause great harm. He explained that national health care was simply a tool for the radical left to transfer wealth and control voters, rather than advance public health. At the end of his speech, Cruz drew a parallel between his fight against the Left and the Star Wars epics. “Just like in Star Wars movies, the empire will strike back. But at the end of the day, the rebel alliance, the people will prevail,” he proclaimed. Cruz had just founded the anti-establishment movement in America!

When I heard the Star Wars references, I envisioned Ted Cruz as a Jedi rebel warrior who could save America from the Progressive abyss. This was the one politician who could unify America in a rebellion to reclaim the Constitution. Over the next two years, I observed closely as Cruz passionately insisted the Constitution was the law of the land and it must prevail.

When I saw movie trailers appear for the new Star Wars film, The Force Awakens, I felt Ted Cruz should star in the movie. Knowing Hollywood was unlikely to cast the Texas Senator, I produced my own Star Wars video starring Ted Cruz, The Constitution Strikes Back: Episode VIII, The Cruzade, a cutting edge 3D animation.

In the video, Senator Cruz receives a Constitution from outer space that turns into a light saber. Riding a regal elephant across America, Cruz unites the elephants, the Republicans, leading them to Washington to save America from destruction at the hands of the evil donkeys, the Democrats. Along the way, Cruz defeats the RINOS, the establishment Republicans who are protecting President Obama!

Breitbart exclusively covered the release of the Cruz Star Wars video on December 17, The Constitution Strikes Back Episode VIII – The Cruzade Starring Ted Cruz.

The video went viral on You Tube. A few days later, the Cruz campaign tweeted it to their 700,000 followers. I posted a The Constitution Strikes Back web page and links to download a Ted Cruz movie poster and Jedi action images of Ted Cruz.

The Constitution Strikes Back captures the charisma and character of Ted Cruz as a rebel warrior. It will set a new standard for production values and graphics quality for political satires. May the force be with Ted Cruz, and may the Constitution be with us!

Joel Gilbert is a Los Angeles based film maker. He is the director and producer of recent political documentaries: Dreams from My Real Father, There’s No Place Like Utopia, Atomic Jihad, and Farewell Israel