Subscription to medical services can cut down on wait time and costs. KEPR talked to Dr. Chris Jenkins in Walla Walla who sees his way of thinking coming to the Tri-Cities.

WALLA WALLA, Wash. -- It's an old solution to a new problem, and a doctor in Walla Walla may have just found the cure.

Subscription to medical services can cut down on wait time and costs. KEPR talked to Dr. Chris Jenkins in Walla Walla who sees his way of thinking coming to the Tri-Cities.

"The average family physician in the United States has about 2,400 patients in their practice," said Dr. Jenkins. But he is far from the average with 300 patients and he is running those same services from a clinic on wheels, instead of from inside a brick and mortar clinic where he used to be.

"It was very confining; the organization had their set of rules," added Dr. Jenkins.

Now he makes his own rules, while tracking miles.

"If a mom has a young child that gets sick and they have to keep them home from school, they don't necessarily want to drag them into a clinic to receive care. I can go to their home and see them," says Dr. Jenkins.

By going directly to the patient, the doctor says he cuts out the middle man. No receptionist, no wait, and no co-pay.

A 2015 study shows the normal visit to the doctor takes 121 minutes, or nearly two hours.

Breaking it down, that's 37 minutes in travel time, 64 minutes of waiting and filling out forms, and only 20 minutes with the physician.

"I can sit down for an hour with a patient; sit down get to know them, have a relationship with them. I don't have the overhead of a large clinic, so I don't have to hurry and see a lot of patients for that overhead," said Dr. Jenkins.

Instead of the 30 patients he used to see, he's down to ten. It's a stark difference to what national healthcare is trending towards.

Before the Affordable Care Act, primary care visits made up 55 percent of the one billion physician office visits annually. Its addition added 25 million more visits to that same year.

The doctor's office is a busy environment; and is one that could explain why out of the 2,000 Americans surveyed in 2013, 520 reported waiting six days or more for an appointment.

Dr. Jenkins serves patients the day of or after. Another rapid twist is his payment method.

"I had a patient, a ten-year-old girl, who fell and cut her eyelid. Instead of calling the emergency room, the family called me up and I went over and was able to suture it up there at their home."

"With an average emergency room bill of about $1,500 dollars for a case like that; (and) in that one morning, (her) family saved more than the cost of my services for the entire year," said Jenkins.

The reason why is because he doesn't take insurance. Instead, he uses a monthly subscription fee that covers visits.

Single clients pay $70 dollars a month, or 140 for a family.

A cost that he says more people are willing to pay for the convenience and care.

The service Jenkins provides is dubbed direct primary care- and it's taken off, growing 25 percent in the last year.