Intermountain CEO Charles Sorenson Visits Valley View Medical Center



VVMC Governing and Foundation Board Members group photo back row L to R: Bruce Hughes, Levi Larson, Kim Rowland, Jason Wilson, Dean Vernon, Wayne Clark, Charles Sorenson, Greg Poulsen, Carolyn Rondthaler, Donna Lister, Michael France, Sharyl Carter, Steve Thompson, Glade Hamilton, Evan Vickers, Terri Kane. Front row L to R, front: Jana Leavitt, Linda Wilson, Roger Bender, Reed Sargent, June Sewing, Glenna Beyer slideshow

(CEDAR CITY, Utah) - Intermountain Healthcare President and CEO Dr. Charles Sorenson, along with Greg Poulsen, Intermountain Healthcare Senior Vice President and Chief Strategy Officer, met with Valley View’s Governing and Foundation boards. They both spoke on national health care policy issues and what Intermountain is doing to meet those challenges now and for the future.Poulsen talked about the challenges the implementation of the Affordable Care Act has brought. “Even former Senator Max Baucus of Montana, who was one of the most influential people regarding health care reform said ‘The changes (from the Affordable Care Act) will be wrenching to all participants,’” said Poulsen. “But the healthcare model Intermountain has created is the blueprint the world is looking to model their healthcare after. “ Poulsen cited a study that found while the national average healthcare cost per 45 year old is close to six-thousand dollars, the cost for the very same in Utah is only three-thousand. Poulsen says, “I feel that is due to Intermountain’s use of best practices (a method or technique that has consistently shown results superior to those achieved with other means) and the value of providing the highest-quality service at the lowest-appropriate cost.”Dr. Sorenson focused on how Intermountain’s use of best practice helps to ensure the best possible outcomes for patients and for the communities that Intermountain serves, at the lowest affordable cost. Sorenson said “Leading change in a complex healthcare environment, at its core, means we put the interests of others first. Virtually everyone I know that goes into healthcare, does so in large measure because they want to be a help in someone else’s life, they want to serve. Intermountain put a high emphasis on patient-centered care, and we can continue to achieve great things by doing so.”Dr. Sorenson was recently recognized for the fourth consecutive year as one of Modern Healthcare's "50 Most Influential Physician Executives in Healthcare" at number 12 in the 2014 rankings. He was also named as one of the 100 Most Influential People in Healthcare by Becker’s Hospital Review. Dr. Sorenson has served as president and CEO of Intermountain Healthcare, one of the largest not-for-profit health systems in the country, since the end of 2008.Dixie Regional Medical Center, Valley View Medical Center and Garfield Memorial Hospital are all Intermountain Healthcare-affiliated hospitals.