Federal regulators said there are 79 narcotic painkiller prescriptions for every 100 people in Nebraska.

Video: Efforts made to inform doctors of prescription drug abuse risks

From oxycodone to cough syrup, America likes its medicine.

"The U.S. is only 5 percent of the world population, but we consume 80 percent of the prescription pain meds in the world," said Joan McVoy, of the Nebraska Regional Poison Center.

Most people have cabinets full of half-empty bottles.

"The medicine cabinet is the new drug dealer. If you want prescriptions to use and abuse, you can find it in any house in a medicine cabinet," McVoy said.

McVoy is one of the state's top educators when it comes to poisoning. It's no surprise to her that two-thirds of the phone calls into the Nebraska Regional Poison Center are concerns about prescription drugs, especially narcotic painkillers.

"We have people trying to get high on meds," McVoy said. "People trying to commit suicide, take their life by taking meds."

The hotline is staffed with trained nurses 24 hours a day, fielding 45,000 calls a year.

"Many calls (are) from health care providers who are calling us for that advice on how to manage these types of medications," Nebraska Regional Poison Center Managing Director Kathy Jacobitz said.

An experienced undercover narcotics agent talked with senior dental students in a Creighton University ethics class and said that dentists are now the No. 1 target for doctor shoppers.

"They may see five of you in the same day and get prescriptions from all of you, because they have this horrible tooth," the agent said.

Drug seekers make finding drugs a full-time job.

"(One recent doctor shopper) was seeing 90 physicians in the Omaha metro area and had 68 different identities," the agent said.

He also told the class to stay alert and warned them not to risk their careers to make an extra buck by doing something unethical, like selling prescriptions.

"These drugs have a huge profit margin. You can make a lot of money. You will get caught. You will go to federal prison," the agent said.

The Center for Disease Control and Prevention said one in 12 people in the U.S. reports using narcotic painkillers to get high, which equates to 12 million people. Nebraska lawmakers are currently considering a measure to monitor those who buy illegal drugs.