MARC AGRONIN: Once upon a time the great American psychiatrist Gene Cohen made an interesting discovery while perusing the extraordinary works of 20 of the greatest African-American folk artists from 1930 to 1980 at an exhibition at the Corcoran Gallery of Art in Washington DC: 80% of the artists had either started their craft or reached a mature phase after the age of 65, and 30% of them did so after the age of 80.

Cohen’s observation teaches us a keen lesson about the potential for finding and developing one’s passion in life: Age is not a barrier but more often the trigger and sustaining fire for creative and meaningful passions in retirement.

Some individuals take previous interests and rework them given the circumstances of retirement, such as the surgeon who can no longer safely operate but is a masterful teacher for medical students, or the former concert pianist who performs at her assisted living facility and works as a volunteer for the city orchestra.

Others decide to activate long-held but neglected passions, such as the retired amateur athlete who took up swimming again and became a champion in the Senior Olympics, or the doctor-turned poet who now has the time and patience to write.

Still others start something completely new by trying out a few activities and settling on one that lights a fire–bridge, golf, speed walking, baking, or crocheting signature afghans for the entire family. There are many outstanding organizations that can help, such as Encore.org and Senior Corps that help connect older adults with opportunities to contribute their expertise to community projects and organizations or to serve as “mentors, coaches or companions” for individuals in need (as described at www.nationalservice.gov).

For those who love livelong learning and travel, Roadscholar.org can connect retirees with innumerable educational adventures. As the lifespan is increasing and providing all of us with decades of generally healthy and clear-minded postretirement years, the discovery and cultivation of these passions is critical to filling this time with purpose and meaning.

Marc Agronin (@MarcAgronin), is a geriatric psychiatrist and the author of “How We Age: A Doctor’s Journey into the Heart of Growing Old.” He is the medical director for mental health and clinical research at Miami Jewish Health Systems and an affiliate associate professor of psychiatry and neurology at the University of Miami Miller School of Medicine.

Read the latest Encore Report.