A racial discrimination lawsuit, a look ahead to workplace changes in 2015, and an interview with a University of Oregon labor historian topped last week's news about workplace issues in Oregon.

First up, a Caucasian drug and alcohol counselor filed a discrimination lawsuit in Multnomah County Circuit Court alleging that Cascadia Behavioral Healthcare fired him as part of an alleged mission to make one of its Northeast Portland clinics an "all African American staffed facility."

Michael Brockman claims he was transferred to two less desirable jobs in 2012 and 2013 as African-American supervisors hired on more African-American employees at Cascadia's Garlington clinic at 3034 N.E. Martin Luther King Jr. Blvd.

The nonprofit organization, which operates from 75 locations, issued a statement by its CEO and president, Derald Walker, saying, "It is not Cascadia's practice to comment on pending litigation. However, we strive to treat all employees fairly and equitably."

Reporter Aimee Green has the full story, which as of this writing had generated more than 200 reader comments.

Next, a preview of changes coming to the workplace generated nearly as many comments, as readers reacted to one or more new employer requirements taking effect because of state and federal legislation and voter-approved initiatives.

"The short list of major issues includes an increase in the minimum wage, the Affordable Care Act employer mandate, legalization of recreational marijuana, and the expansion of paid sick leave," George Rede reported.

Lastly, Bob Bussel, director of the UO Labor and Education Research Center, took time to answer a few questions about President Obama's executive actions on immigration, announced in late November, which could potentially affect tens of thousands of undocumented Oregon residents.

That interview, too, generated several dozen reader comments.

Have any story ideas relating to the workplace? Share them with me at grede@oregonian.com or @georgerede

-- George Rede