Second time a charm

NASA launched its new Orion spacecraft this morning, a day after gusty wind and sticky valves held up the critical test flight. Orion will orbit the world twice on this inaugural flight so NASA can wring out the riskiest systems before putting astronauts on board.

Garner fallout

Demonstrators angry that a grand jury decided not to indict an NYPD officer in the chokehold death of Eric Garner marched throughout New York City and around the nation for a second night. The protests were large, but mostly peaceful -- nothing like the rioting in Ferguson, Missouri last week. CBS News Correspondent Michelle Miller hears from New York City Police Commissioner Bill Bratton and former Missouri police chief Steve James about how preparation and experience made a difference.

Bratton speaks

New York Police Commissioner Bill Bratton faced tough questions about officer Daniel Pantaleo's use of an apparent chokehold, in the death of Eric Garner. CBS Evening News Anchor Scott Pelley asked Bratton, repeatedly, to clarify if the move is taught or sanctioned by the New York Police Department.

Pattern of force

A two-year federal investigation, spanning 600 cases involving Cleveland police officers, found a pattern of excessive force, Attorney General Eric Holder said yesterday. As CBS News Correspondent Dean Reynolds reports, the Justice Department will now try to work out an agreement with the city's police force.

Royal visit

President Obama will meet with Jordan's King Abdullah at the White House this morning to discuss the fight against the Islamic State of Iraq and Syria (ISIS), an ongoing civil war in Syria and Middle East peace. Charlie Rose spoke with the leader on yesterday.

Commando raid

There are grave concerns for an American held hostage by al Qaeda in Yemen, after word that a U.S. mission to rescue him failed. Al Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula (AQAP) put out a video featuring the hostage and warned he has just days to live. As Luke Somers pleaded for help, he gave no indication he was aware American commandos tried to rescue him late last month. CBS News Pentagon Correspondent David Martin has the details about the raid and the the fallout.

Foreign focus

Foreign policy is rarely at the top of voters' minds when they head to their polling places. Yet this year, as prospective 2016 candidates for the Republican Party consider entering the race, foreign policy may seem like one of the more compelling cases they could make for a change in leadership.

Shady sites

Holiday shopping online can be tricky business. And shopping for holiday trees, ornaments and decorations online can be trickier still. Consumer complaint sites, such as PissedConsumer.com and SiteJabber.com, have been collecting frustrating tales of unfilled orders, merchandise that's sub-par and products that don't resemble what was purchased. Christmas is big business, andshady sites want their part of it, too.

Big truffle

Saturday, Sotheby's auction house is selling the largest truffle ever recorded. The white truffle, nicknamed "Big Boy," was found in the Umbria region of northern Italy. While it is in a similar plant family of tubers, the four pound truffle, a highly-sought-after delicacy used by chefs and fans of high-end cuisine, is bringing in a starting bid of $50,000. CBS News Correspondent Don Dahler brings the truffle to Studio 57 and the story you'll see only on "CBS This Morning."

Latest News:

World

Philippines brace for powerful, erratic typhoon

77 Chinese arrested for internet hacking in Kenya

Crocodile kills man searching for golf balls in South Africa

Politics

Obama to announce defense secretary nominee

Chuck Hagel on resigning: "You have to know when to leave"

Trent Lott advises Republicans to fix Obamacare, not kill it

U.S.

Phoenix police shooting of unarmed man sparks protests

Care for Dallas Ebola patient's dog topped $27K

Newest addition to FBI's Ten Most Wanted

"Peter Pan Live: The best and worst moments from the musical

Money Watch

3 reasons the stock market looks bulletproof

5 money-saving credit hacks for the holidays

Health

How well you sleep may depend on your genes

Hospital medication error kill patient in Oregon