Speaker Mary Kissel of the ‘Wall Street Journal’ discussed Donald Trump’s presidential campaign, the sluggish economy and Obamacare Monday at the Palm Beach Chamber of Commerce’s season kickoff breakfast.

By Darrell Hofheinz

Daily News Staff Writer

Reflecting a simmering schism within the Republican Party, Donald Trump’s rising presidential star is anchored in a profound sense of dissatisfaction among Americans who believe the economy and the Obama administration have failed them, Wall Street Journal editorial board member Mary Kissel said Monday morning at The Breakers.

And that disgruntlement is tied directly to the economy’s anemic annual growth rate of 2 percent, she added.

“We’ve been in this for seven years now,” she said. “There is nothing normal about this. We have never had a recovery in modern history like this. We should be growing by at least 2 or 3 annual percentage points more than we are now.”

Kissel spoke to about 480 members and guests at the Palm Beach Chamber of Commerce’s season’s kick-off breakfast, the first of monthly events that will continue through April.

Shiny Shots: Palm Beach Chamber of Commerce

The impact of the economy’s sluggish growth — amid wrongheaded moves by Obama and the many “bureaucrats” he has relied on to guide the recovery — has resonated among voters looking for a solution, said Kissel, 38.

“The conservative movement is in upheaval, because conservatives, like many liberals in this country, are upset about the ‘2-percent economy’ and their limited prospects for personal advancement,” she said.

“The Tea Party and the Occupy Wall Street movement, I think, spring from exactly the same place. They spring from a place of deep economic discontent — the system is somehow rigged and they don’t understand why.”

But they do want action, she said.

‘Political outsiders’

Trump’s popularity is telling, she said, although she warned that if he were elected, his anti-immigration stance would hurt international trade.

“How can we have a businessman-cum-entertainer touting an anti-trade, anti-immigrant platform — completely antithetical to what this country was based on, our founding mission — leading the GOP polls, in some instances by 20 points? That’s nothing to sniff at. Why are political outsiders garnering, at this moment in time, more than half of the likely GOP vote?”

During her speech, she never named Trump but adopted a rhetorical device to wryly refer to him only as “the businessman from New York.”

‘Thanks, Dad’

The breakfast was a homecoming, of sorts, for Kissel, who was raised in Jupiter and graduated from Dreyfoos School of the Arts before completing undergraduate work in government at Harvard and earning a master’s in international studies from Johns Hopkins University. Her career has included stints in London at the Goldman Sachs investment bank and five years as editorial page editor for the Wall Street Journal’s Asia edition.

Now at the Journal’s New York flagship, the Brooklyn resident writes about politics and policy for the unsigned “Review & Outlook” column and hosts “Opinion Journal” on WSJ Video. She also co-hosts a nationally syndicated news magazine on Cumulus Media Networks, and appears regularly on Fox news and business programs.

Her parents attended the breakfast, and her father, Greg Kissel, introduced her on the dais. “Thanks, Dad,” she said, adding that she typically doesn’t get to use those words when she makes a speech.

‘Risk-and-reward decisions’

As champion of “small and energetic government,” she repeatedly slammed the Obama administration’s policies, which she said had led to bloated government, over-regulation and a “distortion of the price of credit,” thanks to the Federal Reserve Bank’s refusal to raise interest rates. She also described the Affordable Health Care Act, known as Obamacare, as “a grand expansion of Medicaid.”

The economy, she said, should be guided not by Washington “bureaucratic experts” but by “private individuals” whose businesses put them “out there every day making risk-and-reward decisions.”

Republicans, she added, did the party no favors with the public by making “hyperbolic promises” they couldn’t keep after being swept into Congress in 2010 – and then shutting the government down for 13 days in 2013. Among the results of those public-relations debacles has been the growing split between “populist” candidates – including Trump — and the more “moderate” candidates within the GOP, such as former Gov. Jeb Bush and New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie.

“The trouble is that the longer the businessman from New York stays in the race, the harder it will be for the GOP to unite,” she said.

For retired small businessman Bill Tylander, Kissel hit all the right notes.

“Our economy hasn’t performed, and government hasn’t performed,” Tylander said. “And government has shackled the economy.”

Attendee Kim Jones of Celedinas Insurance Group said Kissel’s speech gave her a chance to “hear things I had never heard before. More Americans should have the opportunity to hear someone like that, even if they disagree. I think we all need to become educated about our policies, our politics and our roles as individuals.”