Harry Re­id summoned all of his par­lia­ment­ary acu­men and polit­ic­al savvy to pass Obama­care in 2010, but the sac­ri­fices he made to do so still threaten both the law and the Demo­crat­ic Party lead­er’s le­gis­lat­ive leg­acy.

Shortly after Pres­id­ent Obama signed the bill in­to law in 2010, Re­id called it “the most im­port­ant thing we’ve done for the coun­try and the world.” And on Fri­day, Jim Man­ley, a long­time former Re­id aide, told Na­tion­al Journ­al that the sen­at­or would place Obama­care “at the top” of his list of ac­com­plish­ments after more than 30 years in Con­gress and a dec­ade as Sen­ate Demo­crat­ic lead­er.

“There would be no [Af­ford­able Care Act] today” without Re­id, who an­nounced his re­tire­ment Fri­day, says Norm Orn­stein, a con­gres­sion­al schol­ar at the Amer­ic­an En­ter­prise In­sti­tute.

There may, however, not be much of an Af­ford­able Care Act soon, at least one that func­tions the way its founders en­vi­sioned.

(RE­LATED: Sen­at­or Harry Re­id’s Ca­reer in Pho­tos)

A cent­ral piece of the law is cur­rently at the mercy of the Su­preme Court, thanks to a con­ser­vat­ive leg­al chal­lenge ar­guing that the law as writ­ten doesn’t al­low its cru­cial tax cred­its on the fed­er­al in­sur­ance ex­change, which 30-plus states use. As many as 9 mil­lion people could lose their cov­er­age if the justices side with the plaintiffs, un­do­ing much of what the law has achieved.

But while no law passed by Con­gress is per­fect, the Af­ford­able Care Act was par­tic­u­larly flawed by its un­usu­al jour­ney through the Cap­it­ol, as even its sup­port­ers have ac­know­ledged time and again. Those im­per­fec­tions have giv­en the law’s op­pon­ents re­peated op­por­tun­it­ies to ask the courts to un­der­cut it.

The latest chal­lengers seize on just a few words—”es­tab­lished by the State”—and they would be un­likely to have a case had Demo­crats made even a minor tweak.

So how did the Af­ford­able Care Act be­come law with a flaw that could sink its fu­ture but seems so easy to fix? The an­swer comes from the com­plic­ated pro­cess Re­id used to res­cue the health care bill when it was on the brink of fail­ure.

(RE­LATED: Obama­care Prom­ises Tax-Sea­son Sur­prises)

While his nemes­is, then-Minor­ity Lead­er Mitch Mc­Con­nell, united the GOP against the bill, Re­id had to mol­li­fy a caucus that ranged from so­cial­ist Bernie Sanders, agit­at­ing for a pub­lic op­tion, to con­ser­vat­ive Ben Nel­son, who needed a $100 mil­lion Medi­caid kick­back (which was later re­moved) and oth­er con­ces­sions to sup­port it.

Nev­er­the­less, Re­id pro­duced a bill and cor­ralled his con­fer­ence around it, and the Sen­ate cleared its ini­tial health care re­form le­gis­la­tion in the days be­fore Christ­mas 2009. At the time, fi­nal pas­sage looked prom­ising: Demo­crats had the House, the White House, and with 60 sen­at­ors and a united caucus—the votes they needed to to over­come a Re­pub­lic­an fili­buster in the Sen­ate.

Then, in Janu­ary of 2010, Scott Brown threw everything in­to chaos. Sen. Ed­ward Kennedy, the long­time Mas­sachu­setts Demo­crat and lib­er­al health care stal­wart, had died in Au­gust, but Demo­crats be­lieved they were near-cer­tain to keep his seat and their 60-vote ma­jor­ity. But the up­start Brown bested Mas­sachu­setts At­tor­ney Gen­er­al Martha Coakley in the Janu­ary 2010 spe­cial elec­tion, break­ing Re­id’s 60-seat-strong fire­wall against a Re­pub­lic­an fili­buster.

Some in the party wavered: then-White House Chief of Staff Rahm Emanuel re­portedly urged Obama to scale back his am­bi­tions. Rep. Barney Frank of Mas­sachu­setts pub­licly doubted that com­pre­hens­ive health care re­form could still be achieved. But Re­id and House Speak­er Nancy Pelosi de­vised a plan to fin­ish the job: The com­plic­ated pro­cess known as budget re­con­cili­ation, which re­quires only 50 votes to pass in the Sen­ate but lim­its how the le­gis­la­tion be amended.

(RE­LATED: The Eight Cra­zi­est Stor­ies About Harry Re­id)

It took two bills, shuttled back and forth between the cham­bers in the last half of March, and Re­id’s thinned ma­jor­ity with­stand­ing 30-plus amend­ments from Re­pub­lic­ans. On March 30, 2010, Obama signed the Health Care and Edu­ca­tion Re­con­cili­ation Act of 2010, which put the fin­ish­ing touches on the ACA and turned it in­to law.

“I think it was the ex­ample, the prime ex­ample, of sev­er­al things about Re­id that many of the ste­reo­types miss,” Orn­stein said. “It’s not just his mas­tery of the pro­cess. It’s also that, this pub­lic im­age of Re­id as this bom­bast­ic guy who of­ten ex­hib­its thug­gish be­ha­vi­or, masked that trust, and the af­fec­tion, vir­tu­ally all the mem­bers of his con­fer­ence have for him.”

Demo­crats cel­eb­rated, but with the vic­tory came a caveat. Amend­ing the le­gis­la­tion that passed be­fore Brown’s vic­tory, and then re­con­cil­ing it with the House’s bill, was dif­fi­cult un­der the con­vo­luted pro­ced­ure that Re­id and Pelosi took. There was nev­er a con­fer­ence com­mit­tee, and so there was nev­er a chance to make the type of minor fixes and tech­nic­al cor­rec­tions that most le­gis­la­tion re­ceives in the fi­nal stretch.

“We meant to clean it up in con­fer­ence, but we nev­er got to con­fer­ence,” one staffer said in early 2014. “It’s def­in­itely in­art­fully draf­ted.”

(RE­LATED: 5 Years In, 5 Bus­ted Pre­dic­tions About Obama­care)

And the lack of one of those minor fixes has opened a win­dow for a con­ser­vat­ive leg­al chal­lenge that strikes at the heart of the law. In King v. Bur­well, the plaintiffs ar­gue that the let­ter of the law doesn’t al­low Obama­care’s cru­cial tax cred­its on Health­Care.gov, which 30-plus states and mil­lions of ACA en­rollees use.

Demo­crats al­lege that the clause cent­ral to the plaintiffs’ case is simply poorly worded and that the rest of the law makes their in­ten­tion to al­low the cred­its every­where clear. But one lower court has already ruled against them, and des­pite their cer­tainty, the Su­preme Court’s mar­gin looks likely to be 5-4, one way or the oth­er.

The leg­al struggle is an­oth­er in a con­stant string of re­mind­ers of how con­ten­tious Demo­crats’ health care ef­fort has been since the day they put it for­ward—as well as a re­mind­er of the high wire Re­id walked to move it through the Sen­ate.

“He’s a man who loves work­ing hard, but when it came to that bill, he gave it everything he’s got,” Man­ley said. “The thing died any num­ber of times, but he nev­er wavered in his de­sire to get it done.”

Still, time—and nine Su­preme Court justices—will tell wheth­er that achieve­ment stands, or wheth­er the forces that al­most blocked it in the Sen­ate will even­tu­ally find a way to take it down. The fal­lout from the bill’s darkest hour, and the wrangling Re­id used to save it, is still un­fold­ing.