Fox News host Neil Cavuto on Oct. 29, 2013. [Fox News]

Fox Business News host Neil Cavuto, known more for reporting on the economy and defending business interests, attempted a stab at a humorous commentary this week, asking, “Why does Obama blame Fox New for everything?”

After running a selection of contextless clips of the president, sometimes laughing, saying, “It’s fair to say I don’t always get my most favorable coverage on Fox,” Cavuto added “Busted!” with a smirk.

“I am busted, so busted. Pick a crisis, any crisis: FOX created it'” Cavuto said before ticking off a laundry list of ills that have afflicted the country during– and slightly before — Obama took office, saying the president blamed the conservative network for them.

“This tepid economic meltdown? Sorry: Fox News. The housing meltdown that preceded it? You guessed it – Fox News started it,” he mockingly confessed.” The Internet bubble? Fox News created it and we burst it so we could keep milking it. The energy crisis back in the 1970’s? Fox News, which is amazing because we weren’t even around in the 70’s.”

Cavuto then moved on, attempting to use hyperbole to say that Fox News was responsible for the Kennedy assassination, the sinking of the Titanic, Pearl Harbor, and the Irish Potato Famine.

“FOX’s Irish-American anchors [Bill O’Reilly and Sean Hannity] did nothing to stop the famine,” Cavuto admitted..

Cavuto also confessed that the network was also responsible for tsunamis, earthquakes, and the disappearance of the dinosaurs, saying, “FOX News killed them off!”

The Fox host did not share video with his viewers of the president blaming the network for the events — the ones shown contained the president commenting on their coverage of the news — nor did he note that studies have shown that Fox News viewers are consistently misinformed by their news network of choice.

Among many news viewers, Fox News has become a punchline for jokes about poor reporting and misinformation.

On the recent Saturday Night Live 40th Anniversary Special, former SNL Weekend Update host Jane Curtin, reflected, “A lot has changed since I sat at this desk. For example, I used to be the only pretty blonde woman reading fake news. Now there’s an entire network devoted to that,” with an image of the conservative news network’s logo shown beside her.

Watch the video below from Fox Business News:

Watch the latest video at video.foxbusiness.com