In a recent article by AGN media Austin Bureau Chief Enrique Rangel (Rangel: Business as usual for Abbott, Texas, July 19, amarillo.com), Rangel said members of the Texas Legislature were about to go out and tell their constituents what a great job they had done.

Hogwash. They carried out the mandates of the National Rifle Association, and did little or nothing for the working people of Texas.

Texas is the fastest growing state in the nation, with needs expanding at quantum rates, yet tax revenues and appropriations are decreasing at a phenomenal rate. What this means is that we live in a state not meeting even the basic needs of its citizens.

Texas is a state worshiping the phrase, “no new taxes,” even when it means third world status.

This is where Texas ranked going into the recent session:

■ Texas has more residents over 25 without high school diplomas than any other state.

■ Texas has more residents without healthcare and little hope for it in the future.

■ In basic numbers, Texas has more people in poverty than any other state.

■ Texas has a seriously underfunded public school system, with a lawsuit for inadequate funding hanging over its head, which the current Legislature did not even bother to address.

■ Texas ranks No. 1 in air pollution and sits near the top in water pollution. We sue the U.S. government to avoid complying with EPA rules, but this does not make the problem go away.

■ Texas continues to refuse to accept the keystone of the Affordable Care Act, which is Medicaid expansion.

■ Texas ranks near the bottom in funding for mental health, with some of our prisons effectively acting as repositories for the mentally ill.

Here’s the sad truth. We came out of the session in the same condition we went in, which means we are even further behind than when we started.

So what is it our lawmakers are going to brag about? Faking a tax cut of a whopping $10 per household in property tax, but doing this by stealing it from local governments? Allowing guns everywhere? Providing for prekindergarten for only half a day means prosperous mothers benefit. Working mothers, on the other hand, cannot leave their jobs, pickup their children at noon, and take them where — back to work with them?

In 2011, Texas lawmakers cut $5.4 billion from public schools and have never paid it back or kept up with the ever increasing population growth needs. It is estimated that another $20 million is needed just to catch up.

These lawmakers ready to brag about what they have done have made it almost impossible to provide an adequate education for schoolchildren damning us to a bleak future of low paying, minimum wage jobs, In terms of health care needs, Texas’ refusal to accept Medicaid expansion funds means at some point it will take billions to maintain the already-stingy status quo. This means ever more Texans will suffer poor health, have more babies they cannot care for and place more demands on the inadequate current Medicaid program. The legislative decision to combine four out of the five agencies that make up the Health and Human Services system will result in years of confusion and diminution of services.

About all Texas lawmakers can brag about is putting guns in the most inappropriate places imaginable, and subjecting all of us to danger.

Thank God House Democrats and regular Republicans watered down the bill, or we would all be in imminent danger.

So what do Texas lawmakers, bought off by the NRA, have to brag about?

Claudia Stravato is an Amarillo resident.