Staff feared Good Samaritan would need to close until a donor gave $45,000 to get the shelter out of debt.

Fears that The Good Samaritan Rescue Mission might need to close its doors by the end of this month were quelled today, when an anonymous donor contributed $45,000 to the shelter's budget.

"This morning we got an anonymous donation, a walk-in donation of 45-thousand dollars. That someone I've never met, it just...I couldn't believe it," said Rev. Carole Murphrey, Executive Director.

The Good Samaritan Rescue Mission has been in dire need of donations to get back money spent on required renovations after Code Enforcement gave the shelter several violations last summer. Since then the homeless shelter has spent $100,000 from its operations budget to meet code standards, which has put them $45,000 in debt.

Yet now staff have hope that they will not need to close their doors to the 200 homeless they provide beds for.

"The money that we do get right now is simply to get us back to zero. To get back to where we can pay our light bills, pay things like food and so forth," said Rafael Ortiz III, Program Director.

The renovation costs were unanticipated, and that paired with unexpected costs for employee benefits brought by the Affordable Care Act forced the shelter to make cuts.

"I've laid off 8 staff members, which I really hated to do because they were people that were formally homeless," Ortiz said. "We've had our coffeehouse. We've had to shut that down as well because of operating costs. And so we're making cuts to assist ourselves with it."

Staff have new confidence now that the shelter is out of debt.

"I know that we're going to be able to pay up the bills and we're going to be okay at the end of this month," Rev. Murphrey said.

However there are next month's costs, and donations remain down compared to previous years.

"We've had a lot of older loyal people that have passed away. Or because of the fact that the oil shortage is hitting a lot of businesses that normally gave to Good Samaritan," Ortiz said.

The shelter has a $1.6 million annual budget. They hope for $15,000 in donations monthly to maintain that.

Good Samaritan has also repaired major code violations, and is working with Code Enforcement to resolve any remaining problems.