Customized TV Listings are available here: www.latimes.com/tvtimes

Click here to download TV listings for the week of July 20 - 26, 2014 in PDF format

This week's TV Movies

SERIES

Bet on Your Baby In the season finale of this cute but, maybe a little creepy, unscripted series, a father guesses how many items his daughter can identify by touch and a 3-year-old picks costumes. 8 p.m. ABC

Cedar Cove As the drama returns for its second season, Olivia and Jack (Andie MacDowell, Dylan Neal) rush to the hospital to support Eric (Tom Stevens) and his girlfriend (guest star Hayley Sales), whose pregnancy has developed a serious complication. Teryl Rothery, Bruce Boxleitner and Sebastian Spence also star. 8 p.m. Hallmark

Bad Teacher Meredith (Ari Graynor) finds money in the school parking lot in the first of two new episodes of this half-hour comedy. 9 and 9:30 p.m. CBS

The Supervet This new unscripted series follows British veterinarian Noel Fitzpatrick as he treats difficult cases. In the premiere, Scooby the Labrador has a tumor in his leg and his family hopes that he can be saved. 9 p.m. Animal Planet

Almost Royal British aristocrats George and Poppy Carlton stab at the very heart of American politics in a new episode that finds them in Washington, D.C., where they hire a Capitol speechwriter and meet with a congressman. 10 p.m. BBC America

Iron Chef America Iron Chef Bobby Flay and actor Anthony Anderson take on Iron Chef Masaharu Morimoto and food writer Simon Majumdar in this new episode. 11 p.m. Food

MOVIES

Expecting Amish As part of the coming-of-age practice known as Rumspringa, four Amish teenagers are given permission to leave their native Pennsylvania and spread their wings in the outside world, specifically Los Angeles, in this new TV drama. AJ Michalka, Brian Krause and Ron Ely star. 8 p.m. Lifetime

For Better or for Worse Former "Facts of Life" cast mates Lisa Whelchel and Kim Fields reunite for this new romantic comedy about a widowed wedding coordinator (Whelchel) who unexpectedly finds her life intertwined with a lawyer (Antonio Cupo) who specializes in divorces. 9 p.m. Hallmark

WEEKEND TALK

SATURDAY

Good Morning America (N) 7 a.m. KABC

McLaughlin Group (N) 6:30 p.m. KCET

SUNDAY

Today (N) 6 a.m. KNBC

Good Morning America (N) 6 a.m. KABC

State of the Union With Candy Crowley The U.S. military's intelligence concerning the downed airliner in Ukraine: Gen. Philip Breedlove, NATO Supreme Allied Commander. U.S.-Russian relations: Sen. Dianne Feinstein (D-Calif.); Rep. Michael McCaul (R-Texas). U.N. relief in Gaza: Robert Turner, U.N. politics: Michael Crowley, Time; Steve Inskeep, NPR; Peter Beinart, The Atlantic; L.Z. Granderson. (N) 6 and 9 a.m. CNN

CBS News Sunday Morning (N) 7 a.m. KCBS

Fareed Zakaria GPS The economy; the Affordable Care Act: Paul Krugman, the New York Times. (N) 7 and 10 a.m. CNN

Meet the Press (N) 8 a.m. KNBC; 11 a.m. MSNBC

This Week With George Stephanopoulos Ukraine crisis; Middle East crisis: Sec. of State John F. Kerry. Downed airliner in Ukraine: Rep. Mike Rogers (R-Mich.). Israeli ground offensive in Gaza: Israeli Ambassador to the U.S. Ron Dermer; Ambassador Maen Areikat of the PLO Delegation to the U.S. Panel: Martha Raddatz; Richard Haass, Council on Foreign Relations; Julia Ioffe, New Republic; Carol Lee, the Wall Street Journal. (N) 8 a.m. KABC