MKE Diner News and notes on the restaurant scene from dining critic Carol Deptolla SHARE

By of the

A restaurant serving dishes from the Himalayas is due in July in Thiensville, apparently the only such brick-and-mortar restaurant in the Milwaukee area.

The Cheel — Nepalese for eagle — will have its grand opening July 19 at 105 N. Main St.

That’s after considerable work to restore the 125-year-old building, which had been condemned and ordered razed before Jesse and Barkha Daily bought it. The location appealed to them as did the chance to restore the building, including eventually returning its missing spire. The previous restaurant there was Mendini’s on Main.

The Dailys said the menu will reflect both their backgrounds — she is from Nepal, he is from Idaho. They met in Milwaukee after each came here to attend college.

“What brought us together was our love of food,” Jesse Daily said. He has an engineering consulting firm, Core Consulting, she worked in insurance, and they also manage Thiensville’s farmers market.

Barkha Daily said she expects to get some of her seasonal produce from market vendors for her family recipes. Cheel chef Joe Sandretti, who previously was at Buckley’s restaurant in Milwaukee among other restaurants, is working with her to convert the family recipes to the large batches the restaurant will need.

Dishes will represent Nepal, Tibet, Burma and north India. Ingredients and seasonings that distinguish the cuisines include ginger, garlic, fenugreek, clarified butter (ghew in Nepalese), chiles, cumin, mustard seeds and saffron. Some hard-to-find ingredients will be imported from Nepal, including jimbu, a chive-like herb.

The menu will have a number of small plates, ranging from about $7 to $14, such as the meat- or vegetable-filled dumplings called momos, with dipping sauces.

Bigger plates, around $12 to $15, will include ribs; a limited number of feasts, or thali, will be served nightly. The thali encompass seven or eight dishes such as dal, salad, meat, vegetable and rice, likely $30 for two. The thali plates and bowls themselves will be hand-made of bronze.

The Cheel’s bar will focus on cocktails, particularly classics popular around the 1930s, when the building was a bar. The bar’s staff will infuse liquors and press fruit juices by hand for the cocktails. “We really want the bar to be an extension of the restaurant,” Jesse Daily said.

The Dailys have hired Ryan Palkowski, a 15-year veteran of Elsa’s on the Park, as the restaurant’s general manager.

A large deck on the south side of the restaurant will allow guests to dine outside this summer; the Dailys have plans to expand it next year with a second-story deck and garage-top seating.

Madison has Himal Chuli, a food serving food from Nepal. Last year a food truck serving momos rolled on Milwaukee streets; the Flirty Momos owners are looking for a new truck, as well as a brick-and-mortar location.

Journal Sentinel photo