Who would Trump pick as healthcare advisors?

If Republican candidate Donald Trump were to become president, a few names are being floated as potential HHS secretary, according to Politico.

They are: Ben Carson, MD, former candidate for the Republican presidential nomination; Florida Gov. Rick Scott (R), who was CEO of Nashville, Tenn.-based Columbia/Hospital Corporation of America until resigning in 1997 following allegations of fraudulent billing to Medicare and Medicaid; and former Louisiana Gov. Bobby Jindal (R), who held a top HHS post in the administration of President George W. Bush and who staunchly opposed the Affordable Care Act while he was governor.

Those three names are just speculation right now, Politico notes.

Some conservatives are already ruling out a post in a potential President Trump administration.

James Capretta, an associate director who oversaw healthcare programs in the White House Office of Management and Budget during the George W. Bush administration, told Politico he would not serve in a Trump administration because "[t]he person at the top is unfit for the presidency."

Dan Mendelson, president of Washington, D.C.-based healthcare consulting firm Avalere Health, told Politico he believes jobs running agencies such as CMS or the Food and Drug Administration could be attractive if Mr. Trump chooses somebody who doesn't have a lot of governing experience to oversee HHS.

"I would expect those picks to be very functional and people who know how to do their jobs," Mr. Mendelson said, according to the report. "In a world where the HHS secretary is more a visionary, or more of a political pick, the operating division heads get more authority and are able to operate more autonomously, and that would be my expectation for a Trump administration."

More articles on leadership and management:

Medline launches Pink Glove Dance contest

6 findings on the growth of Catholic hospitals and health systems

Merit Health Natchez cuts jobs: 3 things to know

© Copyright ASC COMMUNICATIONS 2016. Interested in LINKING to or REPRINTING this content? View our policies by clicking here.