Provided by The Plainview Daily Herald

After a community survey and staff consideration, the Plainview ISD school board unanimously approved a new name for the consolidation project of combining the district's alternative education program with the currently vacant Ash campus. The new name, Ash High School.

"I think this pays homage to the long history of the campus," said school board member Brandon Brownlee during Thursday night's monthly trustee meeting. "I think if finally gives the campus a chance to be used for what it was meant to be. This campus means so much to the community and the staff."

Back in March, the Plainview ISD school board voted to move the district's alternative education program, known as Houston School, to the 90-year-old Ash campus. Originally, the campus was built to house the Plainview high school. However, shortly after its erection it was used as an elementary school and a junior high until it was closed in 2013.

Still a stable building, the district felt the sizable campus could house a growing Houston School program, which had been dedicated to developing new opportunities for students.

Thinking that a new name would offer a fresh new start for the campus and the program, PISD began a renaming survey, which allowed the community to suggest a new name for the campus. PISD Executive Director of Administrative Services Greg Brown said the majority of the submissions chose to keep the name "Ash" in the new name as it was associated with so much history and ties to the community.

Houston School staff and administrators narrowed the list down to Ash High School, which the school board approved Thursday.

The Ash High School will open its doors this coming fall.

In other highlights at Thursday's meeting, PISD trustees unanimously voted to approve an increase in what the district contributes for employee health insurance premiums.

Since September 2002, the District contribution to each Plainview ISD employee electing health insurance coverage though Plainview ISD has been $316 per month. However, PISD administration requested that the board increase the contribution by $25 per month for a total of $341 a month.

The increase will help offset an average health insurance premium increase of 7 percent for the 2015-2016 school year, and also will assist the district to comply with the "affordability" component of the Affordable Care Act.

A $25 increase per month per employee will be approximately a $222,000 yearly cost to the district.

During discussion, PISD Superintendent Dr. Rocky Kirk stated that the district was in "good shape" financially. This financial soundness was attributed to the administration's budgeting for a 100-student loss last year, which never came about, and a $1.2 million increase in expected state funding.

In the PISD health insurance coverage options, the $25 increase will completely cover a single employee under the TRS-ActiveCare Plan 1 for one year without charge.

However, premium costs do go up as family members and spouses are added to plans. Executive Director of Human Resource Services Brandy Merrick said a handful of employees will still have to pay more in premiums this year as they opt for more extensive coverage.

In other action, the PISD board unanimously approved the appointment of board member Robert Rivera as the voting delegate for the TASA/TASB 2015-2016 Convention, with Sylvia De La Garza as the delegate. The board also voted to approve the 2015-2016 PISD Parent/Student Handbook and Student Code of Conduct.

At the beginning of the meeting, the board heard a preliminary report from Executive Director of Curriculum and Instructional Services Sharon Wright, on the Early Reading Assessment data and reports on the STAAR Academic Progress.

Wright said complete data and reports will be released to the public this fall.

In the initial reports, Wright reported significant increases in the reading assessment data for kindergarten as well as first and second grades. The data painted a picture of students that were reading at grade level. Increases were seen across the board, some reaching as high as 20 percent. Wright praised staff and administration for their work, and thanked the board for implementing the Balanced Literacy initiative program this past year.

"We are very pleased to see what is happening," Wright said.

Higher grades saw a slight decrease, which Wright said could be attributed to the normal hiccups of installing a whole new program in the district. Third grade saw a 2 percent drop in district reading scores from last year and fourth grade a 7 percent drop. Fifth and eighth are still waiting for complete data but they are seeing a 3 percent decrease below state average scores in the fifth grade and a 1 percent decrease in eighth grade.

Wright said she expects increases in those numbers next year as students become more accustomed to Balanced Literacy and as lower-grade students, who are reading better, move up to the higher grade levels.

Sixth grade saw a 3 percent increase from last year and seventh grade saw a 5 percent increase from district scores in 2013-2014.

Writing saw a drop in scores this year as fourth grade saw an 8 percent drop and was 10 percent lower than the state average. Seventh grade also had a 7 percent drop.

"Writing is a concern for us," said Wright, who explained that the district will be placing more emphasis on that subject. One plan of attack will be instituting workshops for writing teachers in the district.

Despite some of the drops, Kirk said the district was starting to see some traction in their practices.

In End of Course tests, the district saw large increases in subjects. English I saw a 5 percent increase in passing grades compared to last year and was 11 percent higher than the state average. Algebra was 9 percent higher, English II was 3 percent higher, Biology was 4 percent higher and History was 3 percent higher.

"We are very pleased with the progress our end of course exams," Wright said.

Wright even mentioned that gaps between economically disadvantaged students and Hispanic students had closed significantly when compared to the school population as a whole.

"I see good things ahead," Wright said.