As Republicans eagerly outline their plans for next year's GOP-controlled Congress, an item near and dear to some of the region's larger employers is the first thing on their lists: repealing the medical device tax.

Jettisoning the tax, which helps fund Obamacare, surfaced last week in interviews with congressional Republicans, President Barack Obama's post-election news conference and even Sen. Pat Toomey's five-minute speech Thursday to Lehigh Valley business leaders.

Local lawmakers such as U.S. Rep. Charlie Dent and Toomey expect the proposal to be among a slew of early votes in 2015. Sen. Mitch McConnell, who is expected to be the next majority leader, said the same thing. The 2.3 percent levy is imposed by the Affordable Care Act on items ranging from pacemakers to dentures to tongue depressors.

Republicans have opposed the tax since the federal health care law's beginnings, and Obama might be agreeable to jettisoning it. Asked about GOP plans to undo the tax, Obama didn't rule it out.

Several previous efforts to repeal or delay the tax have faltered, including as part of a plan offered by Dent, R-15th District, to avoid a government shutdown last year.

For device manufacturers in the Lehigh Valley, an avenue for halting the tax is welcome news. Beginning last year, companies such as Bethlehem's B. Braun Medical and OraSure are required to pay it on many items they sell to hospitals and doctors.

The Valley's medical device makers are a significant part of the local economy, with the three largest companies — B. Braun, Olympus and OraSure — alone employing more than 3,000 workers. There are more than a dozen smaller companies.

The device companies' trade group, Advanced Medical Technology Association, argues that the tax — intended to help pay for health insurance subsidies and other aspects of Obamacare — is onerous. In a 2013 survey of its members, AdvaMed found reports of tens of thousands of slashed jobs and canceled capital investments.

A 2.3 percent tax might seem small, but many medical device manufacturers are struggling to cope, said Marla Phillips, director of Xavier Health, a collaborative affiliated with Xavier University that sponsors an annual conference on the industry called MedCon. The tax hits harder than many other levies because it's assessed on sales, rather than profits, she said.

Companies that also offer products not subject to the tax or that sell products overseas can reduce the hit, Phillips said. Manufacturers with limited product lines and those that rely heavily on domestic sales are hit hardest.

To get an idea for the magnitude of the tax, every time a 100-count box of OraQuick Rapid HCV tests goes out the door at a price of about $2,000, OraSure sets aside $46 in medical device taxes. The company sold about $2.8 million worth of the tests in 2013, according to its annual report, which would translate to a tax bill of about $64,400 on that product alone.

The company does not discuss its medical device tax payments, and would not confirm those figures.

The medical testing company speculated early this year that the additional people insured under the Affordable Care Act could produce increased product revenues, but that it was too early to tell.

"If such additional revenue does not materialize or our efforts to offset the excise tax through spending cuts, price increases or other actions are unsuccessful, the increased tax burden will adversely affect our financial performance," the company wrote in its annual report.

For a smaller medical device company like Fountain Hill's HoverTech International, the money it says it's putting toward medical device tax payments, more than $1 million over two years, could be paying for a new building. The privately held company sells its products, inflatable devices used to move safely move immobile patients, to hospitals, and hasn't been able to build the tax into the price.

"Most hospitals belong to group-purchasing organizations," founder and CEO David Davis said. "We have contracts with most of the worthwhile GPOs in the country. They run for three years. Almost every one sent us a letter saying don't even think about passing along the tax to us."

Davis founded the company in a row home on Second Street in Allentown in 1997 and gradually moved it to larger quarters as sales grew, but says the medical device tax is trimming enough revenue off the books to keep him from taking the next step. He's heard before the tax might get axed.

"I have a feeling this time it has a good chance of getting repealed," Davis said.

Dent does as well, pointing in part to the support from several his Democratic colleagues in both the U.S. House and the Senate.

U.S. Rep. Matt Cartwright, D-17th District, who represents parts of Northampton County, has said he's open to repealing the tax. Democratic Sen. Bob Casey also has been on board, saying the levy has "unfairly burdened" small businesses and manufacturers in Pennsylvania.

"We believe that the votes are there," Dent said in an interview. "The president is going to have to make a decision: Does he veto the bill and risk the wrath of members of Congress and the public? I hope the president would set aside his ideological objections and do the right thing."

It's unclear whether those pushing to undo the device tax would need to find a way to replace the $30 billion it's projected to raise over a decade. Republicans say no, arguing that the tax shouldn't have been imposed in the first place, though Dent acknowledged that issue will be part of the debate.