HOUSTON--(BUSINESS WIRE)--PROS® (NYSE: PRO), a big data software company, today announced its participation in the Professional Pricing Society (PPS) 26th Annual Fall Pricing Workshops and Conference. The event, scheduled for Oct. 20-23 in San Francisco, will be held at The Palace Hotel. PROS will spotlight the breadth of its enterprise product portfolio at the event, including smart applications for pricing and selling.

“PPS provides outstanding opportunities for us to meet and share insights with customers, partners and thought leaders,” said Patrick Schneidau, PROS Chief Marketing Officer. “PROS is redefining pricing with our next-generation smart applications, which combine simplicity and data science to offer data-driven pricing and selling guidance. We look forward to showcasing how PROS smart applications help companies realize their revenue and profitability potential.”

During the conference, PROS executives and customers will share insights on how pricing leaders can outperform in their businesses:

To learn more about the event, visit the PPS website. To learn more about PROS, visit the website at www.pros.com or follow PROS on Twitter at @PROS_Inc

About PROS

PROS Holdings, Inc. (NYSE: PRO) is a big data software company that helps customers outperform in their markets by using big data to sell more effectively. We apply years of data science experience to unlock buying patterns and preferences within transaction data to reveal which opportunities are most likely to close, which offers are most likely to sell and which prices are most likely to win. PROS offers cloud solutions to optimize sales, pricing, quoting, rebates and revenue management across more than 40 industries. PROS has completed over 800 implementations of its solutions in more than 55 countries. The PROS team comprises more than 1,000 professionals around the world. To learn more, visit www.pros.com.

Forward-looking Statements

This press release contains forward-looking statements, including statements about the functionality and benefits of PROS software products. The forward-looking statements contained in this press release are based upon PROS historical experience with sales, pricing, revenue management and big data software and its current expectations of the benefits of sales, pricing, revenue management and big data software for organizations that implement and utilize such software. Factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from those described herein include the addressability of an organization’s sales, pricing and revenue management and big data software needs and the risks associated with the complex implementation and maintenance of sales, pricing, revenue management and big data software such as PROS software products. Additional information relating to the uncertainty affecting the PROS business is contained in PROS filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission. These forward-looking statements represent PROS expectations as of the date of this press release. Subsequent events may cause these expectations to change, and PROS disclaims any obligations to update or alter these forward-looking statements in the future, whether as a result of new information, future events or otherwise.