There have been dozens of drinking games that have popped up for observers to get in on the process with a little tongue-in-cheek fun. But as a satirical/parody article on the Raw Story said, presidential debate drinking games are bad for your health

So we want to make sure you enjoy tonight's Republican presidential primary debates responsibly and encourage the use of these BINGO cards. Print them out, play with friends and don't say we never gave you anything.









As an added bonus we’ve teamed up with PolitiFact to tell you which of these campaign rhetorics are true and which of these are false.

1. Iran: “The Iran deal will facilitate and accelerate the nation of Iran acquiring nuclear weapon.” – Ted Cruz, FALSE

2. Obamacare: “If you look at the results of Obamacare emergency room visits are up 10 percent” – Carly Fiorina, MOSTLY FALSE

3. Planned Parenthood: “…not actually doing women’s health issues.” – Jeb Bush, PANTS ON FIRE

4. Unemployment: “We have 93 million people out of work. They look for jobs, they give up and all of a sudden, statistically, they’re considered employed.” – Donald Trump, FALSE

5. U.S./Mexican border: “56 percent of (the U.S./ Mexico) border is not under our control.” – Ben Carson, HALF TRUE

6. Social Security: “60 million Americans depend on Social Security and a third of all seniors in America depend on Social Security for 90 percent of their income.” – Mike Huckabee, MOSTLY TRUE

7. Immigration reform: “40 percent of people in this country illegally are overstaying visas.” Marco Rubio, MOSTLY TRUE

8. Federal budget: Says he was “one of the chief architects” of balancing the federal budget. – John Kasich, MOSTLY TRUE

9. National debt: “We borrow 1 million dollars every minute.” – Rand Paul, MOSTLY TRUE

10. Common core: Changed his opinion after hearing parent and teacher complaints. – Chris Christie, FLIP FLOP

11. Black Lives Matter/Police Violence: “I am the only governor… who signed a law that says there needs to be an independent investigation any time there’s a death of someone in police custody.” – Scott Walker, TRUE