John Zorn, Zorn at 60

The Miller Theatre

At Columbia University

2960 Broadway at 116th Street (212) 854-7799

Friday

It's difficult to define exactly "what" the cutting edge is, but it's always easy to say "where" it is, and that's wherever John Zorn—the bad boy of contemporary music—happens to be. He has done amazing work in so many different genres that it's not even possible to catalog it, from nosebleed noise that makes you want run screaming to some of the loveliest melodies to ever light upon your ears. Tonight, the Miller is presenting a program of some of his most famous, yet rarest works, the "Game Pieces" from 1978-1989, with a band of veteran Zornographers including Joey Baron, George Lewis, John Medeski and Marc Ribot.

Ahmad Jamal

With Wynton Marsalis

And the Lincoln Center Jazz Orchestra

Rose Hall

Broadway at 60th Street, 5th Floor (212) 258 9595

Friday & Saturday

The 83-year-old NEA Jazz Master, whose breakthrough 1958 "Poinciana" is still serving as a template for musicians and singers across the globe, is simultaneously launching his lovely new trio album "Saturday Morning" and the 2013-2014 at Jazz at Lincoln Center with a joint concert combining forces with Wynton Marsalis and the JALCO. The combination of a piano trio and a full jazz big band is a natural since Mr. Jamal is one of the great living masters of space, who knows better than anyone how to interact with a bassist and a drummer as well as a full reed and horn section. This latest team-up will feature new orchestrations of classic Jamal compositions; magic is almost certainly guaranteed.

The Meeting

54 Below

254 W. 54th St., (866) 468-7619

Wednesday

In this monthly variety show, the brilliant monologuist Justin Sayre ("Chairman of the Board of the International Order of Sodomites") offers witty observations concerning a variety of topics of interest to—but not limited to—the gay audience. Said topics are frequently of a musical nature, thus providing the opportunity for a rotating cast of guest vocalists to perform. This month, the subject at hand is the iconic Liza Minnelli, and the three announced performers are all completely stellar, namely downtown belters Molly Pope and Lady Rizo, who well know how to get a room stirred up, and the slyly subversive Australian Kim Smith. But the central event is always Mr. Sayre himself, whose monologues and sketches are stirring, funny and can be appreciated by anyone.

The New Gary Burton

Quartet

The Blue Note

131 W. Third St. (212) 475-8592 Through Sunday

ENLARGE Vibraphonist Gary Burton performs at the Blue Note. Alan Nahigian

The jazz vibraphone is alive and well, and two of its most outstanding contemporary practitioners, Gary Burton (70 years old) and Warren Wolf (33, who is performing at the Jazz Standard through Sunday), both have new albums out as well as simultaneous gigs. When you listen to Mr. Burton's "Guided Tour" (released in conjunction with his new memoir, "Learning To Listen: The Jazz Journey Of Gary Burton"), you're not thinking about the state of the art of the instrument, but rather how superbly this group (guitarist Julian Lage, bassist Scott Colley, drummer Antonio Sanchez) is starting to jell together after years of working steadily., particularly on ballads like "Once Upon A Summertime." Meanwhile, Mr. Wolf is climaxing his new CD "Wolfgang" with a magnum opus of a jazz-classical mash-up inspired by the traditional concert warhorse "Carnival of Venice."

Shanghai Mermaid, 'India' featuring Emily Asher's Garden Party

The Red Lotus Room

893 Bergen St. in Brooklyn

Saturday

ENLARGE Trombonist Emily Asher and the Garden Party will perform alongside fire dancers and aerialists Saturday. Luc Decker

Almost magically, that mistress of the mystic, impresario Juliette Campbell, masterminds an event both exotic and exciting in the middle of an unsuspecting block in Crown Heights. Shanghai Mermaid embodies the romantic heart of the "Retro Nouveau," a dance/costume party with a red hot jazz band (Garden Party) and scandalous "'twenties somethings" charlestoning the night away. There are only two more Shanghai Mermaid events scheduled in the Red Lotus Room before the event moves to a new location, but tonight's event promises to be spectacular: celebrating Art Deco Hindustan (back when Mumbai was Bombay), Ms. Campbell is also featuring a traditional Indian ensemble led by Kavita Shah, the Desert Sin dance troupe, high-flying aerialists, and even fire dancers. Opa!