It’s no secret that competition benefits consumers. Variety allows purchasers to choose the option that best meets their needs and preferences, and it typically leads to improved quality among the options that are available. Even in health care, this is true. That’s why doctors like me are concerned that consolidation in the insurance market is going to lead to fewer choices for our patients.

It’s why the American Congress of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, of which I am a member and Florida district chair, joined with the American Academy of Pediatrics recently to urge the Federal Trade Commission to consider the potential implications of insurance consolidation on America’s health care system and, ultimately, on our patients.

Here in Florida, the attorney general is evaluating whether an announced merger among two of the four largest insurers would impose a harmful impact on patients’ health and on their finances. I’m worried about that, too.

As a physician, my concern is that consolidation among insurers has the potential to reduce options for patients and impose limitations on covered medical services. This could also lead to potentially higher overall costs to patients due to diminished options in the marketplace.

In many cases, insurance is the essential gateway to patient access to care. For the uninsured, high health care costs too often mean preventive care as well as needed chronic and acute care services are simply out of reach. This is unsustainable and unhealthy.

+ Dr. Karen E. Harris ×

Now, increased insurance coverage under the Affordable Care Act has allowed more patients, including women and children, to see the doctor when they need to, whether it be for annual exams and vaccinations or in time of emergency. In many cases, it has reduced their overall health spending. And importantly, insurance coverage also means improved peace of mind — and we can’t put a dollar sign on that.

Let’s not forget that a large deal of this success is because the ACA marketplace was founded on the basis of insurance provider competition to ensure that a wide variety of services are available to beneficiaries. These covered services are what makes it possible for American families to live healthy lives.

Without question, effective health insurance coverage must be comprehensive. Otherwise, some beneficiaries may face the difficult decision of forgoing needed care because it isn’t covered by their insurer. And when insurance companies compete with each other, they are more likely to include a broad array of services and to keep prices reasonable.

As a doctor, I have repeatedly witnessed the frustration and anguish of a patient who finds that the procedure or therapy she needs is unavailable or restricted by her insurance provider. When the patient in need is a pregnant woman with limited resources, this situation is especially painful, as she is considering the future of her pregnancy as well as her own health. We must not allow our health care system to become one in which patient choice and patient access are restricted.

In order for Florida’s families to thrive, they need insurance coverage that is adequate for their needs — coverage that includes the services that they require. Quite simply, this requires competition in the insurance marketplace.

Dr. Karen E. Harris chairs the Florida district of the American Congress of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. She wrote this for The Palm Beach Post.