Jamey Lockley

Jamey Lockley

Website: jameylockley.com

Age: 34

Family: Husband of 11 years, son and daughter, 5 and 2.

How long a resident in Adams 12 School District? 22 years

Professional background: Accountant at CU-Boulder for past 12 years

Political/community experience: Active in Broomfield Methodist Church

Education: Thornton High School graduate, AA Front Range Community College (accounting), BS Regis University (accounting)

Name a person you admire and explain why: I admire my husband, who teaches in our district. He has an amazing passion for the work that he does and spends long hours designing his classroom interactions.

What do you believe the biggest issue you plan to address as a school board member?

One of the most important roles of a school board member is to ensure that all sides of an issue are heard and considered, requiring that all stakeholders have a voice at the table. Engaging the community is a very important part of this process. Information needs to be disseminated in ways that ensure it makes into the hand of those whom it is impacting. Increased community engagement allows for stronger partnerships with local individuals, businesses, organizations and municipalities.

How are you planning to handle the enrollment pressures and issues that arrive from overcrowded schools?

Advertisement

I believe that any current facility planning needs to be forward thinking to handle not just today's overcrowding, but to accommodate future growth. Additionally, designs for facilities today need to be such that expansions can be made in efficient, cost effective ways to make the most of district resources with the least amount of disruption to learning.

How will you address the funding issues the district has faced?

While taxpayer funding continues to be a large part of the district funding model, we need to be seeking more creative ways of generating revenue. This includes seeking out and fostering mutually beneficial partnerships with entities that align with the districts educational values. Further, we need to continually engage the Legislature to ensure that public school funding is made a priority in this state.