Long known for its commitment to the community and its residents, Anderson Valley Health Center has overcome a challenging transition and is on its way to a bright future.

When long-time executive director Judith Dolan retired in 2011, AVHC faced a tumultuous time in health care without its trusted leader. AVHC began navigating the complicated process of becoming a federally-qualified health center to receive federal funding. And like other health centers, AVHC also had to address changes related to federal health care legislation, i.e., the Affordable Care Act / Covered California.

Thanks to dedicated employees and help from neighboring federally-qualified health centers, AVHC has hired a new CEO and a new doctor, both of whom are full of energy and enthusiasm to work with existing staff toward a sustainable future.

New CEO

New chief executive officer Shannon Spiller brings a clinical background and outreach experience to her administrative role. As a mid-level medical provider, Spiller regularly cared for patients at AVHC. She also served as AVHC outreach services director, working closely with the Anderson Valley Unified School District to plan and implement the Carol White Physical Education Grant Program.

This program supports the development of life-long healthy eating and activity habits among Anderson Valley students and their families. The program was so successful — leading to a remarkable 6 percent reduction in the body mass index of participants during the first year of implementation — that AVHC received special recognition for developing a "Best Practice."

Spiller also implemented Teen Clinic services, enabling teens to communicate with health care providers via text message and access services after school. She provided age-appropriate reproductive education to various grades at the elementary school and high school, and is pleased to report there have been no unplanned pregnancies for the 2014 school year.

Before joining the AVHC staff, Spiller worked in health care administration as the assistant medical director for the Leech Lake Band of Ojibwe Health Service in Cass Lake, Minn. There, she developed and expanded health care services to Native Americans, implementing and managing the Cardiovascular Disease Prevention Project, a community-based educational program teaching early lifestyle modification and interventions to prevent and reverse heart disease.

She also collaborated with other local health programs to provide culturally-sensitive health and family services. She managed and supervised the scheduling of clinicians to satellite clinics, as well as providing medical supervision to the county juvenile center.

"We are taking things one step at a time. We have a great board (of directors) and an excellent staff who love this community and are committed to caring for it," Spiller said. "This position offers the challenge and opportunity I'm looking for in my career, and I'm confident we can take care of whatever comes our way."

New doctor

Joining Spiller as a new member of the AVHC team is Logan McGhan, M.D., the new board-certified family practice doctor. Dr. McGhan finished his residency earlier this year and began working at AVHC in late August. He says he cannot believe what a good fit AVHC is for him and how comfortable living in Anderson Valley is for his family.

"It's almost spooky how perfect this feels. My wife is from Michoac?n, Mexico. When we came to Boonville, we couldn't believe how many people were from that same region," he said.

Dr. McGhan and his wife, Rocio, were looking for a small town in Northern California where they could raise a family. When Dr. McGhan came to Mendocino County, he did not know about the position at AVHC. Instead, he came to interview for positions in Willits and Ukiah. It was only after he arrived that someone mentioned the AVHC opportunity.

"I cold-called the health center, drove over (to Boonville) that same day. I knew it was a fit as soon as I got here," he said.

As a new doctor, Dr. McGhan is grateful for the mentorship of long-time AVHC doctor Mark Apfel, M.D. Dr. McGhan said he understands that Dr. Apfel may want to retire some day, but hopes for a good five years together first.

"This will be a warm hand-off," he said. "I wouldn't have come if I thought Dr. Apfel were going to retire anytime soon."

Dr. Apfel shared his enthusiasm at finding someone to help him care for the people in the community he loves.

"I'm not ready to retire yet, but I'm glad to know the community will be in good hands when I do," he said.

Dr. Apfel has been practicing medicine in the Anderson Valley for more than 38 years, long enough to care for patients, their children, their grandchildren, and sometimes their great-grandchildren. His experience and dedication have allowed AVHC to care for thousands of people who would otherwise have had to travel long distances or go without care.

About Dr. McGhan

Dr. McGhan's route to medicine was fairly direct. He always enjoyed math and science in school, and when he considered other professions, he knew medicine would be a better choice.

"I didn't want to be in sales. I wasn't interested in business. Law and politics seemed similar and not for me. So, I went for medicine," he said.

As he looks back, he thinks he probably started considering medicine as a profession as early as age 12 when he visited a leper colony in the Amazon rain forest.

"I was still young enough that I just started playing with the local kids. I felt no different from them. And I remember thinking, as I left to go home with my family, that the next time I saw people in such need, I wanted to be able to help them — not just visit and take pictures," he said.

Now he helps people every day. Dr. McGhan lives just minutes from AVHC with his wife and son, Carmelo. They live off the grid and enjoy the totally unplugged lifestyle. When he's not at work, Dr. McGhan spends time with his family and pursues his other passions: music and fishing. He is a self-taught guitar player and pianist, and he loves to play when he gets the chance. He also looks forward to abalone diving and sea fishing from a kayak.

Anderson Valley Health Center is a federally qualified health center dedicated to serving the people of the Anderson Valley. Medical, dental, and behavioral health services are provided, it is currently accepting new patients.