The King v. Burwell case was heard by the Supreme Court in 2015, and was widely considered to be conservatives’ last chance to overturn Obamacare. At issue was whether the legislation authorized the federal government to apply federal income tax subsidies to individuals residing in states that had not established health care exchanges. While the text of the legislation provided little basis for such authorization, this interpretation would have rendered Obamacare unworkable. If this provision were overturned, it would likely mean the end of Obamacare.

Conservatives rallied behind the opportunity to overturn the law. Ted Cruz, Marco Rubio, Mike Lee, and Paul Ryan put aside personal differences to sign an amicus brief urging the Supreme Court to rule against the Obama administration. Republican attorneys general representing Oklahoma, Nebraska, South Carolina and other states joined together to submit a similar brief.

On the other side of the aisle, liberals banded together to defend Barack Obama’s takeover of our health care system. Nancy Pelosi and Harry Reid led other congressional liberals in submitting a brief that defended Obamacare. Another group of liberals – 21 Democrat attorneys general from across the country – submitted a brief of their own. Joining them as the lone Republican was North Dakota Attorney General Wayne Stenehjem.

These liberals succeeded in persuading the Supreme Court to rewrite the law and save Obamacare. It was an interpretation that the late-Supreme Court Justice Antonin Scalia famously described as “not merely unnatural; it is unheard of.” It was exactly the interpretation that Stenehjem and his liberal colleagues had pleaded with the court to take.

Stenehjem continues to deny that he “supported” Obamacare, even though his actions in the King v. Burwell case clearly demonstrate that he did. Instead of continuing to argue over semantics, perhaps Stenehjem should be asked a different question – why did he decide that Ted Cruz, Marco Rubio and Paul Ryan were wrong, but Nancy Pelosi, Harry Reid and Barack Obama were right?