"If you don't have a good health care package, you'll have hard time getting the best workers." -- GVSU economist

GRAND RAPIDS, MI -- Fears that the Affordable Care Act mandates would result in a shortage of primary care physicians and firms dropping health care coverage for their employees have not materialized in West Michigan.

That's two of the findings of a health care study by Grand Valley State University, released Friday, Jan. 8.

"Health Check: Analyzing Trends in West Michigan 2016," a 76-page report, looks at the economic impact of health care in four counties: Muskegon, Ottawa, Kent and Allegan.

The research was compiled by assistant economics professors Kevin Callison and Leslie Muller. Their work includes a survey of 500 West Michigan residents about their health insurance coverage, and a survey of 200 Michigan firms about changes they have made under the Affordable Care Act.

It's been nearly six years since President Barack Obama signed the controversial federal legislation, often called Obamacare, into law, that was intended to reduce the escalating medical costs by requiring Americans to have some form of private or public health care coverage.

RELATED: Michigan Representatives votes to repeal Obamacare

The proportion of the West Michigan population with no health insurance was significantly lower in 2014 than in 2013, as was the percentage of respondents who report having no personal health care provider, according to the report.

The influx of new patients who have come with the ACA's mandated health care exchanges and Medicaid expansion have been able to find primary care providers.

The majority of 500 West Michigan residents surveyed over the summer by GVSU researchers say that getting access to a primary care physician has either stayed the same, or become easier.

Medicaid patients, who traditionally have the most difficultly finding doctors who will see them because their government insurance plan pays at a lower rate than private insurance, are among that group successfully finding doctors.

One reason there isn't a primary doctor shortage in Kent County is because more doctors are part of group practices, which are more cost-effective, so they can afford to take on Medicaid patients, Callison said.

He added these medical practices are employing more mid-level practitioners such as Physician Assistants and Nurse Practitioners to see patients for routine appointments, which lowers their operational costs.

Fears that firms would opt to pay the penalty rather than providing coverage, hasn't happened either.

"What we think is that health insurance for so long has been used to attract the most productive employees to firms," said Muller. "If you don't have a good health care package, you'll have hard time getting the best workers."

The GVSU report is being released as part of the Grand Rapids area university's seventh annual West Michigan Health Care Economic Forecast that identifies significant health-related trends and issues for the West Michigan region.

The research was expected to presented Friday by GVSU's Seidman College of Business faculty members, and to include a panel discussion by area health care experts about industry trends.

Jean Nagelkerk, GVSU vice provost for Health, said the event and report are intended to inform health care policy and community decisions about the types of health care professionals, services and delivery systems that could best serve the area.

"West Michigan's health care organizations, businesses, governmental agencies, foundations, and educational institutions share collective responsibility to improve the health, safety and vitality of our region," Nagelkerk said. "Perseverance toward integrated, cost-effective, safe, quality healthcare across the lifespan is essential."

The report also includes the analysis of data provided by the state's biggest health insurers: Priority Health, Blue Cross Blue Shield and Blue Care Network.

The report attributed the rising cost of care to an aging and overweight population.

The number of people in the 45 and over range continues continues to outpace the 20 to 34 demographic. In general, those in the 65 and over demographic tend to use the most health care resources, resulting in the highest cost.

Health care costs related to binge drinking and smoking are on the decline, while treatments for diseases related to obesity is on the rise. Two out of every three people in West Michigan are overweight or obese.

That unhealthy condition is often an underlying condition of six chronic diseases: asthma, coronary artery disease, hyperlipidaemia (high cholesterol) and low back pain.

The cost of treating the six diseases is rising, although diabetes treatment leads the pack because more people have the disease that affects the way a body processes sugar.

Researchers' access to private insurers' data allowed them to break down cost rates by regions and even ZIP codes, which revealed how costs vary dramatically depending on geography.

Treating coronary heart disease in rural communities in Newaygo and southern Allegan and Van Buren counties costs nearly double that of Kent County.

Callison isn't sure whether that is a reflection of more treatments or higher price per treatment. But physician discretion appears to be a factor. There are a number of ways to treat coronary heart disease, and some are more expensive than others, he said.

Insurance companies are trying to lower their costs by motivating people to adopt healthy habits - from eating better to exercising more -- to prevent these diseases.Their methods including using high-deductible health plans, price tools and price transparency to people tie their health to their pocketbooks.

The goal is to encourage patients to behave more like consumers, Callison said.

RELATED:

• Affordable Care Act penalties, premiums on the rise for 2016

• 'Obamacare' marketplace rates to rise an average of 6.5 percent in Michigan next year

• Michigan health centers receive $18M under Affordable Care Act

Shandra Martinez covers business for MLive/The Grand Rapids Press. Email her or follow her on Twitter @shandramartinez.