CHILLICOTHE The March 15 primary for Ross County commissioner will feature three Republicans and three Democrats who are seeking to fill the spot currently held by longtime commissioner Jim Caldwell, who chose to not run for another term.

Democrats seeking the seat include County Administrator Brad Cosenza, Zane Trace Principal Todd Holdren and Jan Nusbaum, who has worked with United Way of Ross County and the Pioneer Center. The Republicans seeking to keep the only GOP seat on the county commission are Jefferson Township trustee Jamie Barker, retired education and local school board member Dan Cryder and former Union-Scioto Superintendent Dwight Garrett.

The Gazette spoke with each candidate to find out about their background and why exactly they're running for the commissioner seat next year.

Cosenza

Cosenza said he feels his knowledge of the city and the county puts him in a unique position if elected to the commissioner seat. He has served as Ross County administrator since November 2012 and also served as parks and recreation director for the city of Chillicothe for nearly 15 years.

In addition, Cosenza is a former Scioto Township trustee and currently serves as fair board president with the Ross County Fair. He said he hopes to be able to follow in Caldwell's footsteps.

Caldwell will have spent nearly four decades as a commissioner when his term wraps up at the end of next year and said he feels the commissioner seat will grant him the opportunity to "influence how things work in the community."

"I think I have a lot to offer," Cosenza said. "I think I can be a positive addition to those who are sitting in the seats."

Cosenza also said he feels he possesses the leadership skills to bring the commissioners' office into the 21st century if he is selected for the position.

"I'm looking forward to working hard and being part of that team," he said.

Cosenza added that as county administrator, he has been able to work closely with different officeholders on various matters taking place ranging from the county engineer to the sheriff's office, which he said has been beneficial.

"All the projects that are happening, I've got my hands in them in some place," he said. "I already have a heartbeat of what's going on in the county and that gives me an advantage."

Holdren

Holdren has been involved in education for 31 years, the last 15 of them as principal at Zane Trace High School, and said he has always wanted to be involved in politics. He added that the commissioner seat would be a way for him to continue being involved in public service and views the role in a certain way.

"I think the commissioners' position is more of a coordinator of other officials as far as their budgets are concerned and overseer of those types of things," Holdren said.

Holdren also said he thinks the county commissioners can help working with different agencies to get handle on the county's drug problem through a coordinated effort in an effort to bring different sides together. He also said his skill set makes him different than the other five candidates who are running.

"I think that's what my experience has and what my reputation has been as a person that works for people, whether it's Democrat or Republican, and do what's best for Ross County," he said. "I think my perspective of analyzing a situation, being a problem solver, I don't know the other background they have, but that's all I've done the last 16 years is deal with issues, trying to keep issues from being a big issue and trying to handle those fires as they occur and try to head off the issues that might occur with guns or whatever it might be at a school and I think that experience will give me the edge when it comes to being able to handle some of the situations that may occur at the county and I think I'm a great listener."

In addition to his education background, he has also been involved in the Ross County 4-H program and currently serves as junior fair poultry superintendent. He said he looks forward to the opportunity to serve in Caldwell's place if he is elected, adding that he believes he would make a good addition alongside Commissioners Steve Neal and Doug Corcoran, both of whom are Democrats.

Still, Holdren is looking forward to continuing his endeavors in the political arena and vowed to work hard for the people of Ross County.

"It has been my great pleasure to work with the students and families of Zane Trace. I feel that experience has given me the background necessary to transition into the commissioner's office," Holdren said. "I am honored to have the opportunity to follow in the footsteps of James Caldwell, who has been a great public servant. I will ensure fiscal responsibility, encourage responsible economic growth, foster good interdepartmental working relationships within the city and county governments to serve the people of this great county."

Nusbaum

Nusbaum is a lifelong resident of Ross County and has been involved with several organizations in the community, including United Way of Ross County, where worked as community development coordinator for five years. She is the wife of Ross County Common Pleas Judge Scott Nusbaum and also previously worked as office manager at the Pioneeer Center before resigning to pursue a run at becoming county commissioner.

She said she is excited about being the only woman in the primary race and noted she wants to continue developing relationships in the area if she is elected. Nusbaum also said she realizes the role that commissioners have with budgetary matters, especially since her husband serves as Common Pleas judge.

"I think they (commissioners) do a good job and I know (my husband) does a good job with his budget and I'm very proud of him, of what he's done and I've been a good supportive wife for over 35 years and he is proud of me and maybe now it's my time because he will be retiring in a couple of years, so he said, 'Now it's your time to do what you want to do,'" Nusbaum said.

Economic development is also a main focus for Nusbaum, who said she would like to develop more relationships outside of Ross County and Chillicothe if she is elected to attract new businesses here. She is looking forward to continuing working with people if elected, she said.

"I think we're on fire right now," she said. "I'm just excited and I love Ross County. I've lived here my entire life and I was born here and I'm excited to represent Ross County in some way."

Barker

Barker has been a high school teacher for the last 10 years and currently works at Southeastern High School and also serves as trustee in Jefferson Township. In addition, he is also president of the Ross County Township Association and also serves as a volunteer firefighter.

The 35-year-old who earned his master's degree in social sciences from Ohio University teaches government and said he feels that is one advantage he has.

"I think my youth and experience and, you know, familiarity with technology is unique when we're looking across the field and I'm looking at taking this on as a full-time job," Barker said. "I would dedicate myself 100 percent to serving Ross County in that position and I'm not going to look at as a part-time position or a retirement project or something that I do on the side and for me, that would be my job."

Barker said running for county commissioner was something he had thought about for a while.

"Even as trustee and before that, I've always wanted to go into public service," he said. "I see that as a big step in serving the public and serving the community."

Barker also said he believes more can be done to deal with the growing drug problem within Ross County.

"I'm not the type of person who likes to sit on the sidelines and let other people make decisions and, you know, I want to be active in this process," Barker said. "It's definitely something I want to tackle and I think part of that is being active with young people."

He said he believes there are two components in dealing with the drug problem, one of which includes getting the word out to young people and also helping adults as well.

"We see a lot of middle-aged adults turning to drugs who haven't previously used and I think a lot of those folks are victims of their circumstances and I think we can begin to solve that problem by trying to recruit businesses to locate in Ross County," he said.

Barker also stressed that he is "looking to move into this position with a purpose" and said he'd like to improve communication efforts for fire and EMS crews within the county. Economic development will be a main focus if elected and said he plans to pursue new employment opportunities for individuals in Ross County as well, according to Barker.

Cryder

Cryder, who formerly taught for 32 years and is a lifelong resident of Colerain Township, is also in pursuit of Caldwell's seat next year. Cryder, who owns and manages a 500-acre farm in the northeast portion of Ross County, is a past 10-year member of the Zane Trace Board of Education.

He is currently completing his second term on the governing board of the Ross-Pike Educational Service District and resides in Kingston. Among his priorities, if elected, would be to continue keeping Ross County fiscally solvent, joining with city and county law enforcement in maintaining safety within the county and working with the county engineer and township trustees implementing infrastructure programs of roads and bridges.

Cryder is also involved as a member in the Ross County Farm Bureau, Kingston Mt. Pleasant Church, Ross County Retired Teachers Association and has also been a past president of the Chillicothe Kiwanis Club. He could not be reached for further comment Thursday afternoon.

Garrett

Garrett has been involved in education for the past 36 years as a teacher, coach, principal and superintendent, with 29 years of his career being spent with the Unioto School District. From 2000 to 2014, he served as superintendent at Union-Scioto Schools, where he saw the construction of an athletic complex project that provided the district with new football bleachers, press box, concession stand, ticket booth, press box for the soccer field, as well as new bleachers for the high school gymnasium.

He has since retired from Unioto and now works for the Ohio Department of Education as an area coordinator in the office of school finance. He is mararied to his wife, Carla Jo, and has four children.

Garrett said he feels that Ross County has been good to him "and this is my opportunity to give something back to the county if I get the position of county commissioner."

Garrett said being in the position of superintendent, he has to deal with building projects, including a $32 million project in 2002, and also worked with the county engineer under Moundsville Road for the safety of parents and fans to attend athletic events at Unioto. In addition, he said his experience with negotiations and dealing with people on a regular basis is another asset he brings to the county commissioner seat.

"I ran four success levy campaigns on the renewal levies for Union-Scioto Schools and I don't know if that makes me qualified for the position, but I know there's a lot to deal with as county commissioner," Garrett said.

He said he would like to see Ross County attract more industry to the area, adding that he most enjoyed working with students and seeing them graduate, go to college and become successful during his time as an educator. Overall, he said he hopes to make a positive impact if he is elected.

"I wouldn't run for the position if I didn't think I had something to offer," Garrett said.

Read or Share this story: http://ohne.ws/1R3DNNU