VEAZIE, Maine — Veazie police arrested a Hermon woman Thursday morning, the day after she allegedly led officers from Veazie and Maine State Police on a dangerous high-speed pursuit from Route 2 to Interstate 95 in Bangor.

Katie Spencer, 30, faces a lengthy list of charges including two counts each of driving to endanger and resisting arrest — filed by both Veazie and state police — as well as charges of violating conditions of release, operating after suspension of her license, criminal speeding and failure to register a motor vehicle, according to Veazie Police Chief Mark Leonard.

Leonard said he believes her bail conditions stem from an earlier arrest for operating with a suspended license.

After reading a newspaper article about the chase Thursday morning, a Veazie resident called police to say he or she knew where the suspect was staying.

Leonard and one of his officers went to the address around 11 a.m. Thursday and found Spencer, who claimed she was planning to turn herself in later in the morning. She was taken to Penobscot County Jail and interviewed, Leonard said.

Veazie police Officer Roger Hershey was sitting in his cruiser across from Veazie Congregational Church on Route 2 around 3:45 p.m. Wednesday when he saw a brown Saturn with an expired registration traveling toward Bangor, police said.

Hershey turned to follow and attempted to pull over the vehicle, but Spencer reportedly accelerated to more than 60 mph in a 35 mph zone. Hershey pursued the driver onto Mount Hope Avenue and then onto Hogan Road, where she narrowly missed striking another vehicle in the intersection, according to police.

The driver proceeded to weave in and out of traffic, making her way to I-95, where she turned left and began heading south.

She reportedly continued to dodge other vehicles, speeding up to 110 mph on the busy highway. At that point, around the time the pursuit reached the bridge that passes over the Kenduskeag Stream, Hershey decided to call off his pursuit to prevent a serious crash.

State police also chased Spencer, but called off their I-95 pursuit, also fearing a crash and knowing that the driver was identified.

At some point after the chase, Spencer made her way back to Veazie, where she spent the night.

Leonard credited Hershey for ending his pursuit when he did.

“He made the right decision,” Leonard said. “He was able to physically identify, and we knew at some point we’d be able to arrest the suspect without jeopardizing anyone’s safety.”

CORRECTION:

An earlier version of this article incorrectly stated the day of Spencer’s arrest. She was arrested Thursday.