Politico:

Donald Trump is finally in a feud with someone Republican primary voters care about: Megyn Kelly. Unlike undocumented immigrants, John McCain or Rosie O’Donnell, the Fox News anchor enjoys a rabid following among the network’s viewers, who happen to make up the core of the Republican primary electorate. So picking a fight with Kelly — as Trump did when he chided her during a tough debate question about insults he’s lobbed at women, dissed her in the spin room, and tweeted his complaints about her — carries risks that Trump’s other feuds do not.





Above gif courtesy of @darth Above gif courtesy of @darth

Between those moments (conception and birth) lies a developmental continuum that confounds any and every effort at strictly rational systematization. An abortion at six weeks is worse than one at four weeks. Eight weeks is worse than six. Twelve is worse than 10. And so forth, as we approach fetal viability — at which point, what was once a medical procedure with minimal moral import becomes a matter of murder. I know that Ross Douthat and many other pro-life friends don't see it this way. I respect and admire their consistency, even as I find it hard to understand how they could possibly believe it, and even as I think it sometimes drives them to approach the issue of abortion in a needlessly extreme and counter-productive way. Because, you see, having convinced themselves that every abortion at every stage of pregnancy is murder, pro-lifers can't help but show relative indifference to the other person involved in the moral calculus: the pregnant woman. She's the one looking to hire a contract killer to murder her own child, after all. At six months. At three months. At six weeks. At four weeks. The morning after. The timing doesn't matter. There's always a homicide victim and a perp.

Over the past year, there has been a substantial rise in the share of Americans — across racial and ethnic groups — who say the country needs to continue making changes to give blacks equal rights with whites, and a growing number of Americans view racism as a big problem in society.

For years, voter identification laws have been sold as a sensible antidote to fraud at the polls. Many people, including Supreme Court justices, have bought that fallacious line, even though in-person fraud is essentially nonexistent. Now, slowly but surely, such laws are being revealed for the racially discriminatory, anti-voter schemes that they are. On Wednesday, a federal appeals court panel unanimously agreed that Texas’ voter ID law had a discriminatory effect on black and Latino voters, and therefore violates the 1965 Voting Rights Act. It was the first time a federal appeals court had ruled against such a law. It was also a sign that the Voting Rights Act remains functional, despite the 2013 Supreme Court decision that cut out a key provision requiring federal oversight of jurisdictions, like Texas, with histories of racial discrimination.

The first official Republican debate on Thursday night was fascinating, gripping television. It was also incomplete. Speaking on FOX News, leading Republican candidates like Donald Trump, Scott Walker, Jeb Bush, and Marco Rubio all took shots at the Affordable Care Act … but they left out cruical context on how the law is actually working. Here are three key numbers that were overlooked at the GOP debate — and are incredibly important to understanding the state of health care in America. 1) The nation’s uninsured rate has plunged by at least 37% since the ACA took effect

2) Repealing Obamacare would raise the deficit by $130 billion — at least

3) Eleven GOP governors have said yes to Medicaid expansion