Forget about states trending blue like Virginia and Colorado.

Capitol Hill anchors one end of Pennsylvania. (Photo: Jacquelyn Martin, AP) Story Highlights Instead of getting preoccupied by candidates, the GOP should redraw the party's blueprint for winning the Electoral College.

Wisconsin, Ohio, Michigan and Pennsylvania can make up for the loss of states heading in the Democrats' direction.

The importance of the Great Lakes region is already starting to push itself to the forefront of party politics.

The next presidential election is still three years away, but the horses are already out of the gates. While Hillary Clinton has an early 61-point lead over any Democratic competitor, the Republican field is wide open. Every day sees a new poll about Chris Christie's support dropping or Jeb Bush, Mike Huckabee, Rand Paul and others rising.

Instead of getting prematurely preoccupied by individual candidates, the GOP should concentrate on redrawing the party's blueprint for winning the Electoral College. The Great Lakes Rustbelt is an area conservative presidential campaigns have largely ignored in recent decades but which should be central to future plans to win nationally.

No matter who the next candidate is, the political map is changing and Republicans need a new path to Pennsylvania Avenue. Until Barack Obama arrived on the stage, for example, the GOP had won Virginia in every presidential contest since 1968

– a run of 10 straight. Now Democrats have won two presidential contests in a row there and the governor's mansion in Richmond, and all with very liberal candidates.

Republican election strategy these days is a very narrow numbers game: What will it take to get to the 270 electoral votes needed by the skin of their teeth? With large liberal strongholds New York and California reliably delivering nearly half the votes needed for Democrats, the Republican map doesn't have a lot of wiggle room. Or now that formerly deep-red Virginia has turned blue, it is more accurate to say there is no wiggle room.

That's where Big Ten country comes into play. Wisconsin, Ohio, Michigan and Pennsylvania can make up the shortfall created by the loss of Virginia and other states heading in the Democrats' direction, such as Colorado.

This plan isn't obvious at first glance. After all, the GOP hasn't won a presidential vote in Wisconsin since 1984, Michigan or Pennsylvania since 1988 and has lost Ohio in four of the last six, including the last two in a row. But presidential voting history alone does not accurately reflect the region's partisan disposition.

Despite going the other way for the commander in chief, all of these states have voted solidly Republican across the board for state offices. In fact, all four currently have Republican governors and Republican majorities in both chambers of their legislatures. With GOP locks on the statehouses, these places are hotbeds of conservative legislative experimentation and thus good testing grounds to see how policy proposals could work on the campaign trail across the country.

The importance of the Great Lakes region is already starting to push itself to the forefront of party politics at right-of-center receptions and fundraisers, where Ohio Sen. Rob Portman, Wisconsin Gov. Scott Walker and Wisconsin Rep. Paul Ryan are regular keynoters. The growing national profile of Michigan Gov. Rick Snyder and Ohio Gov. John Kasich is also relevant as they tip their toes in the water to gauge their potential appeal on a national ticket. Both have returned fiscal health – and large budget surpluses – to industrial states hit extra hard by the Great Recession.

Instead of running to a southern safe zone such as Texas for the next party convention in August 2016, the Republican National Committee should head to one of these northern states to establish a foothold and generate local enthusiasm somewhere that is a potential new pickup on Election Day.

Reports of the GOP's death have been greatly exaggerated. While Barack Obama has wiped the floor with weak presidential candidates Mitt Romney and John McCain on the national level, Republicans have won consistently in the states, where they occupy 58% of the governorships. Conservatives have three years to translate their heartland popularity into a winning blueprint to take back the White House. That road runs through the Rustbelt.

Brett M. Decker is consulting director at the White House Writers Group. Follow him on Twitter @BrettMDecker.

In addition to its own editorials, USA TODAY publishes diverse opinions from outside writers, including our Board of Contributors. To read more columns like this, go to the opinion front page or follow us on twitter@USATopinion or Facebook.

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1eBnRcP