The Grateful Dead played its final shows in July, R.E.M. and Pink Floyd recently disbanded and U2 owes part of its remaining shred of relevance to Apple suits who decided last year to throw the latest offering from Bono & Co. onto millions of iPhones against the will of listeners the world over.

But for one day every summer, on a small stage in the parking lot of Left Hand Brewing in Longmont, the beloved tunes of groups either over the hill or done completely roar back to life for a battle of the region's pre-eminent tribute bands.

Leftapalooza, now in its 5th year, drew about 2,000 to Left Hand on Saturday, organizers estimated, for a daylong celebration of craft beer, summer eats and the music of nine local cover acts.

"We've got the Violent Femmes, Journey, Styx, The Allman Brothers," said event manager Joshua Goldberg. "It's kind of the lineup that you never got at Red Rocks."

There are dozens of beer festivals every summer in Northern Colorado, with new ones popping up constantly. Goldberg said that's forced the entire industry to reflect on the various ways to stand out.

When planning the inaugural Leftapalooza, Left Hand's team knew it wanted to raise money for the Leukemia and Lymphoma Society — the event has pulled in more than $100,000 over the years — but adding the slate of tribute bands has proven to please.

"Because you're using material that's already known to be popular, you can kind of pander to the audience a little bit more," KGNU radio host Robert Linder said from a camping chair by the stage.

Advertisement

"If you're doing all originals, you have to live or die by the quality of your songwriting. Here, the crowd goes crazy no matter what."

REMember, an R.E.M. tribute playing its third-ever gig on Saturday, found that out early in their set, with middle-aged diehards hopping up to sing along and air-drum every beat and fill of the hits.

"If you do a credible job at it," REMember drummer Steve Gray said, "you don't have to build a huge following. You have a built-in audience."

Hey, Lady!, a B-52's cover, has felt the love at Leftapalooza since the event began.

"Lucky for us," lead singer Steven Blasinsky said, "we have 'Love Shack' on our side."

A slew of known hits in the back pocket offers tribute acts an inherent advantage, but, their members say, there's also high pressure not to screw up a classic.

Ron Strailey, who on Saturday did his best Neil Peart impersonation for Rush Archives, knows he's got a big drum stool to fill whenever he sits behind his 28-piece kit for a show.

"It's a real privilege," he said. "I've studied Neil's licks for many, many years."

Tribute musicians on hand at Leftapalooza also attested to the fact that in order for a tribute act to soar, its members' adoration of the original songs cannot be feigned.

"You certainly have to have a great deal of respect for the artist that you're trying to emulate," said Steve Clark, Strailey's bandmate and a killer stand-in for Geddy Lee. "If you're not humble and you don't give it your full effort, then you're not going to be accepted.

"We were concerned Rush fans wouldn't like us trying to play their hallowed music, but, in time, we learned that people really respect when you do your best, and I think we do a pretty good job pulling it off."

Alex Burness: 303-473-1389, burnessa@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/alex_burness