Our region is booming economically, so why are so many relying on charitable dental care services?

THIS weekend, more than 300 dentists will join with fellow health-care professionals to provide four days of free care at KeyArena. At the event last year, we helped serve 3,400 patients and contributed to providing $2.3 million in services.

Our region is booming economically, so why are so many relying on charitable health-care services? While we celebrate the spirit of service that brings us together to meet pressing needs, we must also rededicate ourselves as health-care providers, policymakers and human-service professionals to increase access to basic health care.

Every day, underinsured people suffering from terrible pain from an untreated dental issue walk into an emergency room where physicians can treat an infection, but not the underlying cause. Vulnerable patients can be referred to dentists focused on addressing their emergency needs, but those programs are chronically underfunded. As a result, these patients suffer in a cycle of pain and infection.

As long as quality dental care isn’t meaningfully included in the conversation about a person’s overall health and wellness, there will be a gap in meeting health-care needs. The Affordable Care Act requires that all adults carry medical insurance, but there is still no such requirement for dental insurance. Washington state’s dental Medicaid budget for adults would be significantly overspent if every eligible adult were to have the recommended two preventive-care visits a year. It’s not a surprise that many of the individuals who will line up at this weekend’s clinic are in immediate need of high-quality dental care.

The dental safety net may be failing the people of Washington, but dentists are promoting innovative programs to address our region’s oral-health needs.

First, dentists are working with the University of Washington, Eastern Washington University and Washington State University to expand the Regional Initiatives in Dental Education (RIDE) program to train dentists in rural Washington. After graduating, more than 90 percent of those new dentists will return to practice in rural and underserved areas. Washington has one of the nation’s highest levels of dentists per capita, but many of these dentists practice along the Interstate 5 corridor. That’s why we are working to more evenly distribute the dental workforce across our state.

Second, Washington dentists are expanding our state’s dental-residency programs. Dental residents are recent graduates of dental school and are embedded into both rural and urban community health centers and hospitals to provide high-quality dental care at no cost to the state. Each dental resident provides more than $450,000 of free care. Washington has increased from 15 residents to 46 in the last decade, and dentists are working to double this number.

Finally, dentists across the state provide thousands of hours of free care annually. Due to Medicaid inefficiencies, it is more cost-effective for a dentist to help an uninsured patient for free than to try to work within the system. From free “dental days” to mobile dental vans, dentists work to keep people with a toothache out of the emergency room. Dentists provide these services on top of their commitment in schools and community programs to emphasize the importance of preventive care.

A single weekend of dedication cannot replace the focus needed to address the gap in the health-care system that treats dental care like an afterthought. All people deserve access to high-quality dental care. Even while we are grateful for events like the Seattle-King County Clinic, we need to work together to draw closer to the day when it is no longer needed.