The U.S. House of Representatives leadership has tentatively scheduled a floor vote for next week on a bill sponsored by Rep. Bradley Byrne, R-Fairhope, to repeal the health care reform measure known as Obamacare.

The House on Wednesday referred the bill to the Committee on Energy and Commerce. But Byrne's spokesman, Seth Morrow, said it has been fast-tracked for a vote in the full House. He said the specific day has not yet been set.

Byrne's bill is the latest in a long line of efforts by House Republicans to scrap the Affordable Care Act. Previous efforts have failed to gain traction in the Senate. But Byrne has indicated that with the chamber now in Republican hands, the proposal stands its best chance since Congress passed the law in 2010.

"I am very pleased the House will vote next week on a bill to repeal Obamacare, and I am especially pleased it is my legislation," he said in a prepared statement. "In addition to repealing the law which is making life harder for so many Americans, the bill instructs the relevant committees in the House to come forward with an alternative, patient-centered solution to help fix our health care system."

Byrne's bill drew criticism from Henry Brewster, a Mobile lawyer who has worked as a volunteer to help people enroll in subsidized insurance plans under the law.

"I do not understand why we should throw out something that's working," he said via email. "Millions of people are now insured with good, comprehensive health insurance like Blue Cross and United Health Care. The law is saving the country money, and health care costs have at last begun to slow down. It's just not right to yank away millions of people's health coverage for a wink and a prayer."

Byrne's bill makes no attempt to dictate what would come after repeal. He would leave those details to a variety of House committees. Instead, the four-page bill simply repeals the law and directs those committees to come up with alternatives.

"This vote is notable because it will be the first time since Republicans have taken control of the Senate that the House will act on a bill to repeal Obamacare," he said in the statement. "Senator Harry Reid (D-Nev.) can no longer stand in the way of allowing a vote on repealing this law once and for all.

"This also marks the first time the House has voted to repeal the failed law since it has been fully implemented. This year hardworking taxpayers are fully realizing just how many different areas this law touches ranging from new tax requirements and penalties to higher deductibles to canceled plans."

Byrne's bill does outline 12 broad themes for a new health care system:

Foster economic growth and private sector job creation.

Reduce health care premiums through competition.

Allow patients to keep private insurance plans if they like them.

Provide people with pre-existing health conditions with affordable coverage.

Enact medical liability laws to reduce unnecessary and wasteful spending the results when doctors fear lawsuits.

Increase the number of Americans with insurance.

Protect the doctor-patient relationship.

Offer greater flexibility to states to administer Medicaid.

Expand incentives to encourage personal responsibility.

Prohibit taxpayer funds from being used for abortions.

Eliminate duplicative government programs.

Keep federal entitlement programs from growing out of control.

"This is an issue I have heard about almost every day since I first ran for Congress two years ago, and I am proud to be able to champion this important legislation," he stated. "I thank the leadership in the House for bringing this legislation up for a vote, and I urge my colleagues to join me in bringing real relief to American families and small businesses."