Decades-old original facility razed following May arson

Jason Algien and Stephen Algien work Wednesday on rebuilding Howe Mortuary, 439 Coffman St., nine months after an arson destroyed the building. Owner Geoffrey Howe hopes to open the new building in May, he said. ( Lewis Geyer / Longmont Times-Call )

EDITOR'S NOTE: The Times-Call's series Take Two revisits people we have written about in the past year. Take Two stories run on Mondays.

Multiple days of zero-degree temperatures haven't put the brakes on the rebuilding of Howe Mortuary. In fact, the new facility is scheduled to be open in May, a year to the month that an arson destroyed the previous building at Fifth Avenue and Coffman Street.

"We've been dealt the cards and we're trying to make the best of it," said Geoff Howe, as he walked through the frame of the new facility last week while the temperature hovered in negative territory.

Geoffrey Howe, pictured Wednesday at the site where his mortuary's new building is under construction, has owned the company since 1986. (Lewis Geyer / Longmont Times-Call)

Howe's roots in the mortuary business date back to 1898, when his great-grandfather opened a facility in Boulder. In 1942, his grandfather bought an existing funeral home and changed the name to Howe; Geoff became its manager and bought the business from his parents in 1986.

A fire that started in a Dumpster jumped to the building and caused the roof to collapse, requiring the building to be razed and a new one built.

Since then, Howe and his staff have been using the building directly west at 717 Fifth Ave. as an office. Other funeral homes — including Ahlberg, Carroll-Lewellen and Allnut — and area churches have been invaluable in helping him stay in business over the past few months, he said.

Advertisement

"All the churches, they've been very helpful, extending a hand," Howe said. "And the support and understanding of the families we serve — they've just been very gracious."

The new facility will be the same size as the old one, about 11,000 square feet. He's adding about 950 square feet of office space on the northeast corner, he said.

The previous building had been added on to twice, he said: once in 1993 and then again in 2003. Building new will allow him to update some things in ways he couldn't do in the previous structure, Howe said.

"We're going to do an audio-visual system that will all be wired through the drywall, so that's going to be a huge benefit to the facility," Howe said.

Contact Times-Call staff writer Tony Kindelspire at 303-684-5291 or tkindelspire@times-call.com