PHOENIX — Eyes can’t be trusted in September. Along with March, it ranks as baseball’s most deceiving month. Matchups are mishmashes of aspiring prospects, veterans and a battery of players who will never see the big leagues again.

There was a moment Friday that created multiple blinks, an astonishing feat that sparked a five-run rally in the Rockies’ 7-5 win at Chase Field.

Rockies outfielder Corey Dickerson hit a pitch that bounced. Not just a short hop. Will Harris’ slider hit 3 feet in front of the plate, and the rookie swatted it into the right-field corner for a double. By itself it was remarkable, the kind of bat flick reserved for Vladimir Guerrero or Ichiro.

That the trick mattered made it mean a little more. Dickerson scored, helping shove the Rockies to only their seventh road victory in 22 games since the all-star break.

Colorado flipped the script, watching the opposition’s bullpen dissolve for a refreshing change. Troy Tulowitzki belted out three hits, and plated a run in the decisive seventh. And Wilin Rosario tied his career high with four RBIs, giving him 78 on the season.

The Rockies were in position to win because their own wobbly relief corps regained its balance. With the outcome in doubt after Adam Ottavino’s game-tying wild pitch, Josh Outman made a big pitch.

Wild and ineffective of late, Outman ran the count to 2-2 before getting a lazy popup from left-handed hitter Eric Chavez for the final out in the sixth.

It was a tough outing for starter Tyler Chatwood, who didn’t make it through the fifth inning.

He gave up seven hits and six walks in 4 ⅔ innings, yet allowed only two earned runs.

Arizona starter Brandon McCarthy also struggled, allowing 11 hits in his six innings of work. Yet he also only allowed two earned runs.

Carlos Gonzalez’s injury has provided a stage for Dickerson. He has made a solid impression. Whether he is in the mix to start next season depends on several scenarios, but his speed and bat make him an effective weapon. He delivered three hits.

One will be remembered. Regardless if it came in September.

CarGo could be done for season. Manager Walt Weiss conceded that Carlos Gonzalez might not hit again this season.

The all-star hasn’t homered since July 20, his power and swing undermined by a painful and annoying sprained right middle finger.

Gonzalez has been reduced to an overqualified defensive replacement since returning from the disabled list earlier this month.

He has visited multiple specialists who have confirmed the sprained ligament in his right middle finger.

Surgery is not a consideration at this point because there is no fracture involved. It’s likely CarGo will see another hand specialist at season’s end or if and when he’s shut down.

Footnotes. Jorge De La Rosa’s Monday start might be pushed back after his left thumb didn’t respond well to a side session Friday. He underwent an MRI on the thumb, revealing a sprain. He admitted that his thumb is more sore than it has been in weeks. He’s scheduled to face the Cardinals at Coors Field … Center fielder Dexter Fowler (knee) is expected to start a game in this series, possibly Saturday. … Drew Pomeranz (biceps tendinitis, forearm tightness) threw a two-inning, 30-pitch simulated game Friday, showing good arm action and mechanics. Weiss said it’s possible that Pomeranz will pitch in a game this month, and it could be as a starter or a reliever.

Troy E. Renck: trenck@denverpost.com or twitter.com/troyrenck

Looking ahead: Colorado at Arizona

Rockies’ Roy Oswalt (0-5, 8.57 ERA) at Diamondbacks’ Wade Miley (9-10, 3.73), 5:10 p.m. Saturday, ROOT; 850 AM

This isn’t what Roy Oswalt had in mind when he signed with the Rockies in May and reported to Scottsdale, Ariz., to build arm strength. The former ace right-hander has appeared in five games for the team. The Rockies have lost all five. Oswalt, after relieving Chad Bettis last weekend, makes his first start since pulling his left hamstring while covering the plate on a wild pitch against the Diamondbacks on July 7. Oswalt is interested in returning to the Rockies, but how he performs this month could go a long way in determining the team’s interest. Troy E. Renck, The Denver Post

Sunday: Rockies’ Jhoulys Chacin (13-8, 3.09 ERA) at Diamondbacks’ Randall Delgado (4-6, 4.04), 2:10 p.m., ROOT

Monday: Cardinals’ Lance Lynn (13-10, 4.23) at Rockies’ Jorge De La Rosa (16-6, 3.49), 6:40 p.m., ROOT

Tuesday: Cardinals’ Joe Kelly (8-4, 2.87) at Rockies’ Juan Nicasio (8-7, 4.58), 6:40 p.m., ROOT