Amy Johnson

Dear Planned Parenthood,

Thank you for being the place that one in five women in the United States has visited at least once in her life.

Thank you for the 516,000 unintended pregnancies you helped prevent last year. Thank you for performing 400,000 pap tests and 500,000 breast exams to help ensure women’s health. Thank you for the millions of HIV and other STD tests and treatments you perform. And thank you for being a place where women can have a safe and legal abortion.

While I am not pro-abortion (let’s be real—who is?), I do believe that it is important to provide a safe and legal option for women who choose to terminate a pregnancy. And since I’m being brave enough to state my pro-choice stance so publicly in this religiously conservative area, do you know what else I believe?

I believe it’s important for parents to have the support they need to raise the children they have to be healthy and well-cared for. This means that, in addition to supporting the EACH Woman Act, I support the Pregnant Workers Fairness Act, which would help pregnant women, who need a paycheck, stay employed, rather than being fired for needing accommodations due to pregnancy.

I also support legislation to extend WIC (Women, Infants and Children) benefits to a child’s sixth birthday, so that children in low-income families can continue to receive nutritious food between the time they turn five and the time they are eligible for free or reduced meals through their elementary school. And I support the Healthy Families Act, which would establish a national paid sick leave policy so that more employees have the opportunity to earn paid sick leave to care for themselves or other family members in need.

PP, I know you know that family planning is more than providing birth control pills to teenagers. I know you know that family planning is a lifelong task; one that involves all these issues and more. And I know you are right there on the front lines of the fight for reproductive justice in all kinds of ways, giving your clients all the information they need to make informed choices.

At a round table discussion on women’s issues last week with Rep. Adam Smith, he said, as a public policy maker, his No. 1 wish was that he had a magic wand that would make every child wanted and loved. I know you are the people who work for this idea each and every day, despite the political groups who spread nasty rumors and try to make you the villains in the health care story of our time.

I know I’ll probably get a few passionate letters with opposing beliefs after this is published, and I know it’s nothing compared to what you endure on a daily basis in order to provide health care to millions of women who have nowhere else to go. Thank you for your diligence. Thank you for your service. Thank you for being a voice for women and families in the midst of all the politicians who talk so much and do so little for women and families in our country.

Sincerely,

Amy Johnson

Amy Johnson, MSW, is a trainer, educator and coach in the Pacific Northwest. She is co-author of the books, “Parenting by Strengths: A Parent’s Guide for Challenging Situations” and “Homegrown Faith and Justice.” AShe specializes in working with parents and in sexuality education. Amy can be reached at comments@diligentjoy.com.