PARSIPPANY, N.J., Sept. 24, 2013 /PRNewswire/ -- Jackson Hewitt Tax Service® is partnering with Getinsured, a leading private health insurance exchange, to offer customers free, in-person help to get enrolled in new health insurance options under the Affordable Care Act. The partnership will enable customers in all 50 states and the District of Columbia to apply quickly and easily for the premium assistance tax credit and find the right health plan for their needs. Jackson Hewitt and Getinsured are partnering to take away the work and the worry of the Affordable Care Act – for free.

"The Affordable Care Act is complicated and there's a lot of confusion out there," said Chini Krishnan, Founder and CEO of Getinsured. "We're making it our mission to help every American work through this confusion and find the health plan that's right for them. Our partnership with Jackson Hewitt means we'll be able help individuals and families in 6,800 Jackson Hewitt store locations across the country get enrolled in the right health plan for their individual or family situation, based on both preference and need."

In addition to helping tax credit-eligible customers, Jackson Hewitt will also help Medicaid eligible customers get enrolled in coverage. Jackson Hewitt offices across the country will help eligible customers complete the necessary application forms to apply for coverage in their state's Medicaid program and Children's Health Insurance Program (CHIP).

"The tax filing season is the ideal moment to get folks enrolled in health insurance," said Brian Haile, Senior Vice President for Health Care Policy at Jackson Hewitt Tax Service. "We are very pleased to announce that Getinsured is a key part of the ACA services Jackson Hewitt will offer to our customers in the 2014 tax season. Together, we have designed a comprehensive, user-friendly process to make it simple and effective for our customers to access the coverage for which they are eligible. When taxpayers come to Jackson Hewitt, we won't just help them understand their options – we'll actually offer them an easy process to get enrolled in coverage." Jackson Hewitt tax professionals will complete the government paperwork for paid tax preparation customers at no additional cost. When possible, Jackson Hewitt tax professionals will also submit the government paperwork on behalf of individuals and families.

Haile added that, "what makes Jackson Hewitt unique is our ability to serve all our customers. There is no state where you cannot come in for help at a Jackson Hewitt location. And we serve all eligibility categories under the ACA – certainly the tax credits, but also Medicaid and CHIP."

For more information about how Jackson Hewitt can help individuals and families claim tax credits and enroll in the right health program, visit www.JacksonHewitt.com.

About Jackson Hewitt Tax Service Inc.

Jackson Hewitt Tax Service Inc. is an industry-leading provider of full service individual federal and state income tax preparation, with 6,800 franchised and company-owned locations throughout the United States, including 2,800 located in Walmart stores nationwide, and more than 400 Sears stores in the United States and Puerto Rico for the 2013 tax season. Jackson Hewitt Tax Service also offers an online tax preparation product at www.JacksonHewittOnline.com. For more information, or to locate your neighborhood Jackson Hewitt® office, visit www.JacksonHewitt.com or call 1-800-234-1040. Jackson Hewitt can also be found on Facebook and Twitter.

About Getinsured

Getinsured.com is the leading online health insurance marketplace, combining modern technology and customer service capabilities to make health insurance shopping easy and efficient. Since its founding in 2005, Getinsured.com has helped millions of individuals and families find the right health insurance plan for their needs and budget – offering over 12,000 health insurance plans with over 100 of the nation's leading insurance carriers.

Getinsured.com also provides state governments with technology solutions for the enablement of state-based health insurance exchanges, including health insurance exchange contracts in California and New Mexico.

Contact:

Jennifer Minchin

Jackson Hewitt Tax Service®

+1-973-630-0737

jennifer.minchin@jtax.com

SOURCE Jackson Hewitt Tax Service Inc.