2 years ago

Washington (CNN) – Hillary Clinton's failed 2008 presidential campaign has rented out their email list to Ready for Hillary super PAC, a group urging the former Secretary of State to run in 2016.

Ready for Hillary sent an email out on Sunday from the address "info@hillaryclinton.com" offering supporters bumper stickers that read "I'm Ready for Hillary." Usually, the groups emails come from their own website, readyforhillary.com.



Follow @politicalticker Follow @danmericacnn

"Grassroots movements happen when neighbors talk to neighbors and tell them to get involved," read the email from General Wesley Clark, a Clinton supporter. "Hillary has what it takes to be the next President of the United States. But today, as she decides whether to run she needs our support."

Late on Sunday, after the story was first reported by TIME, Seth Bringman, the group's spokesman, confirmed that Ready for Hillary had rented the 2008 email list in order to "connect with her past supporters."

And the plan appears to have worked: After sending the email out, the group tweeted that Sunday "is already the biggest online fundraising day in @ReadyForHillary history."

Although outside groups like Ready for Hillary are not allowed to coordinate directly with a candidate's campaign, because Clinton has yet to declare as a candidate, renting her 2008 email list is legal.

The rental and fundraising haul is further indication of how focused the pro-Clinton campaign has become on helping Clinton get off the ground if she decides to make another White House bid.

Clinton, however, has yet to say she will run – only delivering paid speeches each month and attending award events in her honor. She has, however, said she will make her decision on running sometime in 2014.

In response to the Clinton email, Sean Spicer, communication director for the Republican National Committee, claimed on Monday that while Clinton is “publicly playing coy about her presidential ambitions,” she is also “fully coordinating with her two Super PACs preparing for her candidacy.”

After launching in early 2013, Ready for Hillary has grown to become one of the primary super PACs urging Clinton to run after amassing over one million email addresses – primarily, the group says, of young people looking to volunteer and help a possible 2016 Clinton presidential bid.

Clinton, at the time a U.S. senator from New York, was the early frontrunner in the race for the 2008 Democratic nomination, but was edged out by then Sen. Barack Obama of Illinois in a marathon and historic primary battle.