Oklahoma Secretary of State Chris Benge has set Feb. 16 as the start of the 90-day period for backers of a penny sales tax to collect the 123,000 signatures necessary to put the issue on the November general election ballot.

The initiative drive, which is led by University of Oklahoma President David Boren, would provide $5,000 raises to the state's more than 40,000 public school teachers and boost funding for other educational purposes.

This is just one of several proposals to increase salaries for public school teachers despite an oil bust that has blown a $900 million hole in the state budget.

Multiple proposals

Rep. Doug Cox, R-Grove, has introduced legislation calling for a public vote on a $2,000 teacher raise to be funded by a cigarette tax increase of $1.50 a pack.

Other proposals lack specific funding sources and rely on tax code changes that haven't been identified or approved.

A plan by Sen. David Holt for a $10,000 jump would also use future revenue that wouldn't be available until the price of oil goes up and the economy turns around.

Complaints aired

Teachers have complained of low salaries for years and have staged loud rallies at the Capitol. This year, Republican leaders seem to have embraced the cause like never before.

Concerns have grown about teacher vacancies as low salaries have made it harder to recruit and retain qualified instructors.

It's also an election year.

"The election is 10 months away, and now they have all 'come to Jesus' on the issue, and they want to at least throw that out there as a potential so they can at least go home this election cycle and say, 'I know the pay raise didn't happen, but we tried,'" said House Democratic Leader Scott Inman.

Senate President Pro Tem Brian Bingman acknowledged that politics may have played a role in the emergence of multiple suggestions for teacher pay raises.

"I'm not going to deny that, but I think the reality is, let's look at the difference in pay and for somebody graduating from college, where are they going to go?"

Competing plans

Some leaders oppose the penny sales tax initiative and would like to see alternatives. Oklahoma already has one of the highest average sales tax rates in the nation.

Gov. Mary Fallin has proposed a $3,000-a-year raise for teachers.

Mark Dorman, a special education teacher in Piedmont, said her proposal has been a long time in coming.

"When oil was $100 a barrel we didn't get a raise," he said. "Now with oil at $30 a barrel, the governor has come up with a way for $3,000 raises.

"I find that very odd. Personally, I think that's the way to placate the public and prevent the penny sales tax from going through in November."

Many educators support the 1-cent sales tax initiative as opposed to lawmaker efforts because it includes a specific funding mechanism and also provides money for other educational purposes, including universities, said Amber England, executive director of Stand for Children.

"We're certainly happy to see lawmakers talking about the issue of teacher pay, but it's a truly difficult task to piece together funding solutions to hold public education harmless and find money for a teacher pay increase," she said.

Teacher pay proposals:

•University of Oklahoma President David Boren is leading an initiative campaign for a penny sales tax proposal that would provide $5,000 teacher pay raises, grants for locally controlled reforms like incentive pay, funds to keep down higher education tuition, funding for early childhood programs and money for the vocation and technology system.

•State Sen. David Holt, R-Oklahoma City, has a proposal for a $10,000-a-year pay raise. His plan comprises six pieces of legislation, including measures that would go before voters. The raises would be funded by savings through tax reform together with future revenue growth.

•Gov. Mary Fallin has suggested a $3,000 increase. She called for a $1.50-per-pack increase in the cigarette tax and wants lawmakers to examine the tax code to see if money could be gained by eliminating outdated tax exemptions and imposing more service taxes.

•Rep. Doug Cox, R-Grove, has introduced a resolution calling for a public vote on a $1.50 increase in the cigarette tax, which would fund a $2,000 raise.

•Sen. A.J. Griffin, R-Guthrie; Rep. Josh Cockroft, R-Tecumseh, and Rep. Michael Rogers, R-Broken Arrow, have bills calling for $5,000 raises. Exact funding is not identified.