“Cause I’m sittin’, I’m sittin’ on top of the world.”

— Cream

Seventeen years ago, the world’s leaders beat a path to Denver’s door. The occasion was the Denver Summit of the Eight, a gathering of media and the global elite that amounted to a major windfall for the Mile High City.

But looking back at those heady days of the late 1990s, much of what seemed certain then now lies in tatters. Much of what is important today was barely foreseen, or not expected. A look back at the world as it looked from Denver in June 1997 shows how much the global landscape has changed — and not necessarily for the better.

That year, President Bill Clinton chose the Mile High City to host the 23rd annual G7, an informal summer meeting of leaders of the major industrial nations. Canada, Japan, Britain, France, Germany and Italy would join the U.S. and a non-voting European Union delegate to weigh global issues, with a focus on the economy.

But the Denver meeting came with a twist. The Russian federation was making great strides toward embracing capitalism and appeared to be moving toward a more open society under then-President Boris Yeltsin. As a nod to an emerging Russia — China at the time was an economic afterthought — Yeltsin was invited and the G7 became the Denver Summit of the Eight, later the G8.

And what a heady time it was for Colorado and the region. Denver presented terrific venues, including a state-of-the-art airport to welcome visitors, a new convention center for the 15,000 members of the media who would attend, and the Michael Graves-designed Denver Public Library for the main sessions.

Colorado was symbolic of a resurgent American economy, increasingly a dominant force in technology and innovation. Mayor Wellington Webb enjoyed broad support, and LoDo was in the early stage of its takeoff. The city had sent Webb’s predecessor, Federico Peña, to Washington as transportation secretary and Gov. Roy Romer was a major figure in Democratic Party circles. John Hickenlooper was talked about in newsrooms and business circles as an amiable and ambitious barkeep.

The Denver Summit of the Eight came off without a hitch. A particular star was Secretary of State Madeleine Albright. She was coming home to Denver, where her late father, Josef Korbel, had been dean of the Graduate School of International Studies at the University of Denver. Albright also had received her Ph.D. at DU.

Yeltsin himself proved highly popular. At one point, he even waded into a crowd for a bit of democratic politicking. Deputy Treasury Secretary Larry Summers, prickly as ever, deftly fielded media questions at a Convention Center briefing, then cut them off when the growing currency crisis in south Asia came up.

The summit was a media feeding frenzy that lasted just 48 hours, from June 20-22. Then it was over — and very different realities soon would set in.

Bill Clinton would continue to ride high in politics for another six months, but by January 1998, the Monica Lewinsky scandal began to break and for the next year Washington would be absorbed in the scandal and subsequent impeachment proceeding. This set in place the bitter, partisan tone of national politics, with vitriol only increasing during the next decade and a half.

Denver would ride high for nearly another year, but in April 1999 the shootings at Columbine would bring the national media back to Denver in a way that was dramatically different from the events of the previous summer.

Denver’s exposure from the summit would set the stage for the Democratic National Convention in 2008, a key moment in Barack Obama’s run for the presidency. This epoch-making event would also be eerily followed by the terrible theater shooting in Aurora four years later.

Yeltsin, the star of the summit, would last in office only another two years. By 1999, exhausted and perhaps ailing, he resigned. He was convinced that a young lieutenant, a former security official named Vladimir Putin, would continue to march Russia on the path to reform.

Instead, Putin has been leading Russia toward an extreme nationalism and disregard for international boundaries and norms. His actions echo the onset of fascism under Mussolini and Hitler.

For the global economy, the Asian crisis would flare from a minor brushfire to a substantial regional financial crisis, forcing Summers and aide Timothy Geithner to tap many experimental tools of monetary policy to keep the contagion from spreading. That experience framed their response to the much larger financial contagion that threatened to engulf the world economy in the Great Recession.

This year, the G8 is headed for history’s scrap heap. Russia’s bid to host the summit was roundly rejected after Putin seized Crimea by force and irregulars aligned with Russia overran several cities in eastern Ukraine. The meeting, held this week in Brussels, has reverted to the G7 as the established order ponders a post-Cold War response to Russian aggression.

The Denver Summit of the Eight is largely forgotten, but not completely. In an online State Department archive, there’s a copy of the final documents signed by the world leaders 17 years ago. With great prescience, they agreed to work together on environmental issues, presaging today’s rising concern about climate change. And they agreed on more unified efforts to head off financial crises. That said, issues such as terrorism or China’s aggressive expansion were not high on the agenda.

In our technological, inter-connected world, change can come rapidly, deeply and unexpectedly. What seems certain, permanent and important today may quickly falter, subside and even disappear. Sitting on top of the world is not a permanent perch.