Sky-high costs for breakthrough specialty drugs that have proven to be highly effective at treating diseases such as cancer, HIV and hepatitis C have been one of the top problems over the past several years for health insurers trying to keep premiums affordable.

The Blue Cross Blue Shield Association recently highlighted the issue in a report finding that spending on specialty drugs increased 26 percent - $87 per member – between 2013 and 2014. Specialty drug spending was 17 percent higher in the individual market, which includes plans sold in the Affordable Care Act health insurance marketplaces, than it was in the employer market in 2014, the report found.

The $87 billion spent in 2012 on specialty drugs could quadruple by 2020, reaching about $350 billion, the report said.

While the BCBSA pointed to possibly unsustainable price increases, the Pharmaceutical Research and Manufacturers of America (PhRMA) shot back that the analysis was “another misleading report on medicine spending that cherry-picks data” to justify discriminatory treatment against patients with chronic diseases like cancer, rheumatoid arthritis and multiple sclerosis. Health plans often only cover drugs to treat those diseases by requiring the highest level of cost-sharing by patients, PhRMA said.

Other health-care experts caution that it’s an over-simplification to chalk all high drug prices up as being excessive. Dana Goldman, director of the USC Schaeffer Center for Health Policy and Economics, helped author research finding that high prices for some drugs developed in recent years to treat cancer, HIV and hepatitis C may be warranted because they save money over the long run.

And Ted Okon, executive director of the Community Oncology Alliance, said that research shows that while the price of specialty drugs “is a problem,” the cost of hospital inpatient admissions and surgeries has grown less rapidly than drug prices for cancer treatments, an indication of the new drugs’ effectiveness.

“We really need to find ways to link price to value,” Okon said.