When students of faith step onto the Pacific University campus this fall, Chuck Currie hopes they won't be stepping away from their religion.

"It can be very disconcerting for students who are moving away from their home and family to also be cut off from their spiritual community," he said.

Empowering students to experience and express their faith on- and off-campus is part of Currie's mission this year as he takes on his new role as director of the Center for Peace and Spirituality and university chaplain at Pacific.

He is the school's first chaplain in more than 30 years.

A 'love thy neighbor' faith



Currie, 45, attended Pacific from 1987 to 1988 but didn't receive a degree there.

He said his mother had a major influence on his path to ministry.

"She taught me from an early age that all people were equal, and that caring for each other should be a foundational organizing principle of life and work," he said.

He spent his youth in South Carolina, growing up in a mix of Southern Baptist, United Methodist and Lutheran traditions.

But during his high school years in Oregon, Currie saw a more harsh and judgmental side of Christianity as the culture around him became increasingly secular.

"I decided I couldn't be a Christian anymore," Currie said. "To me, the Christian faith could only be seen in very dogmatic and oftentimes hateful terms."

He and his mother became Unitarians during that time, until a minister encouraged him to learn more about the diversity in Christianity.

Currie began to read more books from Christian writers and discovered that "the Christian faith, and Jesus himself, was centrally concerned with justice" and helping the poor, he said.

This was a cause, and a faith, he could believe in.

So after spending a year at Pacific, Currie dedicated nearly two decades to working at homeless shelters and helping found the Goose Hollow Family Shelter in Portland.

It was during his years of shelter work, Currie said, that he realized homelessness was not only a political or economic crisis but also a spiritual crisis stemming from a lack of "love thy neighbor" behavior toward the homeless community.

"Until you can see that (homeless) person who's invisible, see that common humanity that we all share, there's no piece of legislation that I can pass" to solve the problem, he said.

Rather than going into politics or law, Currie decided to pursue a Master of Divinity degree at Eden Theological Seminary in St. Louis, Mo. and in 2006 was ordained as a minister in the United Church of Christ.

He's now working on a Doctor of Ministry degree through Chicago Theological Seminary.

Currie's speaking and advocacy ministry is based on the idea that "faith is meant to bring justice and reconciliation to all people – regardless of their faith tradition," he said.

He's an outspoken activist for healthcare, immigration reform and gun violence prevention. He worked on the Affordable Care Act and married several same-sex couples when same-sex marriage was approved last spring.

He is a regular opinion piece contributor to The Huffington Post and the Forest Grove Leader.

Finding 'common ground'

While students of different faiths may not be able to come to the same conclusions about "hot topics" such as abortion or same-sex marriage, Currie — who is openly pro-choice and a supporter of same-sex marriage — believes spiritual and religious students can still be a strong force for significant, but less controversial, issues.

"I would like very much to get students who have faith backgrounds to be interested and involved in the world around them," Currie said. "I want people to be concerned about the economic inequality that we have in the world. I want people to be concerned about climate change and the environment. These are going to impact them and their children."

He called these "common ground issues" that can bring students of all religious backgrounds together to be a positive force in the world.

Currie hopes to engage students of all religions in service projects in and around the Forest Grove community.

He said he hopes to eventually take students on overseas trips to experience the religious climates of other countries, and that these trips could also include a community service element.

Religion at Pacific

Though now a non-sectarian university, Pacific has its roots in the Congregationalist tradition — Congregationalist minister Harvey Clark cared for and educated orphans of the Oregon Trail in the school's earliest days.

Today, says Lang, welcoming a diverse population of students is key to the school's mission.

For students who don't want religion or spirituality to be part of their college experience, Currie knows that having an official chaplain on campus might make them a bit wary.

He looks forward to winning these students over — not to his "side" per se, but to tolerance and discussion.

"I expect all of my encounters with students will be learning experiences for me as much as they're going to be learning experiences for the students," he said.

While he won't hold weekly chapels, he hopes to host a few interfaith worship services and help students connect with religious groups on- and off-campus.

Currie will teach at least one religion-based class each semester and will hold office hours for all students to probe him with questions about religion and spirituality.

"My job is not in any way to convert people from one religion to another or to tell people they ought to be religious," Currie said. "But I do think it's a good thing for students to realize that religion is there."

-- Kelsey O'Halloran