The Eye

'Reign' Season 2 Episode 14 Spoilers: Mary Must Confront Feelings For Condé In 'The End Of Mourning' [WATCH PROMO]

SIGN UP TO RECEIVE THE LATEST NEWS FROM FASHION&STYLE

(Photo : Facebook/"Reign") "Reign" is a popular show on The CW. Read below for spoilers, recaps or news!

In the next episode of "Reign," titled "The End of Mourning," Mary will be forced to face her true feelings for Condé. Also, the truth will be uncovered about who poisoned Henry's bible.



In the most recent episode, Catherine discovered the reason behind her hallucinations — Henry's bible carried traces of poison, and she had been handling and reading it lately. Meanwhile, Mary and Francis' relationship seemed to get better — only for Mary to eventually end things for good. She finally invited Francis into her bed — just to sleep. But she couldn't make it through the night without having flashbacks to her sexual assault.



King Antoine visited the castle and recognized Bash as the man who he believed killed his and Condé's brother. He will most likely be back to get his revenge on Bash.



As a matter of fact, Antoine can be seen in a promotional photo from the next episode, standing with Condé.



In another pic, Mary appears to be all smiles while outside at some type of feast in the snow. Maybe they're still partaking in the Winter's Ease celebrations.



Read "The End of Mourning's" official synopsis for all the details:



As Mary and Francis investigate who was behind the poisoning of King Henry, they unearth secrets of the past which force Mary to confront her feelings for Condé as she attempts to move forward. Catherine finds herself in the middle of a romantic triangle when the Duke of Guise (guest star Gil Darnell) returns, which forces Narcisse to commit a hideous act out of desperation. Meanwhile, Greer finds herself in a situation she never fathomed in order to survive.







Catch the next episode of "Reign" on Thursday, Feb. 12 at 9 p.m. on The CW.





SIGN UP TO RECEIVE THE LATEST NEWS FROM FASHION&STYLE

© 2015 Fashion & Style.com All rights reserved. Do not reproduce without permission.