The following article is entirely the opinion of Patrick Frye and does not reflect the views of the Inquisitr.

Holly Fisher has become infamous as Holly Hobby Lobby for the Facebook photo she posted that showed her support for the recent Supreme Court decision. Holly posted a photograph of herself standing in front of a Hobby Lobby store while wearing a “pro-life” T-shirt and holding a Chik-fil-a cup.

The only way this combination could have infuriated supporters of the Obamacare birth control mandate even more is if she had slung a gun over her left shoulder. But that did not stop the death threats from pouring in…

In a related report by The Inquisitr, Holly Fisher has already explained why she made the Hobby Lobby photo:

“I have always been extremely conservative and passionate about my views. The last few years of the growing hate and intolerance among the ‘tolerant’ left has made me want to stand up and speak out. I saw this as a perfect opportunity to show where I stand. I didn’t do it to try to change minds of those who disagree with me, but more so to show like-minded people that they’re not alone and it’s okay to stand up for what you believe in, even if it’s not popular right now. I want younger Americans to know it’s okay to not follow the current liberal path…”

She also remarked that the same people who complain about the so-called “war on women” are also the same people who are publicly insulting her all over the internet. But, while insults might be expected on social media, Fisher even says she’s received deaths to herself and her family. For example, one of the worst was from a guy who “told me he would kill me by shoving the cup down my throat.”

That’s just the tip of the iceberg, unfortunately. Other Twitter users have responded to Holly’s account by attacking her presumed religious beliefs, claiming they’d like to get her pregnant just to walk out on her, and other perpetuated the war on women mantra by saying she was a “brainwashed female” who is just an “object to men” who forcing people to believe in an “imaginary man, whose life is written by men in a fictional book.”

If anything, this type of response seems like a new war on women. If the goal is for women to have the perfect freedom to choose what they believe, and which actions they desire, then it would seem logical to support an independent woman like Holly Fisher who has chosen her own path, even if you might disagree with those choices.

What do you think about Holly Hobby Lobby, and the reaction she has received to her photo?

[Images Via Twitter]