JEFFERSON CITY • With their job of crafting a state budget completed, lawmakers enter the final three weeks of the annual session with more than a dozen major issues in legislative limbo.

From a controversial anti-gay marriage proposal to a bid to raise the gasoline tax, the list of hot-button topics is expected to keep legislators busy until they leave town on May 13.

The Republican-led House and Senate cleared the decks for the stretch-run toward adjournment by sending Democratic Gov. Jay Nixon a $27 billion spending blueprint on Thursday.

Before heading home for the weekend, Senate Majority Floor Leader Mike Kehoe, R-Jefferson City, said the Senate remains on track to act on the same trio of issues he highlighted as priorities when the session began in January. They include good government legislation, a voter identification law and changes to civil justice laws.

“We’re still working toward those goals,” Kehoe said.

Looming above those topics, however, is a proposed voter referendum that would shield some businesses that deny services for same-sex weddings.

The fight over Senate Joint Resolution 39 has been intense, with major businesses calling on the Legislature to drop the effort or drastically alter it. A scheduled vote in a committee stalled last week.

House Speaker Todd Richardson, R-Poplar Bluff, said he doesn’t believe the influence of big business is making much of a dent in the support or opposition of the plan.

“I don’t think the lobbying has changed people’s perspective on this issue,” Richardson said. “I think you’re seeing across the country a very serious conversation about how people deal with this question of religious liberty.”

Rep. Ron Hicks, R-St. Peters, a member of the House Emerging Issues Committee, said Friday he’ll support the measure, but he has concerns.

“Are we going to lose a bunch of business because of it or are we going to bounce back?” he said. “Because sometimes the state has to take a stand on the issues. Because we’ve taken a stand on Medicaid expansion, Obamacare, abortion, Common Core — this is just another one.”

Hicks said the delayed vote was caused by an expected tie and one member who requested more time to evaluate the proposal. Hicks declined to say which of the 12 committee members were on the fence.

“With it being at a tie, if they would’ve brought the bill up, the measure would’ve failed,” Hicks said.

All three Democrats on the committee oppose the proposal. Rep. Anne Zerr, R-St. Charles, who also sits on the panel, said Saturday she was still deciding how she would vote. Rep. Caleb Rowden, a Republican who is running for a Columbia-based state Senate seat, could not be reached on Friday.

Meanwhile, a proposal to ask voters to raise the state’s gas tax by 5.9 cents per gallon also faces a steep climb in the House.

“A tax increase of any kind is going to be very, very difficult,” Richardson said.

A plan to ban lawmakers from accepting freebies from lobbyists has run into turbulence in the Senate, where Sen. Dave Schatz, R-Sullivan, is pushing for a $40 cap on gifts instead of the outright ban approved earlier in the House.

Other issues on the GOP agenda include election-year staples like abortion, guns and reining in the influence of labor unions.

Lawmakers also are trying to start a prescription drug monitoring program, which supporters say is an essential tool in combating opioid addiction. The program could help doctors and pharmacists determine if addicts are visiting multiple doctors to get prescriptions.

Opponents like Republican Sen. Rob Schaaf, a St. Joseph doctor, say the program would be an invasion of privacy.

Kehoe acknowledged it could become a lengthy debate.

“There are passionate feelings on both sides,” Kehoe said.

The to-do list doesn’t end there.

St. Louis Zoo officials are trying to win approval of a plan to allow surrounding counties to add a sales tax to help fund the operation. Additional reforms of the municipal court system are still being debated. And, Ameren and other utilities attempting to convince lawmakers to change how electric rates are set.

In addition, Richardson sounded hopeful the state could move to become in compliance with a U.S. Supreme Court ruling barring juvenile murderers being sentenced to life without parole.

“It is a priority,” Richardson said.

?Kurt Erickson • 573-556-6181

@KurtEricksonPD on Twitter

kerickson@post-dispatch.com

Jack Suntrup • 573-556-6184

@JackSuntrup on Twitter

jsuntrup@post-dispatch.com

———

©2016 the St. Louis Post-Dispatch

Visit the St. Louis Post-Dispatch at www.stltoday.com

Distributed by Tribune Content Agency, LLC.