Health care tax forms 8962, 1095-A, and 8965. (Photo: Carolyn Kaster, AP) Story Highlights Never give a tax preparer money directly to cover a potential penalty for not having health insurance.

IRS warning unscrupulous tax preparers conning taxpayers into paying them penalties directly.

Several exemptions will enable many taxpayers without health insurance to waive penalties.

The scams this tax season just won't quit.

Now, we're hearing about really nasty tax preparers who want to collect and pocket penalties relating to the Affordable Care Act and the uninsured.

The Internal Revenue Service is warning taxpayers that corrupt tax preparers are telling their clients to pay them directly for any "shared responsibility payments" relating to not having health insurance or not qualifying for an exemption under Obamacare.

The IRS put out a notice saying that individuals who owe money relating to the Affordable Care Act would make such payments via a tax return or in response to a letter from the IRS. Never, ever write a check to a tax preparer to cover the "shared responsibility payments" or the penalty for going without health coverage.

The IRS said it has received several reports of tax preparers who aren't on the up-and-up requesting that health-care related tax payments be made directly to the preparer.

Some con artists are telling taxpayers to make a payment for a penalty directly to them, even though the taxpayer had Medicaid or other health coverage and would not owe a penalty.

The IRS said some unscrupulous return preparers are targeting taxpayers who primarily speak Spanish and may speak limited English.

Many times, people will not owe that penalty because many can qualify for a coverage exemption if they do not have health insurance coverage.Several exemptions can be filled out directly on the tax form.

Bad preparers are asking for direct payment to them using a variety of scam stories:

--They might tell tax filers that they must make an individual shared responsibility payment directly to the preparer because of their immigration status.

--Or the preparer promises to lower the payment amount if the client pays it directly to the preparer.

--Or the preparer is demanding money from individuals who are exempt from the penalty or individual shared responsibility payment.

Tax filers who have been targeted by a preparer with questionable motives can report it to the IRS on Form 14157, Complaint: Tax Return Preparer.

Taxpayers also can go online to www.irs.gov to use a tool called an "Interactive Tax Assistant" program to help determine if they qualify for an exemption under the Affordable Care Act or owe a penalty. Lower-income households also have limited penalties.

The penalty for being uninsured and not qualifying for an exemption is somewhat complicated. For 2014, the fee could be $95 for each uninsured person in the household or $47.50 for each child under age 18. The maximum penalty would be $285 for a family under that method.

Otherwise, the penalty could be around 1% of a household income, again whichever is greater. The household income is first reduced by the filing threshold amount and then multiplied by 1%. A single filer with $40,000 in income could face a penalty of about $298.​

Also the IRS noted that individuals who are not U.S. citizens or nationals, and are not lawfully present in the United States, are exempt from the individual shared responsibility provision and do not need to make a payment.

For this purpose, an immigrant with Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals status is considered not lawfully present and therefore is exempt.

Contact Susan Tompor: 313-222-8876 or stompor@freepress.com.

​

Read or Share this story: http://on.freep.com/1GCl1Eo