Dick Cavett (right) talks with Senate Watergate Committee Vice Chairman Sen. Howard Baker (R-Tenn.) in the hearing room in Washington on “The Dick Cavett Show” on Aug. 1, 1973. Credit: Photo Credit: Daphne Productions

Before "House of Cards," America binged on the Watergate hearings.

According to the Museum of Broadcast Communications, from May 17 through Aug. 7, 1973, the then-three commercial television networks aired 319 hours of congressional hearings into the break-in at the Democratic Party headquarters by President Richard Nixon's campaign and the subsequent coverup, and rotated coverage from one network to another every three days.

PBS aired taped coverage each evening. All three commercial networks carried 30 hours of testimony by former White House counsel John Dean. Later hearings received less coverage, but one survey showed that 85% of U.S. households watched some of this riveting political theater.

A year later — 40 years ago this week — Nixon resigned under the threat of impeachment.

The wounds of that period linger like bad breath in our body politic. Watergate capped a decade of war and assassinations that left many Americans cynical about government and other institutions, a mood that still divides the country and its elected representatives.

Monday at 7 p.m., HBO relives the era with the documentary "Nixon by Nixon: In His Own Words," culled from recordings from the secret White House recording system.

Whether you lived through that period or not, it may surprise you to learn that talk show host and raconteur Dick Cavett played a peripheral role, which is explored in the PBS documentary "Dick Cavett's Watergate."

It airs on WMVT-TV (Channel 36) Friday at 8 p.m., the exact hour — Central Standard Time — of Nixon's resignation speech. WMVT will repeat the program Sunday at 3 p.m. and Aug. 13 at 3 a.m.; WMVS-TV (Channel 10) also will air it next Monday at 11 p.m.

The documentary was directed by Fox Point native John Scheinfeld, director of the documentaries "The U.S. vs. John Lennon" and "Who Is Harry Nilsson (and Why is Everybody Talkin' About Him?)."

The elfin, dapper Cavett had a late-night talk show on ABC from 1969 to 1975, during the scandal, opposite "The Tonight Show Starring Johnny Carson," a slot he inherited from Joey Bishop (whose announcer was Regis Philbin).

"Dick was the smart one," said Scheinfeld, a Nicolet High School alum.

"He had people on to have a conversation. It wasn't about performing a song or flogging a book. It was, 'Let's talk about something of substance.' He wasn't throwing softballs. In his own nice, witty way, he would ask important and significant questions and wasn't afraid to ask something that would make a guest uncomfortable."

The show's opening graphic was a Peter Max-type flower power design, and his guests included giants of their time — Judy Garland, Groucho Marx, Orson Welles, Laurence Olivier, Alfred Hitchcock, Janis Joplin, Jimi Hendrix and John Lennon among them.

Figures from the Nixon administration appeared "because he reached a younger, more liberal audience," Scheinfeld said. U.S. Attorney General Richard Kleindienst appeared after the burglars were indicted to say, "'We did the job, now let's stop talking about this,'" Scheinfeld said.

Cavett's guests included reporters Bob Woodward and Carl Bernstein, who broke the story, and CBS anchor Walter Cronkite, who dedicated his newscast to the story over two nights.

Two days after the break-in, Cavett discussed it with Sen. Edward Kennedy. Cavett even hosted his show from the room where the hearings were being held, and his guests included four of the senators who were conducting them.

"The night he hosted his show from the Senate committee room, Johnny Carson and Merv Griffin had the latest big-breasted singer on," said Scheinfeld.

Years later, Cavett hosted a PBS show on which he interviewed Watergate principals John Ehrlichman and G. Gordon Liddy, after they were released from prison and on which former President Gerald Ford talked about his pardoning of Nixon and of the guilt that "acceptance of a pardon signifies," Scheinfeld said.

Scheinfeld lives in California, but said he still reads the Milwaukee Journal Sentinel online daily and misses Kopp's custard. He is looking for distribution for "I Hope You Dance," a documentary about the power of music, and is working on a film about John Coltrane, inspired by Ugandan orphans with AIDS inspired by his music. It's the first time the jazz musician's estate has cooperated with a film, "and we have access to all his memorabilia and never-seen home movies."

Scheinfeld is a stickler for rare footage. The Woodward and Bernstein clip was thought lost forever, until Scheinfeld found a kinescope in the ABC archives. If only he could work his magic on the 18 1/2 minutes of recorded Oval Office conversation between Nixon and H.R. Haldeman thought to be erased by Nixon secretary Rose Mary Woods.

Like others of a certain age, Scheinfeld remembers watching Nixon's resignation speech at his parents' home: "I was glued to the set." And he recalled that, as a kid, he recorded Cavett's interview with his idol, Kenosha native Orson Welles, holding a microphone from a Wollensak tape recorder up to the TV speaker, which he revealed to Cavett.

However, his documentary is less about Cavett than "what was going on in the country at the time. What was going on in Washington. Where we were as a society and government, and how Dick and his show fit into all that.

"But it isn't about the Dick Cavett show," Scheinfeld said. "It's about Watergate."

Tuesday marks the second anniversary of the shootings at the Sikh temple in Oak Creek, which killed six worshippers. WMVS-TV (Channel 10) will air a half-hour documentary "The Sikh Temple Shootings: Waking in Oak Creek," by a California production company that makes programs about how hate crime tears apart communities. It airs at 8 p.m. Monday, followed by a discussion about the tragedy hosted by Dan Jones with Pardeep Kaleka, whose father was killed in the shootings; retired Oak Creek police Lt. Brian Murphy, who was wounded; and Oak Creek Mayor Stephen Scaffidi.

Email: ddudek@journalsentinel.com