× NewsChannel 3’s Weekend Events Blog: Free events around Hampton Roads

They say another day, another dollar, and if you’re trying to save a few, check out these free and fun events around Hampton Roads.

5th Annual Virginia Honey BEE Festival

Don’t you just love the buzz of a bee? If you’re like me and you don’t, you’ll learn to this weekend! Join Norfolk Botanical Garden and the Beekeepers Guild of Southeast Virginia for the 5th annual Virginia Honey BEE Festival. Saturday, garden guests will enjoy children’s activities, demonstrations, honey & bee products, handmade jewelry and ceramics, refreshments, door prizes, live music, honey samples, a costume parade and much more starting at 10:00 a.m. ! The Honey Bee Festival is included with Garden admission and will take place on the Baker Hall Visitor Center terrace. Plus, children that dress as a bee will receive a free honey stick. So, go out and experience the BUZZ!

6th Annual Health and Fun Fair

Get your life back at the 6th annual Health and Fun Fair presented by the Hampton Roads Community Health Center a part of the 2015 National Health Center Week. This quality event provides quality service features and tons of family fun including music, bounce house, free food, face painting, line dancing, cotton candy machines, popcorn machines and more. There’s also a Q&A session about the Affordable Care Act and FREE Health Screenings (Blood Pressure, Diabetes, Lead etc.) They also have a host of vendors attending the Fair such as Anthem Health Keepers, Identa-Kid, Health Hypnosis Services, Tidewater Community College and more! This years fair runs from 10:00 a.m. – 2:00 p.m. at 664 Lincoln Street, Portsmouth, VA 23704. For more information visit: www.healthcenterweek.org.

Share the Health Expo

If the health fair wasn’t chock-full of health tidbits for you, The Vitamin Shoppe is hosting a national event to celebrate healthy living on Saturday, August 15 at participating stores. Want to know what’s even better? The first 50 shoppers will receive a free tote bag and a Vitamin Shoppe t-shirt. To find out if your neighborhood Shoppe is sharing the health, visit their website at www.vitaminshoppe.com.

World War II Commemoration

We’re nearing the 70th anniversary of the end of World War II and this weekend the MacArthur Memorial is celebrating with a host of events. Starting at 12:30 p.m. there will be a Masonic procession through MacArthur Square and wreath-laying at General MacArthur’s grave in the MacArthur Memorial’s Rotunda. At 2 p.m., Christopher Kolakowski, MacArthur Memorial Director, will make a presentation in the Memorial’s Theater entitled “The First Eight Weeks: Douglas MacArthur and Japan, August 15 – October 15, 1945.” All events are free and open to the public. For more information visit: www.macarthurmemorial.org.

Spirit of “45” Wreath Laying

Parents, are your kids in need of a little lesson about our great country? You might as well stay for the entire World War II commemoration then and teach them all about World War II as the Hampton Roads Naval Museum commemorates the ‘Spirit of ’45” wreath laying Saturday. In 2010, Congress created the “Spirit of ’45” commemoration to honor the men and women of the World War II generation. The Hampton Roads Naval Museum will also hold a brief ceremony, along with a moment of silence, during the wreath laying. The ceremony will be conducted in the museum’s WWII gallery, located on the second floor of Nauticus on the Norfolk waterfront. Admission is free of charge. For information visit: http://www.spiritof45.org.

Back to School Bash

Get ready for school with sophistication. The Sophisticated Ladies, a community service organization for girls, is hosting an annual Back to School Bash Saturday from 12:00 p.m. – 5:00 p.m. They’re helping you get ready for the school year with FREE school supplies and live entertainment. Meet the Sophisticated Ladies at 512 E Mercury Blvd in Hampton on Saturday, and help them help you!

AfroDogs Back to School Backpack Giveaway

Every year, teachers spend nearly $600 on supplies for their students according to Forbes.com. Help ease that process by getting your child prepared. Go pick up a backpack and other school supplies Sunday afternoon in Portsmouth. Plus, kids eat free while supplies last. And it’s from the AfroDogs…who doesn’t love a name like that? Get right for school Sunday starting at 1:00 p.m. at Bayside Harley Davidson.

8th Annual Surfers Healing 5K Run/Walk

Get educated on Saturday at all of the health fairs and get fit Sunday at the Oceanfront. The 8th annual Surfers Healing 5K sprints through the Virginia Beach Oceanfront at 8:00 a.m. Sunday morning. Beginning at 45th Street, the Run/Walk is an effort to raise funds for autism research. So get up and exercise for a cause. Click here to register.

13th Annual Wine, Women and Fishing Event

Ladies, go wine and dine Sunday night — you deserve it. Men, you get to stay at home because this is a ladies-only event! The 13th annual Wine, Women & Fishing (WWF) event hosted by the Chesapeake Bay Wine Classic Foundation docks this Sunday at 5:00 p.m. The ladies-only fishing tournament raises funds for breast cancer research at Eastern Virginia Medical School (EVMS). To date, WWF has generated almost $400,000 for EVMS. You’ll watch the decorated boats come in to the weigh station as part of the Crazy Crew contest, while enjoying great refreshments. The dock party will feature wine tastings, a silent auction, handcrafted goods by local artisans, and a bourbon tasting. Enjoy wine and seafood with class! For more information visit: www.cbwc.org/wwf.

For a listing of these events and more, head on over to our Events tab located on the home page of our website. Also, if you would like to submit any events to be featured in our weekly blog, send them over by emailing us at desk@wtkr.com. And of course catch us weekends starting at 6:00/6:30 p.m. on NewsChannel 3.

-McKinley Strother