When Nebraska bolted from the Big 12 Conference to the Big Ten on July 1, 2011, two themes dominated the conversation: football and money.

Nebraska, which built its sports reputation on the back of a powerhouse football program, was leaving old rivals such as Oklahoma for a more stable and financially secure destination.

Any potential ramification to Nebraska’s men’s basketball program was at best an afterthought. And yet, three years later, the move appears to have most benefited the Cornhuskers in hoops.

Hiring an exciting young coach, Tim Miles, and building a sparkling new facility, Pinnacle Bank Arena, certainly has something to do with the resurgence of Huskers basketball. This past season Nebraska’s average home attendance increased by 5,067 — the biggest jump in the country — to 15,418 fans per game.

Fans had plenty to cheer about, with Nebraska posting a 19-13 record and earning an NCAA Tournament berth for the first time since 1998.

But Miles, hired away from Colorado State just more than two years ago, said being in the Big Ten has had perhaps the most profound impact on his program.

“The venues are fantastic, and it’s been fun for our guys to play against some of the best teams in the country,” he said. “Every night it’s sold out, excitement level is through the roof, and it’s fun. But it’s also very difficult to play in these places, and that’s what makes this such a great league.”

Big Ten teams averaged 13,534 fans per home game last season — an NCAA record, according to CBSsports.com.

Miles said an opportunity to coach in the league was a big draw when Nebraska came calling.

“The first thing was the Big Ten and what it means to be in this league, and the second thing was knowing that Nebraska fans would be behind us,” he said. “The Big Ten has been a league that I’ve always wanted to be a part of.”

For the football program, the move to the Big Ten has not seemingly paid big dividends. The Huskers have posted records of 9-4, 10-4 and 9-4 in their three seasons as a Big Ten member, a similar trend line to what they were doing in the Big 12. The biggest issue has been the loss of a major rival in Oklahoma as well as rivalries with Big Eight teams they played for decades, such as Colorado.

“I’m sure it has been an issue for some fans, and I recognize that as a cost,” Nebraska chancellor Harvey Perlman said. “But on the other hand, we have a lot of alumni in Minneapolis and Chicago and Wisconsin, so there’s trade-offs for sure.”

The disappearance of longtime rivals has been more than made up for with revenue infusion from being in the Big Ten. Last year, member institutions earned about $25 million under the league’s revenue-sharing model. Nebraska didn’t rake in quite that much because it’s still in a transition period and doesn’t earn a full Big Ten share until 2017. Perlman said the amount Nebraska makes now is confidential.

“Certainly the financial impact will make a big difference when we become a full member,” Perlman said. “The ability of our programs to be competitive will benefit greatly from that extra revenue.”

But not all fans have warmed up to the move. Bill Kosch, originally from Columbus, Neb., and a star cornerback on Nebraska’s national championship teams in 1970 and 1971, still finds the Big Ten landscape to be a bit strange.

Gone are the days of quick trips to geographical rivals such as Iowa State, Kansas, Missouri and Kansas State, all longtime members of the Big Eight. They have been replaced by treks to Penn State (1,071 miles from Lincoln), Ohio State (813), Michigan (744) and Michigan State (725). Rutgers (1,285) and Maryland (1,202) became the newest Big Ten members Tuesday.

“There was a lot of familiarity (in the Big Eight and Big 12), and everything was in your backyard,” Kosch said. “With the conference stretching all the way to the East Coast now, it’s going to take some getting used to.”

Alex Lantz: 303-954-2699, alantz@denverpost.com or twitter.com/alexlantz

Long droughts

Nebraska’s move to the Big Ten and the hiring of Tim Miles as head coach has led to a rise in Husker basketball few expected. Last season, Nebraska earned a berth into the NCAA tournament for the first time in 16 years. A look at Nebraska’s NCAA Tournament appearances.

(Year…Opponent…Result)

1986…Western Kentucky…Lost 67-59 in first round

1991…Xavier…Lost 89-84 in first round

1992…Connecticut…Lost 86-65 in first round

1993…New Mexico State…Lost 93-79 in first round

1994…Penn…Lost 90-80 in first round

1998…Arkansas…Lost 74-65 in first round

2014…Baylor…Lost 74-60 in second round