LOS ANGELES — This isn’t new. Reto Berra has been involved in an Avalanche “goaltending controversy” before. This time, though, it’s because the big Swiss goalie is playing well, not because — as happened last season — the Avs had so little confidence in him, they acted afraid to play him.

Berra’s shutout streak ended at 203 minutes, 2 seconds when Los Angeles’ Marian Gaborik scored late in the first period, and the Avalanche’s backup goalie finished with 38 saves and had a strong game again as Colorado fell 2-1 to the Kings on Sunday night at the Staples Center.

Berra had shutouts in his two previous starts, against Winnipeg last April and at Anaheim on Friday, and they were sandwiched around a 22-minute scoreless stint in relief of the yanked Sem yon Varlamov against Boston on Wednesday.

An unattended Gaborik scored from the slot at 13:38 of the first period, ending a Kings siege.

But after Matt Duchene’s first goal of the season tied it at 15:57 of the second, a bad Erik Johnson pass led to a Kings breakaway, and Tyler Toffoli beat Berra to make it 2-1 only 23 seconds after Duchene’s power-play score.

And that’s the way it stayed.

The Kings extended their recent mastery of the Avalanche, improving to 8-0-1 in the last nine regular-season meetings with Colorado.

The difference-making play was when Johnson tried to pass across to his defensive partner, Francois Beauchemin, but Toffoli intercepted it and was off to the races.

“It’s my fault, for sure,” Johnson said. “It’s just a play I have to know better on. It cost us the game, bottom line. It wasn’t the first time. It won’t be the last. It’s unfortunate, but you have to move on. When you try to make plays with the puck sometimes, that happens. Yeah, definitely my fault, and it was the reason we lost.

“Reto’s playing great. He deserved a better fate for sure. It’s tough to put him in that position there in a tight game, but he’s playing awesome.”

Avalanche coach Patrick Roy said of Johnson’s miscue: “Come on, it’s a long year. Those things happen. We had our chances to get back in that game. We need to stick together here. (The Kings) played really well, and they had a lot of good chances.”

Roy said Berra “was very good. He made some key saves at key moments in the game. For some reason, he’s really sound in front of his net and he seems really in control. It’s pretty easy for him right now.”

The Avalanche also failed to take advantage of a 48-second 5-on-3 advantage in the third period, and Kings goalie Jonathan Quick finished with 22 saves. He made a big save on Gabe Landeskog during the stretch.

“That was certainly a key moment in the game,” Roy said.

Both teams were short a forward for much of the game after the Avalanche’s Cody McLeod and the Kings’ Andy Andreoff drew game misconducts at 2:44 of the second period. Their fight came moments after an altercation between Colorado’s Jack Skille and Los Angeles’ Jordan Nolan ended during the same stoppage.

With defenseman Tyson Barrie beginning his three-game NHL suspension, Roy went with veteran Brad Stuart — a healthy scratch in three of the first four games — as Barrie’s replacement in the lineup. At even strength, Stuart was paired again with Nate Holden.

Colorado is carrying eight healthy defensemen on the roster, and Brandon Gormley, acquired from Arizona in the offseason, still hasn’t played.

Before the game, Roy said going with Gormley as Barrie’s replacement “was part of our conversation. But Brad is a veteran … and I wanted to give him a good chance (Sunday). This is a big team here.”

The Avalanche has the next two games at home, against Carolina on Wednesday and Columbus on Saturday.

Terry Frei: tfrei@denverpost.com or @TFrei