A moment of silence was held for an officer killed during a shooting in Maryland Sunday. (Source: WJZ/CNN)

Four-year veteran Police Officer First Class Jacai Colson, 28, was fatally wounded after exchanging gunfire with a suspect Sunday in Prince George County, PA. (Source: Prince George PD/Twitter)

PRINCE GEORGE’S COUNTY, MD (RNN) - Two suspects were taken into custody after an officer was shot and killed near Prince George’s Police headquarters in Maryland, according to reports.

Police say 28-year-old officer Jacai Colson died in the gun battle Sunday.

Reports of the shooting came in at 5 p.m. ET.

Reports say the attack was "ambush-style" and police advised everyone to stay inside.

The order to shelter in place in the area of the shooting is lifted and residents are able to move freely.

Police currently have no motive for the attack.

Happening now pic.twitter.com/y7IKXKrQ79 — Van Applegate (@VBagate) March 13, 2016

Officer shot, possible active shooter(s) outside District III station next to PGPD HQ. Stay inside. Avoid area. — PGPDNEWS (@PGPDNews) March 13, 2016

Local station WJLA reports police reported a suspect opening fire at the station and police returned fire, injuring the suspect in the cross-fire. It is unclear at this point if Colson was shot by the suspect or by police-fire as they shot back. The cause is under investigation.

Details from the second suspect arrested in connection to the shooting were not outlined by police.

In a live conference, Police Chief Hank Stawinski told the press Sunday night that "officers did not shrink. They bravely advanced and engaged this individual who was threatening not just the police officers he was opening fire onto, but numerous members of the community in the area."

This attack comes 15 days after Prince William County Police Officer Ashley Guindon was shot and killed in a domestic-related shooting.

Prince George's County is a suburb of Washington DC. The headquarters is near FedEx Field where the Washington Redskins play.

Copyright 2016 Raycom News Network. All rights reserved.