Today's Marco Rubio news: Marco Rubio has said that full disclosure is important when it comes to campaign donations. Yet the source of $5.5 million spent so far on pro-Rubio ads -- the only ads for him as a presidential candidate -- is a mystery, reports the New York Times.

The money did not come from Rubio's campaign. And it didn't come from a super PAC supporting him, either.

Instead, the money has flowed through a political nonprofit group called the Conservative Solutions Project, formed by a former Rubio aide and now overseen in part by a Republican strategist who is close to Rubio's campaign manager, write Jonathan Martin and Nicholas Confessore. None of the group's donors have been disclosed.

"Unlike candidates and super PACs, the nonprofit — which has raised more than $18 million — will never be required to disclose anything about its donors. The group's spending has opened a potentially risky new front in the regulatory battle around outside groups in the presidential campaign, where a cadre of lawyers and strategists have already aggressively pushed the legal boundaries between candidates and the supposedly independent super PACs who support them. While all of Mr. Rubio's competitors are supported by a super PAC, no one is relying on a secretive nonprofit for the bulk of its advertising."

The Conservative Solutions Project operates under a provision of IRS law governing "social welfare" groups. The group's spokesman is Jeff Sadosky, a former communications director for U.S. Sen. Rob Portman. Sadosky told the Times that the group was created nearly two years ago "to help the conservative movement most effectively communicate with American families so that we win the battle of ideas and are able to enact conservative solutions to the problems they face."

All of the advertising, Sadosky said, counts as tax-exempt activity. While the IRS could eventually challenge that contention, it won't be until the primary campaign is over: New York Times.

Rubio, a U.S. senator from Florida, this weekend was back in Nevada, where he lived for a time as a child. His old working-class neighborhood in North Las Vegas "looks more like the majority of Latino America than Rubio's hometown of West Miami," writes the Miami Herald's Patricia Mazzei. "Restaurants sell tacos. Bars advertise soccer matches. Conversations sound distinctly Mexican.

And Rubio says he feels right at home.

But "when he switches to Spanish, he's unmistakably a Miami Cuban." And all the subtleties and nuance behind that fact create a challenge for Rubio as he campaigns to become the GOP presidential nominee.

"As Rubio campaigns to become the nation's first Hispanic president, the Republican must try to figure out how to win over the largest swing demographic in the country: Latinos, who lean Democratic and in some cases aren't sure the conservative Rubio is really one of them just because his surname ends in a vowel," Mazzei writes.

There's the issue of immigration, with Rubio now embracing a go-slow approach. But there's also the Affordable Care Act, climate change, a higher minimum wage. Cuban-Americans, including Rubio, tend to be more conservative that non-Cuban Hispanics.

These may not be insurmountable problems for Rubio. But "the problem with Marco Rubio is not that he's Cuban American but that he's endorsed Republican positions that Latinos oppose," said Sergio García-Ríos, an assistant professor of government and Latino studies at Cornell University: Miami Herald.