POTUS aspirant: Ted Cruz

Site: Toyota showroom in Portsmouth, NH

Date: 2/4/16

Punctuality Rating: Poor (he took the stage 51 minutes late)

Fifty minutes after Ted Cruz is scheduled to speak, the impatient man next to me declares, “I will forgive him if he apologizes for holding us up.”

A minute later, Cruz appears.

“Good morning,” he begins. “God bless the great state of New Hampshire.”

No apology.

Instead, Cruz brags about his Iowa win, lambasting the critics who gave him no chance. Didn’t his wife warn him that gloating is unattractive?

Cruz dresses down for his visit, donning a sweater and jeans. He digs his left hand into his pocket, only to remove it every few seconds to gesture. A speech coach might advise him to keep that hand resting at his side—repeatedly parking it in his pocket makes him look like Beaver Cleaver—but Cruz is too busy comparing himself to Ronald Reagan to worry about his comportment.

A pastor’s son, Cruz is a biblical whiz.

“Scripture tells us there’s nothing new under the sun,” he says.

Later, he urges us to evaluate candidates by applying the “biblical test” of “you should know them by their fruits.”

I wait for him to translate for ignoramuses like me. He means that you should look at what candidates do, not what they say. You knew that, right?

Orating with a preacher’s cadences, Cruz can say nothing and make it sound profound.

“The great thing about eternal truths is they’re always true,” he marvels. I look around. People are nodding thoughtfully, especially the guy wearing a “Benghazi Matters” button.

Pardon me for applying intrusive logic, but Cruz asks the crowd of 300, “How many people have had their [health insurance] premiums go up?”

Gazing at all the raised hands, Cruz concludes, “Take a look around at what ObamaCare is doing in the state of New Hampshire.”

Wait a sec. Without ObamaCare, those same hands would surely go up. Health insurance costs were soaring before 2010 and would’ve continued to soar.

Then Cruz promises that he’d let Americans “fill out taxes on a postcard.” In the next breath, he vows to abolish to IRS.

Wait a sec. Without the IRS, where do we send that sinfully simple postcard?

Cruz is only getting started.

“Jimmy Carter endorsed Donald Trump,” he says. “I am not making that up. That is real.”

Somehow, I missed that newsy tidbit.

Cruz explains that Carter reasoned that Trump is “malleable” without “core beliefs” that he’d fight for as president. But Carter apparently frowns on Cruz’s unshakable conservative principles.

Actually, Carter has said he’ll support the Democratic nominee. But given the choice between Trump and Cruz, he’d pick Trump.

Cruz or Trump? You pick. Just leave me out of it.