While other candidates used their New Year’s Eve airtime on Fox for brief messages of good cheer, Republican presidential candidate Ted Cruz droned on for nearly two minutes about what he yearns to destroy, plus a long, nasty joke about President Obama.

As I previously noted, Republican candidates Dr. Ben Carson and Carly Fiorina got brief live stints on Fox’s New Year’s Eve special. Frontrunner Donald Trump was the guest of honor. But hosts Eric Bolling and Kimberly Guilfoyle were so busy slobbering over Trump that they missed the countdown that Trump was supposed to do and they ended up doing it late, after January 1, 2016 had already begun and the Times Square ball had already dropped.

Other candidates, including Democrat Martin O’Malley, appeared in video messages that were generally upbeat. But Cruz, in a voice filled with hammy hope and optimism, talked only of all the things he looks forward to obliterating:

CRUZ: Happy New Year. 2016 is going to be an incredible year. 2016 is going to be the last year of the Obama presidency. 2016 is going to be the last year before Hillary retires permanently to Chappaqua. 2016 is going to be the last year that we have ObamaCare.

Cruz apparently thought the idea of 17 million people losing their health insurance was such happy news, he didn’t feel the need to tell anyone what will replace it.

CRUZ: 2016 is going to be the last year until we abolish the IRS. And 2016 is going to be the last year until we utterly destroy ISIS and defeat radical Islamic terrorism. Like 1980, 2016 is going to be a very, very good year.

He didn’t say a single thing about what he’d create or how he'd fund such things as the military that's going to "utterly destroy" ISIS without an IRS. Not to mention roads, bridges, airport security and Social Security. I would not be surprised if Cruz intended to privatize all of them.

Then came the acrimonious joke which, Cruz said in a folksy voice, was “just a simple story, a story that I’ve heard on the trail.”

The gist of the “simple story” that went on for more than a full minute is that in January, 2017 “a little old man” goes to the White House day after day asking for Barack Obama and is repeatedly told Obama is no longer president. The predictable punch line was, “The little old man smiles and with a twinkle in his eye, says, ‘I know that. I just love hearing you say it!’ And the Marine promptly salutes (as did Cruz, melodramatically) and says, ‘See you tomorrow, Sir!’”

“2016 is going to be a very, very good year,” Cruz concluded.

Not surprisingly, hosts Eric Bolling and Kimberly Guilfoyle – the ones who later missed the countdown to midnight – gushed over Cruz’ maliciousness.

Bolling is impressed. “Gotta love the story. That guy can tell a story.” Guilfoyle agrees. “That was very special and creative.”

Watch it below, from Fox’s December 31 New Year’s Eve special.

(H/T NewsHound Richard)