ORWIGSBURG - The plan to turn the former Fessler USA building into apartments could soon be reality.

Barefield Development Corp. was awarded $573,128 in tax credits Thursday for the project.

"I feel great. It's a great project for Orwigsburg," Craig Shields, Barefield chief executive officer, said Thursday.

The project will turn the approximate 40,000-square-foot building into 20 apartments for the elderly. Plans call for 13 one-bedroom apartments and seven two-bedroom apartments. Shields said occupancy applications could start to be accepted by fall.

The Fessler building has been vacant since the first week of July 2009 when operations were moved from 216 W. Independence St. to the location along Route 61, which has since closed.

The funding was announced by the Pennsylvania Housing Finance Agency. According to the PHFA's website, the agency's goal is to assist in providing affordable housing for low-income families. Credits are sold to owners of housing developments to reduce their tax liability. Cash is then given to the company that had credits for the project and the credit can be taken for a 10-year period as long as the development adheres to applicable rules.

That money could generate $5,043.469 for the project, which could vary depending on different factors, according to PHFA.

A $1,000,217 loan was also provided for the project by PennHOMES. Total development costs are projected at $7,019,573, according to the agency.

Revenue also comes from different sources.

This is the second time Barefield applied for the funding and the first time they have been approved.

The Schuylkill County commissioners allocated $25,000 last year from Act 137 money. An additional $25,000 for the project is recommended by the Affordable Housing Trust Board and will be on the agenda for the commissioners meeting Wednesday, Schuylkill County Commissioner George Halcovage Jr. said Friday.

Work could start by the fall and be completed in about a year, Shields said.

Statewide, 75 projects were submitted to PHFA and 20 were funded. A list of funded projects is available on the PHFA website at www.phfa.org.

Shields said he received a call from Sen. Dave Argall, R-29, about the project.

"This is a great example of teamwork to secure much-needed tax credits for a program supported by the community. As chairman of the Senate Urban Affairs and Housing Committee, I know how important these funds can be for communities in fighting blight and urban decay," Argall said in a statement.

Both Rep. Jerry Knowles, R-124, Argall and others, including borough Manager Mike Lonergan, had a hand in the effort for the project.

"This project will make an enormous impact in the ongoing need for affordable housing for our elderly residents in the Orwigsburg area. This funding and the approved tax credits will help this project become a reality," Knowles said in a statement.

Lonergan is also excited about the project and thanked those involved.

"I am very happy that we were selected for funding. It was a pleasure to work with Craig Shields and the entire team to bring this to reality." Lonergan said Thursday.

He said he was grateful for the support of Argall and Knowles, and that now the building can be put to better use.

Walter Meck, president and CEO of the now defunct Fessler USA, said he was also thankful the building will be put to good use since Meck said he did not believe the building would again be used for manufacturing.

"I'm very excited. It think it's a great project for Orwigsburg," he said Friday.

The use for the building as apartments is a "perfect fit," he said because of the available space and location in the borough.

Barefield had an option to buy the property. Meck said he is not in a hurry to get the process moving as he has waited patiently so far.

"We know that it's going to take a couple months," he said.

Also through the building project, a space will be provided for the Orwigsburg Area Free Public Library which currently rents space.

"We're very excited about the opportunity. It's a great opportunity to have a permanent home for the library without the burden of paying rent," Greg Stewart, president of the board of directors of the library, said Thursday.

The final details of any potential move have yet to be finalized. The library board of directors has been notified of the developments, he said.

Action would need to be taken by the board, he said, adding he did not know when that might be.

Mayor Barry Berger thanked Argall and Knowles for their assistance. He also said renovating the building into apartments is good for the community.

"The renovation of this building to provide affordable elderly housing and new quarters for the Orwigsburg Area Free Public Library is a highly viable alternative to permitting its fall into disrepair," he said.

Meck said the building is well taken care of.

Shields said the project is "nothing but a win for everybody."