The high cost of an ego trip

The final tally shows that the Senate voted by a wide margin Wednesday, 67-31, to break Sen. Ted Cruz's filibuster of an increase in the debt limit, thus avoiding a default on America's full faith and credit.

WASHINGTON — — Very few Americans know how close the country came to catastrophe last week.

But 15 minutes after the voting should have ended, Senate Republican leader Mitch McConnell had apparently secured only two of the five Republican votes he needed to join with all 55 members of the Democratic caucus to pass the measure. He raised three fingers in the air and worked his way among his members, but was met with folded arms and shakes of the head. Looking queasy, he patted his thigh nervously and drummed his fingers. In the hubbub, Sen. John Hoeven, R-N.D., knocked a full glass of water and coaster from McConnell's desk to the floor.

Democrats, watching the spectacle, took the extraordinary step of ordering the Senate clerk not to read aloud the ongoing vote tally to avoid setting off a market panic; because the House had already left on a two-week recess, a failure of this vote would have left little chance of avoiding default Feb. 27 when the Treasury runs out of funds.

Watching the chaos from the side of the chamber was the man who caused it: Cruz, his hands in his pants pockets and a satisfied grin on his face. The Texas Republican strolled to the clerk's table to check on the vote count and was met with a look of disgust from Sen. Bob Corker, R-Tenn. And the feeling was widespread: Moments after Cruz walked into the Republican cloakroom, four Republican senators emerged from it and changed their votes to "aye."

Cruz re-emerged from the cloakroom, chewing gum, his hands again in his pockets. He smirked as his colleagues finally overcame his filibuster after a 59-minute struggle.

Cruz's ego trip had come at a high cost. He had forced McConnell, Sen. John Cornyn of Texas and other Republicans to cast votes that could hurt them in primaries to weaker general-election candidates, and he had risked getting his party blamed for a default.

The Wall Street Journal's conservative editorial page dubbed Cruz "the Minority Maker" for making his GOP colleagues "walk the plank" on a "meaningless debt ceiling vote."

But Cruz doesn't care about all that. Leaving the chamber, he told reporters that McConnell's fate would be "ultimately a decision … for the voters in Kentucky."

His actions suggest that Cruz has put himself before his party and even the nation's solvency. And in this sense his actions are typical of the 2016 GOP presidential field. Cruz, Sen. Marco Rubio and Sen. Rand Paul are mucking up the gears of government in ways that will earn them favorable attention in the primaries.

Rubio, of Florida, is pushing legislation that would undo Obamacare in a way that would cause chaos in the insurance market and likely leave tens of millions without health coverage and cost the government billions.