Crosson says meeting Obama was the culmination of a long-held goal. | POLITICO Screen grab Why I am an Obama impersonator

When Iman Crosson began working on his impersonation of President Barack Obama, he didn’t expect to be invited to the White House one day, he was just a struggling actor looking for his big break.

“I’d been waiting tables for nearly a decade and was really tired of it and walked into work one day, and some girl cracked, ‘Oh, here comes Obama,’ and he was just running the first time and that was an epiphany,” Crosson said in an interview.

Story Continued Below

The classically trained actor and dancer known on YouTube as Alphacat saw an opportunity too good to pass up.

( Also on POLITICO: Obama impressionist meets the real guy)

“I didn’t do impressions at the time, but I thought if I could be the guy who put an impression out there first, and he wins, that could be good,” Crosson said. “So I went home and made my first video and posted it on YouTube, and it did really well. The rest is history.”

Crosson’s years of Obama impressions paid off last week when he was invited to the White House with other YouTube stars to talk about the administration’s push to drive Affordable Care Act signups. On Thursday, the White House released a video of the interactions, including Crosson’s one-on-one with the president.

“It was definitely nerve-wracking to do that in front of him, but to do it and see the smile on his face, and to gesture to his camera lady and say, ‘Are you recording this?’ That was such a cool moment for me,” Crosson said Friday.

While his decision to start working on the impression was opportunistic, he said the chance to meet Obama, whom he supports and voted for, was the culmination of a long-held goal.

“It was actually very amazing,” Crosson said. “That’s something that I had wanted ever since I began doing the impression in late 2008, early 2009, and to actually finally get to the point of going there was amazing. It was a great experience and meeting the president and getting to see the man he is, it was all around amazing.”

Getting the chance to study his subject up close was both helpful and not, Crosson said. While he picked up on some subtleties in his conversations with the president, he distinguished between the different tones Obama uses and how it affects his impressions.

“I studied him a lot and his speeches and his candid interviews, his addresses, and the thing is when doing an impression of the president — because obviously its comical — it’s a little bit more of a caricature then it is a spot-on voice,” Crosson said.

He continued, slipping into his presidential voice at times: “I use different tones when I do him, there’s the speech voice which is a lot louder, and the interview voice, which there are pauses, and he takes his time, and there’s his speaking voice, which I don’t use a lot because it works better to do a little bit of a caricature than to do a dead-on voice. And when we were just talking, it was really cool to hear how he sounded and take note of that.”

Crosson said he was interested in meeting with the White House about the implementation of Obamacare, as he has had his own struggles with being uninsured and having medical bills in the past. The video released by the White House largely serves as a “get covered” advertisement, as the YouTube stars talk about the message of signing people up for health insurance.

Crosson also said that the president acknowledged the problems with Obamacare in their meeting, saying there were still parts that needed to be worked on and improved.

It’s a meeting the Cincinnati native wasn’t sure would ever truly happen when the White House asked for Crosson to visit through a studio he works with.

“They said, ‘The White House is going to be meeting with some YouTubers, and they requested you by name, and they wanted to know if you could make it, and I said, ‘Absolutely,’” Crosson said. “At the time I kind of felt there was no way this is actually happening, something is going to go wrong and fall through and there’s no way I’m going to get to go. But it came through, and I got my tickets and got my email that I was cleared, and I was kind of in shock.”

Authors: