Topics: antibiotics, big agriculture, big pharm, factory farming, Food and Drug Administration, Health, OnEarth.org, USDA, Sustainability News, Social News, Business News, Life News

This article originally appeared on OnEarth.org.



The U.S. Food and Drug Administration announced today that it will be moving forward with a plan to curb the overuse of antibiotics in factory farming, which would protect us all from increasingly virulent strains of antibiotic-resistant bacteria, also known as superbugs. The Wall Street Journal said the agency was taking “broad measures,” while Politico called it a “crack down.”

Sounds serious. So what strong-arm regulations can we look forward to? Well, the FDA has asked pharmaceutical companies if they would pretty-please stop selling antibiotics to help enhance the growth of livestock. You know, voluntarily.

And why wouldn’t the drug companies comply? It’s not like 80 percent of the antibiotics sold in this country are pumped into farm animals. Oh, wait.

The use of antibiotics in agriculture has grown greatly in recent decades (see “You Want Superbugs With That?”) as Big Ag tries to keep up with the demand for bigger and cheaper steaks, pork chops, and chicken wings. Factory farming leads to overcrowding and the potential spread of disease, which many meat producers attempt to control by giving antibiotics to animals before they get sick. It doesn’t hurt the bottom line that those same antibiotics can also promote growth.

But bacteria evolve rapidly in the gut of a pig, cow, or chicken, becoming resistant to drugs that are applied over and over. That creates strains of superbugs, which are now escaping the farm and infecting humans. At least 2 million Americans fall victim to antibiotic-resistant bacteria each year, and 23,000 die as a result of them, the government says. This fall, a Centers for Disease Control and Prevention report concluded that soon, if we’re not careful, we may not have any drugs left that can combat resistant bacteria. (See “Who You Calling Chicken Little?”)