The president broke his promise that the health care law would save employers money.

President Obama discusses the health care website in October. (Photo: Chip Somodevilla, Getty Images) Story Highlights Obama said in 2010 that the law would save businesses up to $3,000 per employer.

Yet, a report released last week estimated that two-thirds of small businesses will see their health care costs increase.

The country's small businesses have long known that the president's promise was too good to be true.

The way President Obama told it in 2010, Obamacare would save small businesses money. He even predicted that businesses that provide health care would save so much — he estimated up to $3,000 per employer — that they could give their employees a raise.

Another day, another broken promise. The federal government — specifically the Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services, the federal agency charged with implementing the vast majority of Obamacare's rules and regulations — has quietly changed its tune. Late last week, and to little fanfare, they released a report estimating that two-thirds of the country's small businesses will see their health care costs increase thanks to Obamacare. This will translate into higher health insurance premiums for 11 million employees.

So much for that raise.

The problem stems from Obamacare's mandate that insurance companies can't consider an individual's health when establishing plan prices. While well-intentioned, this has the unintended side effect of spiking premiums across the board, especially for the young and the healthy.

These higher costs will affect small businesses in any number of ways. After all, they have to find the money to pay the new expenses that Obamacare forces on them. The most obvious decision will be to cut back employee hours. Others might ask their employees to pay a greater percentage of their premiums (which means less take home pay). And some will stop providing health care altogether.

This is only news to Obamacare's most partisan defenders. The country's small businesses have long known that the president's promise was too good to be true.

Last year, the Chamber of Commerce and the International Franchise Association asked a cross-section of their members whether Obamacare would harm their businesses. The results were staggering. Fifty-eight percent reported that Obamacare's costs would negatively impact their businesses. Twenty-one percent said that they had reduced employee hours to account for the increased costs. Nineteen percent replaced full-time employees with part-time employees.

These businesses took these steps before Obamacare went into effect. They could see the writing on the wall. Now that Obamacare is up and running, the effects are likely to be even worse.

It's particularly perverse that small businesses — and their employees — are the ones on the chopping block. Technically, they don't have to provide health insurance to their employees because they're under the law's 50 employee threshold.

Yet many small businesses provide health care anyway. All told, such small businesses offer health plans to roughly 17 million employees. Now they're finding out that Obamacare penalizes them for their generosity.

The federal government promised them that this wouldn't be the case. In 2009, prior to Obamacare's passage, the Congressional Budget Office denied that small businesses would end up paying more for health care. The government estimated at the time that premiums would likely decline by as much as 2%.

The CMS report puts those projections to the sword. Now 65% of small businesseswill see their health care costs increase. This news couldn't come at a worse time, either. Since 2009, small businesses have seen their monthly health care costs almost double, rising from $590 per employee to $1,121.

America's job creators have never been so burdened. Small businesses create two out of every three new jobs. They employ half of the country's workforce. These businesses are the key to America's economic well-being; they shouldn't be buried in rising costs and reams of red tape.

But thanks to Obamacare, they can either pay even more for their health plans, or they can drop them altogether. This doesn't exactly fulfill President's promise that Obamacare would save small businesses money — and you shouldn't expect that raise any time soon.

Tim Phillips is the president of Americans for Prosperity.

In addition to its own editorials, USA TODAY publishes diverse opinions from outside writers, including our Board of Contributors. To read more columns like this, go to the opinion front page or follow us on twitter @USATopinion or Facebook.



Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1bUFCcM