In most of Canada the first Monday in August goes by that, ahem, inspiring name “Civic Holiday.” No one would mistake it for Christmas in the summer. As far as I know there are no songs about family far from home dreaming wistfully about Civic Holiday.

Nor is it consistently recognized as a statutory holiday. It differs province to province. Quebec doesn’t celebrate it at all, and whatever you do don’t tell them that they should. Civic Holiday stubbornly refuses to be pigeon-holed; it is consistently inconsistent.

In some cases provinces have given it their own name. In Alberta, it’s Heritage Day. In B.C., it’s British Columbia Day. Saskatchewan went with Saskatchewan Day, and not just because British Columbia Day was already taken.

But if there is a theme to this holiday it is the tendency to use it to tip our hat to our ancestors, and why not? They built a country while battling small pox and bad teeth.

But not all of our Civic Holiday heroes are the guys wearing mutton chops and powdered wigs or suffragettes in their whalebone corsets. Manitoba recently floated the idea of Terry Fox Day, named for the Winnipeg-born young man whose audacious goal, great courage and brief life galvanized the country just a generation ago.

Burlington celebrates the great indian chief and warrior Joseph Brant. In Ottawa, it’s Colonel By Day. In Guelph they pay tribute to John Galt, the Scottish Canadian novelist.

And yet my favourite Civic Holiday celebration might just be Simcoe Day, celebrated in Toronto, Canada’s favourite city. City council proclaimed Simcoe Day in 1969. It is named for John Graves Simcoe, a colonial war hero and a key figure in the fight to abolish slavery in Canada which, I’m willing to wager, most of us didn’t know about.

Simcoe first came to notice as a British military officer who fought with valour in the Revolutionary War. In 1777 he tried to assemble a regiment of free black soldiers from Boston to fight the “rebels” but instead was assigned to command the Queen's Rangers. Not long after he was wounded in the Battle of Brandywine, which is possibly the best name ever for a battle.

Later he hatched a plan to capture the commander of the American forces, none other than George Washington. A year later he himself was captured. Eventually he was freed and would return to England to recuperate from injuries. But Simcoe wasn’t done with the colonies.

The province of Upper Canada was established in 1791. Simcoe became lieutenant governor and, along with Attorney General John White, drafted the Act Against Slavery. Six of the 16 elected assemblymen in the Upper Canada legislature owned slaves. Three of the seven appointed members of the executive council were slave owners. Upper Canada didn’t have tens of thousands of slaves, but those who had them were the people in power. And yet in 1793 Simcoe and White helped push through the Commonwealth’s first anti-slavery legislation.

Yes, Simcoe was a remarkable man who left an indelible mark, which is a good reason to raise a glass in his memory. It seems there’s a lot of history behind the blandly named Civic Holiday.