— The fall 2014 state elections were the costliest in Florida history, with candidates and causes racking up hundreds of millions of dollars in contributions.

Although most of the big money went to a contentious governor’s race and a hot-button medical marijuana referendum, it’s worth remembering as state lawmakers gather in Tallahassee next week that candidates for the Legislature — successful and unsuccessful — hauled in nearly $43 million in campaign contributions. Much of it, of course, came from companies that will be pushing their own agendas before committees and then when the full Legislature meets in March.

Donors, both corporate and individual, gave $32 million to candidates for the 120-member Florida House in the run-up to the November 2014 vote. Candidates for the 40-member state Senate raked in $11 million, according to records on file with the Department of State’s Division of Elections.

“The name of the game is access,” said Susan MacManus, a political science professor at the University of South Florida and longtime analyst of state government.

The biggest beneficiary was state Sen. Jeff Brandes, who pulled in $1.4 million in winning a district stretching from his home turf in St. Petersburg to South Tampa. Brandes is chairman of the powerful Senate Transportation Committee. He could not be reached for comment over the holidays.

Donors had been limited to $500 contributions for legislative races, but the Legislature upped that cap in 2013 to $1,000.

Although “pay-to-play” scandals occasionally break out nationwide — in September, Virginia’s Republican governor, Bob McDonnell, was convicted on 11 counts of performing government favors for a big gift-giver — MacManus and other Florida insiders say that’s not necessarily how it’s done here.

“The textbook example for donors, particularly corporate donors or unions or whatever, is that they want access more than they expect outcomes,” MacManus said. “They want to actually talk to (a lawmaker) on the phone and make a pitch.”

There are plenty of folks who want that kind of access. In addition to next week, committee hearings are set for the weeks of Jan. 19 and Feb. 2, 9, and 16. The legislative session begins March 3.

A key issue is expected to be health care, with Democrats pushing to expand Medicaid, the health insurance program for the poor, and Republicans seeking to continue restrictions on the Affordable Care Act, President Barack Obama’s signature legislation.

Likely picking up the phone will be the Florida Medical Association, which contributed $138,000 to House and Senate candidates; the Florida Hospital Association, in for $76,400; Hospital Corporation of America, whose affiliated companies donated $409,000; and insurers such as Humana ($138,000) and Florida Blue/Blue Cross and Blue Shield ($73,500).

While utilities weight the benefits of the drilling process known as fracking, and who should pay for it, and the Legislature addresses other industry issues such as a revamped Public Service Commission, Duke Energy pumped $73,000 into legislative races and TECO Energy another $122,000.

Those contributions are dwarfed by Florida’s traditional elephant in the room. Three different Disney-related companies contributed $506,000 to legislative candidates. The Disney organization opposes expansion of gambling in the state, an issue the Legislature may address.

Other notable contributors to Florida legislative candidates include U.S. Sugar, $53,000; Bright House Networks, $89,500; Florida Education Association, $39,500; Koch Industries, $70,000; and Publix Super Markets, $107,500.

Ron Book, long considered the most influential lobbyist in Tallahassee, repeated MacManus’ assessment of the relationship between givers and receivers.

“I’ve said this before, and I’ll say it until the day I die: I believe that if you participate, what you’re hoping to do is get your phone calls returned, and get your meeting scheduled,” Book said. “The notion of quid-pro-quos are inaccurate and unfair.”

Book himself spread more than $73,000 around in candidate donations for the 2014 cycle. He’s not alone; the powerful Southern Strategy Group doled out $22,500 in contributions, as did other legal/lobbying firms.

“I don’t believe there’s any substitute for shoe leather on the ground and going door-to-door and working it,” said Book. “Those who try to degrade the process by implying there’s some sort of pay-to-play game is unfair, and it disrespects the institution of government.”

jstockfisch@tampatrib.com

(813) 259-7834