Buy Photo House Speaker Beth Harwell and Gov. Bill Haslam announce a health care task force in the Old Supreme Court chambers at the state Capitol on April 12, 2016, in Nashville. (Photo: Samuel M. Simpkins / The Tennessean)Buy Photo

As the third meeting of the task force charged with finding alternatives to Insure Tennessee began breaking up Monday in Memphis, Rep. Steve McManus took hold of the microphone to rebut citizens’ criticism that the panel is a farce.

“We’re for real, and we’re going to work for you,” said McManus, a Cordova Republican who sits on the task force.

The task force, which was created by House Speaker Beth Harwell in April, is holding meetings across the state to get feedback from health care providers, along with business and community leaders, as it crafts a “conservative” plan to expand health coverage to the uninsured.

Rep. Cameron Sexton, chairman of the “3-Star Healthy Project” task force and a Crossville Republican, said after the meeting — agreeing with McManus — that the goal wasn’t to completely scrap Gov. Bill Haslam’s Insure Tennessee plan, which failed to win legislative approval. Instead, the task force will re-evaluate it to see what parts, if any, the General Assembly can support.

“Insure didn’t have the votes,” he said. “We’re going to look to see if there’s a different approach.”

Summing up his takeaways from the meeting, Sexton said the task force — which includes Rep. Karen Camper, D-Memphis — could try to ease restrictions on faith-based health care organizations like the Church Health Center, which connects patients with volunteer doctors for a flat $35 fee.

Dr. Scott Morris, CEO of Church Health Center, told the task force that state law should be changed to allow citizens to claim health care coverage to satisfy the requirements of the Affordable Care Act and avoid costly fines for being uninsured.

Austin Baker, president of Memphis-based human resources firm HRO Partners, said the General Assembly should play a game of “kill the rule” and see how many other unnecessary health care rules could be eliminated from state law.

Sexton said the task force will also take a closer look at the possibility of “direct to provider” health care, where businesses could pay clinics for their employees’ health care visits instead of routing payments through health insurance companies.

Whatever plan the task force comes up with, Sexton said, it will have to cover behavioral health issues, which “clog up the (emergency room).”

Another discussion topic was the effect the uninsured have on hospitals — especially rural hospitals, like Decatur County General Hospital. CEO Scott Barber said his hospital, like others, had its Medicare reimbursements cut as part of the ACA. But unlike in larger cities, it didn’t feel the benefit from a large reduction in uninsured patients.

“That’s a classic example of how we gave and nothing came back,” said CEO Reginald Coopwood of Regional One.

The task force will likely present its ideas in June to the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, which approves state Medicaid programs such as TennCare, allowing billions of dollars in federal funds to flow to the states.

Several citizens spoke publicly about their concerns that the task force isn’t putting enough of an emphasis on the people involved, whose lives will feel the impact of their decisions.

“I am caught in a cycle where I cannot always get my health needs met,” said Rev. Faye London, who works with Memphis-based reproductive advocacy group SisterReach.

Diane Cambron, who is active in local Democratic circles along with her husband, said the task force already has a solution to the problem of uninsured Tennesseans, and it’s called Insure Tennessee.

“Why are we throwing it out the window, kicking the ball down the field, when people are dying?” she said.

“That’s a classic example of how we gave and nothing came back.”

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/1T830W8