Cindy Domenico ( JEREMY PAPASSO )

Boulder County Democratic Assembly results County commissioner: Cindy Domenico (incumbent), 300, Alan Rosenfeld, 99 County coroner: Emma Hall (incumbent) 233, Deron Dempsey, 166 County suvreyor: Lee Stadele, 225, Sam Knight, 162

LOUISVILLE — It was cold outside but the political scene was heating up quickly Saturday as nearly 500 people packed into Monarch High School's auditorium to voice their preferences in people seeking county office.

"We thank all of you who are willing to give up a Saturday and so much more in order to make important county decisions like this," said Lt. Gov. Joe Garcia, addressing Saturday's Boulder County Democratic Assembly.

Alan Rosenfeld

Laura Spicer, vice chair of the Boulder County Democrats, announced to a packed auditorium that 404 delegates and 67 alternates were on hand to hear candidates campaign for Boulder County commissioner, county coroner and county surveyor.

The excitement of a new election season of was stoked by campaign stickers, posters and tables lining the hallways of the school. Candidates and supporters were eager to get their messages out, with winners at the assembly moving on to the June 24 primary.

After a selection of candidate speeches, delegates were asked to do their democratic duty and turn in their ballots. Results were configured while Democratic candidates for federal and statewide offices or their supporters campaigned on their behalf.

Advertisement

Cindy Domenico, county commissioner for the last six-and-a-half years, was opposed by Alan Rosenfeld in a contest to keep her seat.

Rosenfeld's speech criticized Domenico for not upholding Democratic values and "talking the talk but not walking the walk."

"We need a commissioner who is going to look under the rocks for what needs change and not accept things as they are," Rosenfeld said.

Domenico said she has both common sense and an understanding of the issues on her side.

Emma Hall ( Matthew Jonas )

"I have the ability to collaborate," Domenico said. "I have long perspective, especially on the state-level side. I was pivotal to bringing in state and federal funding for the flood. The flood is a huge, ongoing issue that my opponent didn't even mention."

Domenico will advance to the primaries, bringing in 300 votes, with Rosenfeld at 99 votes.

Emma Hall, current county coroner, was challenged by Deron Dempsey in her bid to retain her position.

Hall brought in 233 votes with Dempsey at 166, although both candidates will appear on the primary ballot, with Hall claiming the first slot.

Hall said a majority of her first term was dedicated to cleaning up the office she was left with, and in a second term she hopes to put the mess behind her and progress.

Deron Dempsey ( Matthew Jonas )

On her list of to-do's is bringing a trained reserve program to the coroner's office to ensure that the small staff is prepared in case of a mass fatality "or even just to cover for vacation days." She also hopes to bring a victim's advocate program directly to the coroner's office.

"I really do know what Boulder County values are, and I bring my progressive values to this position," Hall said.

Lee Stadele and Sam Knight ran for Boulder County surveyor; incumbent Jason Emery is not seeking reelection. Stadele was victorious with 225 votes, although Knight will also advance to the primary ballot in the second slot with 162 votes.

Stadele said in his campaign, "It seems, looking back, that I was born to be a surveyor."