Barbara Rosenwald visits the makeshift memorial outside the home of slain New York City police Officer Wenjian Liu to light candles and say a prayer in Brooklyn on Friday. Adrienne Grunwald for The Wall Street Journal

Three of New York City’s top religious leaders, Cardinal Timothy Dolan, the Rev. A.R. Bernard and Rabbi Joseph Potasnik, visited Friday the South Brooklyn home of police Officer Wenjian Liu, who was fatally shot two weeks ago by a gunman who cited police shootings of unarmed black men and later took his own life.

The Dec. 20 slayings of officers Liu and Rafael Ramos resulted in an outpouring of support for police officers, and Cardinal Dolan has taken a leading role in the aftermath, addressing the shootings from the pulpit and calling the officers’ deaths a “brutal and irrational execution.”

At the Liu family’s home Friday, Cardinal Dolan, the city’s top Catholic official; the Rev. Bernard, who leads a Christian mega-church in Brooklyn; and Rabbi Potasnik, the executive vice president of the New York Board of Rabbis, declined to comment on their meeting. Officer Liu, who was born in China and emigrated to the United States at 12 years old, wasn’t religious, according to police officials. But his wake and funeral this weekend will incorporate some Buddhist traditions in a nod to his cultural background.

Outside the home, bouquets of flowers have been piled waist high and a small blue tarp tent has been erected. There wereseveral teddy bears, including a panda, a wreath and a sign in both Chinese and English that reads: “Gone but not forgotten.” Just inside the fence are a row of religious candles.

Barbara Rosenwald, 57 years old, of Dyker Heights, Brooklyn, lit three candles in front of the memorial, saying it was “important for me to come.”

“I have a 19-year-old daughter who wants to become a police officer,” Ms. Rosenwald said. “She wants to go to the John Jay College of Criminal Justice. I’m scared for her, but I’m very proud of her, and I can’t believe that I lived to see this day when officers were assassinated.”