Late Night Health Radio With Affordable Care Act at the forefront of every American’s medical concerns, Late Night Health Radio has heard from its listeners and teamed with NeedyMeds to ease financial and prescription medication concerns.

Late Night Health Radio, a health and wellness radio program, and NeedyMeds, a national non-profit organization, partner to bring a Drug Discount Card to save individuals up to 80 percent on prescriptions, including generic drugs.

The non-profit organization NeedyMeds is providing a Drug Discount Card that helps individuals buy many prescription medication, over-the-counter drugs written as a prescription, and pet prescription drugs purchased at a pharmacy at a reduced price. The card may be used by those without insurance and by those with insurance if the drug is not covered under their plan, the copay or deductible is high, the cap has been reached, or if they are in the donut hole.

According to Rich Sagall, M.D., president of NeedyMeds, "Our drug discount card has saved people nearly $50 million. It's used in every state every day." The NeedyMeds Drug Discount Card is free and has no cost associated with use. It is accepted at over 63,000 pharmacies, including major chains such as Walmart, CVS, Walgreens, Rite Aid and at regional chains and local stores across the country from Maine to Hawaii.

"Even with the Affordable Care Act, people need a way to save money on prescription medicines now," said Mark Alyn, host of Late Night Health Radio. "NeedyMeds offers a free drug savings card that really works and more so, helps ease the worries of those without insurance or without prescription plans."

Late Night Health Radio addresses the health and wellness concerns of America’s baby boomers. The unique program discusses health issues from the standpoint of a consumer, rather than that of a healthcare provider. With Affordable Care Act at the forefront of every American’s medical concerns, Late Night Health Radio has heard from its listeners and teamed with NeedyMeds to ease financial and prescription medication concerns.

There are no income, insurance, or residency requirements, and no fees or registration processes needed to use the card. One card can be shared with friends and family members, or they can print their own. To acquire a card, please visit http://www.latenighthealth.com and click on the NeedyMeds button on the home page.

The NeedyMeds Drug Discount Card differs from many other cards in that no user identifiable data is collected. Card users' personal data health information is safe.

To listen to Late Night Health Radio or to learn more about this radio show, please visit http://www.latenighthealth.com/. To request an advertising rate card contact info(at)latenighthealth(dot)com.

About Late Night Health

Late Night Health is a unique, entertaining and informative radio show that reaches an upscale active audience. Late Night Health has the experts to answers medical questions from listeners for a wide array of topics from weight management to pain management. Late Night Health features a wide-ranging array of topics, from advice on fighting diabetes and obesity to the latest discoveries in nutrition, pain management, stress reduction and preventative health care.

The program features host Mark Alyn and guests include M.D.s, N.D.s who specialize in a variety of fields and a host of traditional and complementary care practitioners including: psychotherapists, hypnotherapists, osteopaths, acupuncturists, chiropractors, physical therapists, lymph edema specialists, among others.

The flagship Late Night Health station is KABC Radio in Los Angeles.

About NeedyMeds

NeedyMeds' mission is to be the best source of accurate, comprehensive and up-to-date information on programs that help people facing problems paying for medications and health care; to assist those in need in applying to programs; and to provide health-related education using innovative methods. For more information, please visit http://www.needymeds.org.