So many things are happening right now in the massage profession! It is both an amazing and scary time!

Especially in the world of medical/clinical massage therapy.

More and more, insurance companies are paying for massage services.

Consumers want massage covered it is clear from the latest survey from AMTA. 54% of the population get massage for medical reasons. See Why do Consumers Get Massage?

So why then is massage not covered by health insurance in most states?

The only reason why is because not enough people have stood up and requested it!

The Affordable Care Act 2706 should be opening some doors in states where massage therapists are already licensed as health care providers. Some of the states that are considered to be healthcare providers are: WA, NY, FL, MI, WI, NC, GA, AL, TN, VI, CT, MD (LMTs only), WV, Wa DC, OR. MO. (This information has been collected from various Facebook groups and the work of one massage therapist, Della Szeszol Melville from IL. There are probably many more states too but we need confirmation of this and someone reading through all the laws. Just because you are licensed by a board of health in your state does not mean you are licensed as a health care provider as far as I can tell right now. The thing is that in most states massage therapists can already bill for motor vehicle collisions and for work related injuries so why would massage therapists not be able to bill health insurance – just something to look into.



These states should already be working with the Office of the Insurance Commissioner to find out what needs to be done to implement 2706. The insurance commissioners office may ask you for evidence that shows that massage would fit into the Essential Health Benefits that are now required under the ACA. AMTA-WA already has that covered for you. A few years ago, they hired Diana Thompson (previous president of the Massage Therapy Foundation) and a team of research savvy massage therapists to create a document that shows just how massage fits in. See Summary of Evidence (PDF).

Need even more information? The AMTA has also created this resource:

The Value and Efficacy of Massage Therapy in Integrated Health Care and Member Guide that shows how massage fits into the Triple Aim of reform—better health care, better patient outcomes and lower overall costs.

That is the one thing that insurances companies are just Starting to understand – that massage can save them money. I have been repeatedly informed by Deborah Senn, WA State past Insurance commissioner who created the Every Category Law that mandates that massage be covered in WA State since 2000, the insurance companies think that they will have to pay the surgeon the $20k and the massage therapist $1k. They do not understand that massage could eliminate the cost of the surgeon completely.

The time is now to start working towards integration into health care but we have a very, very, VERY long way to go. Yes there are challenges right now like reduced allowable fees (less pay) and restrictions trying to limit coverage. Yes there is paperwork and HIPAA compliance. Yes there is keeping up with all of the legal aspects and procedures.

Massage wants to be healthcare.

It will take some doing. It will take figuring out how to negotiate higher allowable fees with insurance companies that would allow us to make a decent living. It would take organizing in every state because it needs to be implemented at a state level.

Right now the best place is within AMTA but there are many people dragging their feet there too. It will take more people standing up and making a difference. Will you be a part of the future of massage and bodywork?

It is my goal to help share what I know about what has happened here in WA State and to start sharing ideas on how to make this happen in every state. You can join my in my closed Facebook group where we will be writing emails, asking questions and working on this together.

If you are not at the table, you will be what is for dinner.