By

Around the world, youths are on the front lines of social change.

From the Arab Spring to Occupy, Venezuela to Ukraine and Hong Kong, young people have taken to the streets, airwaves and the Internet to push for government reform, their rights, education and jobs.

Indeed, an unprecedented global youth unemployment and underemployment crisis is influencing much of the political, economic and security landscape. Estimates are that roughly 40% of the world's unemployed are youths, and recent projections from the International Labor Organization signal that the situation is likely to get worse before it gets better.

From Europe to the United States, Latin America to Africa and Asia — few countries have managed to avoid or escape the damaging grip of the global recession on its vulnerable young citizens. More than half the world's population is under the age of 25, and roughly 85% live in emerging, developing or conflict-affected regions. And, as population booms create the largest generation in human history, many countries can't keep pace in creating enough jobs to absorb these new workers.

This jobs crisis is costing the world billions and destroying the social fabric of many communities, fueling discontent and unrest. As production and consumption fall, governments are losing tax revenue and paying out insurances, and watching economic growth decline. Young people are deprived of income and livelihood, and see their longer term financial prospects dwindle.

At the same time, economic marginalization affects mental and emotional health and drains self-esteem. It fosters social exclusion, breeds inequality and sustains poverty, pushing more young people into underground economies or toward criminal networks and gangs. In cities and more advanced economies, highly educated, connected and social media savvy youths have greater expectations, bigger demands and an ability to mobilize and grow their networks quickly to challenge the status quo.

As conditions get weaker, the space for civic expression and participation more constrained or jobs and opportunities fewer and further between, youth activism is more likely to turn violent. Young people become more marginalized, more disillusioned and angry, and extremist messaging finds more interested listeners. Increasingly, insurgent groups prey not only on youths' financial woes, but on their yearning for a sense of value, purpose and belonging. As a consequence, youths in alarming numbers are signing up to carry out the terror activities of the ISIS group, al-Qaida and Boko Haram.

However, while there is evidence linking large numbers of youths and joblessness to instability or conflict, there are almost always other factors also at play. At the same time, it is not always a bad thing when youths stand up for change. Throughout history, restless youths — with aspirations, perseverance and courage to stand for their rights and the rights of others — have played a leading role in bringing about some the most important political transitions and social change.

Take, for example, our own civil rights movement: Martin Luther King Jr. was 26 when he led the Montgomery bus boycott. Young people were the vanguard of the democratic revolutions that swept across Europe as the Berlin Wall fell and the Soviet Union collapsed. In Central America, the Youth Against Violence movement (Jóvenes Contra la Violencia Centroamericano) has become an important ally and voice in the effort to combat gangs. Perhaps most famously, Malala Yousafzai at age 17 was the youngest-ever recipient of the Nobel Peace Prize for her work championing education and girls' rights. What if she wasn't a bit restless?

Unfortunately, youths are often left out of the rebuilding that follows from these societal shifts or political transitions; they don't feel the spoils of their effort. In these situations, unmet expectations and lingering disenfranchisement risks a return of greater instability and strife. Expanding education, ensuring economic opportunity and creating meaningful outlets for participation among young people are a few of the most complex and urgent challenges of our time. But there is no time to waste. There is no single or one-size-fits-all solution, and no one player can do it all.

Whether in Milwaukee or Madrid, Manila or Maputo, it will take a coalition of government, international and community organizations, business and young leaders to invest in youth interests and advance youth aspirations. It is clearly in our shared interest to do so.

Nicole Goldin is an adjunct professor at George Washington University, senior associate at the Center for Strategic and International Studies and leads a private consulting practice, NRG Advisory. Goldin formerly held senior advisory positions in the State Department and U.S. Agency for International Development. Twitter: @nicolegoldin

FIRESIDE FORUM

Topic: Young, Frustrated and Mad: Global Youth Unemployment and Unrest

With Nicole Goldin, Principal, NRG Advisory, LLC (Washington)

Local Respondent: James Causey, Milwaukee Journal Sentinel

Details: 7 p.m. Tuesday, UWM Student Union, 2200 E. Kenwood Blvd., Fireside Lounge. The series is free; sponsored by the University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee Institute of World Affairs and the Milwaukee Journal Sentinel.

More information: www.iwa.uwm.edu