“As usual, the present administration is supporting the use of coercive federal power,” Bush said, according to Politico . “What should be easy calls, in favor of religious freedom, have instead become an aggressive stance against it.”

Likely Republican presidential hopeful Jeb Bush courted evangelicals Saturday during his commencement address at Liberty University, a Christian school in Lynchburg, Va. by accusing the Obama administration of working against religious freedom.

“Somebody here is being small-minded and intolerant, and it sure isn’t the nuns, ministers, and laymen and women who ask only to live and practice their faith. Federal authorities are demanding obedience, in complete disregard of religious conscience — and in a free society, the answer is no,” Bush continued.

The former Florida governor did not mention the divisive issue of same-sex marriage in his speech, but focused heavily on the Affordable Care Act. He specifically referenced a group of nuns that fought the birth control mandate.

“I don’t know about you, but I’m betting that when it comes to doing the right and good thing, the Little Sisters of the Poor know better than the regulators at the Department of Health and Human Services,” Bush said. “From the standpoint of religious freedom, you might even say it’s a choice between the Little Sisters and Big Brother. And I’m going with the Little Sisters.”

He also played up the liberal penchant for pushing their agenda while portraying “religious Americans as intolerant scolds.”

“The stories vary, year after year, but the storyline is getting familiar: The progressive political agenda is ready for its next great leap forward, and religious people or churches are getting in the way. Our friends on the left like to view themselves as the agents of change and reform, and you and I are supposed to just get with the program,” Bush said, according to Politico.

Liberty University, which was started by Moral Majority founder Jerry Falwell, has become a major campaign ground in 2016. Sen. Ted Cruz launched his campaign there in March.

Bush has not yet announced his candidacy and only made a playful reference to his lofty presidential ambitions, according to the Washington Post.

Bush mentioned meeting Jonathan Falwell, a Lynchburg pastor who is the son of Liberty’s founder and the brother of its current president, during his speech.

“His dad used to be president, then his brother became president. Somehow — I don’t know what it was — we really hit it off,” Bush joked. “I’m not sure what’s in store for you Jonathan, but I’m pulling for you, man.”