A montage of the same view of the alluvial fan in Rocky Mountain National Park as it has changed through time: 1992 (10 years after the 1982 flood), 2012 (last year's 30-year maturity), this year in flood (Sep 13), and now with it's new channel course (Sep 21). (Sandy Lindquist)

Rocky Mountain National Park staff continues to examine the condition of facilities and trails to determine which areas can be reopened. Debris is being removed and facilities cleaned where needed. A Facilities Management team is assessing the scope and scale of the flood damage and risk to park facilities, roads, and infrastructure as an initial step in determining long-term repair and rehabilitation needs.

For those hoping to visit Rocky Mountain National Park this weekend, here is a breakdown of how to get here and what is open.

Those wishing to access Rocky Mountain National Park from the east should leave Interstate 70 at exit 243, follow State Highway 119 north from the Blackhawk area to Nederland. Then follow State Highway 72 to Highway 7. Follow Highway 7 north to Estes Park. A GPS may not show this route, so consider using a paper map.

Advertisement

If you are coming from the west, take Highway 34 north from Granby to Grand Lake where you will enter the park via Trail Ridge Road. The Alpine Visitor Center, located at 11,796 feet, is open from 10:30 a.m. to 4:30 p.m.

All trails on the WEST side of the park, including Milner Pass, Mount Ida, and Ute West Trails are open for day use only. Timber Creek Campground is open, and, for now, no camping fee will be charged.

Trail Ridge Road is open to both east and west bound visitor traffic and the communities of Grand Lake and Estes Park are open and welcoming visitors. Because weather conditions may change rapidly, particularly in spring and fall, park visitors should be prepared to adjust travel plans accordingly and are encouraged to call the park's Trail Ridge Road recorded status line at 970-586-1222. Commercial traffic is once again prohibited on Trail Ridge Road.

If you are driving Trail Ridge Road, the Alpine Ridge Trail, Tundra Communities Trail, Alpine View Trail, and Hidden Valley Accessible Trail are open. All other trails on the EAST side of the park are currently closed.

For Rocky Mountain National Park information, call the Information Office at 970-586-1206.