Progress toward peace in Ukraine remains stagnant as hope of a cease-fire between Ukrainian troops and Russian-backed separatists quickly faded on Wednesday, with no end to the conflict in sight.

A cease-fire declared early in the day by Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko was quickly rescinded, creating confusion about what, if any, agreement had been reached with Russian President Vladimir Putin regarding military clashes in eastern Ukraine. Putin continues to deny involvement in the unrest, despite international consensus that Russia is playing a direct role in supporting armed rebels currently fighting Ukrainian forces in the region.

President Barack Obama and other European leaders who gathered Wednesday in Tallinn, Estonia, issued harsh rebukes of Russian action in Ukraine. Obama is in Europe for this week’s NATO summit, and met with Baltic leaders ahead of Thursday's gathering in Wales.

“It was not the government in Kyiv that destabilized eastern Ukraine; it’s been the pro-Russian separatists who are encouraged by Russia, financed by Russia, trained by Russia, supplied by Russia and armed by Russia,” Obama said. “And the Russian forces that have now moved into Ukraine are not on a humanitarian or peacekeeping mission. They are Russian combat forces with Russian weapons in Russian tanks. Now, these are the facts. They are provable. They’re not subject to dispute."

Heather Conley, director of the Europe Program at the Center for Strategic and International Studies, says some European countries are hesitant to accept these facts because of the economic impact imposing further sanctions on Russia would have on their own economies.

They must stop trying to avoid provoking Russia, she says.

“I think we need to use the word 'invasion' because let’s call this what it is,” Conley says. “In some ways by speaking very directly and showing satellite imagery and having a unified message from the United States, from Canada, from Europe about what Russia’s doing helps us break through this game in some respects that we’re playing here.”

Multiple narratives of the situation took shape on Wednesday alone. Poroshenko released a statement, which was then quickly revised, saying he had spoken with Putin: “The conversation resulted in an agreement on cease-fire regime in the Donbas,” the later statement said, referring to a region in eastern Ukraine. “The parties reached mutual understanding on the steps that will facilitate the establishment of peace.”

A spokesman for the Ukrainian government said later the statement was too generous in describing the outcome of the call and no official agreement had been reached. A statement released by the Russian government was substantially more vague regarding the outcome of Putin's call with Poroshenko.

“The two presidents continued their detailed discussion of the military and humanitarian crisis in Ukraine and exchanged views on priority steps needed to bring about a swift end to the bloodshed in Ukraine’s southeast,” read Russia's statement. “Mr. Putin and Mr. Poroshenko expressed to a large extent similar views on possible ways out of the crisis.”

While speaking to the media in Mongolia following the call, Putin outlined the “ Putin Plan” to “stop the bloodshed” in Ukraine. The first point of the plan aims to “end active offensive operations by armed forces and armed militia groups in southeast Ukraine in the Donetsk and Lugansk areas.” The plan did not acknowledge a direct Russian role in these operations, nor call for any action from Russian troops to bring peace.

U.S. State Department spokeswoman Jen Psaki said Putin’s plan is missing some key links that would make it viable as a means to achieve peace.

“Our view is that if President Putin is prepared to stop arming, training and financing separatists and remove Russian troops from Ukraine, those are objectives of course that not only we would support but certainly the Ukrainians would support, and President Putin’s plan certainly does not do that,” Psaki said. “So as of now I think there’s a great deal more work to be done. President Putin has had a lot of words but not backed them with actions, and that’s essentially what needs to happen from here.”

Putin asserted last week that Russian troops who apparently crossed into Ukraine “ may have ended up on the Ukrainian side” while patrolling the border. He also said, following a meeting with Poroshenko, that Russia cannot discuss the possibility of a cease-fire because it is "not our business."

"It is a domestic matter of Ukraine itself. We can only support the creation of a environment of trust during this possible and, in my view, highly necessary negotiation process," Putin said.

Speaking with Obama in Estonia, President Dalia Grybauskaite of Lithuania and President Toomas Hendrik Ilves of Estonia similarly condemned Russian action. German Chancellor Angela Merkel and other Western leaders have also publicly rebuked Russia.

“Russia must admit that it is a party to the conflict, and take genuine steps that will lead to a de-escalation of the conflict,” Ilves said. “We must also continue to support Ukraine by providing the country with the assistance that it needs.”

Russian media supports the narrative of blaming the Ukrainian government for the conflict. An article in RIA Novosti regarding the situation described the cause of the unrest this way: “Kiev launched a military operation in Ukraine’s southeastern regions of Luhansk and Donetsk in mid-April to suppress independence supporters who refused to recognize the legitimacy of the new Ukrainian government after a February coup.”