WASHINGTON -- The Senate Small Business & Entrepreneurship Committee Thursday rejected by a 5-14 vote a proposal by panel chairman David Vitter, R-La., to subpoena documents on how members of Congress and their staffs became eligible to purchase health insurance from a Washington D.C. Affordable Care Act marketplace.

It was a sharp rebuke to Vitter, not only from Democrats, but five GOP panel members, who also voted no on the subpoena request. Vitter staffers said all of the panel's Republicans, save for Sen. Rand Paul, R-Ky., had previously said they would vote yes, which would have enabled the subpoena measure to carry.

Vitter had raised questions about applications to the small business marketplace that listed Congress as a small business that employs 50 or fewer full-time equivalent employees. Neither is true.

"These applications contain blatantly false misrepresentations. For example, they claim that the House and Senate each employ only 45 full-time equivalent employees; they state that Congress is a 'state/local government' and they list employee names that are clearly made up," Vitter said at Thursday's committee meeting. "At the end of each application, the source that signed it dishonestly attests that Congress employs 50 or fewer full-time equivalent employees, and that truthful answers were given under the threat of a penalty. Any information that could identify the source of these fraudulent statements is redacted."

But members of both parties said the probe seemed inconsistent with the mission of the Small Business Committee.

"I certainly enjoy being on the Small Business Committee because of the emphasis that we've had on innovation and entrepreneurship and helping people grow their business," Sen. Deb Fisher, R-Neb told the Hill newspaper. "And I hope that that will continue to be the emphasis of the committee."

"I have a hard time understanding how the Small Business Committee has jurisdiction over this issue to start off with," Sen. Benjamin L. Cardin, D-Md., told The Hill. "Secondly, this has been very much handled, administratively, with Sen. Vitter and what he's requesting is not really consistent with the mission of this committee."

But it's also likely that members of both parties didn't want to embarrass their leaders on what was an awkward process to sign up members and staff under the Affordable Care Act.

The unusual process for members and their staffs to get heath care is a result of a Republican-passed amendment to the 2010 health law that required most members of Congress and their staffs to purchase insurance from one of the law's exchanges.

The Obama administration, after consulting with House and Senate leaders, decided the D.C. Small Business Exchange would be best equipped to process congressional applications for coverage, and that the usual subsidies available for federal employees to obtain health insurance could continue,

Vitter has tried to stop Congress from getting any subsidies -– so far unsuccessfully. He now says it is important that the committee get all documents to determine the process used to get members of Congress and their staffs continued subsidies to purchase coverage from the Washington Small Business Exchange.

"Allowing Congress -- which employs nearly 16,000 individuals -- to determine itself as a 'small business' doesn't pass the common sense test," Vitter said. "We need to know exactly how and why this was allowed to happen, so we can fix this injustice and eliminate Washington's Obamacare Exemption. Washington insiders should be forced to live under Obamacare just like the rest of America without a special taxpayer funded subsidy."

Vitter staffers had argued that the Small Business Committee was the right panel to examine how congressional members and staffers were able to obtain subsidized insurance via the Washington D.C. Small Business exchange.

The committee can issue a subpoena via concurrence by both the chairman and the panel's top Democrat, or a majority vote of the entire panel. The panel's top Democrat, Sen. Jeanne Shaheen, D-N.H., opposed Vitter's request for subpoenas.

Vitter got an amendment passed by the Senate that would deny continued subsidies to members of Congress to purchase coverage under the Affordable Care Act. But it isn't binding. Unlike Vitter's previous legislation, the amendment did not call on subsidies for staffers to be eliminated -- just members.

Democrats have accused Vitter of grandstanding on the issue.

"We are treated like everyone else in the country where we have an employer contribution to our health care," said Sen. Barbara Boxer, D-Calif. during last month's budget debate. "Now colleagues, you do not have to take that employer contribution. If you don't want it, give it back. You don't need this amendment to give it back."