The 45th Earth Day is April 22. This image of Earth at night is a composite assembled from data acquired by a satellite over nine days in April 2012 and 13 days in October 2012. It took 312 orbits and 2.5 terabytes of data to get a clear shot of every parcel of Earth's land surface and islands. ( COURTESY NASA / Daily Camera )

Earth Month is upon us. The 45th anniversary celebration of Earth Day (April 22) is quickly approaching, providing a time to display our collective support for environmental protection and our precious clean air, water and wildlife across our communities, state, country and planet.

We've made a great environmental progress since 1970 when our nations' waterways were so fouled that Ohio's Cuyahoga River actually caught fire and our skies were darkened by unchecked pollution. With 20 million Americans rising up together from coast-to-coast, the first Earth Day led to the creation of the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and the passage of the Clean Air, Clean Water, and Endangered Species Acts.

As we celebrate our progress, we also use this day to acknowledge the work that remains to be done to protect our earth, particularly fighting the threat of climate change and protecting public health and wildlife from its devastating impacts. With that in mind, it's worth noting that this year Earth Day falls conspicuously close to the 100th day since the GOP took over Congress and since Mitch McConnell took control of the new Senate.

After 100 days, it appears McConnell and his allies have left a leadership and governing vacuum in the new Congress, leaving the new majority with little to show for itself on any issues important to Americans, especially climate change.

Advertisement

The reason? The new majority owes its allegiance to big polluters who spent $721 million the last election cycle to get the Congress they want and, in return, they are doing polluters dirty work by trying to block public health and environmental safeguards. Namely: the EPA's Clean Power Plan proposal, which sets first ever federal limits on carbon pollution from power plants.

Big polluters and their congressional allies are hell-bent on blocking this vital clean air policy, which also serves as the main pillar of the Obama administration's National Climate Action Plan. They use fear-mongering tactics to argue against the plan, accusing it of having detrimental effects to the economy. The truth, however, is that we never have to choose between a healthy environment and a healthy economy. The Clean Power Plan has clear benefits estimated at $55 billion to $95 billion per year by 2030, far outweighing the costs.

The bottom line here is that the American people did not vote for corporations to run Congress, but that is what they are getting every time a vote is cast to block another public health or environmental safeguard. Big polluters' allies in Congress are determined to make good on their promise to dismantle decades worth of environmental standards that have kept us healthy and helped grow our economy.

What the American people did actually vote for is action on climate. 2014 midterm exit polling from the New York Times shows a majority of Americans believe that climate change is an important issue that needs to be addressed now. A majority of voters across party lines also believe that the federal government should take action to fight climate change, including through policies like the Clean Power Plan.

Our Colorado U.S. Senators Michael Bennet and Cory Gardner have already taken numerous votes on climate and environmental protection. Senator Bennet has provided leadership on climate by sponsoring a successful amendment last week to increase renewable energy to combat climate change. Newly-elected Senator Gardner, while standing up for some public lands issues for which he should be thanked, has made an about-face from his campaign acknowledgement that climate change is real and human-caused, to opposing amendments that underscored the threat of climate change, the significant human contribution to it, and the need for government action to address it.

On this Earth Day, let us ask our leaders to start representing Coloradans, rather than deep-pocketed polluters, by putting people and their health ahead of polluter profits. Let's hold them accountable for combating climate change and protecting public health.

David J. Ellenberger is the regional representative of the National Wildlife Federation.