As the new year gets underway, we wanted to share the thoughts of some of our expert contributors regarding their expectations for healthcare in 2015. From innovation in delivery structures to Supreme Court rulings, here’s what leaders in North Texas healthcare expect to see in the next 12 months.

Joel Allison, CEO of Baylor Scott & White Health

We are in a rapidly changing environment in healthcare today. It is a very challenging time but it is also creating unparalleled opportunity. I believe 2015 will be a year of continued change and in many respects a period of disruption. There are three major disruptive forces that I believe health systems will continue to face in 2015:

Regulatory – The Affordable Care Act, the creation of new insurance products and changes to reimbursement models are all continuing to impact providers.

Economic – Healthcare is still unaffordable for millions of Americans and this continues the push toward high-deductible health plans, defined-contribution plans, HMO products, and narrow networks. Also, reimbursement pressures on providers will continue.

Technological – Consumers are making empowered choices based on information now available to them through the convergence of digital and mobile technologies. Health care will find it is more and more in a retail environment.

I envision several responses to this disruptive environment that will emerge in 2015:

More Partnerships – We will continue to see alliances and mergers, as well as new relationships with physicians and physician groups develop. Collaboration and partnerships are the future.

A Greater Responsiveness to Consumers – Listening to what consumers are talking about online and responding quickly and effectively; developing new mobile applications; and exploring new opportunities in telemedicine are just some examples of how we’ll see nimble organizations use new technologies to their advantage.

An Increased Focus on Innovation – I believe the most successful organizations in this transformative health care environment will be those that can sustain their culture and engage their employees while encouraging them to create, experiment and find new approaches and solutions at a quicker pace than ever before.

We are looking forward to a very exciting and transformative 2015.

Marianne Fazen, of the Dallas-Fort Worth Business Group on Health

Because DFWBGH is an employer-led coalition, the employer perspective tends to color my thinking. Not surprising, my predictions for 2015 focus on important trends that directly impact employers.

Employers will continue their steady march toward high deductible Consumer-Directed Health Plans, with many more companies offering these as the sole option (“full replacement”).

Concierge healthcare services will enjoy a boom period, as employers continue to push more healthcare decision-making responsibility onto employees. However, employers realize that their employees are woefully unprepared for this new role and will seek help from companies that specialize in helping consumers find the best healthcare at the best price. Price and quality comparison tools also will find a ready market among employers.

Innovative ways of providing healthcare at non-traditional sites (onsite, near-site and retail clinics), staffed by licensed non-physician caregivers, will steadily supplant traditional healthcare delivery models, spurred by the employers’ growing demand for readily available, convenient care for their employees.

Steve Love, President and CEO of the Dallas-Fort Worth Hospital Council

The Recovery Auditor Contractors (RAC) will either receive some new administrative regulations or a law will pass Congress revamping the scope of their work since so many provider administrative reviews are overturned on appeal.

The employer mandate under the Affordable Care Act will be reversed.

The sustainable growth rate (SGR) will be patched again by April 1, 2015 with no permanent fix regarding Medicare physician payments.

The Texas Legislature will work collaboratively with a bipartisan approach to expand coverage for some of the uninsured with a plan unique to Texas.

Private health insurance exchanges will gain traction as we begin the movement to a defined contribution versus a defined benefit health insurance plan for employers.

The Supreme Court of the United States will rule in favor of Burwell in the case King vs. Burwell.

LaMonte Thomas of Cigna

Employers will continue to seek lower healthcare costs through the improved health and productivity of their work forces, so they will accelerate their use of incentives to drive employee health engagement and positive behavior change.

As employers move to private exchanges, employees will have more choice among competing health plans. This will result in health plans becoming more focused on individuals with more aggressive consumer oriented marketing rather than business-to-business marketing.

In the absence of effective regulation, egregious out-of-network charges will continue to plague the health care industry–especially in Texas–which will continue to raise costs for everyone who pays for health care.

The pace of physician practices being purchased will ease, while the aggregation of independent physicians into non-employed but clinically integrated networks will accelerate.

The transition from pay-for-volume to pay-for-value will remain a top goal for employers, health plans and many health care providers, but bumps in the road are inevitable as the players come to realize how complicated it is to transform the system.

Iva Lim Peck, of the Center for Oriental Medicine

A combination of consumer demand, clinical outcomes, and emerging literature supportive of a whole person, integrative approach to medicine is leading to sustained growth in the future of healthcare.

A new model of integrative primary care offers a substantial role for adjunctive integrative therapies in Preventive Medical Education.

Driven by a confluence of unfavorable economics, personal burnout rates, and intense frustration at not being able to provide quality, comprehensive care, primary care doctors slowly but steadily will migrate toward concierge practice models.

Integrative medicine is delivered within private settings that include both solo and multi-provider practices as well as non-profit academic medical centers, community hospitals, and hospital systems.

An integrative medicine program comprises a wide range of disciplines, including MD/DO, Chinese medical doctors, acupuncturists, chiropractors, massage therapists, naturopaths, and nurse practitioners.

New financial incentives will emerge that encourage medical school students to enter primary care and that emphasize prevention.

Emerging trend of some important self-insured employers are adding integrative healthcare services as an extension to their wellness and prevention program offerings.

Edward L. Vishnevetsky, of Munsch Hardt Kopf & Harr

Continued consolidation among small and mid-size providers and suppliers.

Increased antitrust scrutiny of managed Medicaid and Medicare plans.

Increased Medicare provider revocations.

Continued HIPAA settlements. State acknowledgements of HIPAA as the basis for the standard of care necessary for individuals to assert private causes of action.