The stars are aligned in favor of staffing provider AMN Healthcare Services as spending under ObamaCare, changing demographics and an improved economy have helped spark a surge in demand for health care workers.

AMN Healthcare Services (AHS) is the largest health care staffing and workforce solutions provider in the U.S.

Further fueling demand for its services has been the ongoing trend on the part of health care providers toward outsourcing the entire procurement and staffing functions.

AMN is cashing in on that trend by using acquisitions and internal efforts to offer a far-flung suite of solutions to meet clients’ needs from a single large partner.

In the past 18 months, it has acquired five companies and launched efforts that have enhanced its position in the market by adding software and other services that meet clients’ needs.

Its strategy is bearing fruit. AMN has logged at least double-digit earnings growth in all but two of the past 12 quarters.

CEO Susan Salka is upbeat about the demand for AMN’s services on a number of fronts.

“The demand for health care professionals is through the roof,” Salka told IBD.

The Affordable Care Act has been a key driver, she says. It added 16.4 million newly insured Americans into the system, according to the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services’ 2015 estimate.

As more insured people have been added to the system, more go to the emergency room, urgent care or to see a doctor, which has sparked more demand for doctors and nurses, Salka says.

Demand From Demographics

Another driver, she adds, is the point that more people in the U.S. are reaching the age of 65 and, as they age, require more medical services than the general population.

Doctors and nurses are also getting older, she says, and are beginning to retire in greater numbers.

An improved economy and brighter jobs picture have also helped provide more people the money needed for medical expenses and co-pays.

“Lower general unemployment also drives higher attrition and job openings, particularly within nursing,” Salka adds.

AMN’s stock has risen 35% this year after a 33% gain in 2014.

AMN provides workforce solutions — including managed services programs, vendor management systems, recruitment process outsourcing and consulting services — meant to help health care providers more effectively and efficiently manage their temporary and permanent staffing needs.

Its clients are hospitals, community health centers and clinics, physician practice groups and many other health care providers. Through its managed services program, or MSP, it provides clients with a single point of contact for all their dealings with workforce vendors. AMN handles all the financial, management, clinical and other aspects of agency workforce supply.

Providing that single point of contact to meet clients’ needs has worked in AMN’s favor:

“For years, the main driver (of our business) was helping clients fill hard-to-fill positions and deal with seasonal fluctuations,” said Salka. “Over the past decade more and more health care providers want to outsource the whole procurement and staffing function for temporary and permanent workers.”

The result has been a “pickup” in clients; demand to work with one large outsourcing partner to fill their needs, Salka says.

“Our strategy is to continue this evolution of not just being a staffing partner, but a holistic workforce solutions partner,” Salka said.

Acquisitions have helped AMN meet that goal.

Staffing Up By Acquisition

One important acquisition in this area was the 2010 purchase of Medfinders, a leading provider of clinical workforce managed services programs, and its Nursefinders brand that keyed in on the continuing high demand for nurses.

“AMN embraced the managed service provider concept with Nursefinders … pretty big in the MSP concept,” SunTrust Robinson Humphrey analyst Tobey Sommer told IBD. “Prior to that acquisition AMN was not that big in MSP.”

After the acquisition, he adds, AMN grew the MSP business “nicely” and in the last 18 months has bought companies that have software to implement MSP.

“The acquisitions they’ve done in the last couple of years bring additional software and alternative staffing services that coincide with this trend of being a broader provider of workforce solutions to clients,” William Blair analyst Timothy McHugh told IBD.

One of AMN’s recent acquisitions was Avantas, a leading provider of clinical labor management services, including workforce consulting, data analytics, predictive modeling and scheduling technology, a transaction it completed in December 2014.

The price included an initial payment of $16.5 million, with an earn-out potential of up to $8.5 million based on future operating performance. Avantas’ 2014 projected revenue was estimated then at about $8 million, with the acquisition expected to be neutral to AMN’s earnings in 2015 and accretive by 2016, AMN said in a statement.

“Avantas helps hospitals with workforce planning by providing technology and consulting services to help them better predict their total staffing needs,” said Salka. “They have scheduling and predictive analytics to predict what (hospitals’) needs will be, so they can better schedule the clinicians. Most hospitals do scheduling (for nurses) two to three weeks in advance. We can help them do better than that by looking out 60 to 90 days.”

In January, AMN closed on the acquisition of Onward Healthcare, Locum Leaders and Medefis from OGH for a total price of $82.5 million. Onward Healthcare is a top national nurse and allied health care staffing firm. Locum Leaders is a national locum tenens (temporary physicians) provider. Medefis is a provider of an SaaS (software as a service)-based vendor management system for health care facilities.

Acquisitions have helped drive AMN’s growth. In the first quarter, earnings climbed 67% to 30 cents a share, on an adjusted diluted basis. Revenue rose 36% to $327.5 million.

Revenue for its Nurse and Allied Healthcare Staffing segment was $229 million, up 40% (24% excluding acquisitions) from a year earlier. This segment provides hospitals and health care facilities with temporary professionals.

The Locum Tenens Staffing segment revenue was $87 million, an increase of 30% (19% excluding acquisitions). This segment involves the temporary placement of physicians as independent contractors.

“Their growth the last few quarters is a reflection of longer-term demand drivers coming to fruition as well as positive market share trends,” said McHugh.

Analysts polled by Thomson Reuters expect full-year earnings to rise 39% to $1.03 a share. They see a 16% gain in 2016.

Overall, temporary nurse staffing accounts for the biggest percentage of the company’s revenue, or about half of the total, says Salka.

“Our growth strategy is to help clients to be more efficient and effective in managing their entire clinical workforce, both permanent and temporary,” said Salka. “It’s all about getting the right talent at the right time at the right cost.”

Salka says the company continues to look for acquisitions, including those that would expand its workforce solutions.

AMN is a part of IBD’s Commercial Services-Staffing industry group. It has a 98 Composite Rating out of a best-possible 99. Also included in the group is TrueBlue (TBI), which also has a Composite Rating of 98, and Robert Half International (RHI), which has a 91.