St. Joseph Hospital in Orange this week laid off 152 employees as part of a plan to cut up to $30 million to compensate for fewer patients and lower reimbursements.

CEO Steven C. Moreau wrote in a Feb. 19 memo to doctors that the hospital's “financial turnaround plan” will cut roughly 5 percent of its $550 million budget for the current fiscal year. He said the changes do not impact the hospital's commitment to providing safe, high-quality care.

“Despite our recent challenges, St. Joseph Hospital remains strong and is doing the work necessary to position ourselves well for FY2015 and beyond,” Moreau wrote. “We are not alone in being challenged with the changes our nation is experiencing with aging and healthcare reform.”

While the Affordable Care Act, or Obamacare, is creating more newly insured patients, experts say hospitals are under greater financial pressure because of cuts from Medicare and from private insurers offering plans on the state insurance exchange.

In addition to the 152 employees, who were notified Tuesday, the hospital will not fill 18 other positions. Ten percent of management positions were eliminated. Before the changes, the hospital had 2,200 full-time employees.

Moreau also announced a number of other cost-saving measures. Among them:

The Outpatient Pavilion Surgery Center will close on Mondays, starting April 21, to consolidate the schedule for more efficiency. Outpatient surgeries will take place in the hospital on Mondays, and no elective procedures will be performed in the hospital on weekends.

Valet parking hours will be reduced and the cost will be increased. Additionally, free parking validation for patients will be eliminated and instead they will be charged $2.

Due to low patient volume, the pacemaker clinic, which provides testing and monitoring to patients, will close March 21. Patients will receive ongoing care from their doctors. Also, because of low demand, the digital skin imaging program, which uses photography and software to identify melanoma at its earliest stage, will close March 1.

The Mother-Baby Assessment Center, which helps women after they give birth but before their first follow-up doctor's appointment, will reduce hours but will remain open six days a week.

In December, Moreau told doctors that the nonprofit Catholic hospital had a $7 million loss in the first four months of the fiscal year. He said then that the hospital would develop a plan to save $25 million to $30 million.

Moreau cited lower reimbursement rates, changes in the mix of payers and a weakening demand for services. He said the hospital lost pediatric patients to the recently expanded Children's Hospital of Orange County, orthopedic patients to Hoag Orthopedic Institute and outpatient surgery patients to physician-owned surgery centers.

St. Joseph Hospital is part of St. Joseph Health, which includes St. Jude Medical Center in Fullerton and Mission Hospital in Mission Viejo and Laguna Beach. Earlier this year, the state attorney general approved an affiliation between St. Joseph Health and Hoag Hospital in Newport Beach and Irvine.

Hoag Orthopedic Institute is a separately licensed for-profit hospital owned by surgeons and Hoag Hospital.

Last April, St. Joseph Hospital eliminated 128 jobs after neighboring CHOC opened its own operating rooms and emergency department. In 2011, 109 positions were cut, although only 37 involved layoffs.

Contact the writer: 714-796-3686 or cperkes@ocregister.com