Photo

Writing is scary. It is especially scary now, as advances shrink, publishers fight with Amazon, and the death of the novel is forecast with ever-increasing frequency. It’s a time when it would make a lot of sense to quit — and a time when simply not quitting is becoming its own art form.

Those who leave academia have “quit lit” — stories of how and why they exited an institution that they felt undervalued them and their work. But many creative writers today seem to be writing what you might call “stay lit” — accounts of how the publishing world has bruised and sometimes bloodied their egos, and why they’re still writing anyway.

In an essay recently published on The Rumpus, the novelist Russell Rowland describes being dropped by his agent after years of underwhelming books sales and dwindling advances, the most recent in the two figures. These disappointments weigh on him: “Every time I get my royalty statements, which come every six months, my resolve gets tested in ways that sometimes take weeks to overcome.” Yet he keeps coming back: “The desire to write, it seems, is a sickness for which there is no cure. Except writing.”

Alexander Nazaryan sounded a similar note in Salon in 2013, writing that despite many rejections (and a successful career in journalism), he wouldn’t let the dream of being a novelist die:

“The irony of my predicament is that if I could just wean myself off the novel, I would invariably be happier and healthier, a better husband and a better father. But I cannot do it, and not even failure can check me.”

Stay lit is practiced by writers with more success under their belts as well. Emily Gould wrote in Medium about the slow realization that, despite a big advance for her memoir, she wouldn’t be able to support herself with writing:

“In January 2013 I began a full-time job that, while it leaves me no time to write, is helping me slowly repay the debts I incurred by imagining that writing was my livelihood. Act 1 is over — it’s been over for a while — and I’m headed back into the woods.”

And “Still Writing,” a 2013 memoir by the popular fiction and nonfiction writer Dani Shapiro, extols the virtues of sitting at your desk and doing the work, even when it feels impossible. She is one of the lucky ones — she has published seven books, received widespread acclaim, and appeared on television with Oprah. But she told Op-Talk that she felt driven to open up about her writing difficulties too:

“I have this kneejerk desire to be honest about it. It’s never just what it appears to be. Writing lives and writing careers are very hard-won even when they’re successful, and I feel like it’s important to say all that, and to be open about that because otherwise, especially because we all do what we do alone in a room, there’s a tendency to think, Oh, it’s just me.”

For her, this kind of openness feels especially important at a time when she and many other writers maintain upbeat social media presences that might make things look more effortless than they are: “I know almost no writer who isn’t always kind of scrappily figuring it out, living by our wits in various ways, whether it’s teaching or it’s lecturing or it’s writing for Big Pharma or it’s ghostwriting or it’s doing editorial work, and I just think that that’s important especially in this age of the curated self-image, for people to know.”

Knowing about other writers’ day jobs and setbacks can be demystifying. Marie Mutsuki Mockett, a novelist and nonfiction author who has written about her own struggle to find a publisher, says that “as a younger writer, I felt like there was this magical thing that happened, where you went from really wanting to write and then you had a book.” Reading other authors’ blogs taught her “how writers made what looked like this magical change, how they got their angel wings.”

And learning about others’ disappointments might soften the blows of one’s own. Mr. Rowland told Op-Talk that many fellow writers found his story familiar, as even those with long track records, like him, struggle to be read. “With the major publishers,” he said, “it’s become way more focused on the numbers than it ever was.” However, his confession may have had an unexpected perk: An editor noticed his Rumpus essay and is now reading his manuscript.

Some stay lit is encouraging — keep going, it’ll happen for you. But it can also be about persevering in the face of the knowledge that “it” — acceptance, publication, financial success — may never happen. It can be a way for writers to express their fears the only way they know how: more writing.

Honest writing about the realities of publishing can be sobering in the extreme. Ms. Gould told Op-Talk she hoped her Medium essay gave aspiring writers an understanding of the financial realities of the business: “It’s good for people to be aware of what the situation really is.” That situation can be harsh, and certainly isn’t for everyone. Of her own journey from disappointing sales to debt and deep career uncertainty, she said: “People who get past those sort of demarcations and then continue to do it are crazy, obviously.”

Given all this, it’s easy to imagine some stay lit actually convincing aspiring writers to quit. But for the truly committed, there may be something redemptive about stories of sticking with it despite lack of recognition or of remuneration. In “Still Writing,” Shapiro writes that “ultimately a writer is someone who writes. And a writer who writes is one who finds a way to give herself permission.”

Permission — that hard-to-describe feeling that you’re allowed to keep writing — can come from traditional validation. Esmé Weijun Wang, a fiction writer and blogger, has written about the agony of seeing that validation go only to others: “didn’t it mean that I wasn’t fit to be a writer, a real writer, if I wasn’t receiving that permission as well?” But maybe it can also come from seeing others in the same boat as you. These writers have been rejected again and again, and they’re still at it, so maybe it’s O.K. to keep writing in the face of your own setbacks. Maybe you’re not crazy. Or maybe you are, but at least you’re not alone.