BRAC or Base Realignment and Closure Commission is a process through which the Federal Government reorganizes its base structure to more efficiently support its force structure, increase operational readiness, and facilitate new ways of doing business.

"The past has taught us number one to not stop working," Meridian Airport Authority Tom Williams stated. "You don't defend a BRAC the day the list goes out. You don't just form a committee and go to work."

Williams says the community learned that in 91 and 92 when NAS Meridian was placed on the list for closure. It was then that the Meridian Military Team was created.

"It involves number one relationships with your bases," Williams said. "What's on their mind, what are their issues, what are things that we can do in the community to help you operate better and remain viable."

Williams says the team works to keep both NAS Meridian and Key Field off of a BRAC list.

"There will be another BRAC," Meridian Military Team Lamar McDonald said. "The people we talk to think it will be either in 2018 or 2019 and we hope it's that far. there will be a BRAC apparently and our job is to be alert and stay in touch with our navy bases and key field and make sure everything is done to keep them viable."

It's through the continued efforts of the community, the state, and the local military bases that work together to ensure that both bases remain off a future BRAC list.

"The state of Mississippi for example to help has put up, we think close to 60 million dollars through the years to help the navy and the 186th here," said McDonald. "We have a delegation in Washington that's dedicated and helpful and they are always available to listen and to help."

Most every part of the state has a military installation. In all, the military bases in Mississippi have an estimated economic impact of 5.7 billion dollars. That is through the military operations and manufacturing done in the state. The last military base to close in Mississippi was Naval Station Pascagoula.