ROCKWALL COUNTY,TX. (July 2, 2015) Rockwall County businessman, Justin Holland announced he will seek the Republican nomination for Texas House of Representatives in State House District 33. HD 33 covers portions of Collin County and all of Rockwall County.

The 33rd District became open in the upcoming election upon the announcement by State Representative Scott Turner that he will retire at the end of his term.

Holland co-owns the largest and oldest independent real estate agency in the area, with almost 40 agents. Holland is also the former Mayor Pro-Tem of Heath. Justin is currently serving his third term on the Heath City Council.

“Texas is the center of innovative new legislative ideas to lower taxes on business and limit damaging regulation. Like Rep. Turner, I will continue to build upon the ‘Texas Miracle’ and make sure Collin and Rockwall Counties continue to lead the way in making Texas a model for the country,” said Holland.

Holland supports limited government and cutting government regulations that needlessly limit job creation and prosperity. Holland is strongly pro-life, a vocal opponent of Obamacare, and is a lifelong defender of the 2nd Amendment. Holland also believes Texas must keep a secure southern border. In addition, Holland is very concerned about protecting the property rights of all Texans.

“Texas has proven that conservative values lead to lower crime rates and greater prosperity for all. Core conservative values have been around for hundreds of years, but when they are forgotten governments lose their way and people suffer,” said Holland.

“I am running for State Representative because I want to ensure that Texas remains an example of prosperity and opportunity,” said Holland. “In these often troubling times, we need principled conservative leaders.”

Justin and his wife, Neely, have been married for seven years and have two daughters, Wiley Beth and Emma Cullins. They are active members ofLakePointeChurch.

The publishing of any public announcement or paid political advertisement on this news site or in our print edition does not imply a political endorsement on the part of Blue Ribbon News; we welcome all candidates to submit their announcements, positive news-related events, and paid political advertising.

To share your good news and events, email editor@BlueRibbonNews.com.

Please click here to LIKE our Facebook page, so we can reach more people with good news like this!