Chances are you know someone who has died from lung cancer. That loss might have been prevented if proposed Medicare coverage of screening for heavy smokers had been in place.

Screening those at greatest risk of developing the disease could save tens of thousands of lives each year. A leading cause of death in the United States, second only to heart disease, lung cancer claims more lives than any other type of cancer. In fact, the National Cancer Institute estimates in 2013 alone more than160,000 Americans died from lung cancer, more than from colon, breast, prostate and lymphoma combined.

Lung cancer has few, if any, recognizable symptoms when it first develops. The progression of the disease is classified by four stages identifying extent and severity. In Stage I, the cancer is small and within the lung. By Stage II it has spread to a lymph node nearby and by Stage III to the lymph nodes in the chest. In Stage IV, the cancer has advanced to both lungs, the surrounding fluid, or to another part of the body.

With lung cancer, often the first symptoms appear when the cancer spreads. In fact, for every 10 new lung cancer diagnoses, two are Stage III and six are already Stage IV. Both of these stages, while treatable, are rarely curable.

Currently, 60 percent of lung cancer is diagnosed at Stage IV. If we could identify 60 percent of lung cancer in Stage I or II, when it is most curable, we would have a real shot at reducing mortality from this disease. The National Institutes of Health tested this hypothesis with the national lung screening trial. It screened 53,000 high-risk individuals with low-dose CT scans or regular chest X-rays and found that the CT-screened group had a 20 percent reduction in lung cancer deaths. As hoped, 65 percent of the cancers found were either Stage I or II.

The results were published in 2011, and most professional societies whose physicians care for lung cancer patients quickly endorsed screening. However, since no insurance companies covered the cost of screening, very few eligible patients were screened.

Shortly thereafter, St. Luke's University Health Network began providing lung cancer screening for present or past heavy smokers between the ages of 55 and 74. We have screened well in excess of 1,000 people and have found lung cancer in about one of every 100 people, compared with 1 of 320 in the national trial. Of those 11, half were Stage I, underwent minimally invasive resections and are cancer free today as a result.

Meanwhile, in December 2013, the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force endorsed screening individuals at high risk for lung cancer with yearly low-dose CT scans. This meant that private insurers, but not Medicare, would ultimately have to cover lung cancer screening, starting in January, under the Affordable Care Act. Finally, just last month, Medicare published its intention to cover lung cancer screening — a critical decision given the median age of diagnosis in the U.S. is 70.

Screening has risks and is therefore limited to those most likely to develop the disease. Individuals must have a physician's order and be between 55 and 74 with no symptoms of lung cancer; currently smoke or have quit within the past 15 years; and have smoked for at least 30 pack-years. (A pack-year is calculated by multiplying the number of packs smoked per day times by the number of years smoked; so 30 pack-years equal one pack per day for 30 years or two packs per day for 15 years.)

Also, screening has both monetary costs and unintended harms. During the national lung screening trial, approximately 30 percent of those screened had an abnormality that needed follow-up. Although most abnormalities proved to be noncancerous, many people experienced anxiety and a few underwent invasive biopsies.

Each individual must weigh the risks against the benefits. Without routine screening, however, most lung cancers will continue to be found in late stages when the patient's prognosis is poor. As is true today, finding early-stage lung cancer will be left to chance. As a thoracic surgeon, I follow many patients who are alive today because they were "lucky enough" to have had pneumonia or some other health problem. Through a chest X-ray, their lung cancer was found inadvertently. To reduce suffering and save lives, I wholeheartedly support annual screening for heavy smokers and applaud Medicare for its intention to cover the cost.

Dr. William R. Burfeind Jr. is chief of thoracic surgery at St. Luke's University Health Network and is a clinical associate professor of surgery at Temple University.