Michigan health insurers and Obamacare advocates say the array of insurance plans on the online marketplace offer a mix of features – not just high deductibles of $10,000 or more – and once the uproar over the new system quiets most people on the individual market will find much better coverage at nominal cost increases.

While the state’s dominant insurer in the individual market, Blue Cross/Blue Shield of Michigan, will only offer one plan in 2014 at current prices – a response to the 1-year reprieve granted by President Obama – BCBS officials say they don’t anticipate dramatic changes for their 175,000 customers who are losing their current coverage.

“We urge our customers to use the ‘Keep Fit Plan’ as a transitional option while they search out their options and determine what fits their needs,” said Andy Hetzel, Blue Cross vice president of communications.

Many recent media stories that have featured consumers suffering from a four- or five-fold jump in their annual deductible after their 2013 plan was cancelled represent the worst-case examples under the new realities, according to Terry Burke, vice president of individual business for BCBS and a 27-year veteran of the industry.

Advertisement

The Keep Fit plan with a $2,500 deductible is the top-selling individual, non-group policy in Michigan, Burke said, and Keep Fit with a $5,000 deductible is the No. 2 plan in the state. Keep Fit will offer deductibles ranging from about $1,500 to $10,000, and premiums of roughly $150 to $300 monthly, after the Affordable Care Act tax credits are calculated.

Insurers note that customers will be given ample assistance by experts and brokers in choosing a new plan, whether it is a 1-year fix or a more comprehensive shopping experience.

State Insurance Commissioner Ann Flood announced Friday that she will allow all Michigan insurance companies to revive cancelled plans through 2014, even if they do not meet ACA standards for coverage.

While the president left that decision in the hands of each state insurance commissioner, Flood said insurers may have trouble shifting gears this late in the game, with the first applicants receiving coverage on Jan. 1.

The Michigan Association of Health Plans said they agreed with the commissioner’s decision to give consumers maximum flexibility as the health care system transitions toward new standards.

Many Michiganders who need new coverage will still be sent to the ACA online exchange that categorizes health plans into four categories based on quality and price: platinum, gold, silver and bronze. The variety of plans will force those who lost their coverage in the wave of cancellations to choose the right mix of premiums, deductibles and co-pays.

Marti Lolli, director of health care reform for Grand Rapids-based Priority Health, said it is “nearly impossible” to design a bronze plan without big deductibles. That’s because the bronze plans offer low premiums but force the consumer to pay 40 percent of overall expenses as out-of-pocket costs.

As a result, nearly all of the 12 bronze plans on the healthcare.gov web page for southeast Michigan require a family deductible of $10,000 to $12,000 yearly.

“For most people, a silver or a gold plan is what they need,” said Lolli, whose company is grandfathering all 2013 individual plans for another year.

For example, in exchange for higher premiums, Priority Health offers a silver family plan with a deductible capped at $1,500 and a gold plan with a $1,000 deductible for families.

Blue Cross has a gold plan on the ACA exchange with deductibles as low as $150 to $250.

Burke warned that the trend toward higher deductibles took hold before the dawn of Obamacare.

“The deductibles in the bronze plans are consistent with what we see now in the individual market,” he said.

Of course, policies with a combination of low premiums and high deductibles lure many consumers who are in good health. But they present a significant financial risk because one major illness or injury can rack up bills of $15,000 to $50,000. Premiums vary by income, age and geography.

Though the many breakdowns on the federal website have sharply limited enrollments, early indications are that many low-income people can sign up for a plan that, due to the tax subsidies, will cost them nearly nothing for premiums.

At the same time, some insurers say the subsidies for those with incomes at 300 percent to 400 percent of the federal poverty level are miniscule, which means they are paying at or near the “retail price.” The maximum eligibility of 400 percent of the poverty line equals an income of about $46,000 for an individual and $94,000 for a family.

A segment of people living above those income standards are nonetheless uninsured because they choose to not buy coverage. The Obamacare individual mandate will change that.

Industry experts say that many of the customers who buy on the individual market are small business owners who don’t offer coverage at their workplace or the self-employed. About one-fourth of the individual market policy holders are seeking transitory coverage of 12 months or less due to a job change or other financial circumstances, according to BCBS.

A study that was released on Thursday by Families USA, a nonprofit that advocates for health care consumers, put the best face on the situation.

The report described the individual market this way: just 5.7 percent of the population relies on that market; among those buyers, about 70 percent will qualify for tax subsidies or the ACA’s expanded Medicaid coverage.

The conclusion, according to Families USA Executive Director Ron Pollack, is that the people who want to continue buying their plan on the individual market but do not qualify for federal subsidies represent

0.6 percent of the nation’s non-elderly population.

For those who will qualify for a subsidy, some careful calculations are ahead.

“People need to pay attention,” Pollack said, “to the tradeoff between premiums and deductibles.”