Topics: Gun Control, Gun Violence, isla vista shooting, Richard Martinez, News, Politics News

What does Father’s Day mean for someone whose only child is no longer living? It is something I have struggled with since last Father’s Day, which came less than a month after my only son, Christopher Ross Michaels-Martinez, was shot and killed in the Isla Vista mass shooting on May 23, 2014. He was 20 years old, and he meant the world to me.

The last time I saw Chris alive was on Mother’s Day 2014. Like every day we had together, it was filled with laughs one minute and serious conversations the next. On this Mother’s Day, a little more than a year after his death, without thinking I picked up the phone and did what I do every year – I left a message for Chris’s mother: happy Mother’s Day. My brother, who overhead me, was appalled. He pointed out that my message would needlessly upset her, so I called back and left a message apologizing for my thoughtlessness. Surprisingly, she returned my call and left her own message: She was not upset by my message – she was happy to have been Chris’ mother. While she will never see Chris graduate from college, never see him get married or have a child, she still was, and will always be, his mother.

Chris won’t be with me to celebrate this Father’s Day, but I’m still his father. And I can celebrate his life, the amazing person he was, and would have become. I recently had the opportunity to meet with a number of Chris’ classmates at UCSB. Some were close friends who shared personal stories of their time together. And others were people who weren’t necessarily close to Chris, but whom he touched along the way. One student in particular told me he never had a social group, never felt like he fit in anywhere. But Chris would always reach out to him and make him feel included. Chris touched his life, and I know there were many more lives he was meant to touch.

Immediately after the shooting I was consumed with anger, and insisted “Not One More” family should have to bury a child because of senseless gun violence. I have chosen to make this my life’s mission. This mission is deeply personal, because by speaking out and sharing my story, I am keeping Chris’ memory alive, allowing him to continue to touch people even though he is not physically here.