Dr. Thomas Andrew, New Hampshire's chief medical examiner, keeps a personal logbook of each death he's worked on. Recently, he turned back to a page from five years ago, where he found many different causes logged: motor vehicle crashes, homicides, drug overdoses.

But if he flips to the last three or four pages, Andrew is hard-pressed to see a cause-of-death entry other than "acute intoxication by ..." followed by the name of a drug, usually an opioid such as heroin or fentanyl, he said.

"Drug overdose after drug overdose," he said in an interview last week. "It's dominating our casework, and I don't like it."

In 1997, the year Andrew started his job, the state had 40 drug deaths. In 2014, "we just blew past 250."

It's close to a year since Gov. Maggie Hassan declared opiates and opioids a statewide epidemic, and health and law enforcement officials say New Hampshire is still grappling with a serious drug problem.

And there's another dangerous trend. Deaths from the synthetic drug fentanyl — 50 to 100 times more potent than morphine — are surpassing heroin-related deaths in the state, and local and state emergency responders are scrambling to deal with it.

Andrew is candid about the seriousness of New Hampshire's drug problem.

"It's the Ebola of northern New England."

A pressing issue

The final number of drug deaths in 2014 has yet to be fully tallied, but so far, it's 253, according to the Medical Examiner's Office. In 2013, the number was 193.

In Cheshire County, the number of drug overdose deaths in 2014 recorded by that office so far is 11. Seven deaths took place in Keene. This number is down slightly from 2013, when nine people died from drugs.

But even though the number of local overdoses is down, it doesn't mean the overall problem is going away, officials say.

Keene emergency responders went to 98 overdose calls and administered the opioid overdose-reversal drug Narcan 51 times last year, according to Fire Chief Mark F. Howard.

Police may not encounter people who have overdosed as much as emergency responders, but one effect of opioids in the community they see every day is the spike in property crimes.

The number of Keene burglaries in 2014 was up about 32 percent from 2013, according to police department data, and Police Chief Kenneth J. Meola said many of those are people stealing for drug money.

He also says the role of law enforcement in dealing with drugs in the community has changed. The Cheshire County Drug Court in Keene has given his officers more of a multi-faceted role instead of simply arresting users and dealers, Meola said.

The drug court is an alternative to jail for non-violent offenders who are addicted to drugs, and prescribes a course of treatment, 12-step programs and court appearances to ensure compliance. The drug court has been up and running a little more than a year; it now has 25 active participants and four graduates in 2014.

Keene police officers check on participants, making sure they are following curfews and other requirements, and trying to keep them out of trouble.

"I think the law enforcement component is extremely important," Meola said. "It's a complex problem that not any one profession can cure."

A new, dangerous drug

Many health and law enforcement officials point to the proliferation of prescription painkillers over the past decade to the subsequent outbreak of heroin usage.

In the past few years, more people switched from prescription drugs to heroin because it was very pure and cheap, officials say.

Much of the heroin in New England comes from Mexico and makes its way into the region on state highways. Interstates 93, 95 and 91 are all heavily used drug corridors, according to N.H. Assistant Attorney General James C. Vara, who prosecutes medium- to large-scale drug dealers for that office's Drug Task Force.

"Every drug that comes into the state of New Hampshire travels on a vehicle," Vara said. "We're seeing a lot traveling from Massachusetts into New Hampshire as well as Vermont."

The synthetic drug fentanyl started showing up in heroin batches early last year with deadly consequences; 22 people near Pittsburgh, Pa., died in January 2014 from heroin laced with fentanyl.

Fentanyl has surpassed heroin as a killer in the Granite State. Ninety-one people died of a fentanyl-related overdose last year, compared to 78 heroin-related deaths, according to data from the state Medical Examiner's Office.

When used appropriately, fentanyl is administered in hospitals to relieve severe pain, and is most often prescribed in a patch or lollipop. But it can also get into the community when people sell their prescriptions or steal from hospitals, according to Dr. John A. Curtis, an emergency department doctor and toxicologist at Cheshire Medical Center/Dartmouth-Hitchcock Keene.

Fire Chief Howard said his emergency crews have seen people locally who have melted down patches and injected fentanyl on purpose.

Other times, fentanyl is produced in clandestine labs and cut into heroin to extend the batch. Sometimes, people may not realize the stronger drug is mixed into what they buy; sometimes people buy it intentionally, chasing a more powerful high, according to health officials.

"When people start hearing about deaths related to heroin, sometimes people seek out those things, figuring out those must be really potent drugs," Curtis said.

The prevalence of fentanyl is also problematic for emergency responders; the drug's strength means EMTs sometimes have to double the dose of Narcan they give to patients. And before emergency responders can raise the dosage of Narcan, they have to call the Medical Control Board for the N.H. Bureau of Emergency Services and get permission, said Dr. James C. Suozzi, Cheshire Medical Center's associate medical director for emergency medical services. It's something that's been happening across the state, he said.

In fact, it's happening often enough that the Medical Control Board will meet this week to discuss allowing first responders to up doses of Narcan without having to get permission if the patient is at first unresposive, said Suozzi, who is also the medical director for the state board.

Trying to improve treatment

Finding substance abuse treatment in the Granite State is still as much of a challenge today as it was a year ago, some health professionals say.

At Keene's Phoenix House, a substance abuse treatment center, more than half of the people seeking help are addicted to opioids, according to Director Amelie Gooding.

The good news is the Affordable Care Act and Medicaid expansion are helping more people access treatment, she said.

"The old Medicaid did not cover the single, young male without children," Gooding said, adding that's the demographic most likely to be addicted to opioids. "Now they can have health insurance."

The bad news is that wait times to get into more intensive inpatient programs are still long.

Even though the N.H. Bureau of Drug and Alcohol Services recently launched a treatment locator website, nhtreatment.org, to help people find providers in their area, Gooding sees a larger issue.

"The problem is there's not a lot of providers," she said. "When someone wants treatment in this community, they have to go to the Phoenix House; there's nothing else."

Vara said law enforcement officials across the state also see the need for treatment.

"The criminal justice system isn't always the remedy," he said, adding he believes there's "a strong push, a strong desire and a strong need" coming from the law enforcement community to add more rehabilitation and treatment.

"We are concerned what's happening; we really need to be," he said. "These are our neighbors, these are many people's children."