Antonio McFarland

A 23-year-old man was found guilty of reckless homicide Saturday in connection to the shooting death of a 15-year-old girl during a Portland gun battle in the summer of 2012.

Antonio McFarland argued at trial this week that he was confronted by armed attackers and fired his gun in self-defense, accidentally striking Ty'Sha Spearman.

McFarland was the fourth person to be tried for her killing. Prosecutors tried to convince the jury to convict him of murder. They deliberated for eight hours before opting for the lesser charge of reckless homicide and tampering with physical evidence, both D class felonies punishable by one to five years in prison.

The other side of the gun battle — the child's cousin, Cecil Spearman, his girlfriend, Reginae Williams and a friend named Cephus Gore — were tried and acquitted of the killing in July.

In the summer of 2012, Ty'Sha went with Williams to liquor store on West Main Street where Williams recognized a man named Dwight Myles. She believed Myles burglarized her home a year before, and she grew irate. She confronted Myles and his friend, McFarland, intervened.

Myles and McFarland left for their home a block away. But Williams followed the men and allegedly called Spearman and Gore to come for the fight. Ty'Sha Spearman, a sophomore at Shawnee — followed.

How the argument spiraled to a gunfight became the central question at trial this week. McFarland maintained Williams and her crew fired first and he shot back. Prosecutors alleged it was the other way around.

McFarland testified Friday and acknowledged he lied to detectives at least 48 times in the wake of the killing. He told them he didn't live at the house and confessed that he probably fired the bullet that hit the child in the back.

But he said he fired the bullet in self-defense.

"Antonio McFarland was targeted, he was trapped," his attorney, Renee Ferrell told the jury in her closing statement. "So he pulled the trigger."

He saw his girlfriend outside arguing with two men. One was cocking his gun and the other was reaching for the one tucked in his waistband, McFarland alleged.

"I knew at that point it was too late to do anything — it was too late to call police. It was too late to stay in the house," he said. "…I felt it was my last and only option."

He testified that he retrieved his rifle and went outside. The other side fired first, multiple times, he said. He felt a bullet rush past him and heard metal strike metal, he said. So he fired a single shot at the crowd. He meant it as a "warning shot," he said, to let the group know he was armed.

But the bullet tore into Spearman's back and the child collapsed into her cousin's arm.

McFarland hung his head and wiped his tears, when his lawyer asked how he feels about taking the child's life.

"I really can't explain with words," he said. "I didn't mean to kill anybody that day."

Prosecutor Frank Dahl reminded the jury of McFarland's callousness in the moments after the killing: he ran and hid at a relative's house. When U.S. Marshals found him, he was playing Xbox. Then he lied repeatedly and connived a plan to try to wiggle out of responsibility.

Dahl pointed to a tattoo that McFarland has tattooed on his arm: "death before dishonor." He alleged another scenario: McFarland was mad that Williams disrespected him, so shot at her to teach a lesson.

The others didn't fire until after Spearman was hit, he said.

Ferrell told the jury that the child wasn't the "innocent bystander" prosecutors described.

She knew what Williams was up to, she heard her on the phone rallying troops and must have known they were headed for battle. She tagged along anyway.

"Tony may have killed Ty'Sha Spearman, but Reginea Williams was the reason she died," Ferrell said.

Dahl called it "offensive" that McFarland's attorney said the child was responsible for her own death.

"She was failed by the people she trusted," he told the jury, "and she was murdered by a stranger."

The jury returns Monday for sentencing.

Reporter Claire Galofaro can be reached at (502) 582-7086. Follow her on Twitter at @clairegalofaro.

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1tBDCyw