With the Democrats debating far less frequently than the Republicans, it can be hard to keep track of their performance from one debate to the next. What can we expect tonight?

The attacks in Paris, of course, are likely to shift the conversation sharply toward national security. As for the dynamics between the candidates, they’re down to just three, since Lincoln Chafee and Jim Webb dropped out of the race. This means that a debate that was already pretty substantive in tone will get even more so, with candidates likely to have time to engage more deeply with issues than last round, and far more deeply than the enormous Republican main-card debates.

We analyzed the dynamics and language of the last one, and based on that, would offer a few predictions:

· More back-and-forth. In the first debate, Bernie Sanders passed on an opportunity to attack Hillary Clinton, and, as a result, there was not as much crosstalk as in the Republican debate. Given the increasingly sharp tone from both campaigns recently, we may see much more back-and-forth in this debate.

· Due to the smaller number of candidates, this is likely to be a debate that is primarily driven by the moderator, although we should keep an eye on Martin O’Malley. It will be interesting to see how he reacts if the moderator decides to start asking him for his opinion on the other two candidates, rather than on his own policy stances.

· Finally, now that the Republican field has started narrowing, and with Donald Trump’s latest rants providing plenty of fodder, there will be more temptation for the candidates to start attacking Republicans, and especially Trump, by name.

Here are the patterns we noticed in the first debate. Comparing these to what happens in this debate should give us a good idea where the campaign is heading.

Clinton and Sanders Dominated

To nobody’s surprise, the two front-runners dominated the time in the first debate. Clinton and Sanders had more than 55 percent of the turns to speak and the words spoken. Jim Webb came in fourth—he was right to complain about his lack of time—and even further behind him was Lincoln Chafee, who’s now out of the race.

In this debate, the proportion of words a candidate was able to speak was almost the same as the proportion of turns they had to speak—which indicates a far more orderly debate than what the Republicans have experienced, in which the candidates are giving more thought-out responses and having fewer impromptu exchanges. Webb had the most words-per-turn, possibly because so much of his turns were spent complaining about how little time he had to speak. Still one more time, Chafee was the real outlier, not only receiving few turns to speak but also not using his turns when he had them. Clinton and Sanders were most certainly the winners—or at least they talked the most.







Chafee Was Simple, The Others Complex

Nearly all of the candidates employed language at above an eighth grade level, as rated on the Flesch-Kinkaid readability scale. The only exception was Chafee, whose rhetoric was closer to a sixth grade level. The most complex rhetoric was employed by former Maryland Gov. Martin O’Malley. Compared with the Republican debate prior to this, the rhetoric employed by the Democratic candidates was at a much higher average level— with the exception of Chafee, all the Democratic candidates would have been near the top for the Republican field. The only Republican candidate whose debate language was more complex than the Democrats’ was Texas Sen. Ted Cruz.

Trump Must Have Felt Lonely





Being talked about during a debate is a good thing—it signals that others take you seriously as a candidate and grants you extra time to speak on the floor. Even if you aren’t in the debate, being talked about is a strong indicator of importance. The Republicans, for example, have mentioned Hillary Clinton and Barack Obama quite a bit in their debates.

The Democratic debate was much more self-contained: The person who mentioned Republican candidates the most was actually the moderator, Anderson Cooper. Only Trump was mentioned by more than one candidate. When the Democratic candidates did mention the Republicans, it was usually as a group rather than as individuals.

Also interesting: The Democratic debate participants didn’t mention one another all that often. If you look at the network chart here, you’ll see a hub-and-spoke pattern, with Anderson Cooper receiving and giving the most direct mentions. (Strangely, CNN presented a word cloud the morning after the debate suggesting the candidates talked about each other a lot—perhaps because they forgot to remove the moderator’s words from the transcript?)

This network is also in contrast with the Republican debate immediately prior, where both Bush and Trump were central. Here again, this could have been the result of either structure or strategy. From a structural perspective, with fewer candidates on stage, there may have been less incentive to pick a direct fight with other candidates. From a strategic perspective, the candidates may have been trying to limit the time they granted to other candidates, as required by the debate rules when they are mentioned by name.



Policy Discussion Dominates

Our word clouds for this debate also suggest a more substantive discussion. Clinton used a number of policy-related terms, talking about her “plan” and “deal.” Her discussion about college tuition, health care and security show up quite prominently. We can also see in this word cloud the most prominent way that the Democratic candidates referred to their potential general election rivals—as generic “Republicans” rather than as particular candidates.

Sanders was also quite focused on policy-related talking points. His focus on economic justice is reflected in the prominence of terms like “economy,” “billionaire(s)” and “working.” He also makes much mention of the “legislation” he was involved with, as well as his views on guns, war and health.

The relative lack of mentions by both of the leading candidates of terms related to personal histories and failings is very different from what we observed in the Republican debate just prior to this one. Some of this, of course, was due to Sanders giving Clinton a relative pass on the email controversy.

Finally, we can see the strategies of the minor candidates playing out. There are many mentions of “time,” reflecting Webb’s emphasis on getting equal time in the debate. There was also a strong emphasis on foreign policy, with “Iraq,” “Iran” and the “Middle East” showing up prominently in their debate rhetoric. Much like the Republicans, the minor Democratic candidates felt they could gain some ground on both Clinton and Sanders by emphasizing foreign policy. It will be interesting to see if O’Malley employs this tactic again in the upcoming debate.

A Boring Debate?

In the immediate aftermath of the debate, commentators commended the debate for its focus on substance and its relative civility. After a couple of days, however, both comedians and pundits began to point out something else: The debate didn’t get the high ratings of the Republican debates and may have been somewhat boring for viewers. The numbers seem to bear out both stories. There was a general polish and civility not present in the Republican debates—characteristics likely to appeal greatly to policy wonks, while perhaps a bit boring to those who are used to the Republican reality TV.

Lazer Lab team: David Lazer is Distinguished Professor of Political Science and Computer and Information Science at Northeastern University, Visiting Scholar at the Harvard Kennedy School, and founder of Volunteer Science. Oren Tsur is a postdoctoral fellow in computational social science and natural language processing at Northeastern University and Harvard University. Katherine Ognyanova is a postdoctoral fellow in computational social science and network science at Northeastern University and Harvard University. Ryan Kennedy is an associate professor in the department of political science at the University of Houston.

ch