Carl Hilliard, a Colorado statehouse reporter and political columnist for The Associated Press for 32 years, died Sunday after a heart attack at his home. He was 76.

Hilliard was a legendary journalist, was a member of the Denver Press Club Hall of Fame and has been listed as one of the state’s most influential media members. When he retired in 1999, three governors and more than a dozen legislators attended the party, said his wife, Lana.

She said he had heart problems for some time. He loved politics, cars, Civil War history, horses and dogs, she said.

“He told me about a week ago, ‘I had the strangest dream,’ ” she said Sunday night. “I said, ‘Was it a good dream?’ because he had been having bad dreams. He said, ‘I was standing out in front of the house, and I had a heart attack. And all the dogs came and gathered around me, and they could talk.’ They were all the dogs he had had. He asked where they had been, and they said, ‘We’re in the happy place, and we’ve come to get you.’ “

Hilliard was known for his intelligence and his sense of humor.

“He would say, ‘We saved two other people from us,’ ” Lana Hilliard said with a laugh. The couple would have celebrated their 50th anniversary in March.

They met when she was a senior at the University of New Mexico in 1963. He was working at the Albuquerque Journal soon after finishing a stint in the Army. He had worked as a medic and a writer at Fitzsimons Army Medical Center in Aurora.

Hilliard joined The Associated Press in November 1964 and was assigned to its bureau in Cheyenne. He was assigned to cover politics and state government in Denver in 1967.

His son, Bronson Hilliard, spokesman for the University of Colorado, said people across the state remember his father, from his news stories and his weekly column “Capitol Closeup.”

“He was the window to the Capitol and state government all over Colorado,” his son said. “Every small-town paper carried his stories and his column.”

Hilliard also helped cover the Denver Broncos.

He is survived by his wife, and two sons, Bronson and Brendan, as well as three grandchildren. A memorial is being planned for this month, his wife said.

Joey Bunch: 303-954-1174, jbunch@denverpost.com