Pius forward Vashti Nwagbaraocha (33) and New Berlin West guard Sarah Meleski (31) fight for a loose ball. Credit: Rick Wood

By of the

Brown Deer — As her free throw seemingly got every piece of the rim Saturday afternoon, Pius XI's Vashti Nwagbaraocha quietly pleaded for a friendly roll.

"Drop, please drop," the Popes senior thought. "Just drop."

Eventually it did and the members of Pius girls basketball team could breathe a sigh of relief and start making their travel arrangements for the state tournament.

The free throw gave the Popes a four-point lead with 6 seconds left, and after the 5-foot-11 forward hit her second attempt they were just moments away from a 38-33 victory over New Berlin West that secured their second straight state tournament appearance and kept their record a pristine 26-0.

Nwagbaraocha finished with nine points and 10 rebounds for the Popes, who will face Waunakee in a Division 2 state semifinal at 1:35 p.m. Friday at the Resch Center in Ashwaubenon. Senior point guard Gabby Green had a team-high 12 points in addition to two rebounds and two steals.

The victory took Pius back to the heart of what has made it one of the area's most consistent winners over the years: defense.

With points coming at a premium, the Popes defense held West to 5-for-23 shooting (21.7%) and went for an 8 1/2-minute stretch in the third and fourth quarters when it didn't allow a point. The result was the Vikings' third-lowest point total of the season.

What team held them to its lowest total? That's right, Pius. The Popes allowed just 30 points when they scored a 12-point victory over West on Feb. 13.

"I think we got some good looks, but we hurried them," said New Berlin West coach Jef Radtke, whose team finished 19-8. I think Claire (Radtke) had a couple, (Alyssa Nelson) had a couple. Ali (Boldt) had some. ... Against them you've got to shoot it quickly because they'll be in your face."

Senior forward Rachel Novotny (11 points) and Nelson, a freshman guard who had 10 points, were West's leading scorers. Nelson's biggest shots were in the first half, while the 6-1 Novotny was her most productive during the first 3 minutes of the second half when she scored six points.

Her putback at the 5-minute 22-second mark of the third quarter cut Pius' lead to 21-20. The three consecutive scores were West's best run of the game, hardly an indication of the drought that was to come.

Pius forced five misses and four turnovers during that defensive run, and when the team forced a miss, it got the rebound. West had no second-chance opportunities during the run.

Meanwhile on the other end, Pius was scoring eight straight points. Green, who made 5 of 10 shots, started the run with a 15-foot jumper and two possessions later she froze her defender and drove past for a three-point play opportunity. Green missed the free throw but completed a personal 6-0 run with a bucket in the paint with 61/2 minutes left in the game.

A basket in the lane by senior forward Olivia Freckmann (eight points, seven rebounds) next time down gave Pius a 29-20 advantage with 5:44 left. Eight points in about 6 minutes was a considerable outburst for a team that managed just 15 first-half points.

Pius was on its way to the WIAA state tournament for the fifth time — four in the last six seasons — but not before West would make one last run.

"We've been playing together for a while now and we're pretty experienced," Green said. "So we knew that even if the score got close, we could play through it. We've played through those situations. We were prepared for it."

But before the Popes pulled out the victory, they missed 5 of 8 from the free-throw line in the final 2 minutes.

That opened the door for West, which got a two free throws and a basket from Novotny and two free throws from Nelson before Radtke hit a three-pointer with 7 seconds left to make it 36-33.

That set the stage for Nwagbaraocha, who is about a 60% shooter from the line. Not this time.

"That one I think hit every part of the rim, every part of the backboard and went in," Pius coach Scott Herrick said with a smile. "That one was long coming because we've missed so many free throws this year, it's amazing. We got a break there and it was kind of nice."