As the House Energy and Environment Committee finished a hearing on a bill that would repudiate President Barack Obama's climate change plan, one representative expressed frustration at the amount of time the committee has spent debating climate issues.

“It’s a little disappointing that we can’t come to some scientific certainty about some of these issues,” Rep. Russell Jennings, R-Lakin, said. “We heard last year from scientists on this issue, seemingly endlessly, as I recall, with charts and graphs on both sides.”

Jennings said he wondered if the committee could come to some consensus on the president's plan without including an overarching statement about climate change itself.

“There’s somewhere in the middle here where I think we can all agree,” Jennings said.

But agreement on the committee remains elusive — on whether human-caused climate change exists and on the appropriateness of renewable energy mandates.

Rep. Dennis Hedke, R-Wichita, the chairman of the committee and a climate change skeptic, led an unsuccessful effort to roll back the state's Renewable Portfolio Standards last year.

Hedke's committee has added two new members this year who could be more sympathetic to that cause and Americans for Prosperity has bankrolled a statewide television and radio ad blitz, but there appears to be no guarantee of victory for RPS repeal this session either.

Last week Hedke's committee tabled a bill to eliminate "net metering" — the requirement that utility companies compensate kilowatt-for-kilowatt customers who put energy back on the grid through methods like solar power.

Hedke said that bill isn’t dead, but the 9-7 vote to table it surprised him.

The renewable energy standards, passed in 2009, require the state's utility companies to get 20 percent of what they produce from renewable sources by 2020.

Proponents say utilities are having little trouble reaching that goal, thanks largely to a wind energy boom that has driven commerce to parts of the state starved for it.

Those who want to repeal the standards say they aren’t against wind, they just don't like government mandates. They also say the standards are driving up energy bills.

The Kansas Corporation Commission testified that two of the state's largest utilities, Kansas City Power and Light and Westar, reported rate increases of "less than 1 percent" and 1.7 percent, respectively, due to purchasing wind power.

Attempts to repeal the renewable standards last year failed in part because of moderate Republicans like Rep. Marshall Christmann, R-Lyons, who consistently voted with Democrats to keep them in place.

During the legislative session, Christmann was shuttling back and forth from Topeka to Pratt County, in his district, where local zoning decisions were paving the way for energy giant BP to build a wind farm.

In March, with the session underway and RPS repeal on the table, BP suddenly pulled its permit application.

"Which of course scared me," Christmann said. "I want those jobs."

Christmann said he didn't know if BP's decision was prompted by the RPS repeal talks, but he wasn't taking any chances.

The wind project was slated to produce 500 jobs for up to four years. That represents more than 5 percent of the population in Pratt County, which, as of August 2013, had an unemployment rate of 4.5 percent.

"Every time I voted and revoted and voted again, it was always with my district in mind," Christmann said.

BP is now "back in the game" in Pratt County, Christmann said, but he is no longer on the energy and environment committee.

He and Rep. Phil Hermanson were replaced by Rep. Joe Seiwert, R-Pretty Prairie, and Rep. Ken Corbet, R-Topeka. Hermanson was replaced because he resigned from the Legislature.

Christmann said his reassignment to the House Veterans, Military and Homeland Security Committee, while not unsavory, wasn’t his decision.

Christmann received a one-sentence email from House Speaker Ray Merrick, R-Stilwell, announcing the move.

Merrick's spokeswoman, Rachel Whitten, said it was part of the normal shuffling that occurred in a House chamber that lost seven members from the year before.

"Once you make one adjustment, it's kind of like a domino (effect) in the other committees," Whitten said.

Christmann said he is still tracking the renewable standards issue as one that is important to his district.

He also said he has heard the commercials ripping the standards and attempting to tie them to former Gov. Kathleen Sebelius and the federal health care reforms she is leading that are unpopular in Kansas.

"Somebody is spending a lot of money," Christmann said.

Jeff Glendening, the state director of Americans for Prosperity, said that repealing the renewable standards remains a high priority for his organization and he would be "disappointed" if the Legislature doesn't take another crack at it this year.

"We see it as a free market issue," Glendening said.

There have been no hearings scheduled on it yet, but Glendening said he believes that will change.

"We fully expect it to be an issue this session," Glendening said. "We just don't know when."

Forbes and other news outlets have reported that Americans for Prosperity is funded in part by Charles and David Koch, Wichita brothers who have made billions in the oil and natural gas industry.

Hedke himself has ties to that industry, as a contract geophysicist who has worked for dozens of regional oil and gas producers.

He has said that his views on climate change are based on careful consideration of the scientific evidence and he believes in protecting the environment.

But his views clashed with environmental groups like the Kansas Sierra Club at the hearing on Obama's climate plan, where he took the unusual step of testifying at a hearing he chaired. He also found himself opposite environmentalists when he testified Thursday for a bill to encourage completion of the Keystone XL oil pipeline.

The pipeline hearing was in another committee, but the one on net metering was also in Hedke's and some members of his committee seem burnt out on the debate over fossil fuels versus renewable energy.

Rep. Julie Menghini, D-Pittsburg, asked if committee members were "just spinning our wheels" by spending over an hour debating whether to protest Obama's climate plan.

“Do you really think passing this achieves any practical action or purpose?" Menghini asked.

“Well, I hope it will open some people’s eyes and minds to attempt to understand that not everyone agrees with the president’s climate action plan," Hedke said.

“I think everyone understands that," Menghini said.