Heavy equipment moves dirt Tuesday, July 22, at the site of the future Les Schwab Tire Center at 184 W. 64th St. in north Loveland, not far from Wal-Mart. The six-bay retail and service center should be open by January 2015, according to a company official. ( Craig Young / Loveland Reporter-Herald )

Around Loveland these days, there's a whole lotta diggin' goin' on.

At three highly visible locations around town, construction has started on new businesses that will open by early 2015: a car wash, an auto-parts store and a tire center.

Wash Worx Car Wash

This tunnel-type car wash will pull your car through its foaming brushes and spit it out on the other side, clean and dry, three minutes later, according to co-owner Erik LaPlante.

"It's a very convenient, high-speed model of car-washing," said LaPlante, a Timnath resident who works for Hi-Performance Wash Systems, a Denver-based car wash distributor and supplier.

LaPlante said the location at 3555 Mountain Lion Drive, just off East Eisenhower Boulevard, is aimed at commuters headed to and from Interstate 25, as well as residents of the new housing under construction in east Loveland.

A basic wash will cost $5, LaPlante said, and "the works" will run about $15.

Wash Worx will have three vacuum stations for unlimited free use, he said, and most of the property will have heated concrete surfaces. "When you go to vacuum on a cold day, you don't have to worry about slipping," he said.

The car wash's systems were designed with the environment in mind, he said, so they will use biodegradable cleaning products and recycle almost 80 percent of the water used in a wash.

Advertisement

Dohn Construction of Fort Collins broke ground on the $3.5 million project about two weeks ago, and LaPlante said he expects the car wash to open before the end of the year — optimistically by Thanksgiving.

LaPlante is partnering with Loveland resident John Parker, who owns the Wash Time car wash near the north Wal-Mart; Mike and Ellen Lindsay of Windsor; and Thomas McDougall of Westminster, who also works for Hi-Performance Wash Systems and who owns a self-service car wash in north Denver.

This architect's rendering shows the entrance to the tunnel-style automatic car wash under construction at 3555 Mountain Lion Drive off East Eisenhower Boulevard in Loveland. Wash Worx Car Wash is expected to be completed by the end of 2014. (Courtesy of Hover Architecture)

O'Reilly Auto Parts

The auto-parts chain, which already operates a Loveland store at 885 S. Lincoln Ave. and several others in Northern Colorado, is preparing to have north Loveland covered as well.

California-based general contractor Austin/Jones Corp. broke ground Monday at the southeast corner of Garfield Avenue and Knobcone Drive.

"This is going to be a real high-end building," said job superintendent James McCormick.

Mark Merz, director of external reporting and investor relations for O'Reilly Auto Parts, said the new store will open in late fall or early winter.

The 10,000-square-foot "hub store" will be larger than a typical 7,000-plus-square-foot O'Reilly store because it will have warehouse space in the back.

Hub stores augment the company's distribution centers, allowing parts to be driven to stores nearby the same day, he said. A typical store carries about 23,000 different parts, while a hub store has about 50,000, Merz said.

The publicly traded company, based in Springfield, Mo., owns all of its 4,257 stores nationwide, he said.

Hours vary at O'Reilly Auto Parts stores, Merz said, but generally they are open about 7 a.m. to 9 p.m. Monday through Saturday and open later and close earlier on Sunday.

Les Schwab Tire Center

The Oregon-based tire retailer, which has 450 locations in eight states from the West Coast to Colorado, is expanding into Northern Colorado with a store at 184 W. 64th St., just southeast of Loveland's north Wal-Mart.

The company broke ground July 14 for its 10,000-square-foot, six-bay tire center, which should open next January, according to Dale Thompson, chief marketing officer for Les Schwab.

The family-owned chain moved into Colorado two years ago and now has eight stores in the Denver area, with three more opening soon, including one in Longmont and then the Loveland location.

Thompson said Les Schwab's growth is a product of the company's employee-benefits philosophy. The company has a generous profit-sharing program that boosts workers' job satisfaction and attention to customer service, he said, and encourages longevity.

"The dream for employees is to get their own store someday ... to be a manager of their own store," he said. "We have a growth plan that helps keep that incentive alive."

The Loveland Les Schwab will sell tires, batteries and other auto parts and offer services such as brake work, alignments and shocks-and-struts service.

It will be open 8 a.m. to 6 p.m. Monday through Friday and 8 a.m. to 5 p.m. Saturday.

Contact Reporter-Herald Staff Writer Craig Young at 970-635-3634 or cyoung@reporter-herald.com. Follow him at twitter.com/CraigYoungRH.