Infertility is a disease and causes a significant amount of anxiety and depression.

A group of University of Michigan graduate students is lobbying the school's governing board to expand health insurance offerings to include coverage of fertility treatments, such as in-vitro fertilization.

"There is no health care coverage for fertility treatments," graduate student Katherine Lelito told the Board of Regents during its monthly meeting in November. "We've been forced to select lower cost options [which are] incredibly expensive for graduate students."

Lelito said she's undergone multiple low-cost treatments, paying $3,000 for each.

She and three other students and staff members petitioned regents during the public comment section of their Nov. 21 meeting, saying it's not fair that abortions and adult sterilization treatments are covered by U-M, but infertility treatments are not.

U-M does pay the full cost of infertility assessments and up to $5,000, in a lifetime, of fertility medication, according to U-M benefit documents.

Provisions in the Affordable Care Act require removal of the dollar lifetime limit in 2014, so beginning in January the prescription drug coverage will change. The new plan will provide coverage without limit for most fertility drugs, while medications high in both cost and utilization will be covered for up to 5 cycles per lifetime.

However, the health care policy specifically excludes in-vitro fertilization— the very procedure GEO representatives have been asking U-M's human resources to begin covering.

"IVF coverage isn’t an industry standard for coverage," said U-M spokesman Rick Fitzgerald. "We design our plans to be competitive in the market and cover procedures based a balance between cost and medical outcomes."

Liz Rodriguez, a representative of the GEO who is pregnant, told regents that Eastern Michigan University covers 50 percent of the cost of fertility treatments. EMU does cover IVF treatments, but the percentage covered varies depending on an individual employee's chosen health care plan, said EMU spokesman Geoff Larcom.

"It just doesn't make sense for us to be the ones lagging behind," Rodriguez said, adding that the benefit would make U-M a more competitive workplace among elite universities.

Elizabeth Walker, a U-M staff member, also asked the board to change its policy.

"Infertility is a disease and causes a significant amount of anxiety and depression, made worse when patients are required to pay for treatment out of pocket," she said.

Kellie Woodhouse covers higher education for the Ann Arbor News. Reach her at kelliewoodhouse@mlive.com or 734-623-4602 and follow her on twitter.