Updated: Monday, September 9, 9:41 p.m.

HARTFORD — Hartford police arrested a city worker for drunk driving after a two-car collision in the West End late Saturday.

Rhonda Moniz-Carroll, 53, of Hartford, was arrested for driving under the influence and failure to travel in the proper lane, police said.

According to reports, Moniz-Carroll’s white Ford Escape was heading southbound on Prospect Ave at about 9:30 p.m. when the car drifted into oncoming traffic and hit a black Nissan Altima head on.

The driver of the Altima, Caitlyn Greenabum, was reportedly unconscious when the emergency crews arrived. She suffered an ankle injury, police said.

Greenabum was transported to St. Francis Hospital and is in the intensive care unit, police said.

This is not the first time a city employee was involved in a car accident.

In August, Andrew T. Jaffee, the director of emergency services for the city of Hartford, who was fired over several problems with how 911 dispatched emergency officials in the city, was also questioned for his use of his city vehicle.

Mayor Pedro Segarra’s former Chief of Staff, Jared Kupiec, was arrested for using a city vehicle without permission after he resigned. Kupiec was also involved in a car accident earlier this year.

On Monday, Segarra issued this statement on his decision to terminate DPW Deputy Director Rhonda Carroll:

“Ms. Carroll has worked for the City of Hartford for many years and her dedication and hard work is appreciated. Her recent behavior, however, shows a lack of judgment incompatible with her job and my expectations for any employee of the City. Accordingly, Ms. Carroll’s termination is effective immediately.”

Rhonda Carroll worked for the City of Hartford since 1997. Her annual salary was $101,833.16.

Moniz-Carroll is the sister of Hartford attorney Joe Muniz, who has also been arrested for DUI in the past. Moniz was a distinguished attorney who was a lead attorney on the Citron and other high profiled and racially charged cases in Connecticut.