To pay for Affordable Care Act health-care plans, the potential increase in cost for clients of labor staffing agencies has been estimated to be about 10 cents an hour.

Kristy Anderson, the assistant branch manager for Penmac’s Fort Smith Branch, said most local companies use temporary workers and the cost of 10 cents an hour would not hold true for every employer, but in this era of adjustment, the 10-cent mark was the best estimate and method of payment the Springfield, Mo.-based staffing agency has devised for an approximately $150 per month plan.

“The actual dollar amount is undetermined because we are still in the process of narrowing it down and haven’t selected a specific plan yet, but we’re dealing with a lot of employees that haven’t been eligible for benefits and we have no idea what kind of participation levels we’ll have,” Penmac Benefits manager Tim Lee of Springfield said.

Lee was speaking to about 20 people in a seminar at MovieLounge in Fort Smith on Thursday to give Penmac’s clients a better understanding of the health-care law. Within the realm of the law, temporary staffing agents have struggled with ambiguous definitions and methods of determining minimum coverage through past temporary employment history.

“When Washington was writing these rules, they were not thinking about staffing agencies,” Lee said. “Some people may just work and get two paychecks, others may get 42 paychecks.”

As a side note in talking about the various levels of health-care plans, Lee said the bronze plan is turning out to cost more than the government expected and a “copper” plan could be rolled out. He also said the “Cadillac” platinum plan could see a change in 2018 that would likely force people into less exclusive plans.

“If the premium cost exceeds a certain dollar number, it will cost a 40 percent tax on top of your premium,” Lee said. “Can you imagine if your family coverage was costing $20,000 and you had to pay an additional $8,000 in taxes just because your plan is too rich?”

During the hourlong presentation, Lee also recommended employers contact their attorney if they were near the 50-employee threshold, which requires them to provide health-care plans because they may also be required to include temporary and/or leased employees even though they are not statutory employees.

“If the government perceives you to be an employer that crosses that 50-employee threshold, you’ll need to offer your employees coverage as well,” Lee said.

Local businessman Bill Engles said the Affordable Care Act has “ruined health insurance because people can’t afford it.”