Brian G. Grissler: Budget hits Stamford Hospital with $28M bill

Connecticut not-for-profit hospitals were already struggling under the burden of the state-imposed hospital tax and cuts in reimbursements. The new budget recently approved by the legislators makes this struggle even more difficult for all, potentially pushing some over the brink. Recently, Hartford Health System announced they will eliminate several hundred positions and close programs and Yale-New Haven said they will need to cut $117 million over the next two years, by eliminating jobs, closing clinics and delaying the installation of a critical data backup system. I can assure you this is just the beginning.

At Stamford Hospital, we provide a high level of care to a broad and economically diverse population. This will magnify the impact of the additional cuts and increasing hospital taxes on us — which now total more than $28 million each year for the next two years.

Despite implementation of the Affordable Care Act and expansion of Medicaid in Connecticut, we aren’t seeing the growth in newly insured patients promised from these initiatives. The reality is we have a significant on-going obligation to care for a growing undocumented immigrant population and uninsured patients, who are ineligible to participate in these support programs.

Rather than talking with us about ways to work together to meet the needs of these patients, the state responded by eliminating the modest Medicaid funding that partly offset that unfunded expense. In 2014, we absorbed $24 million in charity care alone. Now the money that we would otherwise reinvest back into serving these patients and the greater community will instead be diverted to fill the state’s coffers. Services and programs that benefit the community will most certainly be reduced or eliminated.

The current state budget also undermines a long-term, carefully executed fiscal plan we created many years ago in order to build and finance a new hospital. A hospital that our vibrant and diverse community desperately needs and deserves. We anticipate that the budget will negatively impact the hospital’s financial strength and expect a downgrade to our bond rating. This will mean higher interest rates to borrow for any future long-term building projects, making further investment and upgrades more difficult.

A recent study by UConn’s Connecticut Center for Economic Analysis (CCEA) states that “the hospital tax and its associated policies inflict systematic widespread damage on Connecticut’s economy and undermine its competitive health.” Through the wages we provide to more than 2,400 full-time employees, the goods and services we purchase and other economic activity created by our caring for the community, Stamford Hospital has a positive economic impact of more than $1 billion each year.

It is utterly perplexing, and disheartening, to realize that our own Stamford legislative delegation unanimously supported the current state budget. There is no question that the additional burdens placed on our hospital will have a significant and negative impact on their constituents and the city’s economy.

Though passed, the vote for this misguided 2016-17 budget was close in both the House and the Senate. Rather than further burdening our health care system, our elected officials instead must address the issues at the core of providing care for a population at or below the poverty level — many still with no insurance coverage. And the state cannot continue to view hospitals as a piggybank to fund general budget obligations.

Our representatives may have one more chance to make this right. After several large, national corporations threatened to leave the state because of the proposed taxes, the governor announced plans to reopen the budget in a special legislative session in June. Unfortunately, threatening to leave is not an option for hospitals. We are owned by and exist to serve the community — a mission that is non-negotiable.

Our elected officials need to revise the budget to minimize the impact to our patients, our employees and our community. We have been very clear. It was not easy for Stamford Hospital to find ways to absorb the previous taxes. Any additional money taken by the state cannot possibly be absorbed without the elimination of programs and services we provide to the community. Cutting programs is certainly not our preference, but we will be forced to consider it to remain financially stable.

One thing is certain — the impact of this budget will be felt by everyone.

We have one more chance to have our voices heard. If the health and wellness of the community matter to you, join us in urging our legislators to protect and improve reimbursement levels for state-run programs during the special session. We need an environment where ideas and compromise are openly discussed. Our elected officials must reconsider and make changes to the tax on our state hospitals. Connecticut can, and should, do better for its residents. Otherwise, the health of our state — and all of us — is at stake.

Brian G. Grissler is president and CEO of Stamford Hospital