Drew Angerer via Getty Images

Retiring Rep. Paul Broun (R-Ga.) endorsed radio show host and Baptist minister Jody Hice (R) as his successor on Monday.

"I encourage the voters of the 10th district to vote for Jody Hice to replace me in the U.S. Congress," Broun said in a radio interview.

Hice faces off against businessman Mike Collins (R) in a July 22 runoff to replace Broun. Broun lost in a five-way GOP primary for the U.S. Senate in May, the results of which will pit Rep. Jack Kingston (R-Ga.) and businessman David Perdue (R) against each other in a July 22 runoff.

Broun said he supported Hice over Collins because he believes Collins would vote to raise the debt ceiling and "do whatever the leadership wants."

"I believe very firmly that Jody Hice will take up my mantle that I, and the torch that I've been carrying to fight, stop this out of control spending," Broun said.

He tweeted about the endorsement as well:

.@jodyhice will fight to fully repeal #Obamacare, defend our individual liberty, & work to restore constitutionally limited government.

— Paul Broun (@PaulBrounforGA) July 14, 2014

I'm confident that @jodyhice will take bold & courageous stands for the Constitution & conservative values as the next #GA10 Congressman.

— Paul Broun (@PaulBrounforGA) July 14, 2014

Hice has made some controversial comments about Islam in the past. He told a tea party crowd in July 2011 that "most people think Islam is a religion, it’s not. It's a totalitarian way of life with a religious component."

Hice also wrote in his 2012 book that "although Islam has a religious component, it is much more than a simple religious ideology."

"It is a complete geo-political structure and, as such, does not deserve First Amendment protection," he wrote.

In the same book, Hice makes disparaging comments about homosexuality and references the Nazis on numerous occasions.

The victor in the runoff will challenge Athens, Georgia, attorney Ken Dious (D) in the November general election.

Also on HuffPost: 2014 Election: $500,000-Plus Super PAC Donors 2014 Election: $500,000-Plus Super PAC Donors

1 of 81 Thomas Steyer: $20.8 Million Thomas Steyer, former head of the San Francisco-based hedge fund Farallon Capital, has given $20,753,000 to super PACs in the 2014 election. A staunch environmentalist, Steyer has donated $20,253,000 to the super PAC he founded to help elect more lawmakers who support action on climate change. Steyer also gave $500,000 to Senate Majority PAC. CE Action Committee (formerly NextGen Committee) spent millions in 2013 to support Sen. Ed Markey (D-Mass.) in his successful special election bid and to help Democrat Terry McAuliffe win the Virginia governorship. Steyer told Bloomberg Businessweek that he wants to push climate change into election conversations in 2014 and beyond. "If you look at the 2012 campaign, climate change was like incest -- something you couldn't talk about in polite company," he said. Steyer was not a super PAC donor in the 2012 election. Share this slide:

AP