Custer County closed game on 19-4 streak to down Florence 50-39

Trent Braun (20) and Dennis Donley (11) walk off the court during halftime of the Florence Huskies' basketball game against the Custer County Bobcats on Saturday at the FHS gym. ( Brandon Hopper / Daily Record )

Josh Sisneros tries to take a charge as Brian O'Connor shoots a lay up during the Florence Huskies' basketball game against the Custer County Bobcats on Saturday at the FHS gym. (Brandon Hopper / Daily Record)

Florence — A big run to end the third quarter put the Huskies in a position to earn a win on Saturday afternoon. The team's poor offense failed to execute in the fourth, though, and the Bobcats went on a 19-4 streak to close out their win.

Brian O'Connor and Conner Rawley each scored double digits as the Class 2A Custer County Bobcats beat Florence 50-39 at the FHS gymnasium.

After a third-quarter timeout by Huskies coach Mark Marquez and a stern talking to his team, the Huskies responded with a 12-0 run to end the quarter and took a 31-29.

About a minute into the fourth, the Bobcats' leading scorers took over. O'Connor scored eight fourth-quarter points and Rawley had seven.

"I challenged them honestly," Bobcats coach Shannon Byerly said. "I told them they were being outhustled, outworked and it was time they respond like men."

Huskies senior Ryan Wilson said the team didn't play with the tempo they needed to, especially in the fourth quarter when they were outscored by the wide margin.

On Deck Thursday: Florence vs. The Classical Academy, 7 p.m.* Friday: Florence @ Fountain Valley, 7 p.m.* Jan. 21: Florence @ Buena Vista, 7 p.m.* Jan. 24: Florence vs. Colorado Springs Christian School, 8:30 p.m.* Jan. 28: Florence @ The Classical Academy, 7 p.m.* * Tri-Peaks League West game

The Huskies fell to 4-5 this season with the non-league loss. Custer County improved to 5-2.

Florence was led by Wilson offensively. He scored a game-high 17 points and was followed by Matthew Miller's 12. No other Huskies player scored more than four.

"No secrets, offensively we really struggled today," Huskies coach Mark Marquez said of his team that was 7 for 21 from the free-throw line. "When we were forced to run our offensive sets (today) we were completely ineffective."

O'Connor finished the game with 16 points, and Rawley had 14.

Florence's next game will be at 7 p.m. Thursday against The Classical Academy at FHS' gym.

NOTES: The Bobcats are coached by Cañon City Police Department Sgt. Shannon Byerly.