Topics: Editor's Picks, Julia Roberts, mark ruffalo, matt bomer, Ryan Murphy, The Normal Heart, Entertainment News

There’s perhaps no genre quite as mixed as the HBO movie. Some are high-quality but seem more apt for box-set gifting on Father’s Day than for actual viewing (“Band of Brothers,” “John Adams”). Some are perfectly fine for a tune-in but seem airily inconsequential, a would-be movie script that didn’t clear the bar for studio funding but, with a star on board, could definitely garner an Emmy (“Phil Spector,” “Game Change,” “Mrs. Harris”). And then some — a select few — take advantage of the intimacy and solitary nature of television viewing in a way that movies, by their nature, cannot.

“The Normal Heart,” airing this Sunday on HBO, is one of those. It’s probably an amateurishly made movie in parts, but that’s beside the point, because it’s great television, and the best movie HBO has broadcast since the similarly sentimental “Mildred Pierce.” For something this watchable and moving, one’s willing to forgive a lot.

The film is an adaptation of Larry Kramer’s play, which was written in the early 1980s and depicts Kramer’s, and others’, own work in the early fight against AIDS, back when the disease was known only as a mysterious gay cancer and when the president, a cosmopolitan Californian with gay friends, refused to speak its name aloud. That the play, and its adaptation, both feature lengthy and sometimes didactic politically minded monologues about gay rights is kind of revelatory. The movie follows one Ned Weeks (played, quite well, by Mark Ruffalo), a fellow we first see declining to doff his shirt at a pre-AIDS Fire Island beach party. Weeks is uncomfortable with other men but very comfortable with the notion of himself — politically, at least — as gay, and quickly becomes involved in a fight that hadn’t previously existed at all.

That Fire Island beach party, which starts the film, presents, at once, the best and worst of “The Normal Heart,” directed at great personal expense by Ryan Murphy after years during which Barbra Streisand, who held the film rights, reportedly refused to move forward. Murphy knows from TV: He has an Emmy for directing “Glee,” and his “American Horror Story” keeps on collecting acolytes. The anarchic, childlike spirit of early “Glee” infuses the opening scene in “The Normal Heart,” in which seemingly throwaway details, tossed off in vamping conversation between Weeks and friends played by Jonathan Groff and Taylor Kitsch, actually convey a great deal. And the luridness of “American Horror Story” rears its head as Groff’s character, amid the idyll, begins to cough, and then collapses; later, Ruffalo’s character happens upon a ménage in the Fire Island woods that looks like some twisted vision of Eden.

It’s through these two sets of skills — “Glee’s” knack for portraying communities coming together, and the “AHS” eye for the horrific — that Murphy makes a credible movie. When he indulges too far, it’s in overselling the terror of his story. To a generation that didn’t live through the AIDS crisis and to a generation that did, the telltale lesions are upsetting for entirely different reasons. They say enough — and two scenes, one in a hospital and another on a subway car, in which the camera careens around and the colors go super-saturated, do far too much to hammer us with the horror of AIDS.