Getting rid of it would blow a $30 billion hole in Obamacare's finances over 10 years.

A total knee replacement. (Photo: M. Spencer Green, AP)

Not many issues get strong bipartisan support in Congress these days. One big exception, though, is the tax on medical devices, a 2.3% levy on everything from tongue depressors to artificial hip joints. Republican or Democrat, most of Congress hates it, and the tax is a top candidate for repeal in the new session that begins Tuesday.

That would be a serious mistake.

OPPOSING VIEW: Tax destroys jobs and innovation

The tax has been in effect since Jan. 1, 2013. It was written into the Affordable Care Act as part of the funding that now helps uninsured Americans get health coverage. Thanks to the law, medical device makers — along with hospitals, insurers and others — are getting millions of new customers and billions in new profits. It only seems fair that they should help offset the cost of the law.

But device makers are well funded and well placed to fight back. Over the past five years, the industry has spent nearly $150 million to lobby against the tax, including tens of millions in carefully targeted contributions to members of Congress.

Like big defense contractors, the medical device industry has companies all over the country. That helps explain why Democratic liberals such as Sens. Al Franken and Amy Klobuchar, of Minnesota, and Sens. Ed Markey and Elizabeth Warren, of Massachusetts, support repeal.

In 2013, the Senate voted 79-20 for a non-binding repeal measure. The handwriting is on the wall. On the merits, though, there are many good reasons to keep the tax.

Getting rid of it would blow a $30 billion hole in Obamacare's finances over 10 years. Repeal backers have been more interested in killing the tax than in finding a way to make up the lost revenue, despite rules that require Congress to do that to avoid increasing the deficit.

Even worse, killing the medical device tax would spur hospitals, health insurers and others to demand relief from taxes or spending cuts they accepted under the new law, putting an estimated $370 billion of health care funding in jeopardy during the next decade. That would dangerously undermine the Affordable Care Act's finances.

The industry complains that the tax is an onerous job killer that drives manufacturing overseas and stifles innovation. None of those claims is true, according to a November analysis by the non-partisan Congressional Research Service.

The 2.3% tax actually nets out to just 1.4% because companies can deduct the cost of paying it as a business expense. Further, roughly half the industry's output is exempt because the tax doesn't apply to exports or to retail medical devices such as eyeglasses and hearing aids.

Demand for the sort of medical devices subject to the tax — artificial joints, for example — tends to be unaffected by small price increases, so the tax will have minimal effect on sales. Though an industry study claims it will cost 43,000 jobs, the CRS report says job loss could be little or none.

Overall, CRS concludes, the tax will have "fairly minor effects," not the devastating impact the industry claims. Congress would do well to listen to its own researchers instead of the industry's self-serving whining. Of course, the CRS doesn't make campaign contributions.

USA TODAY's editorial opinions are decided by its Editorial Board, separate from the news staff. Most editorials are coupled with an opposing view — a unique USA TODAY feature.

To read more editorials, go to the Opinion front page or sign up for the daily Opinion e-mail newsletter.

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1BmQJVJ