Take one father, two sons and the family farm. Add a neighboring farm, several contractors and great views and what do you have? Piatt Estates, a family affair turned suburban development in Chartiers, Washington County.

Ground was broken on Phase I in fall 2013 and now Phase II is about to begin. The 110-acre subdivision is a mixture of single-family homes starting at $331,900, patio homes starting at $281,900 and custom-built homes starting in the mid-$600,000s.

The patio homes have between 1,300 and 1,800 square feet and single-family homes start at 1,800 square feet, according to Shannon Assad of builder S&A Homes. The difference between the two styles is the living space and size of the lot, with patios averaging ¼ to 1/3 an acre while single-family homes start at 1/3 of an acre.

PG graphic: Map & Sales Snapshot

(Click image for larger version)

There are 12 floor plans to choose from for a patio home, mostly one-story but a few two-story designs are available. And there are 15 floor plans for single-family homes.

"Part of the process is working with our design coordinator," said Ms. Assad. Clients have the opportunity to choose everything from cabinets to appliances to plumbing fixtures with upgrades available at an additional cost.

S&A provides Century Cabinets in maple with cherry as an upgrade.

The Winterbury, one of S&A's single-family home designs, offers a well-equipped kitchen open to the family room, where tall windows serve up a splendid view of the surrounding countryside. S&A kitchen design standards include a stainless-steel refrigerator, dishwasher, microwave-hood combo and electric range by Whirlpool along with a garbage disposal.

Flooring in the kitchen and bathrooms starts out at vinyl.

"Some people want ceramic in their kitchen and some want hardwood. This way they can choose what they want in their rooms," Ms. Assad said.

Kohler bathroom fixtures include toilets, shower/tub combination and pedestal sinks.

The Winterbury is 2,634 square feet with four bedrooms and two full baths and a powder room. There is a mudroom on the first floor that can be converted to a first-floor laundry room and other options include a morning room, a 4-foot rear extension or a 2-foot side extension.

"One of the benefits of building with S&A is that we do a lot of floor plans and we specialize in doing custom changes," said Ms. Assad.

The exterior of a home can be customized but changes must meet the community standards of the homeowners association. Landscaping, stone water table, garage door opener (two remotes provided), exterior lighting and light posts are all included at Piatt Estates.

Energy efficiency is built in and ranges from a Lennox 92 percent efficient gas furnace to R-19 wall insulation, R-38 blown-cellulose ceiling insulation and a 50-gallon, quick-recovery electric hot water tank. There are also ultra low-e glass windows and low VOC paints and finishes.

"All the homes are e-homes. Our website details the energy efficiency and basically the customer is going to see monthly saving on utility bills," Ms. Assad said.

The designs include two-car garages and large unfinished basement, some with walkout doors.

The Winterbury single-family model at 109 Piatt Estate Drive is not for sale, but a house with similar features, four bedrooms and 2 1/2 baths starts at $351,900. For more information on the single-family or patio homes in Piatt Estates, call Ms. Assad at 412-518-1082 or go to www.sahomebuilder.com/pennsylvania/pittsburgh/piatt-estates/floorplans.

Some buyers prefer to build a completely custom home. A section of the development called The Enclave at Piatt Estates is for them. Diane Tatano of Howard Hanna Real Estate Services (724) 941-8800 or www.howardhanna.com) is marketing eight estate lots remaining in Phase I and mini-estates in Phase II. The lots range in size from ½ to 1 acre.

"Everything about the home is custom and truly one of a kind," Ms. Tatano said. "Clients sit down with the architect and draw up their dream home."

Primrose Builder, which was named builder of the year in 2014 by the Builder's Association of Metropolitan Pittsburgh, is the primary builder for The Enclave. Other custom builders can be used but must be approved by The Enclave's homeowners association.

Custom building is just part of the draw; the views are outstanding. Looking out across the landscape, visitors can see why it was formerly a horse farm. One Piatt family member still calls it home. Marcus Piatt, vice president of Piatt Estates, built his home on 3 acres his father, Jack, gave him.

"My dad built his house in 1975," Mr. Piatt explained. "Delvin Miller, a legendary sulky driver, gave him the original 10 acres as a wedding present."

The Piatts saw a demand for higher-end homes in the growing area around the Meadows Racetrack and Casino.

In The Enclave, a two-story spec home built by Primrose at 106 Piatt Estates Drive (MLS No. 1022520) has four bedrooms, 31/2 baths, two fireplaces and a 0.65-acre lot. It's priced at $799,999.

"The spec home is available and ready for completion," said Ms. Tatano. However, the buyer will be able to choose colors and finishes. Its floors are a combination of hardwood, ceramic tile and wall-to-wall carpeting

Piatt Estates is approximately 30 minutes from Downtown (non-rush hour) and the airport and 20 minutes from Tanger Outlets and the Soutpointe Golf Club.

CHARTIERS, WASHINGTON COUNTY

Website: www.chartierstwp.com.

Inside Out: Located 26 miles south of Downtown Pittsburgh in Washington County, Chartiers was formed from the southern part of Cecil Township in 1790. It was home to numerous industries including bituminous coal, which was mined for use in steelmaking and blacksmithing as early as 1800. It sold for 25 cents a bushel. By 1876, more than 25 coal banks were on record and mining was big business here.

Chartiers Creek, which gave the township its name, was once used to ship flour and other domestic goods. Chartiers is a fairly large municipality measuring 24.53 square miles in the center of the county. It was the site of two industrial accidents: an explosion at the Ewing pump station in 1886 on what is now the Meadowlands and a lightning strike of two 50,000-barrel oil tanks on June 23, 1908, sending thousands of barrels of burning oil floating down Chartiers Creek and killing all vegetation and trees along the stream for 1 linear mile.

The Washington County Fair Association began in 1911 at the Hagan Stock Farm. The facility now operates year-round, hosting a variety of events where agriculture, industry and recreation meet. The yearly fair takes plate in late August and draws thousands from the tri-state area for 4-H fun, entertainment and the crowning of the Fair Queen.

In 2014, the township's population was 7,818 and the median income was $34,214. You might be surprised to know that residents spend exactly the national average commuting to work: 25.5 minutes a day.

Schools: The Chartiers-Houston school district serves Chartiers and Houston Borough. (chbucs.k12.pa.us) Enrollment: 1,145.

Average SAT scores: Verbal, 499; Math, 528; Writing, 478

Taxes: The annual taxes on a home with a market value of $450,000 would be $7,433. The median home price in Washington County was $141,000 through 2012 making the yearly tax bill $2,477.

Tax Rates for Chartiers Township, Washington County

Township: 24 mills

School: 11.5 mills

Washington County: (24.9 mills)

Earned income tax: 1 percent

— Rosa Colucci, Post-Gazette