By of the

The WEA Trust, long a leading seller of health insurance to Wisconsin school districts, has won the League of Wisconsin Municipalities' endorsement for a new health plan designed for employees of small cities and villages.

The plan is part of WEA Trust's focus on new markets after Act 10 — the state legislation that restricted the bargaining power of many public employees — gave school districts new freedom to buy insurance from other sources.

WEA Trust's health insurance once covered roughly a third of the state's teachers.

The nonprofit health insurer, based in Madison, now generates about 40% of its revenue from state and county employees and from municipalities. But it also is still recovering from the changes in its core market.

WEA Trust today covers about 92,000 people, down from 127,000 in 2011. It lost money last year after posting a small profit in 2013.

It has sold health insurance to small municipalities for about five years but has not made a strong push in the market, said Mark Moody, chief executive officer.

"That's one of the reasons we are excited about the league's endorsement," he said.

The health plan will give small cities and villages the option of self-insuring, or paying the medical bills of employees and their families up to a set limit.

Most large employers — those with 200 or more employees — self-insure, or self-fund. The option is less attractive for smaller employers because self-funding works best when the risk of high medical bills is spread among a large number of people.

Self-funding enables employers to avoid some of the regulations and taxes imposed by the Affordable Care Act, Moody said. It also could give small municipalities more flexibility in designing their health plans.

Most of the members of the League of Wisconsin Municipalities have fewer than 100 employees, said Jerry Deschane, the league's executive director.

The group's membership consists of about 190 cities and 400 villages.

The League of Wisconsin Municipalities — which had never endorsed a health plan before — will receive a royalty payment on any plans that WEA Trust sells to members, Deschane said.

WEA Trust knows the public sector, he said, and is known for its customer service.

Also working in WEA Trust's favor is that it is a Wisconsin company.

"They are Wisconsin jobs," Deschane said. "They speak Wisconsin-ese."

All that, he acknowledged, will only go so far.

"They are going to earn our members' business, and pricing is a big part of it," Deschane said.

Getting the premium right in a competitive market is a challenge, Moody acknowledged.

"We are pretty close to where we need to be in the market, but we have some work to do," he said.

WEA Trust has become a significant competitor in the market to insure state employees. It has won back more than 20 school districts that it lost after Act 10 was enacted. And Moody is optimistic that it can gain market share among small municipalities.

"We really feel we are on a positive trajectory," he said.

In 2012, Moody predicted correctly that WEA Trust would face several tough years after Act 10 became law. But, he said, "We are still standing, and we are not going away."