Debate wrap

DEBATE WRAP: CLINTON’S CONUNDRUM — Strong showdown between Bernie Sanders and Hillary Clinton in Wisconsin last night. Clinton once again ripped Sanders for promising more than he could ever deliver on universal health care and wrapped herself in the banner of the president saying that before Obamacare existed it was a proposal called “Hillary-care.” The debate once again displayed the difficult challenge Clinton faces. She is the pragmatic realist running against a challenger promising free college, universal single-payer healthcare and parades of bankers in handcuffs.

Clinton promises an expansion of Obamacare, targeted efforts to attack student debt and Wall Street reform that focuses on risk more than size. Clinton’s approach is far more realistic, especially given the likely makeup of Congress in 2017. It’s also much harder to fit in a soundbite and fire up a leftward-moving Democratic Party. Clinton will likely win the nomination but she faces a very difficult job selling realism versus idealism. She probably had her strongest moment at the end when she said — in reference to Sanders’ corporate bashing — “I am not a single issue candidate and I do not believe we live in a single issue country.”

Story Continued Below

SAME PROBLEM IN THE GOP — Clinton’s dilemma is pretty neatly mirrored among the GOP candidates who have to somehow beat a man promising to build a giant wall with Mexico, beat the crap out of all our enemies and generally dominate everything in completely non-specific and non-possible ways. Beating fantasy with reality is just really hard. We all like super hero movies and fairytales. We don’t always like eating our vegetables and going to bed early.

SOUTH CAROLINA BLAST — Great POLITICO Caucus event in Charleston last night. Some tasty clips for you. AEI’s James Pethokoukis said GOP candidates are no longer bothering to try and pay for giant tax cuts: http://politi.co/1PQoiar

Gene Sperling riffed on how Donald Trump is catering to people’s worst instincts: http://politi.co/20YEOsB

IS THE MARKET HITTING BOTTOM? — Wells Capital’s Jim Paulsen: “The S&P 500 hit fresh new intra-day and closing lows for this correction … We certainly do not know where or when this stock market will finally bottom and would not be surprised if the S&P ultimately breaches the 1800 level before a sustaining rally commences … However, we do think a bottom is nearing. … [T]he character of a market bottom is forming. Values have been significantly cheapened, investor sentiment has turned decidedly more fearful and a potential positive catalyst of better economic news may be on the horizon.”

BMO’s Jack Ablin: “The market selloff has gotten pretty emotional, particularly among individual investors. Recent readings from the American Association of Individual Investors show that bullishness among small investors is at its lowest level since the ‘flash crash.’ Who can blame them? Since the beginning of the year the S&P 500 is off about 10 percent and the small cap Russell 2000 is more than 15 percent lower.

“Considering the lack of good news, it’s heartening to see favorable action in the Smart Money index, which tracks stock market action in the first half hour of trading and compares it to the last half hour. … For all the terrible headlines, it appears that market action before the closing bell is much more positive than morning activity, indicating that the pros are accumulating stocks.”

MAYBE NOT — Bloomberg: “The global equity bear market deepened in Asian trading, with Japanese stocks headed for their worst week since 2008 amid anxiety over central banks’ ability to revive the world economy. U.S. crude rose from a 12-year low. The Topix index slumped 4.1 percent in Tokyo as traders returned from holiday, pushing the regional Asian benchmark toward its steepest weekly drop since gyrations in Chinese assets at the start of the year.

“The index pared some of its losses as the yen weakened for the first time this week. U.S. index futures indicated gains after losses there helped the MSCI All-Country Index cap a 20 percent slide from its May record. … Japanese Finance Minister Taro Aso said regulators will respond to market volatility if necessary after a move to negative rates failed to assuage anxieties last month” http://bloom.bg/1SLaGQz

MORE TREASURY TEA LEAVES — OK, at some point we will pump the brakes on Clinton Treasury Secretary talk. But not yet.

One sage Washington hand emails: “I think MM is right that the odds of HRC picking someone directly from the financial industry are low. But also missing from the discussion is the diversity factor. Treasury has never been headed by a woman or minority. The historic nature of the first female president nominating the first woman, African Amer., Hispanic, etc. will be tempting.

“In addition to Sandberg and Burwell, which MM mentioned earlier, HRC would likely consider diverse, accomplished candidates w/ non-Wall Street ties like Sam’s Club CEO Rosalind Brewer, Rhode Island Governor (and former State Treasurer) Gina Raimondo, Brainard, Tyson, CFTC Commissioner Sharon Bowen. Former Fed Vice Chair and current TIAA-CREF CEO Roger Ferguson and Citibank Exec Ray McGuire could also make a short-list”

And yet another smart person: “Amazing to me that no one has stated the obvious regarding Laura Tyson, Bill Clinton's Chair of the Council of Economic Advisers & currently at Berkeley (which is as far as you can get from Wall Street). She has a long & positive relationship with the Clintons, & would be the first woman to be named SecTreas.”

And one more! “So if you do another round of this(!), Lael Brainard and Laura D'Andrea Tyson would be good additions to the mix.”

Last one for the day! “I am sure you don't need one more name — but if HRC does win this election it will be on the back of minority voters — she will have to do something historic in her appointments. We have never had a black or Asian Treas Sec so how about some of these folks: Ken Chenault of Amex; Ajay Bhanga of MasterCard; Punit Renjen of Deloitte; Roger Ferguson; Ursula Burns, Xerox”

EVEN THE GOP HATES WALL STREET! — Bloomberg Businessweek’s Josh Green in a piece up at 6 a.m.: “Republicans up and down the ballot are trying to harness voters’ anger by criticizing Wall Street donors. The Republican presidential candidates have turned on the financial giants that have been their biggest benefactors — and are attacking one another for being too close to the financial industry” http://bloom.bg/20YLEhW

COMING SOON: MOHAMED A. EL-ERIAN EVENT — Save March 10th on your calendar for a great America’s Fiscal Future event at Nasdaq with Mohamed A. El-Erian, chief economic adviser at Allianz and author of the must-read new book “The Only Game in Town: Central Banks, Instability, and Avoiding the Next Collapse.” http://bit.ly/20O4uf0

GOOD FRIDAY MORNING — Morning Money goes dark Monday to observe the President’s Day holiday, returning Tuesday, Feb. 16th. Email me on bwhite@politico.com and follow me on Twitter @morningmoneyben.

POLITICO’s Colin Wilhelm on the “Big Short” in DC: “Director Adam McKay … was up on stage before about 300 of his closest D.C. friends Tuesday night for a showing of his (Oscar-nominated) movie adaptation of Michael Lewis' book of the same name. Sens. Sherrod Brown (D-Oh.), Johnny Isakson (R-Ga.), Jack Reed (D-R.I.), and Roger Wicker (R-Miss.) provided bipartisan Congressional sponsorship for the event and introduced McKay, who joked the that he would've preferred if his 2008 comedy 'Step Brothers' were shown to Congress instead.

“‘The main reason I wanted to do this was so we don't forget,’ said Brown, ranking member on the Senate Banking Committee, who also added that his home zip code in Cleveland was the hardest hit in the country by foreclosures in 2007. … ‘If something looks too good to be true, it probably is,’ said Isakson, who also gave the most succinct yet thorough synopsis of the 2008 financial crisis your correspondent has heard.”

THIS MORNING ON POLITICO PRO FINANCIAL SERVICES — Colin Wilhelm on the CFPB's small-dollar lending rule — and to get Morning Money every day before 6 a.m. — please contact Pro Services at (703) 341-4600 info@politicopro.com

THINK THE DEBT CEILING IS OVER? THINK AGAIN!! — POLITICO’s Ben Weyl: “Thought you didn't have to pay attention to the debt limit until next year? Think again. It's true that last year's budget deal inked by President Barack Obama and on-his-way-out Speaker John Boehner raised the debt ceiling until about March 2017. But House Republicans are still angry with how the administration has handled the issue and they want to spotlight the ballooning federal debt.

“So … the House passed legislation (H.R. 3442) to require the Treasury secretary to testify before Congress within 60 days of the federal debt limit being reached and to present a plan to curb government red ink. The bill was backed on a near-party-line vote, and it faces an uncertain road in the Senate.”

LANGONE GOES KASICH — POLITICO’s Daniel Strauss: “Ohio Gov. John Kasich has secured the support of Home Depot co-founder Ken Langone, a megadonor who previously backed New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie. Kasich's campaign announced that they had brought over Langone on Thursday. Langone, a brash and outspoken moderate Republican who brings his own network of like-minded donors, has an estimated net worth of $2.8 billion, according to Forbes.

“It's a major coup for Kasich who, like Christie, has been running in the establishment lane in the Republican primary and also devoted most of his campaign efforts to a strong showing in the New Hampshire Republican primary. Kasich ended up in second place behind only Donald Trump, while Christie placed a disappointing sixth.”

MARKET SEES U.S. RECESSION (AND MIGHT CAUSE ONE) — WSJ’s Greg Ip: “Is the U.S. headed for recession? The markets suggest so. With Thursday’s selloff, the Dow Jones Industrial Average is now down 14.5 percent from its all-time high last May. Yields on risky bonds continue to climb, while investors have sought safety in U.S. Treasurys, sending those yields lower. And oil has hit a nearly 12½-year low. Yet the economic data show no recession. Job growth in January was healthy, and employers are having trouble filling vacancies.

“This dichotomy is neatly captured by two indexes compiled by Cornerstone Macro. One, using financial indicators such as the stock market and corporate bond yields, puts the probability the U.S. is now in recession at 50 percent. The other, which adds in macroeconomic data such as loan delinquencies and inflation-adjusted income, puts the probability at just 28 percent. Of course markets often wrongly predict recessions. But in some circumstances they can help bring them about” http://on.wsj.com/1XmO5ZA

CENTRAL BANKS FAILING? — NYT’s Landon Thomas, Jr.: “What if the bazooka is shooting blanks? Since the financial crisis, it has been gospel for many investors that some combination of actions by central banks — bond buying, bold promises or flirtations with negative interest rates — would be enough to keep the global economy out of recession. But investors’ distress over the latest volley by a major central bank, the surprise decision on Thursday by the Swedish central bank to lower its short-term rate to minus 0.50 percent from minus 0.35 percent, has heightened fears that brazen actions by central bankers are now making things worse, not better.

“Global stock markets sank, the price of oil plunged to a 13-year low and investors fled to safe haven instruments like gold and United States Treasury bills. Markets generally embrace conviction and run away from indecision — which is what many see in the policy making of some of the large central banks these days. The Swedish central bank, the Riksbank, for example, has been criticized in the past for prematurely raising rates, and Thursday’s rate cut was opposed by two bank deputies.” http://nyti.ms/1mvVb0f

JAMIE DIMON MAKES BIG BUY — FT’s Ben McLannahan: “Jamie Dimon has tried to put out a fire in financials stocks, spending more than $26m to buy half a million shares in JPMorgan Chase, the bank he has run for a decade. The purchase — confirmed in a filing on Thursday evening — is the first big open-market purchase Mr Dimon has made since the “London Whale” scandal four years ago, when the bank’s shares were knocked by the disclosure that a trading desk had racked up billions of dollars of losses. It will be seen as a statement by Mr Dimon that the global sell-off in bank shares has been overdone.

“JPMorgan, the biggest US bank by assets, has been caught up in the maelstrom, losing 17 per cent of its market value since the turn of the year. Wall Street analysts have been urging clients to resist the urge to ditch their bank stocks, while elder statesmen of the banking industry such as Dick Kovacevich, former head of Wells Fargo, have appealed for calm. Even so, the sector has continued to drop amid fears over China, plunging oil and the Bank of Japan’s embrace of negative interest rates” http://on.ft.com/1PqiAuE

ALSO FOR YOUR RADAR —

CLINTON MONEY BLITZ — IBT’s David Sirota and Andrew Perez: “Clinton’s campaign is launching a fundraising blitz that includes events with representatives of industries that have significant business interests before the federal government. An International Business Times review of fundraising invitations found that the Clinton campaign’s nationwide tour includes events with corporate officials from the food, investment and energy sectors — all of which have vested financial interests in the policies that the next presidential administration will decide” http://bit.ly/1Ru613T

CHAMBER ON THE FIDUCIARY RULE — Via the U.S. Chamber: “The U.S. Chamber of Commerce is up with a new episode of its podcast series, “The Business Impact,” which features U.S. Chamber Center for Capital Markets Competitiveness President and CEO David Hirschmann who discusses the proposed rule and the impact it will have on small businesses” http://bit.ly/1IGXBDy

BANKS RACE TO BEAT THE TROLLS — Bloomberg Businesweek’s Susan Decker and Elizabeth Dexheimer: “Banks and Silicon Valley are on a collision course, the future of finance may be at stake, and one side is brandishing its most dreaded weapon: the PowerPoint presentation” http://bloom.bg/1TbYKpi

AIG BOWS TO ACTIVISTS — FT’s Alistair Gray: “The activist investors who have called on AIG to break itself up have secured seats on the insurer’s board after directors struck a deal to avoid a damaging fight with shareholders. John Paulson, the hedge fund manager, and a representative of the billionaire Carl Icahn are to become directors from May, AIG said on Thursday … People close to AIG billed the arrangement with its rebel shareholders as a truce that lessens the immediate pressure on directors to split apart the company” http://on.ft.com/1KJBwFP