Oil prices are plummeting and the price per gallon of gas and diesel are following suit. As a municipal fleet operator – responsible for moving approximately 250,000 riders across a 700-square mile service area every day – as well as being an everyday consumer, that should only make me happy, right?

Oddly, the answer is yes and no. I actually get a little concerned when oil prices are this volatile.

ADVERTISEMENT

This price volatility is one of the reasons I feel strongly that having robust energy policies are important.

It’s just one of the considerations that led the Dallas Area Rapid Transit (DART) to advance our migration of its 500 buses operating from diesel to natural gas. We’ve have liquefied natural gas buses in our fleet since the late 1990’s. We began our big push to natural gas – compressed natural gas (CNG) – in 2011.

Just this month, we completed the next phase of our transition to CNG. This milestone for DART was achieved after years of careful planning, community input, taxpayer impact studies and, most importantly, considering our consumers’ needs.

We believed this decision was a sound one when we made it in 2011. It still is. That’s why the next 40 buses we’re about to order will run on CNG.

There’s no shortage of arguments as to the benefits of using natural gas as a replacement fuel for diesel or gasoline. Natural gas is cleaner, by some 30 percent in carbon output and toxins. It’s cheaper by as much as $1 per gallon equivalent, even as we watched the price of gas and diesel plummet in recent weeks.

I’m an engineer by background and education – I rely on data to drive my decisions, and my ability to plot a course for future decisions. With all the data in place, the disciplines I learned at Texas Tech informed me that the switch to CNG was the clear one. Using CNG allows DART to contribute to cleaner air in Dallas while saving taxpayers an estimated $120 million in fuel costs in the next decade. What’s not to like?

So to say I’m bullish on the potential of natural gas is an understatement. I want to share the DART success story whenever possible. I hope others will strongly consider the viability of natural gas in their fleets, from municipal to heavy-duty and everything in between.

That’s where policy comes into play. Nobody doubts that energy policy is critical to the continued strength of our nation, from both a national and economic security standpoint. But I know that strong energy policy could also be an important part of further growing the natural gas success story we’ve experienced in Dallas and across the country.

Because oil prices have dropped so quickly – and there’s so much else going on in the world every day, particularly in Washington – I can see how energy policy isn’t as hot a topic as it has been in the past. I worry that recent headlines, like one in the Financial Times (“US oil imports from OPEC at 30-year low”) make it easier to become complacent about falling gas prices and move on to other issues.

But energy policy must always be among our leading policy discussions. As a municipal fleet operator I can never stop thinking about our energy future, and neither can our elected officials.

So I appreciate that the Senate Finance Committee is looking at energy policy at a time when so many other things are demanding Congress’ time. In my mind, that’s clear recognition of the fact that we can never take our eye off the importance of strong energy policy to our current and future needs.

Making it easier for businesses and municipalities to leverage tax incentives to maximize the potential of American natural gas is good policy – something the committee is thankfully discussing. Making it a long-term one will dramatically enable operators (like me) to plan and grow. In doing so, we can invest more in people and infrastructure. That’s something every community needs, including Dallas!

In spite of wider adoption in the last five years, the natural gas success story in America is still in its infancy. But ask anyone of us who have made the switch, and we’ll tell you why we’re never looking back…and why energy policy is so important to our future.

Thomas is the president and executive director of Dallas Area Rapid Transit (DART).