Obamacare will wreck many family budgets in 2016, but the safety and health of patients are also at stake. Over half of the largest Affordable Health Reform co-ops have failed spreading panic in the White House. To make matters worse, a prominent doctor compares the American health system to a disastrous plan crash.

Each day passengers aboard aircraft fly confidently knowing there is a certified and licensed professional pilot at the controls in the cockpit. But what if the government required two separate and autonomous pilots to work the controls simultaneously?

“The consequences, within minutes, would be disastrous,” states John P. Tedeschi, a licensed pilot in Robbinsville, NJ acknowledged yesterday. “Unfortunately, with constant interference from the government and insurance companies, that is exactly what is happening to doctors – every hour of every day.”

“The ability to fly a plane is the result of the wisdom of aerodynamics and mechanics,” Tedeschi explains. “The pilot must have a comfortable and working relationship with his machine before he can operate it precisely and safely. There cannot be two captains on the flight deck. The pilot makes sure the equipment is properly maintained and that there is enough fuel for the trip. If the owner of the plane wants to save money, however, common sense dictates he cannot expect to have the same outcome using less fuel and less maintenance.”

Not only is Tedeschi a pilot, he is also a physician and has been practicing medicine for over thirty years. With the wisdom of both the pilot and doctor, he cautions that the government is treating passengers far better than American patients seeking medical care.

“The doctor, a certified and licensed professional, is second-guessed every step of the way and is told how to practice medicine,” Dr. Tedeschi explained. And they are being forced to provide care “not based on individual patients or their issues; rather, based on ‘how much it costs,’ and whether such a treatment or procedure is ‘really needed’ determined by computer-generated algorithms, not by the individual's condition.”

Dr. Tedeschi, a renowned, knowledgeable and honest critic of Obamacare, aims his truths straight at insurance companies.

“They are directing physicians on what is – or is not – appropriate treatment. It's all about money. Not safety. Not healthcare. Money,” the doctor stresses. “What if these same companies entered the cockpit and began to change the flight's ‘checklist’ in order to save time and money? Or employed unqualified or incompetent people in the passenger compartment to outline the safety features of the aircraft and what to do in an emergency? It wouldn't be long before disaster struck.”

“Sadly, it's not a ‘what if’ scenario anymore,” charges Dr. Tedeschi. “It is happening now in medicine. Physicians cannot be second-guessed or directed to perform their craft by individuals and forces with less experience.”

“Many times, when flying an aircraft, an unexpected complication arises,” he elaborates. “The pilot may contact Air Traffic Control and request a change in flight plans. The pilot, however, remains in control; still in charge.”

“The controllers' main response and obligation is to assist the pilot with whatever is needed – not to distract the pilot from the problem at hand, but to assist in the main mission of flying the airplane. The first thing a pilot is taught in learning to fly is ‘first fly the plane,’ and then solve the problem.”

But with Obamacare, “physicians, on the other hand, are repeatedly interrupted and challenged with every decision they make on behalf of the well-being of the patient. They are misdirected and ordered to adhere to ‘flow sheets’ that have absolutely nothing to do with the safety or care of the patient,” Tedeschi points out. “Medical decisions today are dollar-driven. And that is contrary to the oath that all doctors take.”

Dr. Tedeschi illustrates the failures in the American healthcare system by considering that when a pilot declares an in-flight emergency, “Air Traffic Controllers hear the Mayday – but instead of reacting immediately to help solve the problem, they first demand that the pilot fill out several forms, explaining the emergency, how it happened, why it happened, what they need in order to correct the problem and, then, depending on how much it will cost, controllers respond, ‘Flight 123, please hold your position while we secure approval for your request.’"

If American health is intended to be improved, why do the latest Gallup polls now indicate that about one-third of all citizens are putting off medical treatment because of costs? In 2001, only 19% delayed care because of money.

In October, physicians, nurses and medical staff were bombarded in October with what one doctor termed “one of the biggest Obamacare blunders toward government controlled medicine.” Thanks to the Affordable Care Act, a new system called “ICD-10,” made the 14,600 codes used for diagnostic and procedural codes inflated to about 70,000 overnight.

Physicians and analysts who have used ICD-10 indicate the system is far more complex, extremely detailed and is burdensome. Various estimates reveal that tax payers are paying $5.5 billion to $13.5 to implement ICD-10 nationwide. Experts reveal the suggested benefits from this bureaucratic monster will only be $.7 billion to $7.7 billion for the next decade. This new coding mandate, along with Electronic Health Records (EHRs), have changed the medical profession for the worse according to many critics.

“The obligation and responsibility of the physician, to present to the third party payer, is like a pilot asking to be cleared for take-off after a complete flight check was satisfactorily performed,” explains Tedeschi. “And then being told by the control tower that the manner in which the flight check was performed needs to be presented in a ‘different language,’ no longer verbally, but written in a format that changes year to year -- or the flight is cancelled.”

He equates the Obamacare “Control Tower” as “being operated by lawyers, businessmen and politicians” with the EHR requirements being like “pilots having to document, in writing, every move they make on the flight deck –every switch they throw, every button they push, every instinctive move they make. And if they don't – even if the plane took off and landed safely – they would be financially punished by the ‘Form and Document Police’ for not following the rules.”

Tedeschi observes that pilots, by their training, nature and protocols, do a “walk around” and then cockpit check for aircraft safety prior to each flight. After starting the aircraft, “RPM's are increased, a run-up is performed, the transponder is set, the pilot marks a course and makes a flight plan with full concentration, and finally radios the control tower for clearance to taxi.”

“The tower responds, ‘Sorry, Flight 123, we can't just take your word for it that you did the flight preparation, you need to put it – plus all your thoughts – in writing, before you can push back from the gate,’" Tedeschi continues. “Have I not done this hundreds of times and logged thousands of hours in the air? Do I not know what I'm doing? You need this in writing? For EACH flight?"

"Finally, after all of the bureaucratic requirements are fulfilled – and you're at a cruising altitude about to settle back and enjoy the flight – a message comes in demanding you put the plane on auto-pilot and fill out a form that asks questions about 27 previous flights,” Tedeschi cites. “And failure to do so, quickly, will result in your loss of a pilots' license and be forced to land at the nearest airport.”

“This is the world of medical audits,” Tedeschi offers. “Doctors are bombarded daily with ongoing demands to justify previous medical decisions, all under the threats of loss of license to practice medicine, withholding payments and possibly being charged with fraud.”

“The instructions are for immediate compliance – to drop everything at the moment, despite the number of people in the waiting room – in order to fill out the forms,” he continues. “And patients wonder why the doctor is late – or spends most of the time entering data into a laptop – rather than concentrating on their well-being.”

"Control medicine – and you control the population,” Dr. Tedeschi emphasizes. “Welcome to the world of medicine. Welcome to the world of government control.”