Anne Hill, 16, who friends call Annie, has not been seen or heard from in six months.

Police arrested two teenagers in the disappearance of a Casady High School student.

Anne Hill, 16, who friends call Annie, has not been seen or heard from in six months. The break in the case came from one of the suspects herself. According to court records, 17-year-old Chloe Thomas turned herself in Friday, at Oklahoma City Police Headquarters.

She told investigators that 16- year-old Chadd Raymond choked Hill to death at his brother's apartment in Edmond, near Second Street and Rankin, on April 11. The two then allegedly loaded Hill's body into the back of her car and drove to an unknown wooded area.

Thomas could not remember the exact location where they dropped her body, but admitted they covered her with sticks and brush. The two then drove back to Edmond where they allegedly abandoned her car in a neighborhood near the apartment. The car was recovered in Fink Park in Edmond,

"It was just a few days later around April 16 that Anne's car was located," said Sgt. Jennifer Wardlow.

Investigators questioned Raymond and Thomas early on in the investigation. Both suspects gave police the same story: That Hill allegedly came to the apartment to purchase drugs, they all watched a movie, but she became upset and left after finding out her drug dealer was in jail.

According to court records, the only thing consistent between that, the confession, and what Hill told her mom before her disappearance was that Hill planned to watch a movie with friends in Edmond

10/13/2014 Related Story: Two Arrested On Murder Charge In Missing Piedmont Teen Case

"We really are just processing it ourselves," Edmond Public Schools District Spokesperson Susan Parks-Schlepp was shocked to hear the news.

She said Raymond is currently a student at Edmond Santa Fe High School. Before this year, he attended the same alternative school as Chloe Thomas. Both were previously enrolled at Boulevard Academy in Edmond, but they did not attend the school at the same time.

Administrators said Thomas withdrew from school on April 14, 2014, just three days after the alleged murder.

"We're talking about teenagers here, young teenagers, and this is a very, very serious charge." Parks-Schlepp said the school is sorting out how it will address student-parent questions.

It is still unclear how all the teenagers knew each other, but there was apparently a connection social media sites. The motive for the killing is as much a mystery now as the day Annie Hill disappeared and investigators did not say if they have been able to recover Hill's body.

Raymond and Thomas are being both held in the Oklahoma County Jail on first-degree murder complaint.

Annie Hill's family issued a statement on Monday, thanking everyone who helped search for her:

"We are thankful for the prayers and support during the last six months. Our gratitude for the many, many individuals and organizations who have contributed time and resources in our search for Anne is immeasurable."