Felician Village will host a Medicare information session at 3 p.m., Monday, Oct. 12, at the Village Hall, 1635 S. 21st St., Manitowoc. (Photo: Getty Images/iStockphoto)

GREEN BAY - Wisconsin health care insurers and providers said added services, collaboration and familiarity have put the Green Bay area ahead of the curve when it comes to Medicare Advantage enrollment.

Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services data shows that 50 percent of Green Bay area residents eligible for Medicare, mostly those over 65, now enroll in Medicare Advantage. That compares to a national enrollment rate of 33 percent. Green Bay residents’ enrollment in Medicare Advantage plans increased 45 percent since 2011. During the same period, the Medicare-eligible population only grew 16 percent.

United Healthcare Medicare and Retirement in Wisconsin CEO Chris Abbott said added benefits like dental services, vision care and house calls have helped generate interest in the alternative to Medicare.

“I look at the Green Bay marketplace and it really is one of the big Medicare Advantage wins in the country. Wisconsin, overall, is a success story for Medicare Advantage,” Abbott said. “The combination of the value, the financial protection and predictable costs are huge parts of why it’s been successful in Green Bay.”

Traditional Medicare involves fees based on services a person needs, with the patient paying a deductible and Medicare picking up the rest of the bill. Medicare Advantage coverage is provided by private insurance companies that offer health insurance plans such as HMOs and PPOs that are familiar to people now approaching retirement age.

Medicare Advantage also combines traditional Medicare's Parts A and B, which provide separate coverage for hospitals and doctors, into a single plan. Some plans also fold in the Part D drug benefit.

The program has been around since the 1970s, but previously operated under different names.

“Baby Boomers frequently are coming off employer or commercial plans that have premiums and co-payments,” Abbott said. “They understand the dynamics of that and get Medicare Advantage. With Medicare Advantage, we put this into a single package: You get one card from one company. It’s easier.”

Dr. Ashok Rai, president and CEO of Prevea Health, said the growth of Medicare Advantage enrollment follows the retirement of a group of Baby Boomers who became more informed health care consumers as they navigated changes in employer benefits packages and the rollout of the Affordable Care Act in 2011.

Prevea has made a concerted effort to work with its those patients before reach retirement age to help them understand the transition to Medicare and be able to evaluate their options.

"What we don't want them to do is to be confused when they transfer to Medicare or Medicare Advantage," Rai said.

Many are finding Medicare Advantage to be the right choice. In fact, about half of Prevea's Medicare patients are now enrolled in an Advantage program.

Bellin Health COO Jim Dietsche said the local growth of Medicare Advantage is also due to strong competition between United Healthcare, Network Health and Humana for enrollees.

“They’re offering zero premium plans in our market,” Dietsche said. “To the payer, the attractiveness is the rates the federal government is paying them. We’re a low-cost region when it comes to Medicare.”

Dietsche said the added services insurers offer Medicare Advantage enrollees helps providers, too. He said Medicare Advantage programs require health care insurers to share more patient information with providers. That, in turn, improves patient outcomes and cuts Medicare costs overall.

“We don’t treat a Medicare Advantage patient any different from a traditional Medicare patient,” Dietsche said. “The bigger thing starting to happen is the Medicare Advantage plans are sharing more patient information with us so we can provide better care for patients. It’s incumbent on providers and the insurance companies that are providing that benefit to continue to work closer together to share information to get the outcome we’re looking for. The more we can exchange information and make it better for patients, the better off we will all be.”

jbollier@gannett.com and follow him on Twitter@GBstreetwise.

Read or Share this story: http://gbpg.net/27EaibY