Buy Photo Claire Crowell stirs a pot of sauce in her home kitchen. Between work and her raising her daughter, she says she’s had to get organized in order to have the time to prepare meals. (Photo: Sanford Myers / The Tennessean)Buy Photo

Claire Crowell grew up in kitchens. Now she is running several of them. Director of operations for Puckett's family of restaurants, she worked in the kitchen at Puckett's in middle school, high school and off and on in college.

Her dad, Andy Marshall, is the founder of Puckett's. Crowell began her work in the Leiper's Fork Puckett's Grocery, which is no longer part of the collection.

"When I went to college, I was absolutely certain I would not be in the restaurant business after graduation," she says. "It wasn't that I didn't love the family business or the work, I just thought I wanted to do something else."

With a degree in French and French literature, she took a bit of time off after graduation. Her plan was to return to school to get a master's degree and teach.

"Dad asked me to come help him for awhile during my sabbatical. I agreed," she says. "Six months after I was back in the business, I decided I wanted to stay, after all. I love it and decided that it's a better career path for me."

She took another sabbatical nine months ago, this time to stay home with her new baby, Hattie Jane.

"After about a month, I was ready to go back to work," she says. "At first, (working) was pretty easy, but about four weeks into it, I became pretty stressed. I was working a lot, on the road a lot and stressed when I got home about not having enough time with Hattie."

She set out to correct that.

She says she, her husband and baby moved from East Nashville to Franklin, which made a huge difference in her days. And she got herself organized in other areas, such as cooking dinner.

"Of course I could bring dinner home every night, and my husband, Tyler, would be fine with that. He's a comfort food kind of guy," she says. "But I end up eating probably two meals a day at work, and when I get home, I want to cook."

Planning ahead

She says cooking is second nature to her; it was just a matter of getting into a rhythm, changing her menus, planning ahead, especially for grocery shopping — and cooking and freezing food in bulk on the weekends.

"I usually cook a lot on the weekends; I like to do spaghetti sauce, stews, things that freeze and thaw and reheat well," she says. "I've learned to label everything I put in the freezer with its date so that we use the fresher things first."

She patties and portions big containers of ground beef and freezes them so she can grab what she needs for burgers or chopped steak. She says she thinks meats need to be cooked within two months. Anything over three is not acceptable to her.

"Now, if you have a deep freezer, that's another thing, but for freezers in refrigerators, I just don't like to keep things too long. Everything has a shelf life," she says.

She uses slow cookers sparingly, usually just to reheat food she has frozen.

"I've had some bombs on Crock-Pot recipes trying to make them in the morning before work. For me, they're better for reheating," she says.

And she's not a baker. That's too precise, she says.

"I just cook; it's so easy for me to throw a meal together," she says. "Baking is an exact science; it's too time-consuming."

In addition to meals for herself and Tyler, she's making Hattie's food. She has made that work through trial and error, and a bit of research.

"I have found that making Hattie's food doesn't have to be hard or complicated," she says. "I thought I would need all the gadgets and gizmos, but it really boils down to getting the food soft enough to blend."

She bakes sweet potatoes to retain flavor and make them easier to peel. She also bakes chicken breasts, then cuts them into tiny pieces to blend into vegetables for added protein.

"You can do the same with tofu if that's up your alley," she says. "Since I'm a cook-ahead kind of gal, I freeze them into ice trays, then store in labeled quart-size bags. I run some cool water over the cubes to get them out easier."

Big batch o' spaghetti sauce

This recipe is adapted from Ree Drummond's blog Pioneer Woman

5 pounds ground beef (ground round or ground sirloin)

3 tablespoons olive oil

6 cloves garlic, minced

1 cup red wine (or low-sodium beef broth)

2 cans 28-ounce crushed tomatoes

1 can 14-ounce crushed tomatoes

1 can (small, 4-ounce) tomato paste

1 jar good store-bought marinara sauce

2 teaspoons Italian herbs (get the good stuff from Savory Spice on Main Street in downtown Franklin)

2 tablespoons onion powder (exclude this if you are using real onion)

4 whole bay leaves

2 tablespoons sugar

2 teaspoons sea salt or Kosher salt

¼ cup finely minced fresh parsley (or 3 tablespoons dried parsley flakes or more to taste)

1 whole rind from one wedge Parmesan

½ cup grated Parmesan cheese

Optional

2 whole large yellow onions, diced

2 whole green bell pepper, seeded and diced

½ teaspoons crushed red pepper

In a large pot over medium-high heat, brown the ground beef until totally browned. Remove meat from pot with a slotted spoon and put into a bowl. Set aside.

Discard any grease in pot, but do not clean the pot. Drizzle in olive oil. When it is heated, this would be where you'd throw in the diced onion and diced bell pepper if you are using it. Stir it around for 90 seconds and then add the garlic. Stir and cook for an additional minute.

Pour in the wine and allow it to bubble up and reduce for about 90 seconds. Add crushed tomatoes, tomato paste and marinara sauce. Stir to combine, then add your Italian seasoning, onion powder (if using) sugar, salt, bay leaves and crushed red pepper (if using). Stir, then add cooked ground beef and stir to combine. Place the lid on the pot and allow to simmer for 1 hour, stirring occasionally. Add a little water or some low-sodium broth if it needs more liquid.

After an hour, add the minced parsley and the rind from a wedge of Parmesan (or grated Parmesan if you prefer). Stir to combine, then put the lid back on and allow it to simmer for 30 minutes or so. Discard bay leaves before serving.





Hattie's breakfast blend

Whole milk plain yogurt

1 ripe banana

Handful of diced strawberries (Note that this is on the high-allergen list, so omit or substitute this if you haven't tried them already)

Handful of blueberries

Dash of vanilla if you feel fancy

Blend with whatever blending device you have; I use a simple food grinder since my fancy food processor broke. And add baby cereal to thicken it up to desired consistency and blend again. The great thing about this is that you can use whatever fruits you have available to sweeten the yogurt.

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/1nju44b