Reader responses to the week’s most commented stories. (Photo: Getty Images/iStockphoto)

Flu patients jamming Shore emergency rooms

Story:Several hospitals say their ERs have reached capacity because of a flu outbreak and respiratory virus, forcing them to divert patients to other hospitals.

Anthony Vito Paccione: Why are people going to a doctor or emergency room when they have the flu? Are they nuts? When you have the flu, or scrapes, or even need a few stitches, go to a "minute clinic" found at large pharmacies. There are doctors' assistants who are certified to treat these issues, plus you get much quicker attention there, as opposed to sitting in an emergency room waiting area for five hours. The cost is much less, usually about $50 as opposed to hundreds of dollars at an emergency room.

If a "minute clinic" cannot treat you, then you should go to an "urgent care" facility, which is still cheaper than the emergency room.

Barbara Whitt: If the minute clinic or urgent care facility are not in your network, it can cost you thousands instead of a co-pay to see your doctor or go to the ER. Most Obamacare plans require you to call them for permission to go to urgent care or the minute clinic. And if they are not in your network you are out of luck.

Bonnie Rast Cairns: With so many doctors not accepting new patients, of course the emergency rooms are flooded. I have called more than 20 doctors' offices within a half an hour of my home and they have all turned us away. They all say the same thing: We have met our quota for your health care provider and we are no longer accepting new patients from that health plan. So much for the medical oath they take.

Ray M Ond: People flood ERs with ridiculous complaints because they either don't get themselves a doctor, or wait for the situation to become so serious that they can't wait for an appointment. People abuse emergency rooms because it's a way to see a doctor.

Gina Marie YT: They say the flu "mutated" so the shot doesn't work, but in reality they just "guessed" wrong this year.

Nicole Andreano Ianco: You can't get an appointment with your personal doctor for weeks. So unless there's an urgent care, ER is your only option.

Melissa Hahl: If you can't get an appointment with your primary care physician within a day, you should switch doctors. I work for 18 doctors. Nearly every one of them has same-day sick visits, and if you can't see them, they have nurse practitioners.

Octavia Harrell: I've never known a doctor who wouldn't take emergency sick visits. And anyone who didn't shouldn't be a doctor.

Christine McCabe: I spent Sunday and Monday at the ER at Community Medical Center in Toms River. What a joke. We waited for hours in the lobby, as they did testing in the triage area including taking blood. We were there because my husband was showing signs of a stroke but we didn't even see the nurse-practitioner until after waiting six hours. People were vomiting, coughing and choking, and none were separated out of the crowd.

The staff was busy, but no one was going above and beyond their job description and gave nothing comforting or helpful to those of us waiting. It took another two hours to finally see the ER doctor, who kept my husband for the night in a holding room with no food. I haven't seen an ER like that since I was a kid in Manhattan at Columbia Presbyterian, and you knew you had a 12-hour wait going in. There were patients who were lining the halls in cots waiting to be seen and they were still there in the morning. People were frustrated, mad and uninformed as to what was going on. When asked later on, a nurse told me it has been this way for weeks now with no relief in sight.

Pat Davis: Doesn't NJ have those walk-in centers like NY?

Ray M Ond: Plenty of them. People are just too dumb to use them.

Christopher Nelson: Most doctors now don't do anything for treatment. They tell you to go to the emergency room.

Doreen Tamney DeMarco: The only suggestion I would make is to have two different doctors' offices, with multiple doctors in each per household. If you can't get in with one, you can try another. You have options..Also try to pick a doctor's office that has nurse practitioners. That gives you even more options in an emergency or in flu season.

Laura Renee: I have a $100 co-pay if I go to the ER and $25 for my general practitioner. It would have to be a true emergency for me to choose the ER. Certainly not for the flu or even upper respiratory.

Christine McCabe: People go to the ER because they are guaranteed care without having to pay. That is why it has been overrun for years with illegals going for ear aches, strep throat and other infections that are normally taken care of by family doctors. Now it is also people with ACA insurance with deductibles that cannot be met by most.

Gary Donaldson: The problem is that doctors are only open certain hours during the day and week, whereas hospitals are open 24/7.

Iris Ortiz: I get the flu shot every year and this year it seems like it didn't work. This is the second time in three months that I got sick. No flu shots for me next year.

Black Lakewood man: KKK member saved my life

Story:John Brown lay prone in a village near Bo Tuc, Vietnam, in 1967, bleeding heavily, fingers shot off, half of one hand blown away. Suddenly, another member of his team, a card-carrying member of the Klan, rushed over to save him.

Lynne Wooby: Obviously the brotherhood of battle is stronger than the Klan.

Katherine Naranjo: Not all white people are racist. Not all blacks are thugs. Glad this man is still alive.

Linda Bedell: Proud to say I know this man and his twin brother. They are two of the kindest, most generous, most humble human beings you will ever meet. True gentlemen in every sense of the word.

Jim Casagrand: Glad you got to come home, Mr. Brown, and thank you for your service to our country. It's promising that something good came out of such bad things (racism and Vietnam).

Ryan Berger: My father always said, "No matter the color of their skin, everyone breathes the same air and bleeds the same color." He was a Vietnam vet and told me stories how he was shunned by some whites because he palled around with African-Americans. Hopefully this generation can help pull us over the hump.

Yha' Ru: He's part of your team in war. He damn well better help you. Y'all are fighting together. Back in the U.S? Maybe a different story. People in the service come from all over. You don't get put where you ask. But you are expected to do your job. That's the job of a team member. This is not extraordinary. Feel-good story, yes.

Maria Pirela: Wow, what an inspiring story.

Gail Oliver: God touched the rescuer's heart. That's humanity in us.

Deborah Brown Driscoll: I had so much respect for Mr. Brown, even before I read this article. He is such a kind and gentle soul and his brother also.

Amy Ellison: See, not all white people are bad or racist. I'm glad to hear that there is a chance for people to change.

Denise Desiree Capizzo Stewart: A documentary I watched about the KKK said that a lot of young men are born into it and don't have much of a choice. In this case it's nice to know that in combat a U.S. soldier would help a fellow soldier. That bond is stronger.

How much did Christie trip to Dallas cost taxpayers?

Story: Cowboys owner Jerry Jones paid for Gov. Christie's trips to watch the team play, his office said, but New Jersey taxpayers remain on the hook for undisclosed expenses incurred by Christie's security detail.

Logan Parker: You gotta love a rich governor who harps about government workers' benefits, then uses taxpayers' money for his own pleasure trips. Hypocrite.

Patricia Murphy: The "transparent," "reformer" Christie has had a long pattern of withholding public information from the public until he is absolutely forced legally to release it. He plays games with information that belongs to the public.

Jim Sage: I'm very concerned that the governor's office does not have the records. What justification is there for the taxpayers to pay for his trips — wife included — when there are no records?

Aileen Austria: This is arrogance at a level that hopefully will cost him the presidency.

Kevin O'Connor: Charge us now; we will pay later when it comes time to vote.

Matthew Bernstein: Christie is supposed to work for the people of New Jersey. We pay his salary. We have some of the highest taxes in the country and this guy spends our money touring around the U.S.

Kerri Sloan Cruz: He should be paying with his own money for something like that, not the taxpayers.

Bob Hilton: It doesn't really matter. We elected him and he is entitled to live a life. We can't tell him what he can and can't do!

Jill Trim Applegate: Taxpayer money paid for his security detail, just as it would if he went on any other personal trip. He has security; that's part of being governor. What if he went to a family wedding or function outside of New Jersey? Geez, people, get a grip. He is allowed to have a life. He's allowed to root for whatever football team he chooses. He is allowed to wear a shirt that he likes.

Jessica Venticinque: I would be less worried about Chris Christie's trip to Dallas and more more concerned with all the lavish vacations the Obamas take on our dime.

David Bowman: It amazes me how easy it is deflect the issue onto another entity. The Obama vacation is something to be talked about separately. If our tax money is spent on ventures like this, then if you feel it is wrong, use your voice and vote. The anger displayed by some is futile unless used constructively.

Jon Koehler: Christie wasn't the first governor to do it and won't be the last.

Chad Hurley: It was a personal trip so it better not have cost the taxpayers of NJ a cent. He can pay for his security detail out of his own pocket. It's not like he had to pay for the tickets, the seats or the private box.

Greg Wasielewski: Find something of importance to report about. Politicians everywhere travel on taxpayers' dime.

Pamela Holmquist Petersen: Any trip that doesn't benefit our state should come out of his pocket. His personal trips are not the taxpayers' responsibility. I work for the state and I would be fired if I used state funding to pay for my personal expenses. Shouldn't our governor be held to the same standard as he holds his employees?

John Gnapp: One of the perks of the job.

Anthony Dispoto: Christie does wrong, and people still bring up Obama. Remember when we were children, and they taught us that "two wrongs don't make a right"?

Gary Collins: I don't care how much it cost, I have zero respect for him after that.

Narcan credited with fewer heroin deaths

Story:More than 200 people who overdosed on heroin at the Jersey Shore last year may owe their lives to an antidote now carried by police officers and medics.

Alva Flores: That's great. All lives are worth saving. I hope all 200 people are getting the help they need instead of gambling with their lives.

Richard T Colarusso: The problem is that of the 200, 200 likely used again very soon after. Narcan is not the solution....

Terri Foti Titus: I agree, but I don't think that happens This drug is the devil and we as parents and friends have to do something about this. There has to be something we can do as a community to stop this severe drug epidemic. Our children are dying and there's so much education out there for them now. But once they have this monkey on their back, the devil takes them over.

Alva Flores: We don't know if those 200-plus who were saved were all drug addicts. Maybe it was a young kid trying drugs for the first time and overdosed, or a veteran suffering from PTSD who decided to overdose, or that elderly person who didn't read their new prescription directions carefully.

Ryan Curran: The doctors are the drug dealers. Stop them from prescribing opiates and this epidemic will fade instantly. Today's drug dealers aren't the guys hanging out on street corners in Asbury Park, Camden, and Newark. Today's drug dealers are wearing white suits and ties — politicians, Big Pharma companies and family physicians. Stop the root of the problem first and the tree dies.

Chris Walton Sherwood: I just hope the ones who think they shouldn't carry or use Narcan are not your loved one lying there and needing it. Every life is worth saving. Heroin doesn't care who you are; it takes your soul.

Thomas E. Canny: I hope none of the people who have been saved people are becoming repeat clients, and that they are being rehabbed.

Don Murphy: Now that people know something can save them, will more people want to try the drug?

Luigi Tasso: Narcan may not be the ultimate solution, but it can buy some time for these people to get help. We can only hope for the best. That nearly fatal overdose might be a wake-up call for some. I wish Narcan and training would be more available to individuals who would be interested in carrying a kit just so they are able to save a life, like knowing CPR.

Kayla Veal: It's hilarious how any time there are comments about an addiction story, out come the fools who think they are invincible to any kind of addiction, not just illegal narcotics. They all think they're so much better than the user.

Leon Crane: So now you have police running to administer Narcan to people who overdose, while real victims that truly need law enforcement are left waiting? And not being able to charge them? What message is that sending? Keep on using and overdosing and we will keep saving you. Where are the consequences? Charge them and force them into rehab the first time. Any convictions after that they go to jail.

Anne-Marie Cottone: If heroin use is illegal, then isn't this the equivalent of the police giving a drunken driver a cup of coffee and sending him on his way?

Amanda Kearns Hinkson: Narcan is a temporary solution. It does not solve the problem, nor does it save everyone.

Kayla Veal: Unless you're the type of horrible person who actually wishes death on people or are naive enough to think you're invincible to any kind of addiction, then you shouldn't have an issue with Narcan.

Read or Share this story: http://on.app.com/1BM049H