This is an op-ed from Cecile Richards, the president of the Planned Parenthood Action Fund.

Not long ago, on a campus in Iowa, I met a young woman who proudly told me she was about to become the first person in her family to graduate from college. It was thanks to two things, she said: scholarships and birth control.

For her, and for millions of women in America, reproductive health isn't a theoretical issue, a social issue, or a distraction—it's a fundamental issue of economic security and opportunity. As Hillary Clinton declared after eight Democratic debates without a single question on the topic: "It goes to the heart of who we are as women: our rights, our autonomy, our ability to make our own decisions."

Advertisement - Continue Reading Below

It's time to move this issue from the sidelines to the center of the conversation—because women's reproductive rights are essential to our country's economic success. And they are absolutely on the line in this election.

When the first Planned Parenthood health center opened nearly a century ago, it was illegal to give out or seek out information on how to prevent pregnancy. But in the decades since, effective birth control and access to safe, legal abortions have improved health outcomes and opened new doors for women. Today, the number of women who finish four or more years of college is five times what it was before birth control became legal. One study even found that the Pill is responsible for a third of women's wage gains since the 1960s.

Most Popular

Helping women reach their full potential isn't just the right thing to do—it's the smart thing to do. Women are breadwinners in two-thirds of American households with children. Women save more than men, and when they spend, they're more likely to invest in their families and communities. Women-owned firms are the fastest growing segment of new business in the U.S., and there's a correlation between more women on corporate boards and higher profits. As Hillary points out, a huge percentage of America's growth over the last few decades is due to women entering the workforce. In other words, empowering women empowers families, communities, and our entire country.

But when access to reproductive health care is restricted, it's women of color and low-income women who pay the highest price. In the first three months of 2016, politicians across the country introduced more than 400 new abortion restrictions that put reproductive health care even further out of reach for women who already face the greatest obstacles to care. Combined with laws like the Hyde Amendment, these restrictions make it nearly impossible for low-income women and disproportionately women of color to exercise their full reproductive rights. As a result, unintended birth rates for low-income women are five times higher than they are for those with higher incomes.

Despite these facts, Donald Trump recently said that "women get it better" than men. I'm not sure who he spends his time talking to, but it can't be the millions of American women who still don't have equal pay, or the Planned Parenthood health center patients in places like my home state of Texas who have to fight tooth and nail just to get basic health care. His attitude is more evidence—if it was needed—that he won't lift a finger to level the playing field for women in this country.

So here's a nickel's worth of free advice for Donald Trump: You can't grow the economy and shrink women's reproductive health options at the same time. When you work to limit access to contraception and sex education, wipe out access to abortion, and refuse to support paid leave or affordable childcare, you're not just holding back women. You're holding back America.

If our country is going to compete and win in the global economy, it's going to take 21st-century ideas—not Stone-Age attitudes. We need a president who will stand up to the attacks on reproductive rights across the country, continue the progress we've made under President Obama—from bringing teen birth rates to a record low to passing the Affordable Care Act, the biggest advance for women's health in a generation—and keep going. The way I see it, there's only one person up to the job.

This week is Women's Health Week, and Hillary is traveling the country talking about what we need to do to support women and families—because our country can only live up to its potential when women live up to theirs. She's the only candidate with a plan to break down all the barriers that keep women on the sidelines of our economy – including barriers to quality, affordable reproductive health care and safe, legal abortion. As president, she'll fight tirelessly to ensure that women have a level playing field and opportunities to go as far as our talent and hard work can take us. And she'll work—like she has her entire life—to make sure every woman can make her own decisions about her health and future.

That's my kind of revolution.

Cecile Richards joined Planned Parenthood in 2006 and is the president of Planned Parenthood Federation of America and Planned Parenthood Action Fund. She served previously as deputy chief of staff for House Democratic leader Nancy Pelosi. She is a frequent speaker and commentator on issues related to women's rights, reproductive health, and sex education, and serves on the board of the Ford Foundation. She has contributed opinion pieces to the Huffington Post, the Washington Post, and Cosmopolitan.com.