On the last day of classes before Thanksgiving break, robotics students at Hillsboro’s Glencoe High School had a special visitor to their workshop – Rep. Suzanne Bonamici.

So they handed her an Xbox controller.

But the Oregon Democrat wasn’t there to play video games. The controller operated the giant robot the students used in competitions earlier this year, and Bonamici tried her hand at using it to shoot flying discs through a goal.

“It was so fun,” Bonamici said of the demonstration. She was visiting Glencoe to talk to students about STEM – science, technology, engineering and mathematics – education and learn about what they’re doing in Glencoe’s classrooms.



As a member of the House of Representatives' Committee on Science, Space and Technology and Committee on Education and the Workforce, Bonamici hopes to use Glencoe’s example to persuade lawmakers to prioritize federal dollars for education.

“It’s really helpful to be able to talk about specific examples of how these programs engage students,” she said.

She asked the robotics students how their high school careers would be different without the program, and the general consensus was that the hands-on work has taught them more about design, machinery, communication and teamwork than a traditional classroom experience ever could.

Chris Steiner, an engineering teacher who helped launch Glencoe’s robotics team last year, said he and his students were excited to show Bonamici their work and hoped to influence the conversation about STEM funding in schools with constrained budgets.

“We have an expressed interest in meeting elected officials,” Steiner said. “To have a U.S. congresswoman here who is active in science subcommittees is a great opportunity for us.”

Steen Smith, a senior with the robotics team, said being able to meet Bonamici was “great.”

“It means we’re getting noticed. … It means our team is doing something right,” he said.

Bonamici then visited Glencoe teacher Peter Schmurr’s digital electronics class, where more robotics students were designing smaller robots – one could hang itself from a metal bar, and another could detect which of a series of buckets was equipped with an “infrared beacon” and drop a block into that bucket. The students designed the robots themselves.

“We’re really trying to focus on design, not to parrot what other people have done,” Schmurr said, adding that Bonamici had just missed a 45-minute, student-led discussion about circuitry design.

The appearance wasn’t all STEM-related. Bonamici’s final visit was with Glencoe’s student government, whose students asked her about what working in Washington, D.C. is like. She was candid, talking on such topics as the new Common Core State Standards (which she likes, though has some worries about a possible overemphasis on testing) and the “rocky” implementation of the Affordable Care Act in recent months.

There were even some student journalists on hand to cover the event, Anisha Datta and Lorena Colcer, the senior co-editors of the Glencoe Crimson Times, had notebooks out throughout Bonamici’s appearance.

It was the second visit this fall to a Hillsboro high school by a member of Congress. Sen. Ron Wyden spoke to Century High students last month in the wake of the government shutdown.

-- Luke Hammill