The Kalamazoo County Board of Commissioners voted Tuesday to endorse a proposal to locate a proposed U.S. ballistic missile defense system Fort Custer in Augusta.

The benefits are obvious: The system would result in 300 well-paying jobs, and an analysis by the W.E. Upjohn Institute for Employment Research indicates the project would have a $3.2 billion economic impact on the region's economy.

However, opponents say the federal government has much better ways to spend its money, and they question the effectiveness of missile defense systems.

We strongly agree with the county board's endorsement.

It is important to recognize there are two levels of debate to this discussion.

One is whether the U.S. needs another U.S. ballistic missile defense system site in addition to the systems already installed in California and Alaska. The Department of Defense has not yet signed off on the idea, nor has Congress provided funding.

The second question is the system's location. Fort Custer is one of four sites under consideration.

We acknowledge the legitimate questions about whether building a third missile defense system is the best use of federal dollars. This is an issue that Congress needs to carefully consider.

But that decision won't be made by officials here, nor is it the question put before the Kalamazoo County Board. Rather, they are being asked to support locating the system at Fort Custer, if one is to be built.

The fact is, if Southwest Michigan rejects the project, it would simply go elsewhere, along with the economic benefits it would bring. It would be foolhardy to turn away that opportunity.

An analogy is the Medicaid expansion under the Affordable Care Act. Republicans fiercely opposed the ACA, but once it became law, Michigan's GOP lawmakers -- to their credit -- agreed to the Medicaid expansion, recognizing that continuing to stand on principle would hurt more than help Michigan citizens.

In the case of the missile system, the federal government is not offering Southwest Michigan a menu of options for billion-dollar development projects. There is one specific proposal on the table. The question is: Yes or no, would we want it here?

The answer is yes.

This is an editorial from the Kalamazoo Gazette. For more Kalamazoo Gazette opinion pieces and letters visit http://www.mlive.com/opinion/kalamazoo/.