Skaneateles Falls, N.Y. — Welch Allyn Inc. has come a long way since it invented the world's first hand-held, direct-illuminating ophthalmoscope for eye exams 99 years ago.

The company, one of the largest private employers in the Syracuse area, still makes ophthalmoscopes that look quite similar to the one that founders Dr. Francis Welch and William Noah Allyn invented in 1915.

But the company also makes a host of other frontline medical devices that are on the cutting edge of modern medical technology. And Welch Allyn's new top executive says the company is focused on developing even more of them as it prepares for a rapidly changing health care industry.

Steve Meyer, who was named president and CEO in 2012 after 31 years in sales and various executive positions with Welch Allyn, said recent product offerings from the company are designed to help health care professionals manage patient care more efficiently and more cost-effectively than ever.

"We want to make sure we're providing a real value proposition and can prove it," said Meyer.

Driving the change are major shifts in the health care industry. About half of Welch Allyn's sales of medical diagnostic devices are to physicians offices and about half are to hospitals and other acute care facilities. But the line between them is rapidly blurring.

Responding to a need to reduce the cost of medical care, hospitals are merging, physician groups are merging, and hospitals are taking over some physician groups. That means that doctors don't always make the decision on what medical equipment to buy. Their bosses, such as the hospitals that now own their practices, make those decisions — often with cost effectiveness in mind.

Among Welch Allyn's newest products for hospitals are a board that is placed under a patient's mattress. The board contains sensors that listen for and record the patients heart and respiratory rates and detect movement that indicates a patient is attempting to get out of bed. And it does it all without any wires being attached to the patient.

Meyer said the device will help hospitals better monitor patients following surgery and will help prevent a common and costly problem in hospitals — patients getting out of bed by themselves and falling. Previously, hospitals had no way to prevent such falls other than having a health care professional sit next to the patient's bed and observe them, he said.

Another device monitors a patient's vital signs and automatically sends them to a nurse's station and quickly and accurately sends them into an electronic medical records system.

Meyer said Welch Allyn also is focused on expanding sales in emerging markets such as China, India, Russia, Brazil and the Middle East. About 35 percent of Welch Allyn's sales are outside the United States. Meyer said he would like to push that up to 50 percent. (Welch Allyn, which is owned by the Allyn family, does not disclose its sales publicly.)

The shift to emerging markets means the company has to watch its costs more than ever because, though they are increasing their spending on health care, emerging market nations still do not spend nearly as much on health care per capita as the United States does, Meyer said.

To that end, Meyer announced shortly after his appointment as the company's top executive that Welch Allyn would cut 275 jobs — about 10 percent of its workforce — over the next three years.

At the time, the company said the reductions were designed to prepare it for the effects of the 2.3 percent medical device tax included in the Affordable Care Act. However, Meyer said the reductions were primarily driven by the need to prepare the company for the cost pressures created by shifts in the health care industry in the U.S. and by its plan to increase sales in emerging markets.

Meyer said the reductions will be completed by the end of this year, nearly a year ahead of schedule. They include closing a satellite manufacturing facility on Jordan Road and shifting its production to the company's main plant on State Street Road.

The cuts have not meant any significant changes in employment levels in Skaneateles Falls. Most of the reductions have occurred in Beaverton, Oregon. A research and development center remains in Beaverton, but the company has shifted production of vital sign monitors from Beaverton to Skaneateles Falls.

As a result, employment in Skaneateles Falls has remained steady at approximately 1,300 people. The company employs a total of 2,600 people worldwide.

In addition to developing new products, the company is looking to grow through acquisitions. Earlier this month, Welch Allyn announced the purchase of Florida-based PediaVision Holdings LLC, a maker of a portable device that screens patients of all ages for vision problems.

Meyer said the company is looking at making more acquisitions. It takes two to three years for Welch Allyn to develop a product. It can eliminate that development period through acquisitions.

"In this world of consolidated players, bigger is better," he said.

Contact Rick Moriarty anytime: Email | Twitter | Facebook | 315-470-3148