On Fox’s Your World show, host Neil Cavuto helped former GE CEO Jack Welch turn an interview into an infomercial for Republican presidential candidate Ted Cruz.

Cavuto began the interview by giving Welch some extra credibility. Cavuto described Welch as, “my old boss, one of the greatest CEO’S of all time.”

Welch wasted little time launching into a pitch for Cruz. “The thing I like about Ted Cruz,” Welch began, “clearly, is he says what he’s going to do, and he does it. I’ve written a book, as you know, or two and I’ve always talked about truth and trust. You say it, and then you do it.”

Welch said approvingly that Cruz is not liked by his colleagues because, “He doesn’t play ball with you guys and your handshakes with each other in the cartel. He calls it like it’s the cartel, whether it’s the Republicans or the Democrats.”

Cavuto acknowledged that Cruz is reputed to be “a brilliant lawyer, brilliant Constitutionalist, solicitor general” and that “some of the most historic opinions in recent years were written by him.” But, Cavuto added, “He’s a bull in a china shop, the argument goes. He likens himself to Ronald Reagan, but Ronald Reagan was very good at reaching across the aisle because he was first effective at uniting his own. This guy is criticized for dividing his own.”

Welch argued that Cruz won his senate seat in 2010 by vowing to “take on” ObamaCare, which Welch called “one of the worst pieces of legislation in history” that is “falling apart now in our hands.” Cruz was “right,” Welch said, for wanting to “shut the government down over it, he’s fought hard.”

“Ted Cruz is speaking the truth,” Welch continued. “He’s out there saying what it’s like. We’re all tired of these backroom deals. …We won the election, Republicans… in ‘10 and ‘14. …We didn’t get beans.”

”But you’ve got to work with people. …The rap against Cruz is that he can’t,” Cavuto said.

Then, after the two agreed that Cruz’s staff is “fabulous” and “brilliant,” Welch urged viewers to “Give him a chance, and let the country see.”

Not mentioned in this Cruz infomercial was that 67% of Cruz's comments reviewed by Politifact Texas were rated as false, mostly false, or pants on fire.

But it's not too surprising that should have been overlooked. When Welch noted that PolitiFact’s top five most honest people in a list of 18 were Democrats, he accused the organization of bias. “They should be arrested,” Welch said about Politico.

That got a big laugh from Cavuto.

Nobody considered that maybe Republicans are just less honest.

Watch it below from the December 16 Your World.