A few years ago Gov. Terry Branstad pushed to create “world class” schools in Iowa. Lawmakers got on board. Time will tell if changes made in law actually improve the quality of education. What we know right now: Some Iowa children may receive no education at all.

The 2013 “reform” included a new type of home schooling. Parents should have a right to educate their children at home, but with some oversight. But under the new law, parents were given unprecedented permission to keep children home without being accountable to anyone about what, if anything, they teach. They are not required to follow any specific educational curriculum. Children do not need to take assessment tests. They cannot use local school districts for academics, special education, or extracurricular activities.

A world-class education for these kids may look like something from a third-world country. Of course no one will know exactly what it looks like because absolutely no one at the state or local level is monitoring these families.

A Des Moines Register reporter recently caught up with a couple near Tipton engaged in “independent private instruction.” They said they wanted their children to learn values and study science without lessons about evolution. They no longer have to fill out a single piece of paperwork about their homeschooling. They say they have “a little more freedom.”

They certainly are free. In fact, an unknown number of Iowa children are now experiencing the freedom of being in a completely unmonitored and unaccountable “education” environment.

This flies in the face of state attendance and truancy laws intended to ensure children are educated. Iowa youth are required to attend school from about age 5 through the school year they turn 16, but some children are now exempt from that requirement. They can’t be truant because they are automatically assumed to be meeting the compulsory attendance law.

This is unfathomable from an educational perspective. An Iowa child may never learn to read. Her entire science education may consist of watching a cow give birth. Forget algebra if a parent thinks counting butterflies is all the math a teen needs to know.

This is also unfathomable from a child welfare perspective. A youth can disappear from school one day. The parents can say they’re using the new homeschooling option. No one may follow up. In fact, a school official wouldn’t even know to inquire about a 6-year-old when the parents have never notified anyone the child exists for education purposes.

Home schooling works well for some families. Before the change in law, parents contacted education officials and met minimal requirements. Now they answer to no one about anything. And they can do this with unrelated children as well. Kids in two or three families can fall off the education grid into someone’s living room. Or back yard. Or anywhere.

Interestingly, many Iowa lawmakers didn’t even seem to realize this provision was included in the education reform bill they supported. The most ardent homeschooling advocates apparently didn’t. After the reform bill was signed into law, a rural home-school parent told the Associated Press that people were taken by surprise and thrilled. “It was like a dream.”

It certainly does feel like a dream. When lawmakers wake up, they should at the very least require parents to provide school officials some basic information. While that won’t guarantee any educational standards, at least someone will know a child exists.

Read or Share this story: http://dmreg.co/1yzTYuP