PORTAGE, MI – With the primary election in the rear-view mirror, members of Kalamazoo County's Republican Party are encouraging supporters to promote the campaigns of GOP candidates headed down the road toward the November election.

They pushed support Saturday for Republicans facing challenging elections, not the least of which is the U.S. Senate campaign of Terri Lynn Land, who visited Kalamazoo County on Saturday.

"I've lived in Michigan all my life. I love Michigan. I want to make sure that we continue to have a state that continues to make sure that our kids can get jobs here, can grow their families and continue to live in this wonderful state," said Land, who helped officially open the Grand Old Party's new office in Portage.

The party relocated in April from about 900 square of space in the Carillon Center in Portage, into about 1,500 square feet in that same retail/commercial center. It is at 6794 S. Westnedge ave.

"We need to have good-paying jobs here," Land said, "and that's what I'm going to go down to the U.S. Senate and fight for. That's No. 1 priority – putting Michigan first making sure we can have great-paying jobs here in this state."

Land is running against U.S. Rep. Gary Peters, a Bloomfield Hills Democrat, for the U.S. Senate seat being vacated by Carl Levin as he retires. Land, of Byron Center, was Michigan Secretary of State from 2003 to 2011 and was a member of Republican National Committee in 2012. From 1992 to 2000, she was Kent County clerk.

Kalamazoo County Republican Party Chairman David Worthams was among party leaders encouraging members to unify their efforts to re-elect Gov. Rick Snyder and help Land, Margaret O'Brien and others win November elections that are expected to be strongly contested.

O'Brien is a state representative from Portage who is running against state Rep. Sean McCann, a Kalamazoo Democrat, and former Republican state Rep. Lorence Wenke, a Libertarian, for the 20th District Michigan Senate seat to be vacated by Sen. Tonya Schuitmaker. The district includes all of Kalamazoo County, Antwerp Township, Paw Paw Township.

Kalamazoo County Republican Party stalwart Ron Wiser said Land's Senate campaign will be a centerpiece of this year's election. But he said he hopes to see a Republican sweep in the fall.

"This is not just a race against Gary Peters," he told several dozen fellow Republicans, "this is a race to get Terri Lynn Land into Washington against our fine president. Mr. Peters would be a rubber stamp for our fine president. We need somebody to challenge everything that's going on up there."

Land said another priority for her in Washington, D.C., is to repeal and replace Obamacare (the Patient Protection and Affordability Care Act, which was signed into law by President Barack Obama on March 23, 2010).

"We need to have health insurance that works for people," she said. "It needs to be portable.You need to be able to purchase it across state lines so you need to keep costs down. And you need to keep that doctor-patient relationship. That's just critical, especially if you're going through a long-term health issue, you need to have that relationship and we need to continue to do that."

Another priority, she said, is to make sure businesses are not over-regulated.

"I've talked to a lot of business, whether it's manufacturers or retailers," she said, "and what they tell me is they want some predictability. They need to know what the taxes are going to be, what the regulations are going to be and we need to have taxes that are fair, low and simpler. That's what's important."

Asked if she will debate Peters in the fall, Land said, "We look forward to talking about this. That's going to happen and we're very excited about the opportunity to talk to the voters. That's No. 1."

Asked if she supports military air strikes that President Obama has authorized and that were ongoing Saturday in an effort to prevent militants in northern Iraq from attacking U.S. personnel and religious minorities, Land said, "The president needs to lead. He needs to have a clear vision on what he wants to do. And so we're going to follow and watch that. But the reality is that he hasn't led and we need to have him leading and he needs to present a clear vision for what he wants to do."

Asked if it was right for the Michigan Secretary of State to dismiss on Friday a complaint made against her by the Michigan Democratic Party – the complaint questioned campaign finance documents and if Land was an employee of her family's company – she said it was good for the office to issue its opinion.

"As a former Secretary of State, I have issued different opinions on different things and it's great that the Secretary of State issued that opinion," Land said. "You make corrections all the time in your reports and we made a correction and they followed through on that."

Democrats asked in a July complaint if Land was lying about her involvement with Land & Co., a company started by her family and owned by her husband. Their complaint focused on 15 contributions to Land's 2002 campaign in which she listed herself as an employee of Land & Co. But Land has recently said she was never employed by the company.

At Saturday's gathering, Worthams introduced a phalanx of Republic candidates for offices, including:

-Aaron Miller, a 27-year-old math teacher who has become the Republican candidate for the 59th District of the Michigan State House of Representatives. The district represents St. Joseph and Cass counties.

-Brandt Iden, a second-term Kalamazoo County commissioner who won the GOP nomination for the 61st House seat. The district includes the townships of Oshtemo, Prairie Round, Schoolcraft and Texas and most of the City of Portage.

-Dave Maturen, the chairman of the Kalamazoo County Board of Commissioners won the Republican nomination for the 63rd State House District. The district includes the townships of Brady, Charleston, Climax, Comstock, Pavillion, Richland, Ross, Wakeshma, parts of Kalamazoo Township, the City of Galesburg and parts of Calhoun County.

-Stan Runyon, a financial controller for Envirodyne Technologies, is vying for a seat on the Kalamazoo County Board. He is a resident of Portage.

-John Gisler, a candidate for Kalamazoo County Commissioner, District 8. He lives in Scotts.

-Dale Shugars, a former Michigan state senator who is a candidate for Kalamazoo County Commissioner, District 9. He lives in Kalamazoo.

Contact business writer Al Jones may at ajones5@mlive.com. Follow me on Twitter at ajones5_al.