U.S. Rep. Bradley Byrne has wasted no time trying to make his mark on a major national policy issue, announcing on his first full day in office that he has signed on to the latest Republican effort to repeal Obamacare.

Byrne, R-Montrose, announced Thursday that he will co-sponsor the American Health Care Reform Act of 2013, a plan pushed by the chairman of the influential House conservative caucus to repeal and replace the Affordable Care Act. The bill, originally filed in September, has 118 co-sponsors.

“Over the past six months, I promised my constituents that if elected, I would fight to repeal the destructive Obamacare law and replace it with common-sense, conservative reforms,” Byrne said in a prepared statement. “As my first legislative act as Congressman, I am making good on that pledge.”

The bill would repeal President Barack Obama’s signature health care overhaul with a plan that its sponsors promise would rely on market-based solutions to cure America’s health care problems.

The bill would provide a tax break of $7,500 for individuals and $20,000 for families to help Americans purchase health insurance. The government also would fund statewide high-risk pools to help people with pre-existing medical problems that make it difficult to buy insurance.

Insurance companies would be able to sell policies across state lines under the proposal, which also would expand Health Savings Accounts and limit medical malpractice lawsuits.

The Republican-led House has voted dozens of times to repeal the Affordable Care Act, but the GOP does not have the votes in the Senate to pass any of the bills. And even if they did, their proposals would face a certain veto.

The bill that Byrne signed on to received a cool reception from liberal groups when its sponsors unveiled it last year. The left-leaning group Think Progress criticized it as rewarmed ideas dating back to the George W. Bush administration that would do little to help the uninsured and could unravel the employer-sponsored health care system.

But Byrne said the bill would create competition that would bring down prices.

“This measure eliminates billions in taxes and thousands of pages of burdensome regulations by repealing Obamacare, which is weighing down our economy and hurting families across south Alabama,” he stated. “However, it’s not enough to just be against something – to govern, we have to provide conservative alternatives and do what is right for the American people.”

Rep. Steve Scalise, R-La., the chairman of the House Republican Study Committee, praised Byrne.

“It is significant that on Bradley Byrne’s first day as a member of Congress, he has already shown determination to solve problems facing hardworking families in Alabama by co-sponsoring our bill to lower health costs and put patients back in charge of their health care decisions,” he said in a statement.