In the last five years, the federal government has taken significant steps toward recognizing and addressing health disparities that affect lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender (LGBT) people. These include increasing data collection about sexual orientation and gender identity; establishing new nondiscrimination provisions that cover sexual orientation and gender identity; and increasing research and prevention services targeting LGBT health.

But there are two more things that the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services can do that will make an even bigger impact on closing the gap in healthcare disparities that exist among LGBT people and the general population: designate LGBT people as a medically underserved population (MUP) and as a Health Professional Shortage Area population (HPSA).

If HHS makes these designations, community health centers and other safety net providers will get access to desperately needed federal funding to reach out to LGBT people and provide them with culturally competent and affirming preventive care.

All of this should qualify the LGBT population as both medically underserved and one for which there is a shortage of providers. Indeed, the Negotiated Rule Making Committee―which was convened under the Affordable Care Act in order to update methodologies to make MUP and HPSA designations--recommended overwhelmingly in October, 2011 that the Secretary of Health and Human Services designate LGBT people as an MUP and HPSA population group.

This fall, HHS Secretary Sylvia Matthews Burwell is considering making additional MUP and HPSA designations. A policy brief published last month by The Fenway Institute, the Center for American Progress, the Human Rights Campaign, and GLMA: Health Professionals Advancing LGBT Equality urged HHS to make these designations. Implementation of the recommendations made in 2011 by the Negotiated Rule Making Committee will dramatically increase access to culturally and clinically competent health care for LGBT people, and could play a critical role in addressing persistent disparities in health care access and outcomes.

Follow Sean Cahill, Ph.D. on Twitter: www.twitter.com/FenwayHealth