Topics: From the Wires, Entertainment News, News

MINNEAPOLIS (AP) — It’s a bar that serves nothing but tap water. For free.

The concept, developed by two Minneapolis artists, started as pop-ups across the country, ranging from an event at a North Carolina artists’ space to a waterfront fundraiser in Chicago to a four-month run at an art museum in Arkansas.

They’ve been such a hit that Colin Kloecker and Shanai Matteson are preparing to open a storefront Water Bar in northeast Minneapolis, a taproom serving pints of city water plus limited-edition pours from other communities. Visitors will get to taste and compare, but the goal is bigger: connecting the public with the scientists, utility employees, environmentalists and activists who will serve as bartenders.

“It’s really about opening up a conversation with the idea that ‘Water is all we have,’ which is our tagline, because that’s all we’re serving,” Matteson said. “And then the conversation goes from there.”

The timing is opportune with the widespread attention on lead-tainted water crisis in Flint, Michigan, and Minnesota Gov. Mark Dayton making water issues a personal priority for the Land of 10,000 Lakes.

The storefront Water Bar, which is slated to open to the public in May, won’t serve pricey boutique “artisanal water” as has been tried elsewhere — just plain-old tap water. Its funding will come from various sources, such as a neighborhood association and a crowdfunding website, as well as money from ongoing pop-up events. Any tips for the bartenders will go toward supporting allied organizations and providing seed funding for community projects.

“What Water Bar does is let communities and experts come together and talk to each other about, ‘What are the issues here? Have you thought about where your water comes from? What are you concerned about when it comes to water?'” said Kate Brauman, lead scientist for the Global Water Initiative at the University of Minnesota’s Institute on the Environment.

Brauman worked the bar at a sustainability event on campus last year. It was so popular they ran out of cups.