SHARE Cover of Jeff Hall's book "Beyond the White Coat: Wealth Management for Physicians in Turbulent Times."

By John Shearer of the Knoxville News Sentinel

Over the years Jeff Hall has been written about in books and articles due to his successful career as the kicker for the University of Tennessee football team during its 1998 national championship season.

But now he is the author of, instead of one of the subjects, a new book.

A wealth manager and partner with the Rather & Kittrell financial consulting firm in Farragut, Hall's book is entitled "Beyond the White Coat: Wealth Management for Physicians in Turbulent Times"

In it, he offers a simple outline for how medical professionals should seek financial help in this era when the financial aspect of health care is becoming more complicated. He also thinks the book will be helpful for legal and tax professionals who work with physicians.

"There are a lot of books about the technical aspects," he said during a recent interview. "I wanted to do something more succinct that talked about who is the right professional to work with to quarterback this entire process of working with your money."

Hall decided to write the book because he noticed a number of his physician clients were using acronyms and phrases related to their profession. Unfortunately, he had no idea what the terms meant.

Through that and other experiences, he thought he needed to research and write a "white paper," which is an explanatory paper about a complex topic. It eventually developed into the book, which is available at amazon.com.

After interviewing 30 physician clients, friends who are physicians, and executives of medical practices, Hall quickly became aware of the challenges that doctors have with changing regulations.

"I began to understand how difficult it is for physicians to do their job and I began feeling empathetic to what they had to do on a day-to-day business," he said.

"The more I got into it, the more I realized what physicians have to put up with these days. It is amazing. The more research I read, the higher the percentage of physicians I read about being reluctant to encourage others to go into medicine because of all the turmoil and ambiguity."

In the book, he discusses three trends in the profession ? more government regulations, such as the Affordable Care Act; generational shifts toward bigger group medical practices; and general uncertainty about the future of health care delivery.

As a result of the trends, Hall believes several challenges will result for doctors. Among others, they include rising costs with reduced income, a likely increase in taxes, an increase in the use of electronic medical records and difficulties in time management.

"What I have seen is that they are so strapped for time and so confused by everything going on in our world that they are looking for guidance," he said.

In the book, Hall encourages doctors and their families to work with a financial consultant who offers true wealth management services.

"A true wealth manager will listen, pose questions, educate and simplify your life," he writes.

The former NFL player said he understands in part what physicians have to go through in their lives. Like pro athletes, doctors are in intense environments and sometimes quickly accumulate a lot of money, he said.

Hall also writes a personal reflection in the book about his own journey to sound financial and personal peace. Although he started out working with Morgan Keegan financial consultants right out of college when he was not playing in the National Football League for the Washington Redskins and St. Louis Rams, he made some poor personal financial decisions.

As a result, he writes, three years after playing in the national championship Fiesta Bowl game, he was so in debt that he had to call his parents and reluctantly ask them to help pay his bills, which they did.

A short time later, he was hired by Rather & Kittrell, and he said he has tried to live and work with integrity ever since.

He said select clients now entrust him with over $300 million in assets.

Away from work, he and his wife, Stacey, are involved in church work, and he also helps coach the Christian Academy of Knoxville football team. They have two children, AJ and Hadley, with a third on the way.

Hall writes that he felt he had reached a milestone in his work when a physician client called him at night recently to say he had an unusual financial gain due to the sale of his business and needed some advice.

Hall said he was humbled that the doctor wanted to touch base with him.

"At that moment I found myself thinking: he didn't call his accountant, he didn't call one of his attorneys, he didn't call his business manager," he writes.

"He called me. What a huge responsibility and honor."