Related Coverage State orders Hawaiian Electric Companies to lower rates, connect more solar

Hawaiian Electric delivered on its promise on Tuesday, presenting its plan to reduce costs and allow more people to use renewable energy .

HECO delivered binders full of documents late Tuesday afternoon to the Public Utilities Commission. The PUC then posted it online.

The filings include plans to lower residential electricity bills by more than 20 percent by the year 2030 and nearly triple the amount of rooftop solar allowed as part of a more comprehensive strategy, ordered by the commission back in April.

The HECO Companies’ filings included the following:

Power Supply Improvement Plan to expeditiously retire older fossil generation, reduce must-run generation, increase generation flexibility, adopt new technologies, such as demand response and energy storage, for ancillary services, and institute operational practice changes.

to expeditiously retire older fossil generation, reduce must-run generation, increase generation flexibility, adopt new technologies, such as demand response and energy storage, for ancillary services, and institute operational practice changes. Distributed Generation Interconnection Plan to develop technical solutions and action plans to increase distributed generation interconnection capability in major capacity increments.

to develop technical solutions and action plans to increase distributed generation interconnection capability in major capacity increments. Integrated interconnection queue proposal to provide transparent information on the status of all distributed generation interconnection requests.

Read the filings online here.

It’s an ambitious plan that relies heavily on switching from generating units that run on oil to newer units that run on liquefied natural gas, known as LNG.

And customers would eventually pay less for their electricity, if all goes as planned over the next two decades.

Back in April, the PUC sent a strong message to the Hawaiian Electric Companies — that it’s not moving fast enough to lower utility rates and connect more photovoltaic systems into the grid.

HECO answered back late Tuesday afternoon, meeting the deadline set by the PUC.

Isaac Moriwake, an attorney with the non-profit environmental law firm Earthjustice, said: “It’s a definite improvement from the plan that they issued previously which the PUC basically trashed. And they’re being more ambitious in getting rid of their old dinosaur plants and trying to go with clean as possible towards the future.”

Hawaii residents pay some of the highest utility rates in the nation — a source of frustration for many.

HECO says its proposed plan “will lower electric bills, nearly triple the amount of distributed solar, while achieving the highest level of renewable energy in the nation by 2030.”

Moriwake says the plan raises several concerns.

“One concern, it looks like initially this is a plan to convert all their generators to LNG or gas and so is that the right answer? The other major concern that the plan raised is they’re proposing pretty substantial reductions in the paybacks for rooftop solar and is that truly fair? Is that the right answer given that rooftop solar is only going to get cheaper and cheaper and that’s what customers want,” he said.

HECO says it plans to work with the solar industry — supporting a sustainable growth of rooftop solar, and letting customers and the solar companies know how much more solar can be added each year.

“They say they’re going to nearly triple it but that’s all the way out to 2030 and that’s what HECO wants but is that what the customers want? That’s what HECO is planning but is that what the market is going to dictate,” Moriwake said.

And whatever energy needs are not met by renewables will be met with LNG.

“This plan banks on gas it banks on LNG and most of the cost savings as far as I can tell us based on that. is that going to pan out, is that going to work? It remains to be seen,” Moriwake said.

HECO’s President and CEO Dick Rosenblum said in a statement: “It’s the start of a conversation that all of us – utilities, regulators and other policymakers, the solar industry, customers and other stakeholders – need to be a part of, as we work together to achieve the energy future we all want for Hawai’i.”

“It’s a good start and it’s headed in the right direction but it does raise major questions,” Moriwake said.

So what’s next? The PUC says it’ll immediately start evaluating the filings to determine the extent to which the plans are consistent with the PUC’s orders and the state’s energy goals.

Many in the PV industry said HECO’s new plan has been a long time coming.

“We need answers, basically for everyone to know what the best thing to do is going forward,” said Colin Yost, general counsel for RevoluSun. “It should give people more certainty as to when you’ll be able to get approved to have solar connected and how much it will cost.”

While hopeful the new plan should help, Yost said he’s still cautious. “There’s cause for concern because it has taken so long for this plan to come forward,” he said.

With 300 customers that have signed PV contracts but are just waiting for HECO’s approval, “we hope that the filing today will give some answers to all those customers and everyone else who’s been waiting to see what HECO does before signing up,” Yost said.