In preparation for the Alabama Primaries, Donald Trump held a rally at Madison City Stadium, Sunday, February 28, 2016. Many voters who hoped to make up their minds before voting day attended the event and Trump made sure to try to get as many votes as possible.

Before his appearance at 5:00PM, there were several speakers who attacked President Obama’s policies and Trump’s current opponent, Marco Rubio, to whom the crowd yelled, “Marco Whobio!” The speakers decimated Rubio’s proposals and Gang of Eight immigration bill, claiming it provided more leeway for sex offenders and criminals than it did for hard working American people. They made sure that the crowd remembered that voting Rubio was out of the question, employing the chant, “We want Donald Trump!” and “When do we want him?” “Now!!” One speaker specifically pleaded, “Do not vote for Marco Rubio!”

Several of Donald Trump’s notorious policies made an appearance at the rally, such as his tax plan to improve economic growth, the infamous wall to be paid for by the Mexican government, his intents to repeal Obamacare, his intent to improve the state of veteran affairs protecting police officers, and of course, making America great again. In addition to these, Trump also promises to protect the right to keep and bear arms, as well as other freedoms provided in the U.S. Constitution.

His politicking was not exclusive to inside the stadium. There were several vendors outside the event selling “Bomb the s—t outta ISIS” t-shirts available in all sizes and also “trump that b—h” shirts in reference to Hillary Clinton.

Non-supporters and protesters had a space to rally outside the event, in which they advertised statements such as, “Make America great, spread love, not hate.” Although the protesters were given a place to complain outside, there were several attendees who did not share Trump’s values and when they began to protest, were escorted out of Trump’s private event by security.

When Trump finally arrived on stage, he was vigorously hoorayed and welcomed by the crowd. He went on to discuss crowd pleaser topics, such as his plan to build the wall between Mexico and the U.S. Trump noted that the Mexican president exhibited stiff skepticism and anger towards paying for the wall. Trump replied saying that he would raise the wall ten feet higher.

The biggest event at the rally, which Trump referred to as his “surprise” for the night, was the endorsement he received from Alabama Senator, Jeff Sessions. Sessions and Trump share similar, idealistic views. Sessions promotes Trump as the best candidate for President and Commander-in-Chief.

Voting opened in Alabama on March 1, 2016. Trump was in the lead with 43% of the votes. His victory on Super Tuesday showed that his visit to Madison was successful. To learn more about Donald J. Trump and his policies, visit his website.