Miss New Jersey 2013 speaks to youth in Asbury Park. (Photo: iPhone photo by Nicquel Terry)

Achieving the title of Miss New Jersey 2013 didn’t come easy for Cara McCollum.

There were people who doubted her ability to win and she was up against women who were both beautiful and more experienced than she was in pageants.

Still, McCollum said she maintained her confidence, was true to herself, and ultimately won the crown.

This was the story she shared with a group of young girls on Wednesday at the Asbury Park Board of Education office. The group, all participants in the Eloquent Charismatic Orators, sat fully attentive in bright pink T-shirts as McCollum offered advice on becoming a successful woman.

“You truly can do whatever you want to do, you can be whatever you want to be,” said McCollum, a 23-year-old old student at Princeton University. “But it doesn’t matter unless you believe that.”

Asbury Park community center faces uncertain future

The Eloquent Charismatic Orators is an organization led by Angela Ahbez-Anderson, a former school board member, to build self confidence, critical thinking and leadership skills in girls ages 10 to 18. Most of the girls are from Asbury Park and Neptune. The group will hold its own pageant for the girls in July.

McCollum talked to the Eloquent Charismatic Orators about finding their passion in life, making positive first impressions, speaking clearly and overcoming people who may discourage them.

She also discussed her journey from growing up in a small town in Arkansas to traveling the country and speaking to young girls.

“You have to find the individual thing that you like best about yourself and you’ve got to hold on to that because people are going to try and take it away,” McCollum said. “Growing up as a young woman, it’s tough.”

And it also takes more than beauty to make it, she said.

“You gotta find something about yourself that’s more than just your looks,” McCollum said.

Angelica Binot, an eighth grader at Neptune Middle School, said she was inspired by McCollum’s speech on Wednesday.

“It’s good to have someone closer to my age tell me something and to mentor me,” Binot said.

SCHOOL SCOOP

What’s going on in our families and at school? Visit Home & School, blogs.app.com/learning, for more.

Read or Share this story: http://on.app.com/1E2kMBs