The North Central Public Health District, increasingly short staffed since a budget cut last summer and other staff departures, may get a cash infusion from a regional health organization Wednesday.

The Columbia Gorge Health Council, which governs state-funded health care for low income residents, got a sizeable “bonus” for meeting certain health goals set up by the state.

Those goals range from encouraging effective contraceptive use to improving rates of dental sealants for children.

The council will voteJan. 27 on a proposal from its clinical advisory panel to split about $165,000 in bonus money between the Hood River County Health Department and the health district that serves Wasco, Sherman and Gilliam counties.

Karen Joplin, a Hood River County commissioner, is chair of the health council, and said she anticipates the council will accept the recommendation of its advisory panel.

An $80,000-plus infusion from the council would be welcome by the health district, of course, but the agency must also figure out its long-term financial sustainability as well, said district director Teri Thalhofer.

At a recent health board meeting, talk turned to a longstanding topic: what Wasco County might do in terms of ongoing support.

Last summer, Wasco County reduced its contribution to the health district from $376,000 the year before to $314,000 in the current 2015-16 fiscal year.

In response to the budget cut, the health district laid off two staff, one a nurse, and reduced the hours of its walk-in clinic from five days a week to two afternoons a week.

It has pulled other nurses from other duties to cover those limited hours.

Thalhofer said the cuts had to come from the walk-in clinic, because it was the only nursing position funded by county dollars, and the clinic also provided services that could be obtained elsewhere.

It provides immunizations, birth control, and testing and treatment of

sexually transmitted infections.

Wasco County officials questioned why such a deep cut in services was made given the small size of the $62,000 budget cut relative to the regional health district’s overall $2.2 million budget.

Wasco County’s elected representative to the health board, Commissioner Scott Hege, speculated the cuts were made to create political pressure.

When other nurses are pulled away from their regular, billable duties to help at the walk-in clinic, it leads to a downward spiral of further reduction in revenue for the health district, Thalhofer said.

In addition to the two layoffs, retirements and at least one resignation due to stress from staff shortages, have thinned the health district’s staff by almost five full-time positions since July.

Two of them, one full-time, one part-time, will be rehired. The staff has gone from the equivalent of 24.6 full-time jobs down to 19.8.

Hege said after the meeting that he saw the health district as “a system in transition.”

“I think that’s what a lot of this is about,” he said.

The Affordable Care Act insured millions of new people, and was designed to shift clientele away from public health services and to medical clinics for their care, according to Hege.

As fewer people use public health services, the funding for it — which is in part based on billable services like any doctor’s office — will decrease.

“The whole reason our fees are dropping is people aren’t coming here. They’re going to their primary care doctor,” Hege said.

He said it would be a challenge, and the goal was to minimize the challenge.

While the county commission voted a year ago to leave the health district, it rescinded that vote.

Hege said his goal is to stay with the regional health district. He has recently proposed a new board makeup, which would just be county commissioners from the three counties in the district.

Now, each county has one commissioner and two citizen representatives.

Hege said, “That would be helpful in us having a better voice in the district and having more confidence.”

He feels it would lead to better communications and “hopefully a better outcome.”

But health board chair Mike Smith, a Sherman County commissioner, didn’t favor that, saying, “My belief is that we should have more public involvement, not less.”