This article contains spoilers for last night's Walking Dead.

Source: ThanosCopter Newswire

After watching last night's episode of Robert Kirkman's AMC's The Walking Dead, three out of four Americans reportedly agreed that the nightmarish hospital depicted in the show was preferable to the current state of healthcare in the United States. Last night's episode caught viewers up with the status of Beth, who had disappeared in a car with a mysterious cross symbol last season during a one-on-one bonding adventure with Daryl. Awakening in a hospital bed in Atlanta, Beth soon finds herself trapped in a sinister web of menace and extortion, similar to, but at the same time less disheartening to the soul, the profit-driven healthcare and insurance system in the United States.

"It was uncanny," said one viewer and American citizen, comparing Beth's situation of being trapped in a hospital she didn't choose to go to and forced to work off an insurmountable debt to that of the average American seeking medical treatment in the country. "I could hardly tell the difference."

Though Beth's world is inhabited by killer zombies and cutthroat humans, with sudden, gruesome death a mistake away, it pales in comparison to the perils of paying for healthcare in the United States using private insurance, according to 75% of participants in an Outhouse survey. "Sure, Beth was taken in against her will for a minor surgical procedure and ended up being held as a prisoner in the hospital where she was subjected to the institutionally-condoned advances of Officer Rapey, but I'm over twenty thousand dollars in debt from getting my tonsils removed last year," explained another of our survey responders. "At least it seems like with a few months of hard labor, a climb down an elevator shaft using a makeshift rope, and a hail mary charge through a horde of ravenous zombies in the parking lot, Beth could be home free."

"That seems like a way better deal," she added, as if stating the obvious. "At least she has a way out."

All told, the vast majority of respondents agreed that, at the very least, the Walking Dead hospital's fascist policies were easier to comprehend than the current Obamacare rules. Additionally, the dictatorial power structure and murderous intrigue within the hospital was viewed by more than 50% of respondents as relatively positive when compared to sifting through hundreds of pages of complicated legal documents only to figure out that the costly treatment that could save your life is not covered under your plan.

"I'd rather die because the hospital's only doctor poisons me to prevent my endangering his position than because a bureaucrat took my medication off the prescription drug formulary to increase quarterly profits," one viewer agreed. "At least in The Walking Dead, the death panels are literal death panels."

At press time, experts in the field of medicine were projecting that Carol, who was wheeled unconscious into the hospital following Beth's failed escape attempt, would likely receive better treatment than 60% of women Carol's age entering an average US hospital without insurance today.

Support our sponsors: