PetSmart employees and volunteers gather Lucky and Chance to distribute to the children at the Ozanam Family Shelter on Dec. 16. Pictured from left to right, Marco Jurjevich, Dana Cotter,Charlotte Elbert,Tiffany Hill, Angelina Pacilli. Front row left to right, Brian Noll, Justine Cotter and Daisy Jurjevich. (Photo: ~Courtesy of Catholic Charities, Diocese of Metuchen) Story Highlights During a special holiday event on Dec. 16, children at Ozanam Shelter in Edison received stuffed toys from PetSmart associates from Bridgewater

They also had a chance to play games courtesy of a Playtime Party Game Truck

Ozanam Shelter aids homeless families in Middlesex County

One in 30 children will experience homelessness in their lifetime, said Marianne Majewski, executive director, Catholic Charities, Diocese of Metuchen

People go to great extremes to make it home for the holidays, but for those who are homeless, the holiday can be a reminder of what they hope and dream about.

PetSmart supports organizations that make communities a better place to call home. That’s what happened at the Ozanam Family Shelter in Edison, on Dec. 16, when children gathered together to receive Chance and Lucky, two cuddly stuffed animals, from associates of PetSmart in Bridgewater, who volunteered their time to attend the event. Children were further surprised when a Playtime Party Game Truck pulled up. The kids eagerly hopped inside to play interactive games, courtesy of Noel Borrero of Playtime Party.

“That’s what it’s all about!” said Marco Jurjevich, Store Team Leader of PetSmart in Bridgewater. “PetSmart is grateful for the generosity of our pet parents, not only for their support and love of animals, but also for their commitment to the communities where we do business.”

Skybella, age 2, was all smiles after receiving PetSmart’s Dog Chance on Wednesday at the Ozanam Family Shelter. (Photo: ~Courtesy of Catholic Charities, Diocese of Metuchen)

The Ozanam Family Shelter, operated by Catholic Charities, Diocese of Metuchen currently provides shelter to 22 families and 13 single women, who along with Catholic Charities employees welcomed the holiday cheer offered by PetSmart.

“The number of children experiencing homelessness has never been higher, so this visit from PetSmart is especially heartwarming and draws attention to the plight of the homeless”, said Marianne Majewski, executive director, Catholic Charities, Diocese of Metuchen, who added, “one in 30 children will experience homelessness in their lifetime.”

Catholic Charities, Diocese of Metuchen Associate Executive Director Julio Coto offers a choice of PetSmart’s Lucky or Chance to 2-year old Jayla at the Ozanam Family Shelter, and then decides, “Why not both?“ during Dec. 16's event where the children received cuddly pets courtesy of PetSmart and a chance to play interactive games courtesy of Noel Borrero of Playtime Party. (Photo: ~Courtesy of Catholic Charities, Diocese of Metuchen)

Programs at the Ozanam Family Shelter are designed to help residents determine and alleviate the cause of their homelessness, while providing a supportive environment where residents can work toward their goals of self-sufficiency. Last year, the Ozanam Family Shelter provided shelter to 168 families in Middlesex County; Catholic Charities served more than 53,000 people through more than 100 programs in Middlesex, Somerset, Hunterdon and Warren counties. Those wishing to support the work of Catholic Charities can make a donation online at www.ccdom.org/donate.

Read or Share this story: http://mycj.co/1OnPLkY