DUBLIN, Sept. 25, 2014 /PRNewswire/ -- Research and Markets has announced the addition of the "The United States Market for In Vitro Diagnostic Tests" report to their offering.

The United States is the world's largest in vitro diagnostics and nearly half of the global IVD market. While companies seek emerging markets for growth, most healthcare business is generated in the United States and its volume is still a strong advantage of this market. Most recently the U.S. IVD market weathered interrupted lab and healthcare sector investment in anticipation of the Affordable Care Act and several regulatory and austerity measures on the part of government payers that constricted payments for clinical testing.



In this report, The United States Market for In Vitro Diagnostic Tests, Kalorama Information analyst Emil Salazar takes a considered look into these trends and what they mean for diagnostic manufacturers and investors.



As the report notes, there are both challenging developments and postiive trends which make the United States a stable IVD market: The expansion of the insured population under the ACA; demographic aging that increases demand for clinical testing and a medical program that serves as a leading, stable vehicle for payment (Medicare); relatively optimistic macroeconomic indicators vis-à-vis the domestic outlook five years ago or other developed markets in the world; and continued product innovation and industry responsiveness to clients' needs in the world's largest IVD market.



This report includes important tools for business planners, including market size estimates and forecasts for the following IVD segments:

Point of Care (Glucose, Professional, OTC)

Histology and Cytology

Clinical Chemistry

Immunoassays (Infectious Disease, Non-Infectious Disease)

Molecular Assays (Non-Infectious Disease)

Hematology

Urinalysis

Flow Cytometry

Coagulation

Microbiology and Virology (ID/AST, Molecular)

Blood Testing



Market sizes, forecasts and shares are provided, as well as a geographic breakdown of the segments, where possible. Changes in technology development, regulatory and reimbursement issues, clinical care, and business environments are discussed. Current market numbers are presented for 2011, with projections given through 2016. The following data points are included in this report:



U.S. Health Expenditure

U.S. Clinical Lab Expenditure

U.S. Infectious Disease Market Opportunities

Affordable Care Act (ACA)

Clinical Testing under Medicare - Reimbursement Cuts and Revaluation

Molecular Diagnostics and Medicare Policy

Patient Population

Healthcare System Utilization

Aging

Disease Prevalence and Incidence

Analyst Conclusions About the Market

Key Topics Covered:



CHAPTER ONE: EXECUTIVE SUMMARY



CHAPTER TWO: INTRODUCTION TO U.S. HEALTH CARE



CHAPTER THREE: U.S. IVD MARKET ANALYSIS



CHAPTER FOUR: TOP TIER U.S. IVD MARKET PLAYERS

Companies Mentioned:

Abbott Diagnostics

Alere

Beckman Coulter

Becton Dickinson

Danaher Corporation

Hologic

Ortho-Clinical Diagnostics / J&J Diabetes Care

QIAGEN

Roche Diagnostics

Siemens Healthcare Diagnostics

Sysmex Corporation

Thermo Fisher Scientific

For more information visit http://www.researchandmarkets.com/research/qwd9jq/the_united_states

Media Contact: Laura Wood, +353-1-481-1716, press@researchandmarkets.net

SOURCE Research and Markets