What girl needs a white gown when they have so many eye-catching choices atFancy Fashion Boutique in Longmont? ( Mark Leffingwell / Daily Camera )

My heart throbs so hard it nearly chokes me as I watch my daughter standing on the podium at The Bridal Connection in Longmont. She smiles at herself in the full-length mirror, and the world stops spinning.

Bettie Anne caresses the satin bustle of her white gown. Her long blonde curls tickle the oversized teal bow tied at her waist. How is my delicate little rosebud of a child this big? Wasn't she born just a few years ago?

Well, yeah, actually, she was. Four years ago.

This is our tradition. Every year for Bettie's birthday, I get her a formal white gown.

I've never thought it was fair that girls get only one chance in their lives to feel like a princess in a white dress. It puts so much pressure on that one event, that one dress.

Why not feel that special every year —- in celebration of yourself? A promise of self-love.

Plus, if Bettie's already worn her dream white dress 25 different times, maybe she won't feel rushed to get married. Maybe she won't want an expensive wedding dress. Maybe she'll want a black dress. Maybe it'll put more of the focus on the vows. Maybe she'll never get married. Her dad would like that.

Maybe it won't be so hard for me to see her grow up.

Probably not.

I'm probably creating a monster, actually. After 25 different formals, the only wedding dress that will be able to outdo them will surely cost $50,000. I confess; I've been doing this parenting thing every day for four years, and I still don't have a clue what I'm doing. As far as I can tell, no one else does, either.

But I do know my daughter's eyes glowed with joy when she found this year's winner, a dramatic white cloud of tulle covered in tiny silver stars, from the magical back room at the Fancy Fashion Boutique in Longmont.

This 3-year-old shop, 712 Main St., attracts shoppers from across the state for its jaw-dropping selection of girls and women's formal dresses — for baptisms, parties, Easter, Christmas, holiday parties, pageants, weddings and birthday parties, says sales associate Yoselin Frayre, whose mom owns the shop.

Sequin-lined shoes are among the glorious offerings at Longmont's Fancy Fashion Boutique. (Mark Leffingwell / Daily Camera)

Phew. So I'm not the only crazy mama who over-celebrates birthdays.

The Fancy Fashion Boutique (underscore fancy) carries children's clothes from newborns to size 16 and adults from XS to 4XL. They get new inventory every Friday and Saturday, so you can always find something different. In fact, Frayre says a handful of regulars come in every Friday to get a new outfit for the weekend.

Browsing the back room is like dancing inside a rainbow. Dozens of colorful, sequined, ruffly dresses hang from the ceiling and fill the walls and racks. Tiny colorful tuxedos pack another wall. Sequin-lined metallic shoes sparkle near furry capes, satin gloves, elaborate hair accessories and the biggest selection of tiaras and full-blown queen crowns that I've ever seen outside the rodeo ring at the Boulder County Fair.

"You can't find dresses like this anywhere nearby," Frayre says. (As a dress addict, I can vouch for this.) "We try to be pretty affordable, too."

Get three pieces of jewelry for $5, rings for $2, shoes from $9.99 to $18.99 and lingerie for $3.99. I fell in love with darling rose-colored sandals with silver ball accents, $12.99.

Don't be intimidated by the edgy, club-style dresses that hang on the walls when you first walk in. Peek closer and you'll find beautiful pieces for women of all ages, like a sleek, floor-length gold gown; a gray lace peplum top; black lace booties; a black and teal lace pencil skirt, and dozens of boots, from flat and furry to above-the-knee stilettos. When in doubt, go straight to the $7 scarves. I got my mom one for her 61st birthday.

If it's ruffles and sequins you want, then head over to Fancy Fashion Boutique in Longmont. (Mark Leffingwell / Daily Camera)

Most girls' dresses cost far less than $100, and the shop even offered to custom-tailor Bettie's gown at no cost.

Bettie's star dress, gloves and a white bow headband cost $60 total — and she already has worn the outfit three times in three days. Per the cost-to-use ratio, combined with my encouragement for her to wear it every day until she outgrows it, this gown will well be worth the price.

For Bettie, it's about the stars. She likes to stay up after dark to look out my bedroom window, hoping to see a shooting star. She wants to make a wish. She's old enough to know not to share her wish, which makes me simultaneously happy (she has her own dreams) and sad (fewer of those dreams involve her ol' mama).

"I can jump high enough to touch the stars," she recently told me.

She's young enough to truly believe it.

I believe her, too.

Contact Camera Staff Writer Aimee Heckel at 303-473-1359, heckela@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/aimeemay