ATHENS, Greece (AP) —- Greece assumed the presidency of the European Union on New Year's Day, starting 2014 with a promise by the government to pull the country out of a six-year recession, keep a balanced budget and effectively end a financial crisis that rattled the euro.

"In 2014, Greece will return to the markets and start to become a normal country again," Prime Minister Antonis Samaras said in a televised address. "After six unending, painful years, 2014 will herald the prospect of growth. ... What's important is that we've avoided the worst."

Login required We have used your information to see if you have a subscription with us. So far we have not found one. If you feel you are currently subscribed please click on the button to attempt to find your account. Screen Name or Email Password Forgot? Remember me on this computer Login Screen Name or Email Now I remember! Need an account? Create one now. Back Thank you for reading and relying on TulsaWorld.com for your news and information. You have now viewed your allowance of free articles. Login

You must login to view the full content on this page. Screen Name or Email Password Forgot? Remember me on this computer Login Screen Name or Email Now I remember! Need an account? Create one now.

But have they?

With most of the 240 billion euros ($330 billion) in bailout loans already paid out, Greece still has an unsustainably high national debt, faces the threat of renewed political instability, and has more than one in four people jobless and steadily sliding into poverty.

Greeks greeted the New Year after many spent hours lining up in tax offices to pay austerity levies on time. And heavy smog has returned to the country's capital after decades this winter as households left with no heating throw scrap wood and garbage into the fireplace to try to keep warm.

Here's a look at some of Greece's most pressing problems:

No job, no insurance

Greece's financial tailspin wiped out nearly a quarter of its economy and roughly a million jobs. From 7.2 percent before the recession in 2008, unemployment exploded, reaching 27 percent in the third quarter of 2013, giving Greece the worst job rating among the 34 advanced economies in the Paris-based Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development.

More than 70 percent of the unemployed have been out of work for more than a year, leaving most to rely on charity after losing monthly benefit payments and health insurance.

"It's inconceivable that someone with the misfortune of having no work cannot have proper access to state health care," said George Patoulis, head of the Athens Medical Association.

Worst affected, he said, are those with chronic illnesses, unemployed parents seeking vaccinations for their newborn children, and patients in need of expensive drugs including cancer treatment.

Political peril

Greece is being run by its third pro-bailout government in two years, as unpopular austerity measures wear out public support for the parties backing them. Conservative Prime Minister Samaras heads the current coalition government and has seen his support in the 300-seat parliament dwindle in the past 18 months from 179 lawmakers to 153.

Samaras recently fell behind in the polls to the left-wing Syriza party that wants to radically renegotiate or even tear up bailout deals, arguing they have failed to deliver recovery and are socially catastrophic.

Syriza has vowed to try to topple the government at twin elections in May for local government and the European Parliament.

Public sympathy for the far-right Golden Dawn party, meanwhile, remains strong — polling at around 9 percent — despite the jailing of its leadership on charges of criminal activity and recently emerged videotape showing senior party officials greeting newly sworn-in members with Nazi salutes.

Debt mountain

Despite all the bad news, few people doubt that Greece's fiscal situation is slowly improving, with overspending under control and the size of the once-massive public sector reduced.

There's more good news: The country's credit rating has begun a long climb out of junk territory.

Plus, shares on the Athens Stock Exchange were up an impressive 28 percent on the year.