Topics: 2016 Elections, Christianity, Franklin Graham, Planned Parenthood, Republican Party, Elections News, News, Politics News

The second-generation religious entrepreneur Franklin Graham announced this week that he’s quitting the Republican Party. Over what, you ask? Well, the good reverend is furious about the omnibus spending bill passed last week in in Congress, which – you guessed it – continues to fund Planned Parenthood.

In a rambling Facebook post, Graham unloaded on the GOP:

“Shame on the Republicans and the Democrats for passing such a wasteful spending bill last week. And to top it off, funding Planned Parenthood! A Huffington Post article called it ‘a big win for Planned Parenthood.’ I call it a big loss for America. After all of the appalling facts revealed this year about Planned Parenthood, our representatives in Washington had a chance to put a stop to this, but they didn’t. There’s no question—taxpayers should not be paying for abortions! Abortion is murder in God’s eyes. Seeing and hearing Planned Parenthood talk nonchalantly about selling baby parts from aborted fetuses with utter disregard for human life is reminiscent of Joseph Mengele and the Nazi concentration camps! That should’ve been all that was needed to turn off the faucet for their funding. Nothing was done to trim this 2,000 page, $1.1 trillion budget. This is an example of why I have resigned from the Republican Party and declared myself Independent. I have no hope in the Republican Party, the Democratic Party, or Tea Party to do what is best for America. Unless more godly men and women get in this process and change this wicked system, our country is in for trouble. I want to challenge Christians, even pastors, across the country to pray about running for office where they can have an impact. We need mayors, country commissioners, city council members, school board members who will uphold biblical values.”

A couple of things: First, “the appalling facts revealed this year about Planned Parenthood” weren’t facts. Graham is referring to the leaked Planned Parenthood videos suggesting that the organization was pawning baby parts on the black market. As everyone now knows, those videos were deliberately edited and part of a massive anti-abortion propaganda campaign.