Published: Monday, 9/29/2014



Five Things You Might Have Missed: 9-29 Top articles from this weekend's editions of The Blade



THE BLADE/LORI KING Enlarge | Buy This Image Julia Fein's hand is examined by a doctor at ProMedica Wildwood Orthopedic in Toledo. Ms. Fein was able to get health care for the first time through Obamacare.

1. Health-care law has swelled number of insured, but many lack info to find good care

More than 1,000 people in Wood County and 7.3 million nationally bought private health insurance under the Affordable Care Act, had paid their premiums, and were still enrolled.

U.S. Health and Human Services Secretary Sylvia Mathews Burwell said recently that the health law’s insurance programs have reduced the nation’s overall uninsured population by 26 percent and the Obama Administration is touting this number as the key measure of success of the overall program.

But as the federal and state health-care exchanges prepare to open again on Oct. 1 for the next enrollment period, several local health and insurance officials said that the enrollment figures, while impressive, are just part of the story.

“Definitely more people have coverage than they’ve ever had before, which is one of the main goals, and that’s really good,” said Jan Ruma, executive director of CareNet. “Are more people getting all the preventive care they need and living healthier lives? Not so much.” READ MORE



THE BLADE/ KATIE RAUSCH Enlarge | Buy This Image The Old West End's Tillinghast-Willys House is on the market for $299,900.

2. For sale: Toledo mansion with a storied past

The Tudor-style home at the corner of Robinwood and Bancroft in Toledo’s Old West End has the kind of intricate detail that can drive a man to bankruptcy.

And it did, or so the story goes.

The early history of the house, known today as the Tillinghast Willys Bell home, is as alluring as it is cloudy.

Built in 1901 for a licorice tycoon who ultimately went broke, or maybe just downsized, the house was traded for a dozen cars, or maybe just sold.

It was lived in by the great John North Willys before he bought 1,200 acres to develop Ottawa Hills. Then the mansion was sold again to an investment banker. Later an order of Catholic priests lived there.

Through it all, the home has remained remarkably intact and a prominent example of Gothic-inspired Tudor architecture. READ MORE



THE BLADE/LORI KING Enlarge | Buy This Image Toledo Unleashed board member Jeannie McCarthy, 2nd from left, is one of the first to let her dog Max into the dog park.

3. Toledo’s first pooch park unleashed

The dogs of Toledo must have sniffed freedom.

Dozens of canines and more than 100 dog lovers gathered Saturday to open Glass City Dog Park, the new 4.4-acre, off-leash, fenced-in, fur-friendly romping grounds at Woodsdale Park.

Several of the first-time, four-pawed visitors strained at their leashes, as if to hurry the humans’ speech-making, donor-thanking, picture-taking, and political hand-shaking that started the park’s grand opening.

The dogs were more interested in the wagging, the chasing, and the unfettered playing allowed inside the new park. READ MORE

4. Former local man guilty of sex assault in Fla.

A former Whitehouse man assigned to a U.S. Air Force base in Florida was convicted in military court in the sexual assaults of three women and sentenced to 30 years in confinement.

Tech. Sgt. Robert A. Condon, 30, a former special agent and 11-year veteran, was found guilty of rape, sexual assault, stalking, forcible sodomy, and other charges following a general court-martial at Hurlburt Field near Fort Walton Beach, Fla.

He was sentenced to federal confinement on Wednesday following a 13-day trial conducted by a military judge and heard by four officers and two enlisted members acting as a jury, according to an air base news release.

Condon, who was deployed to Iraq and Afghanistan, received a dishonorable discharge from the Air Force for military violations including dereliction of duty, sexual assault, stalking, assault, and threats and obstruction of justice. READ MORE

5. Father is accused of plotting son’s death for insurance

To collect on a life-insurance policy that Michael Taylor II hoped he could use to bail his oldest son out of jail, he’s accused of orchestrating the death of another son.

Michael Taylor II, 41, who is incarcerated at the Corrections Center of Northwest Ohio on a carrying a concealed weapon charge, was indicted Friday by a Lucas County grand jury on two counts of aggravated murder with firearm specifications in the June 10, 2011, slaying of his son Montelle Taylor, 17, and the later death of Christian Snow-Veley, 22.

The subsection of the aggravated murder charge that is cited in the indictment alleges that the deaths were planned.

Toledo police Detective Jeff Clark, the lead investigator on the case, described Michael Taylor II as the “mastermind” behind his son’s death. READ MORE