Kiz: I don’t want a Papa John’s franchise, some stinkin’ defensive tackle or more chicken parm than any man could eat in two lifetimes. So if Manning gave me $4 million today, I’d be on my rental helicopter tomorrow, bound for the Kootenay Rockies in British Columbia to ski as many vertical feet of fresh powder as my old legs could handle.

Hooch: There isn’t a “Brewster’s Millions” catch to this four mil, right? OK, $4 million should get me the following: The “Back to the Future” DeLorean, the cast of “Saved by the Bell” as the groomsmen and bridesmaids at my wedding, a round of golf at Bushwood, lunch with Paul McCartney, a snack with Ringo Starr, my picture on the wall at Don’s Club Tavern and my own table for life at The Cherry Cricket (as well as a burger on the menu named “The Hooch,” featuring a cheeseburger with Klondike bars as the buns).

Kiz: In the NFL, $4 million is a haircut, not a serious pay cut. It’s a lot of money to a guy with a mortgage and two kids in college, but it can’t buy an NFL team one player that’s likely to make the difference between winning and losing the Super Bowl. As my friend Shannon Sharpe told me: “No. 18 had all the leverage. Elway wasn’t trying to win the Super Bowl with Brock Osweiler in 2015.”

Hooch: Still, John Elway had some need to get the $4 million to spend, or else he wouldn’t have told a Hall of Famer to take a pay cut. We’ve known the importance of a nose tackle in a 3-4 defensive scheme ever since 1977, when the Broncos’ Rubin Carter stared down America on the cover of Sports Illustrated (and the headline read: “The case for the 3-4 defense”). The money should be spent on Terrance Knighton or another DT, hopefully also with a fun nickname.

Kiz: Along with the $4 million, here’s hoping Manning also handed Elway a shopping list. At the top of the wish list for Manning should be protection for his 39-year-old body. It will cost far more than $4 million for the Broncos to land Kansas City center Rodney Hudson in free agency. But $4 million would make for a nice down payment.

Hooch: Speaking of down payment, I think I’ll have enough left in my $4 million to use as a down payment on the “Ghostbusters” car.