On the second anniversary of the Boston Marathon Bombings, the crowd gathered around the 26.2-mile course for what was sure to be an emotional day for anyone with clear memories of April 15, 2013. Two hours, nine minutes, and 17 seconds after the race started, Lelisa Desisa became the first runner to cross the finish line, just like he did two years ago.

Twenty hours after the race started, Maickel Melamed, a Venezuelan man with muscular dystrophy, crossed the finish line surrounded by a crowd of well-wishers in what one spectator called “one of the most amazing things I’ve ever seen.” At 5 a.m. with rain pouring down on him and his supporters at his side, Melamed crossed the finish line with two words on his lips: “Boston Strong.”

“Last night I watched a report by Jorge Quiroga about a man from Venezuela who was still running the marathon long after everyone had packed up and went home,” spectator Michael Blanchard said in a Facebook post. “His name is Maickel Melamed and he has muscular dystrophy. When I watched the video on WCVB Channel 5 Boston around 1 a.m., someone commented that he was just passing through Brookline and scheduled to finish between 2-3 a.m.”

For his courageous effort, Mayor Marty Walsh awarded Melamed with an honorary medal after competing in his fifth marathon. Melamed’s message of hope and inspiration could not be more fitting with the backdrop of the Boston Marathon. Melamed explained that Boston has always held a special place in his heart after being brought to the city at a young age for treatment.

“Since I am up all night anyway, I decided to head into town to try and photograph him crossing the finish line,” Marchland added. “When I got there, I was told by a cameraman that he was still in Brookline. Knowing it would be a while before he made it to Copley Square, I drove to Beacon Street to see what the deal was. Soon I came upon about a hundred people walking (very slowly) and singing while cars passed by them. It was truly one of the most amazing things I've ever seen.”