Attention, seniors: Now it’s your turn to get focused on health insurance.

The launch last week of the country’s health insurance exchanges — the centerpiece of the Affordable Care Act — prompted millions of Americans to go shopping for plans.

But for 50 million enrollees in Medicare, another important event is about to begin.

Medicare open enrollment — the period when you can make changes to your Medicare prescription drug plans and to your Medicare Advantage plans for the coming year — starts on Oct. 15 and extends until Dec. 7.

With so much attention being paid to the new health insurance marketplaces, it’s easy to get confused about Medicare open enrollment this year.

YOUR GUIDE TO MEDICARE: GLOSSARY OF TERMS YOU NEED TO KNOW

In fact, 17% of seniors mistakenly believe the exchanges could replace their Medicare plans altogether, according to a survey by Express Scripts. Many believe they have to enroll in an exchange plan to avoid penalties.

“We are getting calls: Do I have to do something because of Obamacare?” said Joe Baker, president of Medicare Rights Center, a nonprofit consumer service organization that provides counseling and education.

“The answer is no.”

YOUR GUIDE TO MEDICARE: FINE-TUNE YOUR PRESCRIPTION DRUG BENEFIT FOR BIGGEST SAVINGS

Daniel and Frances Blafford, 72 and 68 years old respectively, at their Levittown, Long Island home. Will seniors like the Blatfords have to do something because of Obamacare? Joe Baker, president of Medicare Rights Center, says simply, “no.” (Sam Costanza)

The bottom line: Medicare is not part of the health insurance exchanges and seniors will continue to receive their health coverage through Medicare.

Your Medicare benefits aren’t changing. No matter how you get Medicare, whether it be through Original Medicare or a Medicare Advantage plan, you’ll still have the same benefits and you won’t have to make any changes.

If you are enrolled in Medicare, you have complied with the health law’s mandate requiring most individuals to have health insurance.

YOUR GUIDE TO MEDICARE: THIS FAQ ANSWERS YOUR KEY MUST-KNOW QUESTIONS

But that doesn’t mean you should sit back and relax.

As Medicare open enrollment approaches, it’s time to check if the plan you have now still works for you.

Are you happy with your Medicare Advantage plan, or would you prefer to switch to a different one?

YOUR GUIDE TO MEDICARE: WHAT MEDICARE ADVANTAGE PLAN IS BEST FOR YOU?

Is the drug you are taking still covered by your Part D drug plan or is a different drug plan better?

For seniors like Daniel and Frances Blafford, 72 and 68 years old respectively, Medicare open enrollment starts on Oct. 15 and extends until Dec. 7. (Sam Costanza)

Do you want to switch from Original Medicare to a Medicare Advantage plan, or vice versa?

This is the time to make those changes.

This special section will help you through the process. We’ll give you in-depth information on Part D and Medicare Advantage plans, answer some frequently asked questions and let you know where to go for free help.

YOUR GUIDE TO MEDICARE: WHAT ISN’T COVERED?

By now, you should have received your Annual Notice of Change from your insurance provider.

Open it up and read it. Plans get altered every year and your health status may have changed too.

“Medicare is not one-size-fits-all, and a lot can change in a year in terms of a person’s health status and budget as well as the plans that are available,” said Jennifer Cohen-Smith, regional vice president of UnitedHealthcare Medicare & Retirement in New York.

Frances Blafford, a 68-year-old from Levittown, L.I., carefully read the packet of information she recently received from her insurance company, EmblemHealth.

The former chiropractor’s assistant learned that monthly premiums on Medicare Advantage PPO plans for herself and her husband Daniel, 72, a retired UPS employee, will be going down to $140 a month, from $218.50. But she will now have co-pays when she goes to the doctor.

Routine eye care is not covered by Medicare. (Catherine Yeulet/Getty Images/iStockphoto)

“Do your homework,” Frances advised. “If you don’t know how to do it, find someone who can help. It’s very important.”

Check out the Medicare Plan Finder at Medicare.gov/find-a-plan to compare plans in your area.

Plug in information about yourself, including where you live and what drugs you are taking. The Plan Finder will pull up your options, your estimated costs and the plans’ ratings.

When considering a plan, ask some important questions, AARP advises, such as how much will you have to pay for premiums, deductibles, doctor visits or hospital stays?

Will your doctors accept the coverage? What will you be paying in drug costs? Does the plan get a high rating?

“Focus on the ‘4 Cs’: cost, coverage, convenience and customer service,” said Nicole Duritz, vice president, health and family at AARP.

In the end, you may decide the insurance you currently have will do just fine. Either way, it will be time well spent, Duritz said.

“Invest the time to make sure your health coverage works.”

pfurman@nydailynews.com