Freedom Caucus Chairman Rep. Jim Jordan (R-Ohio), center, walks with fellow caucus members, Reps. Justin Amash (R-Mich.), left, and Raul Labrador (R-Idaho), on Capitol Hill in Washington, Oct. 21, 2015. (AP Photo/Carolyn Kaster)

HOUSE CONSERVATIVES HAVE A LONG WISH LIST FOR RYAN. House Conservatives may have given Speaker Paul D. Ryan (R-Wis.) a grace period while he completed the messy work of finishing up the year-end spending deal in December, but it is a new year, and they have a long list of demands. Power Post has the story:

House Freedom Caucus Chairman Jim Jordan (R-Ohio) said voters expect Congress to do more than just talk about issues this year. “The three areas that [Ryan] has focused on [are], real tax reform… real welfare reform… incentivizing work and our alternative to Obamacare.” Jordan said. “We’ve been talking about things for a while and I think our voters expect us to actually put the bill forward and pass the legislation.” Freedom Caucus member Tim Huelskamp (R-Kan.) said he expects the House this year to vote to cut off funding for women’s health group Planned Parenthood in an upcoming spending bill, overhaul of the tax code, change welfare programs and complete consideration of each of the annual appropriations bills, including allowing votes on amendments during floor consideration. “He needs to start [the appropriations process] early and he needs to finish,” Huelskamp said.

DECEMBER JOBS REPORT POSTS BIG NUMBERS. The U.S. economy made some big gains in 2015, including 292,000 new jobs in December. The Washington Post’s Chico Harlan breaks down the better-than-expected numbers in the December jobs report.

The latest jobs report exceeded the expectations of economists and investors and provided a reassuring note about the resiliency of the labor market, even amid volatile oil prices, a major slowdown in China, and modest overall growth at home. In all, the nation added 2.65 million jobs in 2015, the second-best year for hiring since 1999 and one that improved markedly in the last quarter. The economy added an average of 284,000 new monthly positions between October and December; in the first three-quarters of the year, the monthly pace was 200,000. Wage growth remains tepid, but the unemployment rate stands at its lowest point in more than seven years.

OBAMACARE SIGN-UPS TOP 11 MILLION. A new survey released Thursday found that about 11.3 million people have signed up for health insurance through state exchanges and on healthcare.gov. That number puts the Obama administration on track to reach their goal of 16 million sign-ups by the end of this year, according to a report from CNBC.

About 8.6 million people signed up for plans on HealthCare.gov since Nov. 1, and another 2.7 million signed up on the state-based exchanges, officials said.