SCROGGINS’ STATEMENT TO COMMISSIONERS

April 7, 2014: A YEAR OF ACTION!

Good morning Shawnee County Board of Commissioners,

My name is Sonny Scroggins and I am appearing before you today with all due respect in the spirit of Judge Joe Brown to speak out for the acceptance of the Affordable Care Act by all Americans, democrats and republicans alike. Thank you for allowing me to speak and talk to you about the ACA in the home state of President Obama’s mother.

On March 23, 2010, President Obama signed the Affordable Care Act into law. Since that time, a major political party and other groups have supported the efforts to eliminate the ACA over fifty times with little success, which is a waste of taxpayer money since the Supreme Court ruled the law is constitutional. Mr. Archer, I would like to ask you personally, whether your non-support of the ACA is racism or not? It appears that certain members of the Republican Party, such as Ben Carson, Alan West of Florida, Clarence Thomas and you provide cover for not accepting the ACA or any of President Obama’s policies based on racial bias? Couldn’t the energy expended be better spent on certain issues such a saving the Juan “Poppy” Abbott Center and not charging our youth a fee to attend the Center? I have a vested interest in saving the Center because the late Mayor Butch Felker and I dedicated the center, formerly known as Eastlawn Center, was renamed after well-known youth leader Juan “Poppy” Abbott

Your reason for voting against two health agency employees attending a healthcare conference in Washington D.C. smells of bias. Although you are worried about $3400 being spent on job-related travel, apparently you had no problem with the government shut down which cost the country millions or billions of dollars and lost productivity; or when Kris Kobach travels to Arizona, Louisiana or Missouri to help those states pass voter suppression laws while being paid to do his duties as Secretary of the State of Kansas.

Because Kansas chose not to expand Medicaid, Kansas residents have fewer options for health coverage than people in states where Medicaid is growing. ‘But millions of Americans who are currently without both a job and health coverage may find relief under Obamacare because new coverage options are now available through the health insurance marketplace serving Kansas’.

Thank your for your time.

I Challenge my Generation to Inspire Future Generations.

Yours in Christ, Sonny Scroggins