Velma Clifton says three weeks ago, Minco Police Chief Bill Ellis told her to never call police again for anything. She says he also told her if she does, he will call DHS and have her moved to a rest home.

News 9 called the Minco Police Department at 2:30 p.m. Wednesday. The woman who answered the phone was very nice, and said the police chief would not be in until 5 p.m.

An 82-year-old Minco woman says the town's police chief is a bully, and she's scared to death of him.

Velma Clifton is a widow. She's suffered from a severe speech impediment since birth and she broke her hip last Fall. She admits she's called police several times over the years, but she's done it, because she gets scared, and she lives alone.

Clifton says three weeks ago, Minco Police Chief Bill Ellis told her to never call police again for anything. She says he also told her if she does, he will call DHS and have her moved to a rest home. She says she's become so scared of him, she's afraid to leave her apartment and drive to Walmart.

"I cried for a whole day thinking about police calling DHS," she said Wednesday. "It hurt me so bad."

Sources confirm a DHS case worker did visit Velma Clifton on Tuesday. News 9 called the Minco Police Department at 2:30 p.m. Wednesday. The woman who answered the phone was very nice, and said the police chief would not be in until 5 p.m.

News 9's Steve Shaw told her to tell the Chief we were doing this story tonight, and we really want his side of the story. Shaw also walked into the Minco Police Department around 4 p.m. Wednesday, and the Chief had not come into work yet.

The same kind city employee who took News 9's earlier phone message, took Shaw's business card and said she would give it to Chief Ellis. As of 10 p.m. Wednesday, he hasn't called us back.

Sources tell News 9 Ellis has told other Minco residents not to call police as well. News 9 asked Grady County Undersheriff, Rusty Pyle, Wednesday afternoon if he's heard anything about that.

Pyle said, "I can't say he has or hasn't. I know there are citizens that have called us and they have relayed that to us."

Pyle says Grady County Sheriff's Deputies will respond if residents like Velma Clifton call, needing services.