About 200 nontraditional students, most from around the country, gathered in Denver on Saturday to partake in a traditional graduation ceremony: the University of the Rockies commencement.

Heralded by “Pomp and Circumstance,” faculty and students paraded into the Mile High Ballroom at the Colorado Convention Center. They were wearing graduation caps and gowns, but most had not personally met their professors or fellow students prior to Saturday.

Shirley Davenport, 56, one of the commencement speakers, flew to Denver from her home state of Hawaii.

“There was never a doubt that I was going to walk,” said Davenport, who received a doctorate degree in psychology. “Because I’ve earned it.”

Davenport, like most Rockies graduates, earned her degree through online courses and studies.

Davenport, who holds undergraduate degrees from the University of Hawaii, lost her job in April 2010.

Left stunned, “feeling inadequate” and “in a fog,” Davenport found the online university.

At the time she was laid off, Davenport had already made arrangements to go on a mission trip to Africa. Online studies through the university allowed her to keep that commitment, return home and resume her education without missing a beat, she said.

Utah resident Jessica Aguilar, a mother of three, received a master’s degree of arts in human services with specialization in mental health administration.

Aguilar’s undergraduate degree, from Ashford University, was also earned online. The online degrees allowed her to juggle work, family and school.

While studying at Rockies, Aguilar’s son Lucas, now 5, was diagnosed with leukemia.

Aguilar and her husband, Moroni, founded the Lucas Leukemia Foundation, which supports children with leukemia, as well as their parents. While battling the disease, the Aguilars discovered that the stress of the illness sometimes causes families to splinter.

Their foundation offers services and programs along the Wasatch Range that are designed “to keep families together,” she said.

Lucas and his two younger siblings, along with their dad, were on hand Saturday to cheer Aguilar as she accepted her diploma.

“Never give up,” Aguilar said. “You really need to put your best foot forward and keep moving in the right direction.”

Kieran Nicholson: 303-954-1822, knicholson@denverpost.com or twitter.com/kierannicholson