Buy Photo Gov. Mike Pence (Photo: Matt Detrich/The Star file photo )Buy Photo

Gov. Mike Pence was not able to reach an agreement with the federal government Monday on his alternative approach to expanding Medicaid under the Affordable Care Act.

Pence said after meeting with Health and Human Services Secretary Sylvia Burwell that “differences remain.”

“We had a substantive discussion, but we are not there yet,” Pence said in a statement. “Our administration will continue in good faith regarding our proposal to cover more low-income Hoosiers the Indiana way.”

The Supreme Court’s 2012 decision upholding the Affordable Care Act left it up to states to decide whether to go along with the law’s expansion of Medicaid, the joint federal-state health care program for the poor. The federal government would cover all the costs of adding hundreds of thousands of Hoosiers to Medicaid through 2016. After that, federal support would drop to 90 percent by 2020.

Pence has said he will not expand Indiana’s regular Medicaid program, which he calls “broken.”

Instead, he wants to implement a version of the Healthy Indiana Plan (HIP) pilot program that has been in place for a limited number of Hoosiers since 2008.

The proposal Pence submitted to the federal government this summer is modeled on high-deductible plans with health savings accounts that advocates say give consumers an incentive to make smarter health care spending choices. But the financial contributions required by the poor and near-poor are some of the elements for which the federal government might not be willing to waive Medicaid rules.

Pence has not said what the sticking points are in his negotiations with the federal government.

Conservative groups, which have criticized Pence for being willing to expand Medicaid in any form, are pressuring him not to agree to any changes to his proposal.

Some national advocacy groups for the poor, including the National Health Law Program, have said the federal government should require changes in the plan to protect the poor.

The Indiana Hospital Association and some health advocacy groups in Indiana have urged the federal government to approve the plan in time for enrollment to begin next year.

“Hospitals throughout the state are already preparing to educate patients about their new coverage options and are counting on a speedy resolution,” Indiana Hospital Association President Doug Leonard said in a statement Monday.

If the state’s plan is approved, officials estimate more than 300,000 Hoosiers — or 56 percent of those newly eligible for Medicaid — would enroll in the first year and more than 400,000 would sign up during the second year.

Indiana’s current eligibility rules for traditional Medicaid are some of the strictest in the country.

All of Indiana’s neighboring states have expanded Medicaid to those earning up to 138 percent of the federal poverty level (about $16,000). The share of Hoosier adults who lack insurance, 15 percent, is now higher than the uninsured rates in Kentucky, Illinois, Michigan and Ohio, according to a Gallup survey released in August.

The Robert Wood Johnson Foundation, whose mission is improving health care, has estimated that Indiana hospitals will lose out on almost $1 billion in Medicaid payments in 2016 if Indiana’s Medicaid program does not expand.

Email Maureen Groppe at mgroppe@gannett.com. Follow her on Twitter: @mgroppe.

Read or Share this story: http://indy.st/1xiJydz