Lucas Benson (Photo: Special to the Register)

It’s that time of year when Frank Capra’s classic holiday film, “It’s a Wonderful Life,” begins playing 24/7. You know the story — how George Bailey wishes he’d never been born, only to be shown how the world would have been without him. Well, not long ago, I had a similar experience. Not that I was visited by an angel named Clarence, but I did have a chance to see the world through a different lens — the lens of serious illness.

This August I found myself sitting on a stranger's stoop one block away from my house — bathed in sweat, trying to muster the strength to walk the last 100 feet to my couch and finally admitting to myself that I was in trouble.

A couple months earlier my hands had started tingling before going numb altogether. Initially, I was worried I had MS, but after a few strategic Google searches, I was able to diagnose myself with carpal tunnel syndrome. I spent the next few weeks popping Ibuprofen, icing my arms, and doing hands stretches, and soon the numbness improved. Problem solved!

Until one month later, when I started throwing up — every morning. After ruling out male pregnancy, I decided to once again consult Web MD and quickly found two fairly benign options: irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) or ulcers. Out of vanity, I decided to go with ulcers, and started popping Prilosec, cut out booze, espresso and pizza, and soon the nausea started to improve — a little.

Then I started getting tired. Like sleeping-18-hours-a-day tired. I briefly considered diagnosing myself with chronic fatigue syndrome, but that seemed like too much effort. Not only was I tired, but everything I did left me weak, nauseous and exhausted, which is how I found myself one block away from home, bathed in sweat, trying to summon the strength to walk the last 100 feet to my couch.

I spent the next three days in that strange ether-swirl that is a hospital stay. On that third day, I was finally given a diagnosis: pernicious anemia. PA, I came to learn, is an autoimmune disease where your immune system attacks a protein in your stomach called Intrinsic Factor, which is responsible for absorbing B-12. As my doctor explained it: “You haven’t been losing blood as we originally thought; you've simply lost the ability to make it."

And like that, I had an answer.

I was released the next day and left the hospital feeling like Popeye on spinach. It was like a switch had been flipped and suddenly I was who I was before again. Granted, I won't be going mountaineering any time soon, but with medication and loads of B-12 I am able to take my dog for walks, spend time with friends, and stay up past 7 p.m. with my fianceé.

Like George Bailey, I was given a glimpse of life without me in it; and while my recovery has gone well, I know others haven't been so lucky. I also know I'm not the only one who prefers telling a story to facing the facts. It's for this reason I'd like to share a few hard-earned lessons I've taken from this experience.

1. Don’t self-diagnose: Don’t waste your time on the Internet scaring yourself to death. See a doctor, several if you have to, and explain your symptoms in detail. They have a medical degree; you don’t.

2. Donate blood: The moment I felt a stranger’s blood begin to drip into my body my whole perspective changed. I had a sort of flash, where I saw the millions of people who have taken the time to donate blood throughout the years, and I suddenly understood how tremendous that was: that people were willing to donate their time and selves to help someone they would never even meet. Blood donation is an amazing gift. If you’re able to, do it. Angels have nothing on blood donors.

3. Health is a story: The question I'm asked most is "How could you let things get so bad?" Well, like most people, I didn't want to be sick. So I told myself a different story instead. And thanks to the Internet, it isn't hard to construct a narrative that you want to hear. I’ve learned that it’s important to be honest with yourself, to pause a moment and ask, “Am I listening to my body, or am I telling myself a story?” Once I did that, I got the care I needed, and can honestly say, “It’s a Wonderful Life.”

Lucas Benson of Iowa City is a writer and community activist. Contact: lucasebenson@gmail.com

Read or Share this story: http://dmreg.co/1OoYVh5