With The Black Eyed Peas and Miley Cyrus blasting in the background, hundreds of Girl Scouts and their families made their way from one fitness station to the next during a healthy-living event at Chandler Park.

The event Saturday was a kickoff party for the Girl Scouts of Eastern Oklahoma's three-year Live Healthy, Lead Healthy initiative.

Login required We have used your information to see if you have a subscription with us. So far we have not found one. If you feel you are currently subscribed please click on the button to attempt to find your account. Screen Name or Email Password Forgot? Remember me on this computer Login Screen Name or Email Now I remember! Need an account? Create one now. Back Thank you for reading and relying on TulsaWorld.com for your news and information. You have now viewed your allowance of free articles. Login

You must login to view the full content on this page. Screen Name or Email Password Forgot? Remember me on this computer Login Screen Name or Email Now I remember! Need an account? Create one now.

Roberta Preston, CEO of the Girl Scouts of Eastern Oklahoma, said the initiative came about because the council recognized the need to address health issues in the state.

"We've all seen the statistics about the health of Oklahoma adults," she said.

But habits are difficult to change as an adult, Preston said, and the council wants girls to start thinking about their health at a young age.

"It's a long-term solution to confront the health of Oklahoma adults," she said. "So we'll start with the girls and see if we can't change the next generation."

The three-year initiative will encourage girls to be more active and eat healthy, as well as build their social health through addressing issues like bullying and self-esteem. Troops will be encouraged to integrate healthy practices into their meetings and activities.

A 20-week fitness challenge that girls and their families can sign up for will offer Girl Scouts incentives if they meet personal exercise and nutrition goals. At the end of the school year, the council will host a Girl Scouts Olympics event.

About a dozen stations were set up on Saturday and offered a variety of activities. The attendees spent time hula hooping, doing Zumba, jump roping and climbing a rock wall.

Representatives from the Tulsa Health Department were also at the event. Teddy Harbaugh, a certified health education specialist for the department, was happy that the event encouraged families to participate.

"Children don't get to make a whole lot of decisions for themselves, so the parents have to be involved in a lot of the choices that they have to make," Harbaugh said. "Getting the parents involved in making healthy choices and keeping the kids active is always a good thing."

The Girl Scouts and their parents who attended Saturday's event expressed enthusiasm about the initiative.

Hayley Davidson, 15, said the initiative is a great idea.

"It's really hard to be healthy nowadays," she said, citing the popularity of electronics and the fact that people spend less time outside.

The activities offered during the kickoff party showed everyone that being active can be fun, Davidson said.

The event also showed kids and parents that there was an activity for everyone's taste.

"Being active is as easy as doing Zumba on the Wii," said Perri Catey, a troop leader who was at the event with her 14-year-old daughter.

Catey, who recently lost 50 pounds, said the benefits of being fit include having more energy and being able to better handle the stress of everyday life. And when one member of the family starts moving toward a healthier lifestyle, it motivates other family members to follow suit, she said.

Casey Gilmore, who leads a troop that includes her 7-year-old granddaughter, signed up for the fitness challenge with her troop members.

"I want to be a model for the girls, to show them that it can be done," Gilmore said.

The goals of the Live Healthy, Lead Healthy initiative tie in well with the Girl Scouts' mission of building confidence and helping girls respect themselves, she said.

"Living healthy is a way of respecting yourself," Gilmore said.