Labor Day typically is a time for cookouts, lake trips and the beginning of football season.

Yet, the actual purpose of the holiday, which started in 1894, has been lost. For the most part, we no longer celebrate the American labor movement and its contributions to the social and economic achievements we take for granted. We no longer pay annual tribute to the people who, with tremendous toil and personal sacrifice, laid the foundation for this country’s economic strength, prosperity and well-being.

That can change if employers and politicians are willing to stand up for what’s right and increase the minimum wage on a federal, state or city level.

Oklahoma-based Hobby Lobby, a company that has come under fire for its stance on Obamacare, increased its minimum wage for full-time employees to $14 per hour, which is nearly twice the amount of the federally mandated minimum wage of $7.25. In addition, Hobby Lobby increased its minimum wage for part-time workers to $9.50 per hour. The company made those moves last year and it hasn’t hurt its operations one bit. In fact, Hobby Lobby has expanded by opening new stores around the country since that time.

As a state, Oklahoma lags behind its other counterparts like Colorado, California, Florida, Connecticut, Washington, Arizona and New Mexico, to mention a few. All of these states have enacted minimum wages that are above the federal requirement. Some cities are doing the same. For instance, the City Council in Seattle passed an ordinance in June increasing the minimum wage to $15 per hour, giving that city the highest minimum wage in the United States.

Yet Oklahoma Gov. Mary Fallin signed a bill that prohibits cities from increasing the minimum wage. She and her supporters claim the ban prevents a hodgepodge of minimum wages in different parts of the state that could potentially harm the business community.

Once again, the labor movement and the everyday, blue-collar workers have been ignored. They’ve been relegated to second-class status. The bottom line, in most cases, is the rich get richer by paying their workers only what they are required by federal law.

When was the last time Fallin or any of her cronies paid their bills living solely on the minimum wage of $7.25 per hour?

Here are a few facts readers of this column should consider. First, a person who earns the federal minimum wage of $7.25 per hour, while working 40 hours weekly, will receive $15,080 before taxes. After taxes, depending on the person’s tax bracket, they will be hovering around or below the poverty line. That line, according to the U.S. government, is $11,670 for a single person.

Second, 71 percent of adults in the U.S. support a hike in the minimum wage, according to a March 2013 Gallup Poll.

There is no stereotypical minimum-wage earner. They aren’t a specific age, gender, race or ethnicity. In fact, the New York Times reported in February that there are 27.8 million minimum-wage workers in the U.S. Their average age is 35, most work full time and more than 25 percent are parents. On average, they earn half of their family’s total income.

It’s time to re-energize the labor movement and recognize blue-collar workers for their many contributions. This can be accomplished, in part, by raising the minimum wage and allowing these workers to earn a decent living that affords them the opportunity to pay their bills and save for a rainy day.

David Slane is an Oklahoma City attorney who has supported efforts to increase the minimum wage in Oklahoma.