The Flemington Business Improvement District was honored Wednesday night by Downtown New Jersey at the Excellence Awards ceremony held at the Heldrich Center in New Brunswick.

Under the Tools of the Trade category, Flemington took the Platinum award for the 90 Main Street Pop-Up Art and Performance Gallery and the Gold award for the Six Areas of Redevelopment Strategic Plan.

“The 90 Main Street Project is a collaboration between the BID, Council, and local residents Jeff Hersch and Mike Haller, providing an opportunity for a community feature and pilot project of a art and performance gathering space on Main Street,” stated Executive Director Megan Jones-Holt. “It was early spring of this year when Jeff walked into the office promoting a concert he was doing. I invited him to stay and we talk about what he would like to see in Flemington.

"The 90 Main Street project came to life when we approached Councilman Velella about the use of the Borough’s empty space at 90 Main. Since its opening at the May car show, the building has been an active art gallery and performance venue with showings of independent films, open mic nights, local and regional bands, and recently a twenty-four hour creative writing marathon. The project has been a tremendous success and has attracted much attention within the state,” Jones-Holt added.

The first ever Popup Art and Performance Gallery was created to revitalize Main Street by repurposing the empty storefront with an affordable space for local artist to show and sell their art. The 90 Main Street project, as it is called, reflects the address of the space donated by the Borough of Flemington to provide a safe and creative space for the community of all ages to engage in a burgeoning local arts scene the BID is establishing. Both Jeff and Mike, who manage the space under the name of Flemington DIY, accepted the award along with Executive Director Megan Jones-Holt and Chairman Robert Shore.

Tim Delorm of Terra Noble Design also was present to acknowledge his working relationship with the BID and Borough for the Strategic Plan created for six areas of redevelopment.

“The project’s purpose was to create a vision for the future of Flemington,” Robert Shore, Chairman indicated. “The Strategic plan is meant to serve as a vision of what can happen in Flemington for redevelopment. It is not an approved plan in progress, but rather a vision to consider. The FBID took the strategic vision as a proactive approach to its mission and vision plans, Shore added.

The organization’s mission works toward recruiting, revitalizing and retaining businesses in the Borough of Flemington. The strategic plan has been used to attract investors to identify possible areas to develop. The planning board is now reexamining its master plan and it has created conversations with organizations to implement specific elements identified. Transportation has been identified as a key element and several meetings have taken place with NJTPA and NJ Transit to bring connectivity to Hunterdon. The Plan is also in line with the County Of Hunterdon’s Economic Development Plan for Downtown Centers and the BID and Borough of Flemington have been working with the county’s planning board. A web based planning tool through Placeways, LLC and the County Planning Board has selected the BID as a pilot to incorporate the strategic plan.

Each year Downtown New Jersey recognizes New Jersey’s best downtown projects and programs completed within the last 2 years. Winning submissions are considered models worthy of emulation and are promoted on DNJ’s website.

Downtown New Jersey is non-profit corporation comprised of individuals, business leaders, government and non-profit representatives that are passionate about downtowns. New Jersey downtowns act as a focal point for our communities, reflecting their unique identities, and providing residents with a convenient local place of commerce, and an opportunity to gather and enjoy their community. Downtown New Jersey is a resource dedicated to ensuring the vitality of our downtowns.

The Flemington Business Improvement District is a 501c3 not for profit organization who’s mission is to support the business district of the borough through revitalization, retention and recruitment. To learn more about the organization and activities in Flemington go to www.downtownflemington.com.