Stock Market Headlines:

Cautious investors kept major market index futures mixed ahead of the release of the U.S. employment report for February. Dow Jones industrial average index futures were up .1 percent, S&P 500 index futures were up .2 percent and Nasdaq composite index futures were flat. (USA Today)

European stocks fell and the dollar weakened before U.S. jobs data today, while Indonesia's rupiah gained and Indian equities rose to a record. (Bloomberg News)

The euro raced to a 2-1/2 year high against the dollar today as short term money market rates rose on signs the European Central Bank's balance sheet was contracting at a time when other major central banks were still expanding theirs. (Reuters)

U.S. Business Headlines:

Production of the 2016 Ford F-650 and F-750 medium-duty trucks will move from Mexico to Ford's Ohio Assembly Plant in Avon Lake. ( cleveland.com )( USA Today

In advance of the February jobs report being released today, the U.S. economy has been skating on an icy patch. (Associated Press)

Few uninsured Americans are gaining coverage under the Affordable Care Act, though the number has been growing recently. (CNN Money)

A federal judge has struck down an FAA-imposed fine against drone operators, ruling there's no legal way to prevent the commercial use of small unmanned aerial vehicles. (Time)

The government sharply revised down non-farm productivity for the fourth quarter, mirroring the economy's slow growth pace in the same period. (Irish Independent)

Technology Headlines:

Apple has been dealt a blow in its ongoing patent battle with Samsung, with a federal judge denying the iPhone maker a ban on Samsung smartphones in the U.S. (The Inquirer)

Facebook's purchase of WhatsApp may be an unfair trade practice because users of the messaging service had an expectation their data wouldn't be collected for advertising purposes, two privacy groups said in a complaint filed with the FTC. (Bloomberg News)

Ignoring broadcaster complaints, FCC Chairman Tom Wheeler is moving forward with plans to heavily restrict TV station owners' ability to jointly manage multiple stations in smaller markets. ( Re/Code

Sony Computer Entertainment Thursday said Jack Tretton would step down from his role as president and CEO as of March 31. (RTT News)

Google's mystery barge floated Thursday to its new home in the California delta after the Internet company was ordered to move it from San Francisco. (Associated Press)

World Business Headlines:

German industrial output rose for a third consecutive month in January as mild winter weather boosted construction activity. (Bloomberg News)

A small producer of solar panels today became the first company in recent history to default in China's domestic bond market, a development welcomed by analysts as a sign the nation's huge but protected corporate debt market may be growing up. (New York Times)

With youth unemployment upward of 30 percent and its economy only now back to levels seen before its 2011 uprising, Egypt's salvation may lie in the small, informal businesses run by those scraping out a living in the Arab world's most populous country. ( Associated Press

Australian oil output has slumped to its lowest annual production in more than 40 years. (Mining Weekly)