The biggest winner in today's Supreme Court ruling upholding Obamacare subsidies?

Florida.

More specifically, South Florida.

All the talking heads on my TV screen are talking about this being a major win for the Obama administration, and that's true.

But there is no state -- and no region -- that had as much riding on the outcome of the King v. Burwell case as Florida and South Florida.

Of the 6.4 million Americans whose subsidies were upheld on Wednesday, just over 20 percent (1.32 million) are from Florida.

And nearly 10 percent -- 622,000 -- live in South Florida (from West Palm Beach to Key West).

All these folks can breathe easier today. They get to keep their tax subsidies, and their health insurance, even though they live in a state whose stubborn Republican leadership has done everything possible to obstruct and sabotage Obamacare.

Mark Ferrulo, executive director of the liberal grassroots organization Progress Florida, issued a statement that said, "This historic decision benefits more families in Florida than anywhere else in the nation ... Now is the time for Gov. Rick Scott and his allies in the Legislature and in Congress to end their efforts to undermine the Affordable Care Act once and for all."

Florida refused to set up its own state-run exchange, which meant Floridians had to go through the federally-run Healthcare.gov website if they wanted Obamacare tax subsidies. That was also the case in more than 30 states.

And then Obamacare opponents found a legal loophole to challenge those subsidies that made it all the way to the Supreme Court. They focused on a narrow and callous semantic argument, that exchanges were supposed to be set up by "the state" to qualify for tax credits under the law.

Thankfully, in a 6-3 ruling, the Supreme Court took the side of compassion and common sense. (And as usual, the Reactionary Gang of Three -- Justices Samuel Alito, Antonin Scalia and Clarence Thomas -- saw it the other way).

The so-called Affordable Care Act is President Obama's signature achievement, and he now has two major Supreme Court rulings upholding its underpinnings.

This was certainly a huge victory for him and his legacy.

But when you get to the real-world impact, the biggest winners are the flesh-and-blood individuals who can still get tax credits if they enroll for health insurance through the federally-run exchange.

For them, it's what makes the Affordable Care Act affordable.

You can quibble with just how affordable, or efficient, health care is in the United States for all of us. With insurers and major healthcare/drug corporations operating in the interests of profits and shareholders, our system is sometimes at odds with the interests of individuals' health and well-being.

But one thing you can't argue with is that under Obamacare, health care has become more accessible to more Americans. Americans can't be excluded or denied by insurers because of pre-existing conditions.

And now those who get subsidies through the federal exchange can keep those subsidies.

"This was a good day for America," President Obama said.

Thanks, Supreme Court.