GOP candidate talks economy

By Sylvie Belmond belmond@theacorn.com

The third in a series of stories profiling candidates in the June primary election.

Steve Fazio, the only Republican candidate in the 27th California Senate District race, says residents currently represented by Democratic stalwart Fran Pavley of Agoura Hills are ready for a new leader who will work to improve the business climate, reform education and reduce crime.

Fazio is one of six contenders— five Democrats and himself— vying to replace Pavley, whose term expires in November.

In 2012, political newcomer Todd Zink of Westlake Village scored a narrow victory over Pavley in the primary election for the 27th district, which had been redrawn the year before to include broader Republican representation.

The district covers Calabasas, Agoura Hills, Westlake Village, Thousand Oaks, Moorpark and Simi Valley. Approximately 40 percent of the district’s 518,000 registered voters are Democrats and 32 percent are Republican.

Although Pavley trailed Zink in the 2012 primary, she won by 5 percent in the general election. With Pavley out of the picture, Republicans now have a good chance to win her seat, Fazio said.

The 27th district now reaches from Malibu to the Santa Clarita Valley and comprises western San Fernando Valley and eastern Ventura County. Its numerous communities have distinct needs the next senator must identify with, said the 56-year-old Fazio, who owns a laundry and dry cleaning company.

He said his goal is to make California more businessfriendly.

The regulatory environment for small businesses has become onerous, Fazio said. In addition to excessive taxes, governmental regulations and labor laws, “there is a complete lack of tort reform so small businesses are constantly barraged by lawsuits. It should be all of our concern. We don’t have a robust business climate, and many companies are leaving the state.”

The proposed $15 minimum wage would lead to higher automation and unemployment, the businessman said.

Mandatory sick pay leave, the Affordable Care Act, rising workers’ compensation costs and other tax increases have already made it difficult for small businesses to hire and promote employees, he said. Pay should be based on merit, and entry-level jobs are a good thing because they give workers an opportunity for growth.

“I’m not a fan of the antibusiness sentiment in Sacramento,” said Agoura Hills City Councilmember Denis Weber, a Fazio supporter. “There is a need for balance and hopefully Steve can bring that to the state.”

A former reserve officer with the Los Angeles Police Department and member of the city’s Fire Commission, Fazio, like most Republicans, stands tough on crime.

“ Whereas California has made progress, there have been some setbacks,” he said. Reduction of sentencing guidelines and realignment—shifting prisoners back to county jails—has resulted in more inmate releases and a double-digit increase in violent crime.

“Police arrest people in the front door and they’re allowed out through the back door. This is a problem; we’re seeing this in our streets now. . . . We have to do something other than to release people who are predisposed into a life of crime back into our neighborhoods,” the candidate said.

Regarding education, Fazio accused the public school system of failing its students.

And he promised to be an advocate of the state parklands so they can remain accessible to the public.

“As the state senator for this area I hope to be able to provide a good balance for the people that live here. That means good jobs, safe neighborhoods, quality schools and a variety of other policy areas that the state government is involved in that provides the quality of life we have grown to expect,” he said.

As of early April Fazio had raised $400,000 for his campaign, about $150,000 short of his goal.

The California primary election is June 7.