Update: 10:15 p.m.

Late Monday night Ted Cruz unleashed another attack on rival Donald Trump. He said the criticism is fair game because it relates to a policy difference.

At a campaign stop in New Hampshire, Cruz, without provocation, blasted Trump for supporting the concept of eminent domain. He said it wasn’t right for governments to take property from private citizens and give it to someone to develop casinos. Cruz used the casino reference as a hypothetical situation, but Trump is known for developing property in Atlantic City.

What’s more, eminent domain is unpopular in libertarian-leaning New Hampshire.

“We have the right to protect the property of Americans,” Cruz said when answering an unrelated question. “Private property is essential to the rights of Americans”

Update:5:21 p.m.

Cruz was campaigning on the Martin Luther King Jr. holiday, which nearly went unnoticed.

But after being asked about it by a voter, Cruz addressed the slain civil rights leader’s legacy.

“Dr. King’s legacy is powerful in many respects, but one is very, very clear. That is the power of speaking the truth in the face of evil, in the face of racism, in the face of bigotry, standing up and speaking the truth with love and a smile has changed the course of history in the country,” Cruz said. “Just as Dr. King did so, we can do so again today. By standing up and speaking the truth, we can restore the arch of history, the arch of America so it once again bends toward justice and not away from the values that built our county.”

Cruz pointed out that King was an evangelical leader.

“The letter from the Birmingham jail was to pastors across this country saying ‘stand up and fight’ for Biblical values. Stand up and speak the truth. Those are words that desperately need to be heard.”

At every point on his tour, Cruz asked voters to pray for him and the country, using one of Ronald Reagan’s favorite Bible verses, Second Chronicles 7-14, as inspiration.

“If my people, which are called by my name, would humble themselves and pray, and seek my faith and turn from their wicked ways then I will hear their prayers and will forgive their sins and I will heal their land,” he said.

Original post here:

Sen. Ted Cruz, who’s in a dogfight with GOP presidential front-runner Donald Trump, talked with voters in Keene, N.H., on Monday. (Gromer Jeffers/Staff)

KEENE, N.H. — Sen. Ted Cruz’s campaign for president has featured strong references to faith and Christianity, beliefs he says will help restore the country to greatness.

The Texas senator and son of a Carrollton pastor is sticking to religion, even in New Hampshire. The voting population there is heavy with libertarians and is not as influenced by evangelicals as the small towns in Iowa, where Cruz has had success in the polls.

“For too long there has been a spirit of fear and timidity in Washington,” Cruz told The Dallas Morning News on the second day of his New Hampshire tour. “We should not be ashamed of Christ. We should be willing to speak the truth with a smile.”

Cruz said the nation must return to its Judeo-Christian roots.

“Pulling this country back from the cliff we’re facing will require us remembering who we are, rediscovering those values that built American in the first place,” he said.

That has been Cruz’s mantra for months, and along the way he’s climbed in the polls for what’s fast becoming a two-way race with New York businessman Donald Trump.

Cruz’s approach is as important as any time during the campaign.

In New Hampshire, he trails Trump by a wide margin. And though it’s not critical for Cruz to win the Granite State, doing well here could give him a boost toward the GOP nomination.

Cruz’s message has largely been the same during the campaign, but the issues facing New Hampshire have prompted him to connect with voters in different ways.

During a stop in Keene, for instance, he talked about the substance abuse problem that killed his older sister, Miriam.

All day Monday, Cruz was asked about Trump, his admirer-turned- campaign nemesis.

During an appearance on Fox News, Trump called Cruz unlikable, saying, “Everybody hates Ted.”

Cruz fired back, sort of, saying voters would have the final opinion.

“Donald seems to be a little rattled. For whatever reason he’s very dismayed. As conservatives continue to unite behind our campaign, as his poll numbers continue to go down, he’s a little testy,” Cruz said during a stop in Washington, N.H. “I have no intention in responding in kind. If he wants to engage in insults, that’s his prerogative.”

Not just religion

Cruz was not all Bible talk, He promised to repeal the Affordable Care Act, investigate Planned Parenthood, abolish the IRS and defeat the Islamic State and terrorism. But he also answered questions on issues specific to the Northeast, like the heroin smack crisis in New Hampshire.

“I know New Hampshire in particularly has been hit hard. The heroin epidemic is really ugly,” he said. “This is an issue [in which] I have more than passing experience. My older sister, Miriam, died of a drug overdose.”

Cruz said later that his sister’s problems had a profound impact on him as a young man, as he and family members fought desperately to save her.

“She had a hard life. She made a lot of foolish decisions over and over again. She had problems with drinking and substance abuse her whole life until one morning she didn’t wake up,” he said.

Cruz told New Hampshire residents that his plan to curb illegal immigration would help fight the drug problem.

“One of the most important elements to dealing with the drug problem is finally securing the border,” he said.

He said he would build a wall along the Mexican border.

Along with the wall, the U.S. senator from Texas would triple border patrols, establish an e-verify system for employers, develop a biometric entry-exit system for visas and enforce existing laws.

“We know how ?to do this, “he said. “The only thing that is missing is the political will.”

When a man asked if Cruz was really going to get Trump to pay for the wall, Cruz joked: “If he doesn’t, he’s fired.”

Voters wanted to know about the Trump-Cruz feud at every stop. The two had agreed not to attack each other during the primary process. But that changed when Trump questioned whether Cruz was a “natural-born” citizen and eligible for the presidency, because he was born in Canada to an American mother.

Cruz inflamed the situation by criticizing Trump’s “New York values” last week.

On Monday Cruz wasn’t backing down.

“As the voters get close to election day, they looking more at the records of the candidates,” Cruz told The News. “People are tired of being burned…As the voters compare my record and Donald Trump’s record there is difference. I have been fiscal conservative, a social conservative, a national security conservative, and Donald’s record does not reflect the same.”

Though he’s at the top of the polls in Iowa, Cruz trails Trump in New Hampshire, where the first-in-the nation primary is Feb. 9.

Most of those interviewed leaned toward Cruz or Trump.

Ken Sanders, a 54-year-old minister from Westmoreland, said he liked Cruz.

“He’s a guy you can trust,” he said. “He’s consistent. He’s a conservative.”

But Sanders said he worried that Cruz couldn’t beat the Democrats in November, so he’s also considering voting for Trump.

“Trump has a big stick and could knock the Clintons right out,” he said.

Air Force veteran Bob Stoeckmann of Keene also liked Cruz, but wanted to see more contenders. “He’ll protect the country,” he said.

And Stephanie Plant, a 42-year-old service industry worker from Keene, said she hoped Cruz would repeal the Affordable Care Act.

“I have to bust my butt and I can’t seem to get ahead,” she said. “I believe Cruz is a statesman and would be better than what we have now.”

Martin Luther King Day

Cruz was campaigning on Martin Luther King Jr.’s birthday, which nearly went unnoticed. After being asked about it by a voter, Cruz addressed the slain civil rights leader’s legacy.

“Dr. King’s legacy is powerful in many respects, but one is very, very clear. That is the power of speaking the truth in the face of evil, in the face of racism, in the face of bigotry, standing up and speaking the truth with love and a smile has changed the course of history in the country,” Cruz said. “Just as Dr. King did so, we can do so again today.By standing up and speaking the truth, we can restore the arc of history, the arc of America so it once again bends toward justice and not away from the values that built our country.”

Cruz pointed out that King was an evangelical leader.

“The letter from the Birmingham jail was to pastors across this country saying, ‘Stand up and fight’ for biblical values. Stand up and speak the truth. Those are words that desperately need to be heard.”

At every point on his tour, Cruz asked voters to pray for him and the country, using one of Ronald Reagan’s favorite Bible verses, 2 Chronicles 7:14, as inspiration.

“If my people, which are called by my name, would humble themselves and pray, and seek my faith and turn from their wicked ways then I will hear their prayers and will forgive their sins and I will heal their land,” he said.

Twitter: @gromerjeffers