You've probably heard about divestment campaigns like the ones against apartheid South Africa in the 1980s. Divestment is used to criticize and destabilize morally questionable institutions (e.g. the apartheid government of South Africa). Considering that Boulder is experiencing advanced class cleansing, I wonder if divestment might be something worth bringing to the table.

The crisis — or emergency, rather — of affordable housing in Boulder is partly symptomatic of growing income inequality across the country. Folks with more disposable income are increasingly settling in desirable places to live and work. From New York to San Francisco and from Portland to Boulder, the middle and lower classes are being displaced violently. Housing advocates, planning staff, and scholars in Boulder are dutifully struggling to support the working lower- and middle-class.

But their efforts are not enough. Our favorite teachers are moving out of Boulder. Baristas at the Trident can no longer walk to work. And our nurses struggle to live next to the people they heal. We are an apartheid society and the problem is deepening. Why not propose something radical?

If, as I'll argue, economic growth is one of the major variables in Boulder's ill-fated housing equation, why continue to invest? Why not buck the trend and divest. "Make Boulder poor(er)." Or at least, "stop making Boulder rich(er)."

Advertisement

Affordability is a function of a stifling array of variables. As someone involved in advocacy and research on cities, I'll offer my simplified (maybe naïve) understanding of the variables. The first set of variables has to do with the built environment: density, the city's physical size, height limits, and zoning. A second set of variables has to do with population: the number of people who work here, move here, study here, commute here, and who have babies here. A third set has to do with money: jobs, city budget, and peoples' incomes. I won't get into other important variables like transportation, culture, identity, and quality of life.

The housing debates in Boulder focus on the first set of variables: should we add more units (e.g. by modifying height restrictions or densifying neighborhoods), drive up supply, and make things more affordable? Certainly, this might be a good solution in the short term. But looking at San Francisco's crisis reminds me that until we deal with economic apartheid, even dense and large cities suffer from the persistent ability of demand to stay at the heels of supply.

We tend to polarize the debate too. We call anti-growth people "conservatives" and pro-growth people "liberals." There is some correlation, but it's not significant. By poorly framing the debate, we are poorly imagining the problem. We're writing out solutions that may be liberal but that do not focus on building stock. This is dangerous. In an emergency, like ours, "groupthink" has been demonstrated to accelerate the path to doom (look up the history of the Challenger disaster).

I consider myself liberal: I want the people who work in our service industries and other low-paying jobs to live within walking distance or a short bus commute to their place of work; I want teachers to be able to live within a few blocks of the places they teach; and I want ethnic minorities, who tend to have the lower-paying jobs, to live and work in town. And I want all these people to enjoy the magic of Boulder, including its natural resources, parks, and sure, even its views.

I care less about increasing high-paying jobs in town, attracting wealthy new residents, building beautiful new buildings, and growing the city's coffers.

I wonder if we can write an equation with "affordability" on one side and with "small town," "walkable," and "inclusive" on the other. Experimenting with this equation is more ethical than experimenting with an equation in which "job growth" and "affluence" are key variables.

I urge those with influence to get radical with their efforts. (And I imagine an experiment in limiting economic growth is an idea with some potential.) Ours is not merely a crisis; it's a moral emergency. The ambivalence of Boulder's planning and policy-making community is not that different from the ambivalence that perpetuated apartheid in South Africa. We are already an apartheid community. We're no longer "becoming one." Divest in Boulder: sacrifice a too-strong economy, not Boulder's working class.

Lazlo Rivers lives in Boulder.