Ordinarily, a speeding citation is no big deal.

Add a speeding ticket on top of Von Miller’s lengthy list of recent transgressions, however, and the Broncos’ linebacker may be flirting with serious trouble.

Miller was recently cited for speeding and driving with a suspended license last week by the Arapahoe County Sheriff’s Department, as first reported by CBS4. He was not arrested as his father, Von, who was with him in the car, was allowed to drive.

The Broncos had no comment late Tuesday night. It’s had to comment plenty in recent weeks.

Miller’s troubles began when the NFL ruled he was in violation of the league drug policy. Initially, the league was going to suspend Miller for four games without pay but upon further investigation, the NFL found several other transgressions and increased its punishment to six games without pay.

“I understand I’ve made mistakes,” Miller said during training camp in late July. “But the guy I was yesterday is not the guy I am today.”

Trouble, though, continues to find him.

Miller received his suspension Aug. 20. Six days before that, he was arrested Aug. 14 by the Arapahoe County Sheriff’s Department on a warrant he was issued for failing to appear in court stemming from several traffic violations. Miller had been charged in October, 2012 for careless driving, driving without a license and no proof of insurance. His court appearance was scheduled for January but when Miller failed to appear, the court issued a warrant for his arrest.

Miller was trying to purchase a gun, or concealed-weapon permit from the Centennial Gun Club when a background check flagged the warrant.

Before his run of legal woes, Miller had emerged as one of the NFL’s brightest young defensive stars. He was the defensive rookie of the year in 2011 and he earned a second Pro Bowl berth in his second season of 2012 when he had 18½ sacks.

Miller missed the Broncos’ season-opening win last Thursday against Baltimore and he will not be able to play in the next five games. The Broncos will play next without Miller on Sunday against the New York Giants in New Jersey’s MetLife Stadium.

Miller won’t be eligible to play again until the Broncos’ seventh game, Oct. 20, at Indianapolis.