Former New York City Mayor Ed Koch was famous for asking constituents, “How I’m doing?” Although the IRS usually isn’t quite as welcoming, the Treasury Inspector General for Tax Administration (TIGTA) is responsible for checking up on the nation’s tax-collection agency. Accordingly, the watchdog has just released an interim report on the 2016 tax-filing season that concluded April 18.

TIGTA’s objective was to focus on certain aspects during this critical time for the IRS. Overall, the report is generally favorable, supporting earlier comments from IRS Commissioner John Koskinen that tax-filing season was proceeding smoothly. TIGTA expects to issue a final analysis in September.

TIGTA notes that the IRS was challenged by the late enactment of legislation extending a slew of expired tax provisions. To reduce the impact on tax-filing season, the IRS monitored the status of the legislation and took preemptive actions in anticipation of the extensions. These efforts enabled the IRS to begin accepting and processing individual tax returns on the scheduled date of Jan. 19, 2016.

As of March 4, the IRS had received approximately 67 million returns. Of these, 62.6 million (93.9 percent) were filed electronically, and 4 million (6.1 percent) were filed on paper. TIGTA found that the IRS had issued 53.5 million refunds, totaling more than $160 billion, as of that date.

The Affordable Care Act also imposes new responsibilities on the IRS. As of Feb. 25, the IRS had processed 1.4 million tax returns that reported $4.4 billion in premium tax credits received in advance or claimed at the time of filing. Also, more than 2.7 million taxpayers reported shared responsibility payments, totaling $1 billion, for failing to maintain required health insurance coverage under the Affordable Care Act.

TIGTA acknowledges that the IRS is expanding its efforts to detect tax refund fraud. As of March 5, the IRS reports that it had identified 42,148 tax returns with $227 million claimed in fraudulent refunds and prevented $180.6 million (79.6 percent) in fraudulent refunds from being issued. In addition, the IRS reports that new measures enabled it to identify approximately 35,000 false e-filed returns and 741 paper returns as of Feb. 29. The IRS also identified and confirmed 31,578 fraudulent tax returns involving identity theft as of that date.

Trending {{item['sft-title']}}

The IRS continues to offer more self-assistance options available 24/7, including:

IRS2Goapp

YouTube channels

Interactive self-help tools on IRS.gov

Twitter, Tumblr, and Facebook accounts

As of March 5, approximately 46.1 million taxpayers had contacted the IRS by calling its toll-free telephone assistance lines. IRS staffers answered 7.3 million calls and provided a 72.8 percent level of service, with a 9.6-minute average speed of answer.

Finally, during fiscal year 2016, the IRS plans to assist 4.7 million taxpayers through face-to-face contact at its Taxpayer Assistance Centers. On the downside, this represents a 16 percent decrease in Taxpayer Assistance Center contacts from FY 2015.

The results indicate strides have been made, but there’s still plenty of room for improvement.