While some Southern California communities continue to get publicly castigated for their lack of water conservation, the city of Roseville is taking a new executive order from Gov. Jerry Brown seriously, passing what it describes as “stringent drought provisions” to respond to the ongoing state emergency. City residents will now only be permitted to water outdoors two days a week, and any businesses or developers looking to add landscaping to the area will have to do it without adding lawns.

Those looking to shirk the rules could be hit with fines.

Roseville’s new water use regulations were officially announced May 15. City officials said the move was prompted by the governor’s executive order and a drought emergency action ordinance that was revealed May 6 by the State Water Resources Control Board. According to Roseville officials, for the city to help meet California’s goal of a 25-percent statewide cut in water flowing, locals will need to achieve a 28-percent reduction over what they were using in 2013. Roseville leaders stressed that “the most noticeable change” involves day restrictions for outdoor irrigation. Roseville residents can now get used to the term “watering days” — meaning the only specific days that they are allowed to water outdoors.

Roseville’s newly-appointed watering days for residential turf are Mondays and Fridays, before 10 a.m. and after 8 p.m. These are the solo days that lawns, gardens and landscapes can be watered with anything other than low-volume drip irrigation systems that irrigate at less than two gallons per hour.

Other new water rules in Roseville include no washing hardscape, unless for health or safety concerns; making sure fountains, ponds and decorative pools are drained, unless they contain fish; and covering all new pools and spas. Another major component is that residents, business owners and developers can only add new or expanded landscape if it is drought-tolerant trees, shrubs and ground cover fed by a drip irrigation system.

Roseville officials cautioned that these specific measures only apply to Roseville water customers, and that in a few pockets of the city where water is bought from other water agencies, residents will need to check to see what alternative restrictions apply to them.

“We’re moving from one drought stage to another to follow that executive order,” said Maurice Chaney of Roseville’s Environmental Utilities. “Many jurisdictions in the area have already moved.”

In an attempt to lead by example, Chaney added that Roseville city facilities and parks will also see modified water use, which includes replacing ornamental turf at several parks and an expanded program for recycled water outdoors.

Roseville leaders say city residents managed to reduce their water use by almost 20 percent last year. But with the long-term effects of the drought only worsening, good water habits need to become great water habits — or else.

“This has been through state hearings and a lot of meetings, and now it’s law,” observed Richard Plecker, the director of Roseville’s Environmental Utilities. “We’re not focusing on what the drought stage is, because every jurisdiction has its own meaning for what they call a drought stage. We just want to be clear about what the new regulations are. There are fines in place, and if we need to get someone’s attention, we will. We’re not going to go to that first, though. We’ll work with the community to help achieve the reductions. We’re operating on people's sense of what is right. However, like I said, in cases where we need to get someone’s attention with a fine, we will do it.”