“We’re really ready,” U.S. midfielder Carli Lloyd said at a news conference Sunday. “The last three or four days have been really long (in practice), and we’re ready to start.” Credit: Getty Images

By of the

Revenge. Redemption. Respect.

All those Rs are on the minds of members of the U.S. women's soccer team as they open play in the 2015 Women's World Cup on Monday in Winnipeg, Manitoba.

The Americans have struggled at times in the buildup to the World Cup and are part of a difficult Group D, with 10th-ranked Australia, fifth-ranked Sweden and Nigeria.

The second-ranked U.S. plays Australia in its initial group match at 6:30 p.m. Monday (Fox Sports 1) and will face Sweden on Friday before meeting Nigeria on June 16.

Strange but true, the American women have not won a World Cup title since that sweltering July day in 1999 when they prevailed in penalty kicks over China at the Rose Bowl and Brandi Chastain famously ripped off her shirt to celebrate her clinching tally.

Does this team, featuring a mix of young and old, have what it takes to lift the trophy?

"We're really ready," U.S. midfielder Carli Lloyd said at a news conference Sunday. "The last three or four days have been really long (in practice), and we're ready to start."

A late distraction for the Americans came with an ESPN report Sunday that U.S. goalkeeper Hope Solo was combative and insulted police during her arrest on suspicion of domestic violence last year.

The charges — two counts of misdemeanor domestic violence — were later dropped on procedural grounds.

Solo was arrested in June 2014 in Kirkland, Wash., after allegedly getting into an altercation with her half-sister and then-17-year-old nephew. Police said Solo was intoxicated at the time.

"Hope has been fantastic," U.S. coach Jill Ellis said. "That was a long time ago. I'll be honest; we've moved on.

"She's been a fantastic player and teammate. None of that has even resonated with us. I'm sure many of the players aren't aware of it."

Lloyd, who is Solo's roommate, said they did not discuss the report.

Ellis declined to reveal her lineup for the opener but said forward Alex Morgan would be available. Morgan missed all three of the U.S. team's pre-World Cup warm-up matches due to a left ankle injury.

The 25-year-old Morgan is playing in her second World Cup. She was a star for the Americans on their way to gold in the London Olympics in 2012, when she finished with three goals and four assists.

"I'm excited now that she's back in 100% training," Ellis said. "She's been great, sharp."

The U.S. was stunned by Japan in the final of the 2011 World Cup, twice giving up the lead before falling in a penalty-kick shootout.

"I'm still not over it," midfielder Tobin Heath said recently.

But Lloyd took a different approach when asked about it on the eve of the U.S. team's opening match in the 2015 tournament.

"To be honest, we obviously were upset by the outcome," Lloyd said. "But fast-forward; four years is a long time. So we're ready to take on this new challenge and go after it.

"We can't get too fixated on the final game and what we want to accomplish."

Lloyd, 32, scored the winning goal for the U.S. in the 2008 and 2012 Olympic finals. She brings experience along with 35-year-old Abby Wambach, the world record-holder for international goals with 182; and the 33-year-old Solo (84 career shutouts) and 39-year-old defender Christie Rampone.

Looking for a new star to capture American hearts?

Candidates include 26-year-old forward Christen Press; 22-year-old midfielder Morgan Brian, 26-year-old left back Meghan Klingenberg and 23-year-old defender Julie Johnston.

"I'm a firm believer that preparation is confidence," Ellis said. "I know the players are ready.

"I don't want this (the opener) to be our best game. I'd like us to build and grow; but I'm hoping for a good start."