U.S. Sen. Pat Roberts this week filed an amicus brief in a federal appeals court case involving labor regulations for home health care providers.

Currently, home care providers are exempt from paying overtime or minimum wage to employees who provide “companionship services” to seniors or individuals with disabilities. The exemption has been in place since 1974.

In October 2013, the Department of Labor decided to amend the Fair Labor Standards Act to narrow the definition of “companionship services,” a move that would have forced most home care providers to pay their employees minimum wage and overtime.

Before the change could go into effect on Jan. 1, 2015, associations representing home care providers filed suit. In December, a district court judge in Washington, D.C., sided with the health care providers, vacating the new regulation and staying its Jan. 1 implementation.

“While the Department of Labor’s concern about the wages of home care providers is understandable, Congress is the appropriate forum in which to debate and weigh the competing financial interests in this very complex issue affecting so many families,” Judge Richard Leon wrote in his decision. “Redefining a 40-year-old exemption out of existence may be satisfyingly efficient to the Department of Labor, but it strikes at the heart of the balance of power our Founding Fathers intended to rest in the hands of those who must face the electorate on a regular basis.”

The case of Home Care Association of America v. Weil has since been appealed to the U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit. Oral arguments in the case are scheduled to begin May 7.

In his amicus brief, filed Monday, Roberts urged appeals judges to uphold the lower court’s ruling and side with home care providers over the Labor Department.

“Ultimately, the devastating effects of the new regulations will be swift and sure,” the brief states. “The benefits to any group of individuals involved (the elderly and infirm, their companies, and their families) will be limited, at best, and most likely virtually nonexistent.”

Amicus briefs are attempts to lobby appeals courts, including the U.S. Supreme Court, on behalf of people or groups who are not parties in the pending case but believe they have an interest in its outcome. On the same day Roberts filed his brief, 181 House Democrats filed an amicus brief in the 5th Circuit Court of Appeals asking that President Barack Obama’s deferred deportation programs be allowed to take effect.

Roberts, a Republican, teamed with Rep. Tim Walberg, R-Mich., in offering the brief. It was signed by seven other senators, all Republicans, along with Rep. Lynn Jenkins, R-Kan.

“Having access to home health care and keeping that business model around to help families, I think that’s cost-effective and most people are happier when they’re at home,” Jenkins said Thursday. “So we’ve been a huge supporter of that industry and hope to do everything we can to ensure their success.”

The members of Congress argue that labor regulations should be amended through legislation, not Department of Labor rule changes.

“The full scope of the legislative history makes clear that Congress created the companionship exemption in order to ensure that working families could obtain companionship services for their elderly or infirm loved ones,” the brief states.

In an emailed statement, Roberts said the change constitutes an onerous condition.

“This rule is not practical, and attempts to impose burdensome and costly labor requirements in the home where standards must remain flexible due to the individual nature of care for those in need of companion care,” Roberts said. “This is regulatory overreach gone array.”