President Barack Obama put governors who have rejected the federal government's offer of extra Medicaid funding on the spot Saturday. "It always puzzles me when you decide to take a stand to make sure poor folks in your state can't get health insurance even though it doesn't cost you a dime," he said during a speech at the Congressional Black Caucus Foundation dinner. "That doesn't make much sense to me ... It's easy to take a stand when you've got health insurance."

Being criticized by President Obama may be just what some Republican governors want, including Gov. Bobby Jindal.

But they shouldn't be gleeful. The president is right. It is disgraceful to leave people with no health insurance to fend for themselves when you could easily help them.

The governors -- including Gov. Jindal -- who have refused to accept the Medicaid expansion under the president's Affordable Care Act are callous to the needs of their own citizens.

Otherwise, how could they turn down billions of dollars -- almost $16 billion in the case of Louisiana -- that could provide health coverage to hundreds of thousands of residents who need it?

President Obama is not popular with the conservative voters in Iowa and other key states where Gov. Jindal is hoping to launch a campaign for president. So, even though a majority of Louisiana residents favor taking the Medicaid money, the governor has refused to budge.

Families here are paying the price for his stubbornness and personal ambition.

Under the Medicaid expansion, which went into effect in January this year, families can make up to 138 percent of the poverty level and be covered. The federal government is paying 100 percent of the cost for the first three years. After that, Louisiana would pay an increasing portion - but no more than 10 percent.

Gov. Jindal has made sure the state will miss out on the first year of the money, and lawmakers didn't have the courage to override him. But perhaps the $1.2 billion shortfall the state is facing in the next budget will force the Legislature to show some backbone.

A Census Bureau report released in September found the number of uninsured people had fallen across the country, including a slight drop in Louisiana. Our state had 751,000 uninsured residents in 2013, a decrease of about 8,000 from the year before, according to the report.

The Urban Institute found that states taking the Medicaid expansion had larger reductions than states that refused the extra federal money. That isn't surprising.

If Louisiana took the expansion, an estimated 242,000 residents could qualify for the Medicaid program who don't now. That would reduce the number of uninsured residents in the state by more than one-third.

Department of Health and Hospitals Chief of Staff Calder Lynch is dismissive of the help the Medicaid expansion would offer thousands of Louisiana families. "Expansion to Medicaid is not a silver bullet solution," he said when the Census Bureau report was released.

Only someone who doesn't have to worry about paying doctor bills could think that.

Ironically, Mr. Lynch also talked about the success of the LaCHIP program in getting health care coverage for children in Louisiana. He is right about the value of the program.

But that only makes a stronger argument for the Medicaid expansion. LaCHIP is funded by Medicaid.

Mr. Lynch also argued that Louisiana doesn't have the capacity to handle the expansion. "Coverage does not equate to access. One of the reasons we haven't expanded Medicaid is we don't have the infrastructure to support it," he said.

That is really a reach. The Medicaid expansion is a way to pay for more doctors and other health care workers and put hospitals and clinics on stronger financial footing.

An estimated 15,600 new jobs in health care and other fields are predicted for Louisiana if the state accepts the money, according to a study by Families USA and the Louisiana Consumer Healthcare Coalition.

Gov. Jindal and his staff won't admit it, but there is no sensible argument for turning down $16 billion in Medicaid money. Shame on them for pretending there is.