In the past couple of years, getting sick often has meant a trip through the looking glass: Deductibles grow faster than tumors. Doctors spend exams tapping on their keyboards. And hospitals are places for “wellness” rather than illness.

Some of these changes have been driven by Obamacare, which offers more people affordable health insurance while simultaneously attempting to restrain increases in costs. In response, hospitals and doctors groups are rushing to consolidate with two goals in mind. First, they need to assemble large groups of patients over which they can spread financial risk and find ways to cheaply encourage health before it turns into expensive illnesses. Second, they want to gain greater leverage with insurance companies whose reimbursement rates can greatly reduce, or lift, their bottom lines.

Into this maelstrom wades another arm of the federal government—the Federal Trade Commission. After taking more than a year to review a proposed merger of Advocate Health Care and NorthShore University HealthSystem, the FTC sued to block the hospital deal last month, concluding it would be anticompetitive and could raise prices for consumers.

A combo of Advocate, the biggest hospital chain in the state, and NorthShore, the dominant company in one of the state's wealthiest areas, should draw questions from the feds, of course. But are they asking the right ones?

For instance, the FTC decided the relevant market area was limited to a slice of the North Shore in Cook and Lake counties. But it excluded a half-dozen competing hospitals only a few miles outside those artificial borders. And while it looked at the potential impact on insurers and patients, its complaint only glancingly mentions employers who need hospital networks that span the region, not just one corner of it. Yet another unaddressed question: If there's a local monopolist in health care, it's Blue Cross & Blue Shield of Illinois, which has almost three-quarters of the large-group insurance market in Illinois.

More fundamentally, the FTC complaint doesn't acknowledge the central conundrum: Federal policy is encouraging health systems to create these large populations of patients. Trying to thread the needle between that goal and the FTC's mission feels a little like reading the letter from an insurance company rejecting your claim—they say they want you to feel better, but they don't really want to pay for it.