Buy Photo Laptop computer in a nursing class. (Photo: Michelle Pemberton/The Star)Buy Photo

Vicki Bridges knew that she would not be able to hold on to her health plan, which does not comply with the requirements of the Affordable Care Act, for long. But she was not prepared for how much more she might have to pay once she switched to a plan that complied with the law.

Now, Bridges and about 30,000 other Anthem insurance holders are looking to find plans that conform to the health reform law passed in 2010. For the past year, they have remained on policies that for one reason or not do not meet all of the act's strictures.

Originally – after a back-and-forth among the feds about whether these plans would be grandfathered for at least a time -- Anthem told many of these policy holders that they had until the end of next year to find a new plan that would conform to the law.

Recently, however, Anthem sent out a letter, saying these plans would disappear in 2015 and these policy holders would have to find other plans.

The decision to do away with these ACA-non-compliant policies was a business one, said Tony Felts, senior director of public relations for Anthem Blue Cross and Blue Shield.

When the federal government said such plans could be extended through 2016, Anthem offered to let people who held such policies renew them. These policies lack coverage for some of the essential health benefits required by law, such as maternity coverage.

And they did not prove that popular with the 120,000 Indiana residents offered the chance to retain such policies.

"Just one fourth of the individual members took us up on that opportunity. We interpreted that as a lack of customer demand and perhaps a preference to go to the exchange," Felts said. "These plans are on borrowed time and they will have to be canceled at some point anyway."

That's little solace to Bridges, 63, who bought her individual policy with Anthem in 2007.

The Avon resident who works part-time has been paying about $677 a month for health insurance. She recently received a letter from Anthem saying that once her non-ACA compliant plan disappears, she can switch to another Anthem policy for about $916.

Now she's looking into her options, consulting with an expert at Bernard Health, a health insurance brokerage that operates two stores in Indianapolis.

"I was perfectly happy with my plan," she said.

Two years ago, she even tweaked her plan, changing her deductible to keep her premium from increasing by $100. Had she not made that change, she said, her insurance would comply with the Affordable Care Act.

It's not clear at this point how the 30,000 who find themselves looking for insurance will fare this year, said Matt Kleymeyer, Bernard Health's market leader in Indianapolis. Some like Bridges may find themselves paying more; others may less. Some may see their networks change.

This much he knows, however, there will be more competition in the Indiana marketplace with nine carriers offering plans on the exchange and eight offering plans off exchange. Last year, there were only four carriers participating both on and off exchange, he said.

"We're in this period of wait and see until the marketplace opens up and we're able to better gauge the various carriers and plans," he said. "Maybe this will get individuals to see what else is out there in the marketplace."

But not everyone will be looking for new plans this year. Anthem also offered small group policies that did not comply with the Affordable Care Act.

About two thirds of those customers said they wanted to keep those plans as long as they can and the company opted to continue offering those plans for next year, Felts said.

Call Star reporter Shari Rudavsky at (317) 444-6354. Follow her on Twitter @srudavsky.

Read or Share this story: http://indy.st/1qtFAdU