(Christopher Waide)

A former Cotopaxi resident who has been charged with murder in connection to the disappearance of Lea Chali Porter, 19, also a former Fremont County resident, had his preliminary hearing rescheduled Friday.

Christopher Adam Waide, 23, will next appear in court at 10 a.m. Oct. 10 in the Adams County Courthouse.

Investigation into the case is ongoing. The search warrant and the arrest affidavit remain sealed.

Waide is being charged with four felony offenses: murder in the first degree, felony murder, sexual assault and tampering with physical evidence, which were filed June 20.

Porter's mother, Rene Jackson of Rockvale, reportedly filed a missing person's report on her daughter with law enforcement June 5. At a press conference June 11 in Cañon City, Jackson said Waide was the last one to have seen Porter, and law enforcement obtained a search warrant for his apartment June 10 in Westminster.

"But it was five days later," Jackson said. "I'm afraid they waited too long."

Waide was arrested June 12 in Westminster in connection to Porter's disappearance.

At the June 11 press conference, Jackson said Porter was most recently living in Pueblo and was reportedly in the process of moving to the Denver-metro area. She is a former Cotopaxi School student but graduated from Florence High School in 2013.

Advertisement

Porter reportedly spent the night of June 2 with her boyfriend at the Castle Inn in Castle Rock, and the establishment confirmed that Porter and her boyfriend checked out of the hotel June 3, Rene Jackson said.

Jackson said Porter was upset that her boyfriend was moving out of state, and she drove to Westminster on June 3 to visit Waide, a friend who she attended school with in Cotopaxi.

(Lea Porter)

Jackson said the friend in Westminster told authorities that at about 11 p.m. June 3, Porter received a message on her cell phone and she left the apartment. He told police he saw Porter get into a white or light-colored truck.

Jackson said, reportedly, Porter's car was found abandoned in her friend's parking lot on Federal Boulevard and since has been impounded by law enforcement.

The Denver Post reported that Porter's stepfather, Michael Jackson, who Porter's mother said lives in the Denver-metro area, "said Waide has admitted to stabbing and strangling Porter and then putting her body in a trash bag and then a garbage dumpster."

Updated information on the whereabouts of Porter's body was unavailable by press time Tuesday.

Cheri Spottke, public information officer for the Westminster Police Department, prior to Waide's advisement hearing June 16, confirmed to the Daily Record that Porter's brother and her boyfriend allegedly recorded Waide confessing to killing Porter, and that there are no other suspects or persons of interest in the case.