Just over two years after Keres Consulting, Inc. completed its U.S. Small Business Administration’s 8(a) Business Development Program, the Native-owned company announced the formation of a Limited Liability Company on September 29.

Keres, a general management consulting firm with specialized expertise in asset management and sustainability, engineering, and the environment, has established with 270net Technologies, a LLC, called Efficient Mobile Audit Technology (EMAT) according to a Keres press release.

“EMAT is a tablet-to-cloud system that leverages mobile technology and cloud storage to improve the ASHRAE Level II energy audit process,” the release states.

The company that was founded in 2001 provides services to federal, state and tribal entities as reported by ICTMN in 2012. Since then the company has performed energy audits on over 10 million square feet of federal facilities nationwide. Keres participated in the beta testing of the EMAT software during its development phases. The EMAT LLC will provide Keres’ energy engineers with the EMAT software allowing for a higher quality and more efficient energy audit by those onsite.

RELATED: Keres Consulting Graduates From Nine-Year SBA 8(a) Program

“The energy conservation industry has grown alongside regulatory action tied to building sustainability and energy reduction. We’ve seen innovation on the product side with new lighting, metering, and so forth. EMAT brings the innovation to the service side,” said Tim Chavez, Keres’ President and CEO and member of the LLC. “It is good to be on this side of innovation.”

The Small Disadvantaged Business is working to leverage the EMAT for collaboration with large businesses and Energy Service Companies requiring energy audits.

“Through EMAT, Keres can respond to energy audit requirements with credentialed, certified energy managers, but at a fraction of the cost,” Chavez said. “Large businesses and agencies can meet their budget requirements without having to compromise on the quality of services provided at a lower price.”

Federal facilities are required by law to report progress in energy efficiency. The ASHRAE Level II energy audit provides facilities with a comprehensive assessment of energy use and provides recommendations to reduce the consumption of energy in that building. According to a 2013 DOE Office of Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy report, federal facilities consumed 306.7 trillion BTUs in 2012.