For Anthony Levy, a 21-year-old student at University of Colorado–Boulder, convenience and cost drive his health care choices. If an injury or persistent illness forces him to seek treatment, he turns to urgent care. Levy rejects the notion that he must have a regular primary care provider. He refuses to call to make an appointment, for which he might have to wait hours or days in advance. If he needs to schedule a health care visit, he uses an online app.

"I think I speak for my whole generation when I say we're trying to do things quickly," says Levy, who founded tBridges, an initiative to connect older and younger adults through technology. "Our brains are programmed to think of something and just do it then – we've been programmed by Google to think that way." When school or workplace requirements call for a medical checkup, Levy says he'd go just about anywhere other than a doctor's office: "Just walk into Walgreens, get it done quick and easy, cheap – and get out of there."

Health Care as Usual?

Health care is a vital service but it's a business, too – just try showing up for an office visit without your insurance card. But a businesslike attitude cuts both ways, especially for young adult consumers accustomed to online immediacy. Arriving for a medical appointment on time then sitting placidly in the waiting room for an hour is not acceptable. Calling to make that appointment and dealing with frustrating voice menus is not OK.

Unfortunately, many people skip preventive health care altogether. Millennials – young adults between 18 and 34 – are the most likely to forego checkups, wellness visits and screenings, a recent survey suggests. The online survey of nearly 2,200 U.S. "health care dropouts" was released by ZocDoc, an online medical care scheduling service. Of millennials surveyed, 93 percent avoided scheduling doctor visits. For adults overall, that figure was 80 percent.

But preventive care – such as routine screenings, contraceptive care and adult immunizations – is important. And it's possible to engage with the health care system using 21st century technology on your own terms, without ever making a phone call.

Preventive Pluses

Millennials need health insurance, emphasizes Christina Postolowski, health policy manager at Young Invincibles, a nonprofit that works to give young adults a stronger voice on economic issues affecting them like health care. "Young adults end up in the emergency more than any age group other than the elderly," she says. "So even if you think you're healthy – you don't have a condition – you never know when something catastrophic could happen, and it's particularly common in our age group."

Before the Affordable Care Act was implemented, Postolowski says, many young adults simply could not afford coverage. The situation has improved, she says, and it's not just about emergency treatment. Young people want preventive services, too.

"Birth control is a very popular benefit for our age group," Postolowski says. "Immunizations, alcohol and depression screening and counseling are other preventive services we highlight for young people." Flu vaccines and HPV vaccines are examples of immunizations that help keep millennials healthy.

Women's health provisions from the Affordable Care Act have also helped a lot, Postolowski says. Millennials make up the majority of new mothers, she says, so "preventive services like breast-feeding support and counseling, contraceptive coverage, the fact that women aren't charged more for coverage are really popular in our age group."

Young Invincibles doesn't recommend using urgent care facilities as the primary source of care, she says. "We're encouraging people to be proactive about their health and find that primary care doctor and get those regular checkups," Postolowski says.

Other Options

As a college student, Levy rejects another choice available to him: on-campus care. "I personally try not to give any more money to the school than they're already taking from me," he says. The requirement to pay for a university insurance plan is a sore spot for Levy. "They opt you in, and you have to take time out of your day to opt out of it," he says. And opt out he did.

If Levy needs to see a specialist such as an eye doctor or dermatologist, he searches on ZocDoc and books online. He does see a dentist regularly, twice a year. For routine medical services, he would go to an urgent care facility or retail clinic.

"Retail clinics tend to attract young adults as well as people without a usual source of care," notes a United Hospital Fund report released in February. The report cites a study of 1.3 million visits to New York state retail clinics between 2000 and 2007. "[It] found that 43 percent of patients were between the ages of 18 and 44 – a group that accounts for only 23 percent of patients seeing primary care physicians."

Levy recently cut his foot open as he cleaned up a broken glass while barefoot. He received stitches in an urgent care facility where he was traveling and will soon have them removed at another local urgent care provider.