Buy Photo Lauren Mae Henry, a marine biology major at the University of North Carolina-Wilmington and a Seaside Park native, is traveling the East Coast this summer giving presentations on plastic pollution of the high seas. (Photo: staff photo/Kirk Moore )Buy Photo

When Lauren Mae Henry does beach sweeps in her native Seaside Park, she’s seen exactly the same volume of plastic trash wash up on a four-block stretch just 24 hours after she’s cleaned it.

Now Henry’s learned how the threat is global. Scientists have found the high seas are a final destination for millions of pounds of plastics, and this summer Henry, a senior and marine biology major at the University of North Carolina Wilimington, is on an East Coast speaking tour to warn audiences of the threat.

It goes beyond harming fish and wildlife because plastics breaking down to near microscopic bits “is introduced into our food chain...We’re so exposed to it whether it’s drinking out of plastic bottles or eating fish,” she told a gathering of the Ocean County College Environmental Club.

Henry is an alumna of the Barnegat Bay Student Grant program, the summer science project funded by the local group Save Barnegat Bay and the Sedge Island environmental education center at Island Beach State Park, where she also gave a recent presentation to high school students. It’s part of an East Coast speaking tour she’s doing as an intern for 5 Gyres, a Santa Monica, California-based nonprofit group that mounts high seas expeditions to document huge patches of plastic debris in oceans.

The group is named for five mid-ocean areas where prevailing winds, currents and the effect of the Earth’s rotation pinwheel in floating trash. They are huge — the densest part of the best-known North Pacific gyre is twice the size of Texas — but to the naked eye, they are not floating trash heaps, Henry said. A lot of the plastic is just beneath the surface and yields up in the trawl nets towed by 5 Gyres crews during their 30-day expeditions.

Most plastics do not break down as do organic material such as paper or cardboard.

“They don’t biodegrade, they photodegrade” under the sun’s light and ultraviolet rays,” Henry said. It’s still in the water but in smaller pieces.

So it gets mistaken for food by fish and birds. Sea birds on Midway Island and the western Hawaiian islands are found starved to death and full of plastics, while 5 Gyre researchers “haven’t found a fish without plastics ingested, or plastic chemicals” in tissue samples, Henry said.

Speaking to summer camp groups, aquarium visitors and other audiences, Henry urges people to cut back on their use of plastics. The problem has been building since the surge of disposable consumer items in the 1950s, and the throwaway culture must be reined in, she said.

“We use that plastic coffee stirrer for two seconds,” Henry said. “But that plastic stirrer is going to outlive your great-great-grandchildren.”

Kirk Moore: 609-709-5036; kmoore@app.com

Read or Share this story: http://on.app.com/1rzvP2i