Topics: Catholic education, catholic schools, Catholicism, Gay Marriage, LGBT, Mark Zmuda, Marriage equality, Stephanie Merrow, Life News

That Stephanie Merrow’s employer says that she’s welcome to go on doing her job, that her work status is not even an issue for discussion, made national news this week. Because Stephanie Merrow is a gay woman. And she’s a freelance drama coach at a Catholic school. One that just a few weeks ago parted ways with its vice principal – a gay man.

Mark Zmuda — who was not just an administrator but a teacher and coach at Washington state’s Eastside Catholic High School — left his position on Dec. 20, when the archdiocese learned he’d married his partner last summer. Zmuda unreservedly says he was let go, though school attorney Mike Patterson says instead Zmuda resigned. Patterson does, however, concede that school president Sister Mary Tracy “asked in a hypothetical fashion out of frustration” whether Zmuda would consider divorcing his husband. In an interview with Catrina Crittenden, a 14-year-old school freshman, Zmuda said, “Apparently, the fact that I have a same-sex partner, they’re against that. But I also thought a teaching they were against was divorce.”

Zmuda is far from the only openly gay educator to find himself unemployed in the Catholic school system. Michael Griffin at Holy Ghost Preparatory School in Pennsylvania says he was fired in December after 12 years of service when he said he and his partner were applying for a marriage license. Last year Ohio teacher Carla Hale was fired from her school when she included her partner’s name in her mother’s obituary. And in California, St. Lucy’s Priory High School canned Ken Bencomo when his wedding made the local newspaper. And what’s especially galling about these petty, punitive acts is that in many cases, the teachers say the schools knew full well that they were gay. It was when they acknowledged it, when they exercised their right to marriage, that they were punished. The hypocrisy has not gone unnoticed.

The unflattering public spotlight on Eastside Catholic High School, and its clearly confused views on what constitutes a violation of its ethical standards (Marriage? Yes. Divorce? Maybe not so much) has clearly had a disruptive effect. On Monday, its board chair Gene Colin abruptly announced he was stepping down, saying he needed to “take a break.”And parents and students were warned last week that any campus protests to the departure of Zmuda would result in students being sent home.