Topics: From the Wires, News

KORIYAMA, Japan (AP) — Britain’s Prince William is spending the latter half of his four-day stay in Japan, starting Saturday, in the country’s tsunami-ravaged northeast, a visit certain to draw global attention to the stories of survival and continuing suffering in the region.

The March 2011 earthquake and tsunami, which killed nearly 19,000 people, left swaths of the northeastern Japanese coastline destroyed. Four years later, tens of thousands of people are still living in temporary housing. Adding to the hardship is a nuclear catastrophe that has created a no-go zone around the Fukushima atomic plant.

During his stay in Tokyo, which began Thursday, William visited with the cast of a samurai TV show, performed a good-luck sake-barrel-breaking ceremony at a shopping mall and had tea with Japan’s crown prince. He is scheduled to leave Sunday for China.

Some highlights from William’s trip:

___

DIANA’S SON

Memories of William’s mother, who died in 1997, are everywhere. The media in Japan, a culture that traditionally values male heirs, have been referring to him as “Diana’s first-born son,” as though that was more important than his being second in line to the throne.

After William on Friday laid a wreath at a grave for Commonwealth servicemen who died while prisoners of war in Japan, he signed a visitors’ book. Next to the book was a framed photo of his mother laying a wreath at the same cemetery when she visited in 1995. Next to the picture were written the words: “May she rest in peace.”

The master who performed the ancient art of tea ceremony for William in a Tokyo garden had done the same for Diana, and recalled how she had loved the green tea. William’s trip to the tsunami-devastated northeastern region, relatively unusual for visiting foreign dignitaries, follows in the path of his mother’s humanitarian efforts.

___

BRAVING RADIATION

On Saturday, William visited with children in a playground in Fukushima, about 60 kilometers (40 miles) west of the meltdown-stricken nuclear reactors. The children were being allowed to play outdoors for the first time recently. Previously, radiation levels had been too high for children, who are more susceptible to the health risks of radiation.