Democrats fought back Sunday against claims from a former Obama aide that the White House might delay Obamacare’s employer mandate.

House Minority Leader Rep. Nancy Pelosi called the mandate, which requires businesses with between 50 and 100 employees to provide health insurance for workers or face a penalty, “integral.”

“Of all the things I want to say about the Affordable Care Act, Robert Gibbs' opinion, I don't know who his clients are or what his perspective is, but we are celebrating the fact that we have over 7 million who have signed up,” the California Democrat said on CNN’s “State of the Union.”

White House Senior Adviser Dan Pfeiffer also hinted that Obama would remain focused on executing the legislation without further delays.

Applicants line up outside an Obamacare enrollment event in Commerce, Calif. More than 7 million signed up for insurance before March 31, the White House has said. (Ringo H.W. Chiu/AP) President Barack Obama is seen waving to the audience after speaking about the Affordable Care Act last week. (Carolyn Kaster/AP) Former White House Press Secretary Robert Gibbs told a trade group last week that he didn’t think the employer mandate would ultimately go into effect. (Susan Walsh/AP)

“We have to continue implementing the law,” he said on CBS’ “Face the Nation.” The President has told us we have to keep our eye on the ball every day to make sure this law is implemented as well as possible.”

The comments come after former White House Press Secretary Robert Gibbs claimed that the mandate, which has already been delayed twice, would be “one of the first things to go,” as different facets of Obama’s signature health care law continued to run into hurdles.

“I don’t think the employer mandate will go into effect. It’s a small part of the law,” Gibbs told a trade group during a speech last week.

In February, the White House delayed the employer mandate to 2016. Officials had previously delayed the mandate to 2015.

Countless other measures of the law have also been postponed, including the enrollment deadline for people who had difficulty signing up prior to the previous March 31 deadline, and the enrollment deadline for a special temporary pool for people with serious conditions.

Nevertheless, the White House, and many of the legislation’s proponents, have deemed the law’s trouble-plagued rollout a success, because the administration was still able to get 7.1 million Americans to sign up for insurance through its exchanges before April 1.

ON A MOBILE DEVICE? CLICK HERE FOR VIDEO.