Topics: 9/11, Eid-ul-Fitr, Islam, Islamophobia, Muslims, Parenting, Ramadan, Life News

On 9/11, I wanted to stick my head in the sand and disappear, but my 3-year-old son needed to be picked up at preschool and the school insisted parents show up, tardiness and terrorist incidents notwithstanding. I put my hijab on, bundled up my 1-year-old toddler and stood with the other parents outside the brown brick building on that chilly afternoon. I noticed that no one was making eye contact with me as they talked about the news. It was the beginning of the school year, we hadn’t had the time to get to know each other and now I was too shattered with anxiety for small talk. As soon as I got home I called the elementary school where both my daughters were blithely running around during recess. I needed to know they were safe.

That evening I watched all four of our children eating and playing. “We’re all toast,” I said to my husband. As far as I was concerned, the End of Days had arrived for us. “You’re being dramatic,” he said. “People know us.”

Did they?

Although my parents were from Pakistan, I grew up in the West. And like most people, my social circle tended to resemble people like myself. There’s comfort in the familiar. But after 9/11, I realized just how important it was to break that habit.

“You never come to my school?” whined my 7-year-old daughter. As a mother of four young children under the age of 7, I hardly had time to eat or bathe. There were days when my mental state was precarious at best. But there was a nagging voice that said if I wanted to be part of a world where my children weren’t seen as the “scary other,” I had to make time.

It was Ramadan, the Muslim month of fasting. I went to my daughter’s first grade class and read from a book, “Zaki’s Ramadan Fast,” about what that experience was like for Muslim kids and families. And then I pulled out a bag of Kinder eggs for all my daughter’s classmates. I’d tell them to hold on to them until sunset to see if they could put off eating something they really wanted.

“They eat them as soon as you leave, you know,” said my outraged daughter. For her it was a matter of principle, for me it was being an ordinary mother to my daughter’s friends. I went every year to a different child’s classroom and soon became that lady with the eggs. As kids transition into high school, parents transition into kryptonite if you come near them in school. So I came up with another way to include their friends into our lives.