Buy Photo Mark Leicht, Springfield resident and a federal marketplace consumer, speaks during an event held at the First Unitarian Universalist Church in Springfield, Mo. on June 24, 2015 by Missouri Health Care for All to celebrate today's United States Supreme Court decision to uphold a key provision in the Affordable Care Act. (Photo: Guillermo Hernandez Martinez/News-Leader)Buy Photo

There were only 14 people in the First Unitarian Universalist Church Thursday evening to celebrate a U.S. Supreme Court ruling that means Missourians will be able to keep their health insurance subsidies — but the mood was clear.

"The Affordable Care Act is here to stay," said Crystal Brigman Mahaney, deputy director for Missouri Health Care for All. Fourteen pairs of hands clapped in excitement.

Mahaney said that consumers in the community could "breathe easy" knowing that their health care will not suddenly be more expensive than they'd planned.

Consumers like Mark Leicht, who also spoke at the celebration.

He said for him and his wife, the Affordable Care Act provides him peace of mind and gives him the option to seek insurance independent of his place of employment.

The subsidies, he said, mean "we don't have to choose between groceries and health care."

Padgett Smith, board president of the church, noted that there were still challenges to consider, even as they basked in the glow of their victory.

"Our thoughts are with the 300,000 in our state without health care," Smith said.

To see how local lawmakers reacted to Thursday's ruling, read News-Leader reporter Thomas Gounley's article on the topic.

Buy Photo Crystal Brigman Mahaney, deputy director for Missouri Health Care for All, speaks during an event held at the First Unitarian Universalist Church in Springfield, Mo. on June 24, 2015 by Missouri Health Care for All to celebrate today's United States Supreme Court decision to uphold a key provision in the Affordable Care Act. (Photo: Guillermo Hernandez Martinez/News-Leader)

Read or Share this story: http://sgfnow.co/1Lykv05