Editor’s note: First of a series on top players in this week’s NBA draft whom the Nuggets are considering for the No. 7 pick.

With the NBA draft coming Thursday, few prospects are creating more buzz than Croatian shooting guard Mario Hezonja. No longer is he certain to be available when the Nuggets pick in the No. 7 slot.

Hezonja is the best player at his position in the draft. At 6-foot-8 and 200 pounds, his athleticism is off the charts, and he shoots the ball with accuracy well beyond 3-point range.

He has a connection to Denver too: Nuggets center Jusuf Nurkic. They are friends.

“I talk to him every day,” Nurkic said. “I think he’s at this age the best shooting guard.”

Hezonja, 20, didn’t participate in predraft workouts or do interviews with NBA teams because his team in Europe, FC Barcelona, was still playing. But teams in the NBA are well versed on his talent.

WATCH: Who are the true playmakers in the NBA Draft?

Still, just in case Nuggets general manager Tim Connelly needs an extra nudge, Nurkic fully endorses Hezonja. But he smiled when asked if he really would tell Connelly whom to draft.

No,” Nurkic said, laughing. “But it would be great if he comes.”

Hezonja’s upside. It starts with his athleticism. He attacks the rim with fire and flair. He has the quickness and speed to fill lanes on the fast break, and he gets to the rim with a desire to dunk.

“He can jump,” Nurkic said, then grinned, adding, “White guy can jump.”

Hezonja is effective in a pick-and-roll offense, particularly when he keeps the ball, but he also has the ability to make good decisions with the ball as a passer in pick-and-roll situations.

Hezonja is capable of creating his own shot. A 38 percent 3-point shooter in Euroleague play, he can “catch and shoot” with ease and has a good jumper off pull-up dribbles.

Defensively, he has the ability to be active with pressure on the ball and is good fighting through screens. If he is posted up, he works to fight off the challenge from a heavier player.

Hezonja’s downside. Though he is good defensively, his effort on that end of the court isn’t always there. And as with many other young players, he gets caught watching the ball at times and gets beaten on backdoor cuts. While he does have good length and decent lateral quickness, he will get beaten off the dribble.

But of most concern to many is the type of teammate he would be in the NBA. The rap on Hezonja is he might be too cocky for his own good and gets selfish on the offensive end. Nurkic, though, disputes that notion.

“He’s a good guy,” Nurkic said. “Like me, he just has confidence.”

Nuggets’ fit? Hezonja projects as a shooting guard with the Nuggets, but he also could play small forward, depending on what they need. He would improve their shooting and finishing at the rim.

Coming Monday: Justise Winslow

Christopher Dempsey: cdempsey@denverpost.com or twitter.com/dempseypost

Mario hezonja

Age: 20

Height, weight: 6-foot-8, 200 pounds

Hometown: Dubrovnik, Croatia

Draft projection: No. 5 to No. 9 pick