President Obama’s approval rating is at its lowest since 2011, and some might say ObamaCare is a big reason for that.

As a Kentucky family has already experienced, ObamaCare has made healthcare almost ironically unaffordable for those who need it most, making for a new nightmare as previously reported by The Inquisitr. The industry-wide rising of insurance premiums has a lot of people on both sides of the political fence wondering how they are going to make ends meet with a confirmed price of Premium care costing over $300.

Of course, there are other factors as well.

Republicans and Democrats alike are unhappy with the way Congress is handling its job, between gun control and overseas scuffles, and other factors. Congress is about the equivalent of a big dog running in circles in the living room, just seeming to keep itself amused while making everybody wonder how it isn’t going to wreck everything. Could it be time to just let them go and use their salaries to fix the national deficit?

Speaking of the national deficit, it could be said that President Obama’s approval rating is plummeting partially due to misplaced blame involving Congress thinking that raising the debt ceiling while increasing taxes will fix the problem. The fact of the matter is, you can’t get out of debt by spending more money. It’s a universal reality, but some political skeptics are intent on blaming the President for what Congress is doing.

How does the US seem to be spending so much? It may have to do with overseas relations, like the Syria situation that we somehow evaded at the last minute, thanks to an understanding that few saw coming. Wars are expensive, and the US is known for getting involved in situations it really had no business getting into. We have enough disasters right here at home, with mass shootings and such.

In the end, the US is in the economic crapper, and with ObamaCare raising health insurance premiums in the near future, President Obama’s approval rating is at a new low.