Rep. Trey Gowdy (R-S.C.) had some choice words regarding Rep. Jim Moran’s (D-Va.) request for members of Congress to receive a pay raise, as the South Carolinian called the comments “laughable” and ’embarrassing.’

Gowdy spoke out against Moran during an appearance on Fox News’ “On the Record” with Greta Van Susteren.

“I know a lot of people in the world who are underpaid. In fact, I live with one who’s a schoolteacher. But members of Congress are incredibly blessed and fortunate to have the jobs that we have,” Gowdy told Van Susteren. “Nobody makes us run. Every two years we offer for public office, and if you don’t want to do it, then don’t run. But the notion that you can make $174,000 in this country and be underpaid is laughable. We are better off than 99.9 percent of the people that we claim to work for, and I would be embarrassed to say that given our job performance and our salary, that we are anything other than grossly overcompensated.”

Moran told reporters yesterday he believes members deserve more than the $174,000 they already receive in salaries, despite the 113th Congress being dubbed the “do-nothing Congress.” Instead, he plans to introduce an amendment to the Legislative Branch appropriations bill to give legislatures a per diem allowance.

Gowdy, though, believe members receive far more than they deserve.

“Even if we were doing a good job, public service means you give something up. You get compensation in other ways,” he said. “You get the benefit of working in the Capitol, of being part of history, of being able to vote for your fellow citizens — all of which is priceless. So even if we were doing a great job — which no one believes, including our families and our staffs believe we are — we still don’t deserve a raise.”

While Van Susteren said she would advocate for a Congressional pay raise if the Legislative Branch actually accomplished things like tax reform, passing a budget and immigration reform, Gowdy disagreed, and said there are other occupations that do far more yet receive far less.

“There are equally important jobs like law enforcement and firefighters and education and anyone who takes care of children who make far less,” the South Carolina Republican said. “My wife makes a fifth of what I make, my sheriff makes less than half of what I make, and they do a great job.”

He went on to commend several of his Republican colleagues, including Reps. Jason Chaffetz (R-Utah), Jim Jordan (R-Ohio) and Paul Ryan (R-Wis.) who easily earn their pay, but noted that they recognize running for office means “you give something up.”

Gowdy then offered his advice to others who may believe they deserve a raise.

“If you think you can make more money in the private sector, then don’t run for office. If you think you can make more money practicing law, then practice law. But don’t run for office and then complain about the salary because you know what it is when you file.”

Watch Gowdy discuss congressional pay raises below.