Urgent:

Do You Support John Kasich for the GOP Nomination? Vote Here Now

Urgent:

Who Should the GOP Nominate in 2016? Vote Here Now

8. He believes in military strength — "For the United States not to be giving them the weapons they need to defend themselves is a terrible mistake and it frankly borders on outrage," Kasich said in referring to Ukraine during a foreign policy speech in July. On the Islamic State (ISIS), he said we must "begin to destroy" its hold in — "For the United States not to be giving them the weapons they need to defend themselves is a terrible mistake and it frankly borders on outrage," Kasich said in referring to Ukraine during a foreign policy speech in July. On the Islamic State (ISIS), he said we must "begin to destroy" its hold in Iraq and Syria, The Columbus Dispatch reported . As a congressman, Kasich served 18 years on the House Armed Services Committee.

Vote Now:

Which GOP Candidate Would You Support in 2016?

John Kasich is well-known in the conservative movement as a nine-term congressman, weekly Fox News host, and current twice-elected governor of Ohio.In his bid for the U.S. presidency, Kasich has brought with him a long record of conservative advocacy and accomplishments, and gathered below are the best examples of such.— "He backed a balanced budget amendment when Republicans were in the minority, and he was a leading voice for the measure when a GOP wave put his party in charge of the House under Newt Gingrich in 1994," Politifact.com reported . "Kasich has a long track record of pushing for a balanced budget, and contemporary accounts from 1997 place him very much at the center of the action."— "I think it’s a bad agreement. I would never have done it," Kasich said at the second Republican primary debate earlier this month. "Nobody’s trusting Iran. They violate the deal, we put on the sanctions."— "I don't support Obamacare; I want to repeal it," Kasich said in an interview with CNN's Jake Tapper in May . "But I did expand Medicaid because I was able to bring Ohio money back home to treat the mentally ill, the drug addicted and help the working poor get health care . . . Ronald Reagan expanded Medicaid, Jake, expanding Medicaid is a separate issue."— "Kasich signed the Taxpayer Protection Pledge and he kept it," Grover Norquist, head of Americans for Tax Reform, told the Washington Examiner this month. "All his tax proposals were net tax cuts."— Kasich said in May that he is working with Steve Forbes on a flat tax proposal. "It's simpler, it's flatter — I look at distribution tables — and if you don't like it, you can keep the current system," he said.— "I'm for choice in education because I think the more competition [there] is among adults to fight for the right to educate our kids, the better our kids do. Our love is for the kids. Our love is not for a structure or some kind of an organization. It’s for the kids," Kasich said earlier this year, according to Forbes . " I think vouchers and charters lead to more opportunities."— Just this year, Kasich added a major welfare-to-work initiative to his state's budget plan. Previously, as a member of Congress, Kasich was instrumental in getting welfare reform passed under President Bill Clinton, having proposed the Personal Responsibility and Work Opportunities Reconciliation Act of 1996.— "In his six years in office, Kasich has signed every piece of anti-abortion legislation to cross his desk," Mother Jones reported this month . "And far from just rubber-stamping new abortion rules, Kasich has been more aggressive than any other governor in the Republican race in wielding the power of his office to run abortion providers out of business." Kasich has said he favors only three exceptions when it comes to abortion: in cases of rape or incest, or when the mother's life is at risk.— During the first Republican primary debate, Kasich was asked by Fox's Megyn Kelly how he would explain his opposition to gay marriage to a hypothetical gay son or daughter. His answer was compassionate, but firm on the issue, and received praise from conservative pundits. "Look, I’m going to love my daughters. I’m going to love them no matter what they do," he said. "Because you know what? God gives me unconditional love. I’m going to give it to my family, and my friends, and the people around me.”