By Tamer El-Ghobashy, Heather Haddon, Lisa Fleisher and Josh Dawsey

A massive fire burned out of control for hours along a Jersey Shore boardwalk on Thursday, destroying dozens of businesses and threatening more in a region that was still recovering from the ravages of superstorm Sandy.

AP This frame grab from video provided by Fox 29 shows a raging fire in Seaside Park, N.J.

The blaze, which broke out near the Kohr’s Frozen Custard shop in Seaside Park, spread quickly behind gusty winds and overwhelmed firefighters who required assistance from other local departments and state agencies in an attempt to halt its path. Firefighters from six counties were fighting the blaze and using water pumped in from the Barnegat Bay.

In an interview near the scene with NBC, New Jersey Governor Chris Christie called it “a desperate situation” and said authorities were working to contain the fire from spreading north. He said it had already destroyed much of the area around where it started.

“We’re looking at winds here…anywhere from 20 to 30 miles an hour out of the south heading north, and that’s our biggest enemy right now are these winds,” Gov. Christie told NBC.

He was expected to hold a news conference Thursday evening.

Route 35, a main artery running along the Jersey Shore, was closed from Seaside Heights to Berkeley Township in the south around 4:30 p.m. to allow fire trucks to access the blaze, a state Department of Transportation spokesman said.

The New Jersey State Police also sent in manpower to help control the fire, a spokesman said. Power was cut to buildings along the boardwalk as the fire spread, and crews with Jersey Central Power & Light were on the scene working with emergency officials, spokesman Jim Markey said.

In Seaside Heights, just a mile and a half from the epicenter of the blaze, officials have torn about a half-block stretch of its boardwalk to try and create a fire barrier, borough spokesman Michael Graichen said. He expects 15 buildings or so to be lost. There have been no injuries, and people have been pushed northward from the fire.

“You have the wind blowing Southwest about 25 to 30 miles a hour,” he said. “It’s a mess, a total mess.”

The towns had just replaced their boardwalks in time for Memorial Day after they were devastated by superstorm Sandy. Seaside Height’s waterfront suffered extensive damage, with amusements from the Casino Pier plunging into the ocean.

After extensive repairs, Casino Pier had opened at least 15 of its 18 rides this summer. Pier managers had hoped to be profitable this year.

Seaside Heights has closed the bridge coming into town to keep people out and is hoping its barrier of removed boardwalk planks will keep the fire from jumping, Mr. Graichen said.

“We just got rid of Sandy, and all this comes,” he said. “The last 100 years, this one has been bad.”

Associated Press Firefighters battle a fire on the Seaside Heights, N.J. boardwalk Thursday

AP Firefighters battle a raging fire on the boardwalk in Seaside Heights, N.J. that apparently started in an ice cream shop and has spread several blocks down.

AP Smoke from a raging fire on the boardwalk in Seaside Heights, N.J. that apparently started in an ice cream shop and has spread several blocks down, rises in the background Thursday.