"Per capita, Louisiana has more medical doctors in Congress than any other state," Congressman John Fleming, R-Minden, said during a recent SWLA Economic Development Alliance event in Lake Charles, the smile on his face widening. "And I'm not going to stop until every single member of our delegation is a medical doctor. Can I get an amen here today?"

It was an ice-breaker joke more than anything else. Yet those who are tracking Louisiana's congressional politics closely have to admit the gag line works because it's at least partly rooted in truth. "You can't blame me for trying," Fleming added.

Half of Louisiana's House delegation has medical degrees. In addition to Fleming, a family physician, there's Congressman Charles Boustany, R-Lafayette, a cardiovascular surgeon, and Congressman Bill Cassidy, R-Baton Rouge, a gastroenterologist.

Louisiana seems to have an ongoing love affair with physician-politicians. Recent polls suggest voters favor and trust health care professionals above most others. No doubt voters will be pleased to learn that some in the delegation will never be allowed anywhere near an operating room, unless they're going under the knife, as pointed out by Congressman Vance McAllister, R-Swartz, during the Lake Charles event.

"If you haven't figured out, I'm not a doctor," said McAllister, a businessman. "And to be honest with you, I'm probably the last person you want to have when you're laying on the table and looking up and thinking I'm your saving grace. But I could write down your time of death."

While McAllister isn't a doctor in real life, he is facing one on the November ballot in the 5th Congressional District. Dr. Ralph Abraham has a family medicine practice in Mangham and seems to be benefiting from not only McAllister's self-inflicted kissing controversy, but the electorate's penchant for physician-politicians. Abraham has enjoyed a bounce in recent polls, is keeping pace in terms of spending and has a solid advertising campaign. Plus, he has the support of Dr. John Cooksey, who represented the 5th District from 1997 to 2003.

Aside from public trust, physician-politicians have access to a ready-made fundraising base as well. Abraham has so far raised nearly $35,000 from physicians and other donors connected to medical fields. Since being elected in 2003, Boustany has raised more than $1.8 million from health care professionals. Fleming has received $765,000 from the industry over the course of his congressional career while Cassidy has scooped up $1.3 million. Both were elected in 2007.

If there's a concern with this trend it's influence. The health care industry is booming in Louisiana and as a policy topic it's among the most important on the Hill. Political action committees representing health care professionals have given Louisiana's elected physicians in D.C. more than $1.7 million over the past 11 years.

On the other hand, the chosen professions of these congressmen are possibly more relevant than ever, given President Barack Obama's Affordable Care Act. Their backgrounds also should uniquely position them for nuanced stances on issues like evolution and stem cell research. Their positions, however, track the Republican line, just like those of most other doctors in Congress. That's all to say that, yes, they are physicians, but they're also politicians.

Some issues are just too hot to touch, although they're perfectly suited for their expertise. For instance, Cassidy, who is running for the U.S. Senate this fall, has yet to take a stand on a recommendation by the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists that certain birth control should be made available without a prescription.

Louisiana is not alone in this growing trend. There are some 36 physician-candidates running for Congress this year, based on a tally compiled by The New York Times. There are already 20 elected members with medical degrees, including 17 in the House and three in the Senate. While still greatly outnumbered by attorneys and businessmen, it's a huge jump when you consider that only 25 physicians served in Congress from 1960 to 2004, according to a Johns Hopkins University study.

Ask Cassidy why this is happening and he'll offer his own gag line that's funny because, again, at least in part it's true. "I'm a gastroenterologist and gastroenterology prepared me very well for D.C.," Cassidy said with a chuckle. "It's incredible. Sometimes the view seems the same."

Jeremy Alford is the publisher of LaPolitics Weekly and LaPolitics.com. He can be reached at JJA@LaPolitics.com.