Topics: aol_on, California, menstruation, tampon tax, tampons, Video, Life News

If you are or know women, you know that menstruation is for most not an optional thing. Yet in the vast majority of states in the US, tampons and pads are subject to sales tax. Now, two members of California’s state assembly are trying to change that.

As the New York Times reported earlier this week, most states exempt necessities — like food and prescription drugs — from sales tax. But the definition of “necessity” depends greatly on who you ask. In Cosmopolitan last fall, Prachi Gupta astutely noted that “Yes, in many states, there are even sales taxes on essential items like toilet paper and incontinence pads (some legislators are tackling that too). So no, there isn’t some explicit anti-tampon conspiracy. But that should not detract from the argument for states to lift taxes from feminine hygiene products.” And assemblywoman Cristina Garcia, who announced the introduction of the California bill to exempt tampons and pads from sales tax earlier this week, said in a statement that “Women have no choice but to buy these products, so the economic effect is only felt by women and women of color are particularly hard hit by this tax. You can’t just ignore your period, it’s not like you can just ignore the constant flow.”

But Joseph Henchman of the conservative think tank the Tax Foundation thinks otherwise, telling the New York Times that “It’d be nice if necessities weren’t taxed, but necessity is subjective.” He argues that removing taxes from items like tampons drives up taxes on consumer goods, “worsening the budget crises that arise in recessions.” And writing in the Ventura Star, Dan Walters, a person who likely has never had a period, muses, “One wonders how far we are willing to take the notion.” He says that “Garcia decries ‘being taxed for being women,’ but all of us are being taxed for being humans and needing certain necessities of modern life. The electricity and natural gas that keep us alive and functioning are taxed, for example, as are the houses, apartments, trailers and other dwellings we occupy. Is a home any less a necessity than a tampon?” (And if you think it’s contentious to suggest that feminine hygiene products not be taxed, you can imagine what happens when someone says they should be free. When writer Jessica Valenti did just that last year in the Guardian, making “the case for free tampons,” she was met with a deluge of online abuse for “trying to score free tampons.”)