“It is a gracious outreach because we all deserve to live healthy, respectful lives. I feel lucky to work for a clinic that is willing to support the community in this way.” Commented Jessica Mejia, Office Manager at MCoM.

Corte Madera, California: The objective of project Unify is: to help as many needy families in as many ways as possible. However, this event focuses on a comprehensive long-term solution rather than what can simply be accomplished in one day. Though Medical Center of Marin will administer complimentary Flu shots and provide many other items and services at no cost, the goal is to provide resources to needy families to help have their needs met throughout the year. For more information on this amazing community outreach please visit: http://www.mcomarin.com/press_area#press or to see photos of last year’s event visit: http://www.mcomarin.com/unify_event_gallery.

Saturday, January 17th 2015, from 10:00 am to 3:00 pm, Whistlestop Active Aging Center in San Rafael donates their entire building and is transformed from a center for Marin’s senior residents into a service center for our needy families. For more information on services provided by Whistlestop, please visit: http://www.whistlestop.org or call (415) 456-9062. You can also view their Unify page at: http://www.whistlestop.org/unify-2015-event-one-warm-coat-one-flu-shot-one-day/.

The SEIU-UHW union, Marin Community Clinics and the Marin County Department of Health and Human Services (MCDHHS) takes charge of the Affordable Care Act sign up and counseling by providing Certified Enrollment Counselors to assist attendees applying for healthcare in the last two weeks of open enrollment. Those who do not qualify for Covered California can sign up for Medical and will be counseled accordingly. Last year 62 individuals received counseling on applying for coverage and 41 actually signed up on the day of the event. This year, we are looking to double those numbers.

There will be a donation room containing hundreds of complimentary coats from our One Warm Coat Drive that took place in Whole Foods markets throughout Marin, groceries donated by Whole Foods, and used books for the taking.

Many nonprofit agencies will be running tables and offering demonstrations at the event including: Parent Services Project, MCFL Flagship Literacy Bus, Marin Housing, Marin Transit, Centers for Domestic Peace, Home for All Marin, Trips for Kids, Kids Cooking for Life, Marin Community Clinics Dental, Lift-Levántate, Environmental Health Network, Apple Family Works, Promotores and more! There will be services on everything from Mental Health, Substance Abuse, Nutrition, Healthy Lifestyle, Dental Hygiene, Affordable Housing, Literacy, Counseling Services, Domestic Issues, Parenting Classes, Parent Resources and programs for underprivileged youth.

January 17, 2015 is one day like no other . . . UNIFY . . . when many makes us one!

ABOUT MCOM

Medical Center of Marin is an urgent care clinic located in Corte Madera just off Highway 101. They offer minimal wait time and personalized walk-in-service at a cost that is far less than an emergency room visit. They provide a wide-range of services including physician visits, full-lab and pharmacy onsite, digital x-ray facilities, chiropractic care, physical therapy and acupuncture. Their hours of operation are Monday through Friday from 9 am to 6 pm and Saturday from 10 am to 2 pm. All but life threatening injuries can be treated at this locally owned and managed clinic. MCoM has been serving the community of Marin County for over 25 years.

FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT:

Loral Wright, Marketing Specialist

Medical Center of Marin

101 Casa Buena Drive

Corte Madera, CA 94925

loral@mcomarin.com

415.924.4525 x24/415.328.8930 Mobile ###