Lactation rooms (Photo: The News-Press)

FGCU has opened a lactation room on campus, a quiet place where mothers can pump milk in comfort and privacy.

A provision of the Affordable Care Act requires employers to provide "a place, other than a bathroom, that is shielded from view and free from intrusion from coworkers and the public."

Although the provision for lactation space took effect in March 2010, just 34 percent of businesses and organizations offer a dedicated space for mothers, according to a national survey by the Society for Human Resource Management.

"For many years, women have not spoken up about their needs," said Cathy Carothers, co-director of the Greenville, Ms.-based non-profit group Every Mother, Inc. "You have the right to request time and private space that is sanitary. You don't want to force a mother to sit on a toilet stall and try to use a breast pump."

In many cases, though, that's exactly what happens.

"They are going into cars, going into restrooms," said Carol Lawrence, maternal research and evidence-based practice clinical coordinator for Lee Memorial Health System. "A woman is expressing breast milk. That's her child's nutrition."

Not only is that not sanitary, Lawrence said, but it's also not the calm, relaxed environment women need to effectively express breast milk.

Provisions for a lactation room are separate from legislation ensuring a woman's right to breastfeed in any public or private setting. A lactation room is intended for expressing breast milk, not necessarily directly breastfeeding a child.

FGCU's lactation room is a converted office space and contains a refrigerator, sink, electrical outlets, small table, lamp, fixed-back chairs and fake plants. The room opened in November for employees only, but administration decided in early February to grant access to students and employees with pre-programmed key cards. To date, no one has registered for the room.

Edison State College has lactation rooms on all four of its campuses, and Lee Memorial has designated spaces at each of its facilities. Chico's FAS, the largest private company with headquarters in Southwest Florida, also has a lactation room for employees.

Shell Point Retirement Community, which has 960 employees, does not maintain a designated lactation room. Workers are spread across a large property, so the company finds a convenient location for that individual. In the past 12 months, four employees have requested space.

"We do not get a lot of requests, but on a case-by-case basis we take a look at where an employee is working to find a private place for them," said Karen Anderson, Shell Point's assistant vice president of human resources.

The law is clear on what types of businesses and organizations must provide lactation space — all of them. The only exception is employers with fewer than 50 workers, and they must prove creating a space poses an undue hardship on the business.

So if it's the law, why are mothers using their vehicles and restrooms?

"Some women don't want to bring up the issue in the workplace because it's such a private issue," said Fort Myers attorney Christina Schwinn, a partner at the Pavese Law Firm.

A fear of retaliation also could be coming into play, Schwinn said, for mothers who request a private space for this purpose. Employers, however, cannot retaliate against mothers for raising the issue, according to Schwinn.

Since the law was introduced four years ago, Schwinn said no one has even approached her with questions about their rights for a lactation room or break time during the workday to pump breast milk.

Nicholas Moraites, an employment attorney with the Washington, D.C. firm of Eckert Seamans Cherin & Mellott, believes few people are aware of the provision.

"Employees don't know they have a right to ask for it, and employers might not know they have to provide it," Moraites said. "That's where HR comes in."

A lactation room can be as simple as a converted storage closet, according to Lawrence, or more elaborate like the new room at FGCU. Carothers has read about pop-up tents in agriculture fields, converted dressing rooms in retail stores and the shell of a portable toilet, without the toilet, being positioned along transportation routes for bus drivers.

"It's anywhere a woman can have privacy," Lawrence said. "If she's tense or distracted, it's more difficult for her to express her milk."

Connect with Dave Breitenstein on Twitter (@D_Breitenstein) and Facebook (DaveBreitenstein).

Lactation Rooms

The Society for Human Resource Management randomly surveyed members to gauge the percentage of businesses and organizations, large and small, that provide lactation spaces:

• 2009: 25 percent

• 2010: 28 percent

• 2011: 28 percent

• 2012: 30 percent

• 2013: 34 percent

Read or Share this story: http://newspr.es/1ncIKzy