Don't worry about those new taxes, Gov. Robert Bentley says, because you probably won't feel them.

He's mostly right. Among the proposed $700 million in new taxes, there's no hike in the Alabama's third lowest-in-the-nation property tax rate and there's no bump to the income tax rate on the state's wealthy.

Among the taxes Bentley is proposing are increases to the cigarette tax, the automobile rental tax and sales tax and removing an exemption for municipal utilities. Combined, those account for nearly $500 million of the increases.

Now, to be clear, these increases don't really improve our financial shape much. We're still facing huge issues: our schools remain underfunded, most state offices – particularly our court system – remain understaffed, we're short on troopers and long on prisoners and we're due for a ton of roadwork. That's not to mention funding the attorneys who will litigate the unconstitutional bills our pandering legislature is about to pass.

In short, these new taxes are another in a long line of patch jobs meant only to just barely sustain us while changing nothing about the way we operate.

Alabama doesn't need that. It needs a new path altogether.

Like the one Minnesota is on.

In 2010, Minnesota was in bad shape. There was a $6.2 billion deficit and 7-percent unemployment. About 9 percent of the state lacked health insurance and median household income had declined for the fifth straight year.

Minnesota voters elected a billionaire democrat to fix it.

Gov. Mark Dayton, ignoring screams from the state's conservatives, raised income taxes on those earning over $150,000 and he implemented a minimum wage increase. According to the New York Times, it was a $2.1 billion tax increase, of which 62 percent was paid by the top 1 percent.

Next door, in Wisconsin – a state that's virtually identical to Minnesota in climate and industry – a different direction was taken. Wisconsin, which had an economy that was also struggling in 2010, elected conservative hero Gov. Scott Walker, who implemented the Alabama approach: cut taxes, cut state jobs, attack teachers, bust unions and proclaim Obamacare to be of the devil.

That approach worked no better there than it has here.

Job growth has been slow and declines in the unemployment rate have been at least partially due to workers fleeing the state. There have been massive cuts in state workers, big cuts in funding for education and the state's uninsured rate has improved only because of Obamacare's federal exchanges.

In total, Walker's anti-middle class approach has done nothing but ensure the middle class in Wisconsin is a thing of the past.

Meanwhile, in Minnesota, where the high taxes on the job creators and a minimum wage increase was promised to create a mass exodus of jobs, there is a boom.

In his first term, Dayton saw 172,000 new jobs created in his state. At 3.6 percent, Minnesota has the fifth lowest unemployment rate in the country. Its median income is $8,000 above the U.S. average and has just grown for the third straight year.

Forbes named Minnesota the ninth-best state for best state for business, thanks in part to an already-robust health care market growing stronger because of Obamacare, which chopped the state's already-low uninsured rate in half.

And here's the real kicker: Last month, the Minnesota budget commissioner announced the state's total surplus. (I'll pause while you search for the definition of that strange word.)

It's a staggering $1.86 billion.

That's more than a $7 billion turnaround in four-plus years.

A majority of that money is now being dumped back into the state's school system, which will expand pre-K courses and provide all-day kindergarten. There will also be tech upgrades and an increase in per-pupil funding for all schools.

The goal is to close the gap between affluent kids and poor kids when it comes to education – a goal that will lift Minnesota's poor and better the state for generations to come.

It's the opposite of what's happening here, where we'll once again do just enough to squeak by.

Bentley's right, though – we won't feel his tax increases. Not in any way.

Read or Share this story: http://on.mgmadv.com/1MHyf6M