Notre Dame football has helped bring together many people and businesses through the years.

And now that same magic has helped forge a relationship between the South Bend Chocolate Co. and Ben’s Soft Pretzels that should benefit both businesses as well as those in downtown South Bend.

Near the end of the month, Ben’s Soft Pretzels will open in the South Bend Chocolate Cafe.

“They are great people and we wanted to bring something new to downtown,” Kristina Tressler, operations manager for the chocolate company, says of adding the well-loved pretzels to the cafe. “This is something we thought would be a great fit.”

If you’ve been around the Chocolate Cafe recently, you’ve probably noticed the work being done to the south side of the building where cards and candy are now sold. That’s to make room for the pretzel shop, which will open April 26, which just happens to be National Pretzel Day.

It’s a quick build time, but it “will open if it kills me,” Tressler jokes of the deadline. And to top things off, all Ben’s Soft Pretzels locations will give away a free pretzel with a minimum $1 donation to the Intrepid Fallen Heroes Fund to mark National Pretzel Day.

The charity was picked because Ben’s wanted a fund for veterans and because every dollar goes to the families that need it, says Jillian Koeneman, vice president of marketing for Ben’s.

Last year, the Elkhart-based pretzel company raised more than $30,000 for the charity, she says.

Although construction on the new franchise location just started, the Chocolate Company has been in discussions with Ben’s for about a year, Tressler says.

But Mark Tarner, president of the chocolate company, has been a fan of Ben’s for a while. He remembers when the pretzels first came to the South Bend Farmer’s Market, and he’s been eating the pretzels ever since.

“There’s no better pretzel in the market,” he says.

And by buying the rights to open a Ben’s Soft Pretzel franchise, Tarner says he hopes to reach a broader demographic. Currently, the cafe’s biggest customers are families and professionals, but he’s hoping to attract younger customers with the new offering.

“We would like to make the cafe a little more youthful,” he says.

But as a franchise business, Ben’s has strict guidelines on how its stores should look, though South Bend Chocolate was granted some leniency in the design for the new store.

It wasn’t a lot, Tressler says, but it’s enough to keep with the cafe’s “old school gourmet chocolate shop” feel.

Although the new Ben’s location is owned by the chocolate company, it still means good things for the pretzel company. Currently in South Bend, you can find Ben’s products in vendor stalls at Four Winds Field, the South Bend Farmer’s Market and the football stadium.

Now the company will have a more constant presence in the city.

“This is our first brick and mortar store in South Bend, we are really excited,” Koeneman says. They also have a location at the University Park Mall in Mishawaka.

And this is just the beginning of what we will see from the South Bend Chocolate Company and Ben’s Soft Pretzels partnership. If the Chocolate Cafe location is a success, South Bend Chocolate will explore opening more franchise locations.

There are also set plans for a joint venture in another part of the state. Market Basket will have more on that in the future.

“A lot of companies’ personalities don’t mix, but this works,” Tarner says.

LaSalle Grill celebrates 25th anniversary

Monday marks LaSalle Grill’s 25th anniversary. The downtown South Bend business will celebrate with a ceremony from 4:30 to 5 p.m. at the northeast corner of the building located at 115 W. Colfax Ave.

LaSalle Grill will also celebrate its 20th Four Diamond Award. Every year, AAA releases four and five star diamond ratings for approved restaurants. Only 2.3 percent of the nearly 28,000 approved restaurants obtain a four diamond rating, according to AAA. LaSalle is one of only five restaurants in Indiana to obtain the rating for 2016, and no Indiana restaurant received the five diamond rating.

The Carriage House Dining Room & Gardens in South Bend and Artisan in Elkhart were also on the four diamond list.

In celebration of its achievements, LaSalle will roll back prices on many items on Monday to what they were when the restaurant opened in 1991.

Lincoln Wright’s column runs on Wednesdays and Sundays. Contact him at LWright@sbtinfo.com or 574-235-6324. You can also talk retail at Facebook.com/thebasket and at Twitter.com/marketbasket.