More Video...

Credit: NewsCow

A man is dead and another is in jail after a domestic dispute ends in a shooting and stabbing.

Around 4 a.m. Police say they received a call from a 31-year old woman who lives at 520 S. A Street in Arkansas City. She said her estranged husband came to her home while she was in the restroom and that she heard gunshots. She told dispatchers she had taken her 12-year-old daughter and ran out of the house and was currently at a neighbor’s.

Minutes later, dispatchers received a second call from neighbor Stephen Sanders. Sanders tells KAKE News he told dispatchers a man "who was bleeding real bad" had collapsed and was yelling for help in front of his home on East Madison.

Officers arrived and found a 44-year old man with a stab wound. He was taken to a nearby hospital where he later died.

Police identified the man late Sunday night as Leonard D. Daniels.

As they investigated, officers say they learned that when the woman came out of the restroom she was met by her estranged husband and an argument ensued.

A second man, Cameron Budd, 23, who is the woman's friend, approached the couple.

Police say Budd stabbed Daniels in the back. Daniels turned around with a gun and fired several shots at the Budd, grazing him once. The two struggled again before Budd ran out of the house.

During that altercation is when the woman grabbed her 12-year old daughter and ran to the neighbor’s to call 911.

When the officers arrived, Budd was not at the scene. A short time later, he turned himself into the Arkansas City Police Department. He was then arrested and booked into the Cowley County jail on a charge of involuntary manslaughter.

He is expected to make his first appearance in court early this week.

Neighbors say there is a history of domestic violence between Daniels and the woman. They say police have been called to the home at least three times in the past couple months.

Neighbors Justin and Christy Merry say they have called police during several of the disturbances. They say they have feared for their safety and the safety of their 2-year-old son.

"I feel like I can't even let him play in the yard because you never know when he is going to show up," Christy Merry said.

They say in the most recent incident, which occurred on May 21st, Daniels violated a no-contact order, broke into the house, and locked himself upstairs. He involved police in a 6-hour standoff before being arrested.

Offender records for Daniels do not reflect when he was released from jail.

The Merry's say given Daniels' violent history, they believe Budd did the right thing.

"He probably just had to do what he had to do at the time. I'm sure she had told him everything that was going so when he saw him he was probably scared and freaking out," Christy Merry said.

"I think he was protecting her and the 12-year-old. I seriously think that," Justin Merry said.

The Merry's say they hope this marks the end of a very violent chapter.

"I think it was bound to happen sooner or later, either her being hurt or him," Christy Merry said.

"I'm just glad nobody else got hurt," Justin Merry said.