Retailers are learning to respect — not fear — their customers who whip out a smartphone to check competitors’ prices.

The practice is known as showrooming. Shoppers visit a brick-and-mortar store, examine a product, then use a mobile device to see if a better price is offered at other stores or e-commerce sites.

Analysts estimate that retailers lose as much as $217 billion a year in missed sales from showrooming customers. The fallout is bad enough that some stores were disabling wireless Internet connectivity to keep shoppers from browsing — an approach now largely discontinued.

But some merchants are confronting the issue head-on by offering to match competitors’ prices.

Chief among them are Best Buy and Target, which in the past year have implemented or liberalized price-matching policies.

“People want to have information, including pricing, when they’re making a purchase,” said Dave Liken, manager of the Target in Glendale. “I’m sure all retailers have lost sales because of (showrooming), but we want to help customers as much as possible.”

Staffers in Target’s electronics departments and service desks are equipped with iPads to look up product information and to confirm a customer’s claim that an item is priced lower at a competing online retailer.

Target stores will match prices for identical products listed on Amazon.com, Walmart.com, BestBuy.com, Toysrus.com and even its own website, Target.com, as well as local brick-and-mortar stores.

Best Buy takes the concept a step further by matching with a greater selection of online competitors, plus physical stores within a 25-mile radius.

“Some retailers think that showrooming is a dirty word,” said national retail analyst Marshal Cohen of New York-based NPD Group. “But the progressive ones have learned to embrace it and make it work to their advantage.”

The rapid growth of online commerce has brought the issue new visibility on the eve of the holiday shopping season.

Overall retail sales are forecast to grow a modest 3.9 percent this season, but online sales will surge by an estimated 13 to 15 percent, according to the National Retail Federation and Shop.org.

Higher-priced electronic goods — televisions, computers, smartphones, household appliances — are the products for which consumers are most likely to engage in online comparison shopping.

While the chief defensive strategy against showrooming is to match prices, merchants also are attempting to convince customers that shopping in a store and talking to a sales associate can be a better experience than clicking on a website.

“We work with retail clients to accentuate what they bring to the equation,” said Cort Langworthy, a mobile-marketing expert at Lakewood-based Integer Group.

Langworthy said brick-and-mortar merchants have attributes that can prove appealing to shoppers:

• Instant gratification. Why wait for order processing and shipping when you can take the product home now? Some shoppers are willing to pay a price premium for that.

• Exclusivity. Merchants can work with manufacturers to develop products carried only by their own stores.

• Customer service. Talking to a sales rep in person, with a product that can be seen and touched, is a better experience for some consumers than online shopping.

A recent survey by retail consulting firm SDL showed that 73 percent of U.S. shoppers would be willing to pay more for a product in exchange for what SDL described as a “positive customer experience.”

Still, analysts say showrooming undoubtedly will become a more prevalent practice with the growing use of smartphones and tablets.

Staples Inc. announced recently that it will match competitors’ prices, except for special sales events such as Black Friday and Cyber Monday.

Walmart and Toys R Us are among other retailers with price-matching programs.

Kmart does not price-match because the retailer believes its customers get good value from regular store prices and through its “Shop Your Way” affinity program that gives members points and discounts on some products, said spokeswoman Megan Barrow.

Jenn Markey, vice president of marketing for Ottawa, Canada-based consulting firm 360pi, said some upscale retailers frown on price-matching because it diminishes their cachet with consumers.

“Neiman Marcus and Nordstrom, for example, are not trying to go after the low-price mentality,” Markey said. “It actually could be harmful to their brand.”

Steve Raabe: 303-954-1948, sraabe@denverpost.com or twitter.com/steveraabedp