Most Americans’ health insurance decisions under the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act start with their employer.

But employers in Amarillo, like elsewhere, are suffering the same symptom: confusion.

“We’ve had the insurance groups meet with us,” Big Texan Steak Ranch owner Bobby Lee said. “You’re just trying to figure out what they’re talking about. ... It’s very representative of our government. You can’t get a straight answer out of anybody, but you’re 100 percent responsible.”

The $1.3 trillion law mandates individuals obtain medical coverage starting next year and the majority of employers offer health plans starting in 2015 or pay fines.

The law aims to coax 7 million uninsured people to sign up for coverage by the end of March.

They’ll pay penalties if they don’t have a plan by Jan. 1.

“It’s a very complex law, and there are still so many people who have no idea what it means to them,” said Denise Leard, an Amarillo attorney with a national health law practice. “If you’re a small employer, you have different concerns than somebody who’s a large employer, which is somebody who has over 50 employees.”

The Affordable Care Act exchanges opened Tuesday, though the online systems were plagued with problems and their debut coincided with the current federal government shutdown.

The U.S. Health and Human Services Department added computer servers to handle higher-than-expected traffic on the federal site, and health insurers and individuals reported a trickle of enrollments by Friday.

The department is running the exchanges for 34 states — including Texas — that declined to set up their own, according to The Associated Press.

In July, the Obama administration delayed for one year the deadline for large employers to Jan. 1, 2015. Yet the individual deadline to be insured remains Jan. 1, 2014.

“In July, they gave employers a pass,” Leard said. “Where’s that same pass for the individual?

“It’s going to send more individuals to the exchanges. ‘I’ve got to go get it on my own. I can’t wait for my employer to do it for me.’”

Sixty-five percent of uninsured Americans, polled in September, said they would get insurance by Jan. 1, rather than pay a fine, but 25 percent said they would pay the fine, according to Gallup.

An estimated 98 percent of all large employers in the United States already offer coverage to their employees, according to the National Association of Health Underwriters.

But United Parcel Service and other employers cut benefits before the rollout of government health insurance marketplaces, where uninsured Americans can shop for taxpayer-subsidized medical coverage.

UPS, for example, kept workers on company plans, but opted not to keep providing benefits for employed spouses of 15,000 nonunion workers because those spouses must be offered coverage by their own workplaces.

With 250 employees, the Big Texan qualifies as a large employer, defined as businesses with more than 50 full-time-equivalent employees.

Two employees working 20 hours a week would equal one full-time equivalent, said Richard Walton, risk manager for NCW Insurance in Amarillo.

The Big Texan spends about $6,400 per year per person to insure about 70 key management and longtime employees who work full-time at the restaurant and hotel tourist attraction, Lee said.

Meeting the basic government medical-plan requirements for the other employees could cost $1,400 to $2,200 each per year, he said.

Walgreens has said it would move its coverage to a private insurance exchange run by a benefits consultant, giving workers as many as 25 plans to chose from instead of fewer options provided by the retailer.

The approach, called defined-contribution health insurance, involves giving employees a set amount of money and then letting them pick their own coverage through an exchange that helps them sort out the choices, AP reported last month.

The Big Texan is considering that possibility, as well, Lee said. “But, once again, we can’t get an answer that we need. And we have been on it since last May.”

The question for many companies, large and small, will be whether their lower-paid employees would be better off seeking coverage through a government exchange, where they can make subsidized insurance purchases, rather than watching their paychecks dip to pay employee portions of company plans, Walton said.

“If you have a bunch of minimum-wage employees, let’s take smaller restaurants, for example, they (workers) would absolutely qualify for subsidized care,” Walton said. “But if you (employer) offer them benefits, it’s going to cost them more.”

Small businesses, which have two to 50 full-time-equivalents, do not have a deadline for health insurance offerings because they are not required to offer insurance at all under the law, Walton said.

However, many are looking into their options because their employees face the individual deadline.

La Fiesta Grande Restaurants dropped health care coverage for full-time employees six or seven years ago because of increasing costs and decreasing participants, owner Roy Bara said.

Bara said his research showed adding insurance could cost more than $200,000 a year, a cost his company can’t absorb alone.

Employers can garnish a percentage of a worker’s wage to help them set aside an insurance premium, but that’s a tough option, Bara said.

So, for now, La Fiesta will forego offering coverage, he said.

“We’ll re-evaluate it for 2015,” he said. “If we see the marketplaces start to bring some of those prices down, which is supposedly what the Affordable Care Act is designed to do, we’ll re-evaluate.”

M&R Liquor owner Charlie Leard, Denise Leard’s husband, has been shopping insurance packages with an eye to covering the 15 to 20 employees who are not already insured by some other means, though he said his business might not be able to pay 100 percent of the costs.

Recruiting and retaining quality employees hinges on benefits, said Leard, who soon will increase from one store to three.

“I think it’s worth it,” he said. “As we expand, I think it’s becoming more and more important.”

Insurance policies must meet government requirements in 10 areas, a mandate that has advantages and disadvantages.

Dependents can stay on their parents’ insurance until age 26, and people can get coverage even if they have pre-existing conditions, Denise Leard said.

But policies also aren’t tailored for benefits the policy holder doesn’t need.

“One of the essential benefits is maternity care,” she said. “I am 47 years old. I have five children. I don’t care about that type of coverage, but that’s definitely something that my health plan is going to include now.”

Walton cautioned individuals comparing health plans in the exchanges to research the doctors and medical facilities that would be in their plan’s network. Exchange insurance buyers’ choices of health providers typically are more limited.

“There’s a carrier in town that, on their exchange plans they have 338 doctors,” he said. “On their normal plans they have more than 1,000.”

Walton said he suspects many doctors will stop accepting exchange plans if the reimbursements are deemed low, as they have with Medicare and Medicaid.

Bloomberg News and The Washington Post contributed to this report.