If Plaintiffs Prevail in King v. Burwell, Conservatives and Libertarians Have Many Health Care Reform Options from Which Congress Can Choose

All Proposals Would Help People who Lose Subsidies They Improperly Received from Obama Administration Under ObamaCare

Media Claims That Political Right Has Developed No Plans To Replace ObamaCare Are Nonsense

Washington, DC – As the U.S. Supreme Court hears oral arguments in King v. Burwell, the National Center for Public Policy Research announces the release of a spreadsheet detailing the many health care reform plans that have been developed by conservatives and libertarians as possible alternatives to ObamaCare.

If the plaintiffs in King v. Burwell succeed, millions of people who purchased their health insurance via the federal ObamaCare exchanges will lose their taxpayer-supplied subsidies. Each of these dozen plans offers them a promising alternative.

“The political left is trying to scare people by saying that the political right has no plan to help those people if they lose their subsidies,” says Dr. David Hogberg, health care policy analyst at the National Center. “Nothing could be further from the truth.”

A new National Center study by Dr. Hogberg includes an easy-to-access spreadsheet at http://goo.gl/y1ALI2 that summarizes a dozen plans from conservative and libertarian think-tanks and Congressional Republicans offering free-market alternatives to ObamaCare. The spreadsheet explains how each plan treats vital health care policy issues such as tax credits, pre-existing conditions, Medicaid and Health Savings Accounts.

“There are a lot of great ideas out there, from the Heritage Foundation and the Cato Institute to Rep. Tom Price and the Republican Study Committee,” said Dr. Hogberg. “Unfortunately, most of the media has ignored them, so most Americans are unaware that free-market alternatives to ObamaCare exist.”

The Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, known colloquially as ObamaCare, states that only people enrolled in state-based exchanges are eligible to receive taxpayer-paid subsidies to help them pay for their health insurance premiums. Despite this, the Obama Administration has paid subsidies to people who purchased insurance on the federal exchange as well. King v. Burwell challenges the Obama Administration’s practice of allowing subsidies to flow to federal exchanges.

“King v. Burwell could give Congress a big opportunity to move the nation away from the disaster that is ObamaCare and toward a free-market health care system that would make health care and health insurance more affordable for everyone,” says Dr. Hogberg. “And as the dozen plans show, there are ways to do it that will help people on the federal exchanges who could lose subsidies.”

To review the dozen free-market alternatives to ObamaCare spreadsheet, please visithttp://goo.gl/y1ALI2 and for a review of the terms used in the spreadsheet, please visit http://www.nationalcenter.org/NPA670.html.

The National Center for Public Policy Research was founded in 1982. Sign up for free issue alerts here and go here to make a tax-deductible contribution to help us fight for liberty.

source:

Judy Kent

[email protected]

National Center for Public Policy Research

8 SHARES Facebook Twitter

Want to read more articles like this one? Subscribe to EURnewsletter.

Got A News Tip or Video You Want to Share? Contact us HERE.