Photo

WASHINGTON — House Republicans on Friday adopted a budget reconciliation package that would repeal core components of the Affordable Care Act and cut off government funding of Planned Parenthood. The move drew criticism from Democrats, who said the measure was wasting valuable time because it has no chance of becoming law and comes just days before the government will default on its debt unless Congress takes action.

While the reconciliation package can be adopted in the Republican-controlled Senate with a simple majority — circumventing the usual procedural obstacles — it faces certain veto by President Obama.

In that sense, Friday’s vote — by Democrats’ count, it was the 61st attempt to repeal all or part of the health care law — showed Republican lawmakers still angrily throwing air punches at the president even as Representative Paul D. Ryan of Wisconsin is set to become speaker next week, hoping to usher in a more productive era in the House.

A few Republicans, including three senators, even criticized the bill, saying that it did not go far enough and should have fully repealed the health care law, Mr. Obama’s signature domestic policy achievement. In the House, the vote was 240 to 189, mostly following party lines, but with seven Republicans opposed and one Democrat in favor.

“This reconciliation package, getting it to the president’s desk, is a real, real positive step in ending government-controlled health care in this country,” Representative Todd Rokita, Republican of Indiana, said in a speech on the House floor.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Democrats rejected that view, noting Mr. Obama’s inevitable veto. And they cited Thursday’s marathon hearing, at which Republicans grilled Hillary Rodham Clinton about the 2012 attack in Benghazi, Libya, as further evidence of a Republican House that they said was focused more on political messages than on governing the country.

“Let’s stop the games,” said Representative Chris Van Hollen of Maryland, the senior Democrat on the Budget Committee. “We’ve got to deal with the debt ceiling.”

He added, “We’ve got to come together to prevent a government shutdown.”

The Treasury Department has said that the government will run out of money to pay its bills on Nov. 3 unless Congress acts to raise the debt ceiling. Many House Republicans are fiercely opposed to doing so, unless there is accompanying legislation that overhauls mandatory spending programs like Social Security, Medicare and Medicaid.

The exiting speaker, John A. Boehner, is hoping to deal with the debt-ceiling issue before handing the gavel over later next week. To do so, however, he will need to find 35 to 40 Republicans who are willing to join Democrats in raising the debt ceiling without condition, as Mr. Obama has demanded.

On Thursday, House Republican leaders decided not to bring a measure to the floor that would have imposed an array of conditions on lifting the debt ceiling after they concluded that there was not sufficient consensus among Republicans to adopt it.

Beyond the need to raise the debt ceiling, major infrastructure programs expire at the end of the month and require reauthorization, while a temporary spending measure that prevented a government shutdown earlier this month is set to run out on Dec. 11.

On Monday, there is also expected to be a highly contentious debate in the House over reauthorizing the Export-Import Bank, following a rare procedural step in which rank-and-file Republicans and Democrats joined to force House leaders to call a vote on the matter.

That small show of bipartisanship was a brief exception to the rancor that characterizes most business in Congress these days. Those divisions were on full display during Friday’s floor debate over the reconciliation package, as Republicans cheered the push to repeal the Affordable Care Act.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

“This is a great opportunity to get some awful things off the back of the American public,” said Representative Peter Roskam, Republican of Illinois.

Many Republicans have been angered by videos that purport to show Planned Parenthood officials discussing the sale of aborted fetuses for use in medical research. Planned Parenthood has said that opponents of abortion rights doctored those videos.

House Republicans have undertaken several investigations, and at one point were pressing to include provisions in the temporary spending measure that would have cut funding for Planned Parenthood. Those efforts failed, and Democrats said the push on the reconciliation would have a similar result.

House Democratic leaders on Friday held a news conference in which they called on Republicans to swiftly move a measure that lifts the debt ceiling without conditions.

“We have seven legislative days left until we default on the full faith and credit of the United States of America,” said the Democratic leader, Nancy Pelosi of California. “This is a very, very serious matter — in fact, it’s as serious as it gets for our economy, for interest rates.”

Even as the Democrats were talking about the debt limit, Republicans were lining up to take ceremonial photographs with Mr. Boehner, a sign of the historic shift that will take place next week. In an initial vote on Wednesday, Republicans are expected to nominate Mr. Ryan to be speaker, with a formal vote on the House floor set for Thursday.