Former Rockies first baseman content post baseball era

Todd Helton sits on the patio at his ranch Thursday during his first year of retirement from the Rockies. His number will be retired today at Coors Field. ( AAron Ontiveroz / The Denver Post )

Enormous, leafy cottonwoods provide cooling shade as Todd Helton kicks back on the patio of his small house on The 17 Ranch.

Twirling a 9-iron in his hand the way he used to fiddle with his baseball bat, Helton talks about his recent excursion to Pine Valley Golf Club in southern New Jersey, ranked by Golf Magazine as the No. 1 course in the world.

"It was really hard," Helton says. "I shot an 88, on a par-70 course."

Did he take any mulligans?

"No, no mulligans! An 88 the hard way," Helton says, feigning anger that someone would question his skill or sportsmanship.

Since retiring at the end of last season, after 17 seasons in the majors that included 2,247 games, 2,519 hits and 369 home runs, Helton had to find something to satisfy his ravenous appetite for competition.

Todd Helton walks through his barn Thursday during the first year of retirement from the Rockies. (AAron Ontiveroz / THE DENVER POST)

"Knowing Todd as a good friend and a teammate, I am quite aware of his desire to win and compete," said Rockies reliever Matt Belisle. "I was wondering where he could find that when he left baseball."

It was that insatiable drive that helped make Helton a five-time all-star first baseman, the undisputed face of Rockies baseball and a possible Hall of Famer someday. Sunday afternoon at Coors Field, the Rockies will retire Helton's number, making the slugger the first player in franchise history so honored.

"It's amazing. It's significant," Helton said. "To be the first person to have your number retired? That's kind of hard to put into words. Everybody talks about 'Hall of Fame this, Hall of Fame that.' But to have your number retired by the only team you played for, that's pretty awesome."

Advertisement

Great place to escape

Helton and his family — wife Christy and daughters Tierney Faith, 11, and Gentry Grace, 4 — live full time near Brighton. But The 17 Ranch, only 45 minutes away, is where the family escapes to ride horses and relax. The ranch also is where Helton keeps NXS A True Bustamove, the four-time American Paint Horse Association world champion the Rockies gave him as a retirement gift last September.

There's also been a lot of work to do at the ranch. Last September's floods swamped the house with 4 feet of water. Christy has spent a lot of time remodeling the house, using wood from corrals and barns as part of the decor.

Next to the house is a red barn that Helton transformed into the ultimate man cave. But it flooded, too, and Helton has only recently finished fixing it up. The walls are lined with Helton's hunting trophies — deer, elk and even a bobcat he shot on the south side of his property.

Open a bank vault door and Helton's vast collection of hunting guns are on display.

"A little redneck heaven," he quipped.

He's 'death on skis'

Helton's life, in many ways, is fuller than it was in his playing days. He took his daughters skiing three times at Vail this past winter and he's a part-time coach for Tierney's softball team. He owns a deer hunting ranch in north Texas with Belisle and Brad Hawpe, another former Rockies teammate and close friend.

Skiing, Helton found, gave him a feeling of freedom.

"I'm still death on skis, so people had better watch out when I go down the hill," he said with a laugh. "I love blue cruisers. I'm a blue cruiser type of guy. Gentry Grace goes downhill like me; she doesn't pizza. Tierney is a more cautious skier. It's a pain in the butt to get everybody up there and get going, but it's sure fun when we go down the mountain. That's what Colorado is all about, right?"

Helton, of course, knows about the Rockies' struggles this season. It pains him to see them playing so poorly. He consulted with Tulowitzki before Tulo underwent surgery Friday to repair a torn labrum in his hip — a procedure Helton underwent in 2012.

But Helton admits he hasn't played close attention to the team's travails.

"Truthfully, I have never really enjoyed watching the game of baseball. I enjoyed playing the game of baseball," he said. "I wanted to take a year off from the game. It doesn't mean I won't start watching again, it doesn't mean anything. I wanted to get away and know there are other things besides baseball."

Someday, perhaps, Helton will get back in the game, possibly in some capacity with the Rockies, the team that drafted him in the first round out of the University of Tennessee in 1995.

But for now, Helton appears content being a rancher, golfer, hunter, fisherman, husband and father.

"Todd looked at his new situation and said: 'Now I get to be with my kids. I get to dive into being Mr. Mom,' " Belisle said. "It's so funny. A little while ago, I was talking to Todd on the phone and he said, 'Well, Matthew, I'm mowing the outfield of Tierney's softball field with a push mower, so I've got to go.'

"I thought to myself: 'That's perfect for Todd right now. That's exactly what he should be doing.' "