By

There is good news and bad news when it comes to our state's graduation rate.

The bad news is our state has the widest high school graduation gap between black students and white students. The good news is we have a solution right here in Wisconsin.

I am fortunate to represent communities that include some of the best schools, both in Wisconsin and in the country. One of those districts, Brown Deer, has nearly closed the black-white graduation gap. Brown Deer's graduation rates are an example of why the district might serve as a model to schools across the state that are struggling to close the gap. The district has yet to reach perfect parity, but it is close. Very close.

Last year, 100% of Brown Deer's white students graduated in four years and 93% of its black students did the same. Brown Deer is committed to reaching 100% for all of its students, and I know the district can do it. Data from the Department of Public Instruction shows 100% of Brown Deer's Asian students graduated in 2013 and 2014 and 100% of its English Language Learners and Limited English Proficient students did the same in 2012 and 2013. These numbers prove that no matter children's backgrounds, if they enter Brown Deer's school district, they are very likely to graduate.

Superintendent Deb Kerr has a bold vision for her schools. She firmly believes all children can succeed at high levels, and it shows. As a former teacher myself, I know this culture of high expectations is the key to Brown Deer's success.

Sadly, many in the education establishment look for excuses rather than solutions. They will say children can't learn because of the color of their skin or because they are poor. This soft bigotry of low expectations is offensive and wrong.

Brown Deer's graduation rates for economically disadvantaged students disprove these claims: 93% of Brown Deer's economically disadvantaged students graduated in 2013 and 96% graduated within four years in 2014. I am confident Brown Deer will successfully push this rate to 100%, too.

The secret behind Brown Deer's success is simple: The district's leadership, committed educators and families relentlessly collaborate to identify ways to meet the needs of their students. It's not enough to hand kids a diploma and show them the door, Brown Deer is trying to prepare them for the real world of work.

Our state has a shortage of teachers who are trained in technical education. I commissioned a task force to look for a solution. Brown Deer's amazing finance director, Emily Koczela, chaired the group. Thanks to a new law based on the findings of the task force, more trained teachers are in our schools. Kids now have more opportunities for a technical education and the skills they need to compete when they graduate.

I know neither Emily nor other leaders at Brown Deer would draw attention to their successes. I could point to many more than just their stellar graduation rates and impact on state teacher licensure. But, rather than going on, I will say thank you to the students, educators and families of Brown Deer. I am proud to represent a school district that is bucking a disappointing graduation rate trend and, more important, proves every child can reach the expectations we set out.

Alberta Darling, a Republican, is a state senator from River Hills.