Monty Hagler, president and CEO of RLF Communications in Greensboro, North Carolina, has joined a growing number of small-business owners who are forgoing health coverage and paying staffers more to compensate for the lost benefits. (Photo: Gerry Broome/AP )

When Monty Hagler learned his employee insurance premiums could rise as much as 38 percent, the small-business owner decided he couldn't afford coverage that complies with the health care overhaul.

He considered a variety of plans from different carriers but they were too expensive or bare-bones.

"Unless we dramatically changed our plan and went with the most basic plan, I said, 'This is not sustainable,' " said Hagler, owner of RLF Communications, a marketing company in Greensboro, North Carolina.

So Hagler told his 12 staffers he would give them money starting in May to buy their own insurance that was likely to be better than what he could offer.

He joined a growing number of small-business owners who are forgoing coverage and paying staffers more to compensate for the lost benefits. Health insurer Wellpoint said last month its roster of small businesses has shrunk by 12 percent so far this year. Nearly 3 percent of 1,600 small businesses surveyed by the Society for Human Resource Management plan to give employees subsidies next year so they can buy their own coverage on private insurance exchanges.

Losing coverage at work

Insurance brokers are getting more inquiries about individual coverage, a sign to them that many people are losing coverage at work. The brokerage HealthMarkets Inc. has had a 40 percent pickup in applications for individual insurance since the open enrollment period ended March 31. Spring and summer are normally a slow period for policy purchases.

"We're seeing this happen with increasing frequency, and we're believing we'll see it with greater frequency this fall," said Ken Fasola, CEO of HealthMarkets, based in North Richland Hills, Texas. If policy cancellations rise this fall, it likely will be because many small businesses renewed their coverage before Jan. 1, 2014, when policies were required to comply with the health care law. As those policies come up for renewal, owners will have to decide whether to buy the new insurance.

Owners like Hagler aren't required to offer insurance. The Affordable Care Act exempts companies with fewer than 50 workers. But many of these owners provided coverage because insurance is a benefit that helps retain staffers and recruit top talent. But workers may get a better deal on government-run health insurance exchanges, especially if they qualify for government subsidies that will lower premium costs for individuals and families. The government will subsidize coverage on the exchanges for individuals earning up to $45,960. The income limit for a family of four is $94,200.

Giving workers extra compensation to help buy insurance can result in higher income tax for the employees. It also can mean employers will owe payroll tax on the money. Benefits attorneys and accountants recommend owners discuss their options with a tax professional.

A better deal?

Some owners bring in insurance brokers or benefits consultants to help workers find new insurance.

"We explained to them, you probably are going to come out ahead. You will get a stipend and a subsidy, and coverage will be better than what you were going to get with the group plan," said Ashley Hunter, owner of HM Risk Group, an insurance brokerage based in Austin, Texas.

The coverage available to individuals in Texas is more comprehensive than what Hunter provided her staff under a group plan, and it's cheaper. Hunter paid 80 percent of premiums under the plan she dropped as of this month. Under the plan, an employee paid $140 a month. But with the stipend and government subsidy, the employee is paying $24.12 a month, Hunter said.

Many of Hunter's small-business clients also are dropping coverage for their workers.

Workers can do better on their own because they have more options than businesses, said John O'Donnell, president of Insurance Consultants of Central Florida, a broker based in suburban Orlando.

"Small groups have to pick from two or three plans, whereas employees can go to the individual market, exercise more flexibility and have more autonomy," O'Donnell said. He estimates 10 percent of his company's small-business clients have ended insurance and given their workers money for coverage or are considering it.

Copyright 2014 The Associated Press. All rights reserved. This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten or redistributed.

Read or Share this story: http://pojonews.co/1pdqFDr