Three or four weeks ago, I called former Senate Majority Leader Ken Gordon to ask if he really planned to run for secretary of state, an exercise that led to a lengthy conversation about money in politics — he abhorred it — and how much journalism has changed since he served in the state legislature.

No, he said, he likely wasn’t going to run for secretary of state and probably would make that clear by the next campaign-finance filing in January. I told him I still remembered his awarding-winning shark ad the first time he ran for secretary of state.

The Denver Democrat died Sunday of an apparent heart attack. He was only 63 and his death stunned his family and friends. Republicans were effusive in their praise, as were his fellow Democrats. They called him a statesman and recalled his passion for the underdog.

I’ve got a zillion memories of Ken, whom I first met in 2000 when I was assigned to cover the Colorado General Assembly. Here are just a few of them:

P-DOG: In one of the most ingenious pranks ever pulled at the Capitol, someone kidnapped Gordon’s fiberglass prairie dog that stands 2 feet tall, wears a Superman costume and used to reside in his Senate office. Soon he was getting postcards from all over the world, showing his prairie dog in London, in Antarctica, even at opening day of the Colorado Rockies.

WALK ON BY: To support the ballot initiative Referendum C, Gordon led a 350-mile march that started early September 2005 on U.S. 287 at the Wyoming border and ended early October at the New Mexico border, south of Trinidad. It narrowly passed that November.

WHAT THE … Gordon infuriated his fellow Democrats in 2004 for suggesting that Republicans be allowed to serve as vice chairs of Senate committees. Democrats that year won control of the House and the Senate, a feat it had last achieved in 1960.

MARCH MADNESS: House Democrats beat Republicans 15-13 in a sometimes friendly game of basketball in March 2000. Lawmakers joking suggested team names for including the “Bleeding Hearts” and the “Reckless Right.” Gordon, the minority leader, entered the game after halftime, shot an air ball and injured his Achilles’ tendon. He required surgery and then hobbled around on crutches for weeks.

Social media was filled with tributes for Gordon after the Denver Post tonight reported his death:

Ken Gordon was a great man who did great things for Colorado. My thoughts and prayers are with his family and friends. #coleg — Mark Ferrandino (@MarkFerrandino) December 23, 2013

Ken Gordon was an honest man without fear or favor. Very sorry to learn of his passing. #copolitics #coleg — Alan Franklin (@alanfranklin) December 23, 2013

Ken Gordon was one of my favorite Democrats, despite our frequent disagreements. Gone at 63: http://t.co/I4fAN99Mhh — Ari Armstrong (@ariarmstrong) December 23, 2013

And on Facebook, from former Rep. Matt Knoedler, R-Lakewood:

“Ken Gordon gave the best speech at our new legislator orientation in 2004. He explained how the legislature brings people from such different political and personal backgrounds into close quarters, and you come to appreciate your colleagues and their views in ways that are hard to describe back home in our districts. It was true and special, and so was Ken Gordon. May he rest in peace.”