Here’s what our readers liked most in 2014, Politico Magazine’s first full year of publication. From a deeply reported cautionary tale of a $100 million failed media experiment to an insider account of police indiscretion from the real-life Frank Serpico, this collection of investigations, behind-the-scenes dramas and first-person confessionals is sure to make for some great holiday reading.

***

Story Continued Below

14. Joe Biden in Winter

The happy warrior's last ride.

By Glenn Thrush

Forget the politics. Biden is enduring a trial that many people of his age—and that includes 66-year-old Hillary Clinton—are forced to confront: He can see the end of the road approaching, and fast, but the gas gauge still reads full. Biden simply isn’t ready to quit. It’s not clear he even knows how.

***

13. The Plot Against Public Education

How millionaires and billionaires are ruining our schools.

By Bob Herbert

From 2000 to 2009, Bill Gates spent $2 billion and disrupted 8 percent of the nation’s public high schools before acknowledging that his experiment was a flop. ... There was very little media coverage of this experiment gone terribly wrong. A billionaire had had an idea. Many thousands had danced to his tune. It hadn’t worked out. C’est la vie.

***

12. The Barbarians Within Our Gates

Arab civilization has collapsed. It won't recover in my lifetime.

By Hisham Melham

Arab civilization, such as we knew it, is all but gone. The Arab world today is more violent, unstable, fragmented and driven by extremism—the extremism of the rulers and those in opposition—than at any time since the collapse of the Ottoman Empire a century ago. Every hope of modern Arab history has been betrayed.

***

11. Fire Valerie Jarrett

If Obama really wants to shake things up, his closest advisor should be the first to go.

By Carol Felsenthal

The fact is, on balance it appears that Jarrett has been more an obstructer than a facilitator over the past six years when it comes to governing, and it’s probably long past time for the president to move her gently into another role.

***

10. How to Lose $100 Million

The undoing of Tina Brown.

By Luke O’Brien

And there she was, perched next to Diller, legs crossed, a perfect tousle in her blond bob: Tina Brown, the legendary former editor of Vanity Fair and the New Yorker. Famous for generating ‘buzz,’ Brown had remade the magazine business in the 1980s and 1990s. By 2010, she was editing the Daily Beast, a two-year-old online magazine owned by Diller, which had generated much buzz while losing $10 million a year. Now, they were talking with Harman about a merger of the two money-bleeding properties. It made a certain kind of sense: Newsweek’s print advertising still fetched far more money than online ads, while the Beast presumably had the digital savvy Newsweek lacked, if no business model to speak of.

***

9. Why Holder Quit

The backstory of how Obama lost his ‘heat shield.’

By Glenn Thrush

What’s clear is that Holder, for all the headaches he gave Obama’s team, filled a one-of-a-kind role in Obama’s administration and the president’s personal life that will likely never be filled again. On no issue is that more true than race—a subject on which current and former Obama administration officials and confidants of both men say that Holder has been willing to say the things Obama couldn’t or wouldn’t say.

***

8. Can Obama Reboot

Does he even want to?

By Glenn Thrush and Carrie Budoff Brown

Obama, for so long the man with the bright future, has hated being relegated to a sidelined pariah in the midterms—even if it is the inevitable lot of a second-termer with approval ratings hovering in the low 40s—according to a dozen current and former Obama advisers we spoke with in recent days. ... More than anything, Obama’s loathing for Washington, an attitude that reads as ennui to outsiders, has hardened into a sullen resignation at being trapped in a broken system he failed to change, advisers told us.

***

7. The Police Are Still Out of Control

I should know.

By Frank Serpico

The next time I saw my ‘back-up’ officers was when one of them came to the hospital to bring me my watch. I said, ‘What the hell am I going to do with a watch? What I needed was a back-up. Where were you?’ He said, ‘Fuck you,’ and left. Both my ‘back-ups’ were later awarded medals for saving my life.

***

6. The Congressman Who Went Off the Grid

Roscoe Bartlett spent 20 years on Capitol Hill. Now he lives in a remote cabin in the woods, prepping for doomsday.

By Jason Koebler

Limiting the role of government consumed much of his life for the 20 years he spent in Congress, leaving little time simply to sit by his lake and watch the sun go down and the bats come out. But nowadays, his concerns center around when the next frost will come and keeping mice out of the food pantries. He’s more interested in pointing out the different species of trees on his property or showing off his new composting toilet than discussing Obamacare (‘just awful’) or the government shutdown (‘lots of people realized we could get along just fine without the government’).

***

5. Why Russia No Longer Fears the West

By Ben Judah

When Russia sees Spain, Italy, Greece and Portugal outbidding each other to be Russia’s best business partner inside the EU (in return for no mention of human rights), they see America’s control over Europe slowly dissolving. Back in Moscow, Russia hears American weakness out of Embassy Moscow. Once upon a time the Kremlin feared a foreign adventure might trigger Cold War economic sanctions where it hurts: export bans on key parts for its oil industry, even being cut out of its access to the Western banking sector. No more.

***

4. The Day We Lost Atlanta

How 2 lousy inches of snow paralyzed a metro area of 6 million.

By Rebecca Burns

What happened in Atlanta this week is not a matter of Southerners blindsided by unpredictable weather. More than any event I’ve witnessed in two decades of living in and writing about this city, this snowstorm underscores the horrible history of suburban sprawl in the United States and the bad political decisions that drive it. ... As with famines in foreign lands, it’s important to understand: It’s not an act of nature or God—this fiasco is manmade from start to finish.

***

3. The Pitchforks Are Coming … For Us Plutocrats

By Nick Hanauer

The problem isn’t that we have inequality. Some inequality is intrinsic to any high-functioning capitalist economy. The problem is that inequality is at historically high levels and getting worse every day. Our country is rapidly becoming less a capitalist society and more a feudal society. Unless our policies change dramatically, the middle class will disappear, and we will be back to late 18th-century France. Before the revolution.

***

2. What I Did After Police Killed My Son

Ten years later, we in Wisconsin passed the nation’s first law calling for outside reviews.

By Michael Bell

Yes, there is good reason to think that many of these unjustifiable homicides by police across the country are racially motivated. But there is a lot more than that going on here. Our country is simply not paying enough attention to the terrible lack of accountability of police departments and the way it affects all of us—regardless of race or ethnicity. Because if a blond-haired, blue-eyed boy — that was my son, Michael — can be shot in the head under a street light with his hands cuffed behind his back, in front of five eyewitnesses (including his mother and sister), and his father was a retired Air Force lieutenant colonel who flew in three wars for his country — that’s me — and I still couldn’t get anything done about it, then Joe the plumber and Javier the roofer aren’t going to be able to do anything about it either.

***

1. Dear America, I Saw You Naked

And yes, we were laughing. Confessions of an ex-TSA agent.

By Jason Edward Harrington

I hated it from the beginning. It was a job that had me patting down the crotches of children, the elderly and even infants as part of the post-9/11 airport security show. I confiscated jars of homemade apple butter on the pretense that they could pose threats to national security. I was even required to confiscate nail clippers from airline pilots—the implied logic being that pilots could use the nail clippers to hijack the very planes they were flying.