GREENSBORO, N.C., April 1, 2014 /PRNewswire/ -- ConvaTec, a leading global medical products and technologies company, today launched the Natura® Accordion Flange, designed to make ostomy pouch application much easier and more comfortable while delivering the clinically-proven skin and leak protection of Moldable Technology.

The launch is the first in a series of new product introductions that leverage ConvaTec's Moldable Technology to meet a broader set of customer needs.

People with an ostomy have a surgically-created opening (or stoma) for the discharge of bodily waste, commonly as a result of certain cancers or bowel diseases. The Accordion Flange is a wafer-shaped device that adheres to skin around the stoma. Nurses and ostomates simply lift the accordion-like flange away from the body and click an ostomy pouch (which collects bodily waste) onto the flange. They then gently lower the pouch back into place against the body.

"The Accordion Flange makes the entire process of pouch application easier and more comfortable, especially for post-operative patients and others with tender abdomens," said Douglas LeFort, Vice President and General Manager of ConvaTec's Ostomy Care business. "Our Moldable Technology provides unmatched protection against leaks and keeps surrounding skin healthy, giving ostomates the freedom and confidence to live life to the fullest.

"The Accordion Flange is an essential addition to our Moldable Technology portfolio, which addresses a full range of customer needs and preferences."

ConvaTec's Accordion Flange lifts upward from a flat profile to a height of 3/8" (1cm), providing triple the amount of finger space than the Hollister New Image™ flange.1 In the "down" position, the flange gives the wearer a low profile that is extremely flexible, comfortable and conforms to body contours.

The device's moldable, elastic-like seal "rebounds" to fit any stoma size and shape, providing an incredibly secure, snug fit that protects against leaks and skin complications. According to recent studies, half of all ostomates develop skin complications around the stoma. By contrast, more than 95 percent who started on Moldable Technology kept their skin healthy, and over 86 percent of ostomates with pre-existing skin disorders had improved skin after switching to Moldable Technology.

Leaks and skin complications also contribute to high levels of hospital readmissions for ostomy patients. Reducing readmissions is a big concern for hospitals and other payers who are looking to reduce costs and avoid payment penalties under the Affordable Care Act, while also improving patient outcomes and satisfaction.

Click here for a Backgrounder on Ostomy Skin Complications and Moldable Technology.

About ConvaTec

ConvaTec is a global medical products and technologies company, with leading market positions in ostomy care, wound therapeutics, continence and critical care, and infusion devices. Our products provide a range of clinical and economic benefits, including infection prevention, protection of at-risk skin, improved patient outcomes and reduced total cost of care. ConvaTec has over 8,000 employees, with 11 manufacturing sites in 8 countries, and we do business in more than 100 countries. We are owned by Nordic Capital and Avista Capital Partners. More information is available at www.convatec.com.

ConvaTec Moldable Technology and Natura are trademarks of ConvaTec Inc.

All other trademarks are the property of their respective owners.

© 2014 ConvaTec Inc.

AP-014370-MM

1 Data on file. ConvaTec Inc.2013.

All other references available upon request.

Contact:

Punnie Donohue

ConvaTec

908-904-2151

punnie.donohue@convatec.com

SOURCE ConvaTec