Buy Photo Poet Ron Whitehead celebrates as Mayor Greg Fischer officially declares Louisville as "Gonzoville" during GonzoFest 2014. The festival, in its third year, celebrates the life and times of Louisvillian and famous writer Dr. Hunter S. Thompson. April 5, 2014 (Photo: Marty Pearl/Special to The Courier-Journal)Buy Photo

Depending on whom you talk to, Louisville's GonzoFest was either a longcoming celebration of the life and work of journalist Hunter S. Thompson, some kind of atavistic and immoral tribute to a drug-crazed criminal or a mere blip on the city's cultural radar.

GonzoFest has attempted to right the image of one of Louisville's native sons by providing deep, creative insights into the late writer's work.

The festival's mastermind and longtime Thompson friend, Ron Whitehead, stood shoulder to shoulder with Mayor Greg Fischer on Saturday on East Main Street and declared this Hunter's Southern reckoning.

"Every city wants to have a sense of authenticity," said Fischer, after handing over a plaque from the City of Louisville to Whitehead, honoring and solidifying the legacy and persona of Thompson. "He's a part of who we are, and the city wanted to put an exclamation on that."

Whitehead said he likes to blow things up — and there's no denying that that's exactly what he's done. Thompson's "Gonzoville" banner — designed by his longtime friend and collaborator, Ralph Steadman — was unveiled Saturday during the final day of the six-day festival. Whitehead announced that its permanent location would be on the corner of Bardstown Road and Longest Avenue, in an area he called "Hunter's Highlands."

After the unveiling, New York-based poet Frank Messina read an email message from his phone that Thompson's wife, Anita, had written to festival patrons. It concluded with her gifting a writing scholarship to the University of Louisville in Whitehead's name.

"Without events like this, Gonzo fans wouldn't have a chance to meet," said Jacob Anastasio, a Kentucky native who sketched a gonzo-themed portrait of his friend. "It helps bring people together and it opens doors for people to share their own work and experiences with Hunter's words."

Hooray for Hunter To see more photos from GonzoFest, go to www.courier-journal

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1gyseXv