Caitlyn Niston, of Homewatch CareGivers of Boulder County, helps Donna Jones with her breakfast on Wednesday at Jones' apartment in Boulder. ( Matthew Jonas / Longmont Times-Call )

Following a serious accident around Thanksgiving last year, Donna Jones knew that she needed a helping hand. So she called Homewatch CareGivers of Boulder County, who sent Caitlyn Niston over to Jones' apartment to pitch in.

"You looked like a prize fighter when I met you with that black eye," Niston kidded Jones last week as the two sat in Jones' apartment at The Carillon in Boulder.

The black eye is gone and Jones is on the mend but she still gets visits from Homewatch caregivers multiple times a day to help her — whether it's putting on her shoes and socks, helping her maintain her balance in the shower, or at night, helping her put on the mask that Jones said she has to wear to help with her sleep apnea.

"They're my eyes for that," said Jones.

Given The Carillon's proximity to campus, and the stunning views to the west from Jones' apartment, her family came over for Fourth of July fireworks and Niston baked a cake — a birthday cake to celebrate all of Jones' family members' birthdays in 2014.

"They had 17 names on that cake — we were celebrating everybody's birthday," Jones said, smiling.

Homewatch CareGivers of Boulder County is celebrating its 20th anniversary this year. Homewatch is a Denver-based franchise business launched in 1980 that, back then, was doing both in-home senior care and in-home pet care. It has since dropped the pet care part, but the business has grown to be a global operation, with more than 200 territories, according to operations and outreach director Sara Griswell.

Advertisement

But it was founder Julie Heidemann's Boulder County franchise that started it all. It was the first.

Employee longevity at core of business

Heinmann, who lives in Niwot, had been a flight attendant at Continental Airlines when the company announced it was pulling out of Denver. Rather than transfer and leave the Front Range she took a voluntary furlough.

As she pondered her wide-open future, she said she knew she wanted to try doing something on her own and her thoughts kept gravitating toward caring for the elderly.

"I just always had a strong passion for seniors because of my own grandparents, whom I was extremely close to," Heinmann said last week in her company's office on Center Green Court in Boulder.

She attended a franchise fair, where a variety of service and retail businesses try to woo qualified franchisees, and it's there she met Paul Sauer, founder of what is now Homewatch International.

"I knew I was really interested in that," Heinmann said.

She signed up as the first franchisee, and before she knew it her business took off.

"My phone just started ringing nonstop," Heinmann said. "And then I realized, I was up in until 4 o'clock in the morning doing paperwork and billing."

So she hired a couple of office people to help her out — still running the business out of her home — but when twins came to her and husband Ryan five years into her business, she knew it was time to find an office.

In its 20th year, Homewatch CareGivers of Boulder County has more than 100 clients spread throughout Boulder County and it employs almost 90 people, 34 of whom live in Longmont.

Heinmann said one of the things she is most proud of is the longevity of her staff. Griswell and Andrea Bertelsen, quality assurance director, both joined the company in 2002 and human resources manager Traci Wilson has been there since 2007. The newest member of the five-person office team, Brent Schroeder, marketing and office coordinator, has been there two years.

"And we take really good care of our caregivers," said Bertelsen, who said the company offers them full health, dental, vision and 401(k) contributions after a year.

Finally, pairing the right caregiver with the right client is critical, Griswell said, a key factor in the business's success over the past two decades.

"We do a lot of extensive training with our caregivers, so they have experience in a lot of different situations," Griswell said.

Contact Times-Call staff writer Tony Kindelspire at 303-684-5291 or tkindelspire@times-call.com