If you would like to meet Michael Ramirez, he will be appearing at the Nixon Presidential Library & Museum at 7 p.m. on Tuesday for a lecture and signing of his new book "Give Me Liberty or Give Me Obamacare." It's a free event, but you should RSVP ahead of time to reserve a seat. For more information, call 714-993-5075.

Fullerton is a One Degree of Separation town.

You don’t know everybody, but you’re only one person away from knowing everybody.

That might be a bit of an exaggeration, but not much of one.

Recently I had a real One Degree of Separation experience. A friend of mine, Kristine Taylor, who I met in a business group about 10 years ago, posted a cartoon on her Facebook page that was drawn by syndicated editorial cartoonist Michael Ramirez.

As a fan of political humor, I’ve long admired his work. His sense of humor and topic choices are in sync with mine. I commented about how much I enjoyed his work, and she responded, “He’s my neighbor. You should come out to do karaoke with us sometime.”

Wow, just that fast I discovered that I was just One Degree of Separation away from a two-time Pulitzer Prize winner.

For my birthday that year, she gave me an autographed copy of Ramirez’s first compilation book, “Everyone Has A Right To My Opinion.” After looking through his life’s work, I was even more impressed by the volume and consistent quality.

To be a good editorial cartoonist you have to be bold. Ramirez is certainly that, as well as creative and controversial. His work appears worldwide in hundreds of newspapers and magazines (including the Orange County Register) and is seen weekly by an audience of millions.

He’s been presented with many prestigious awards including two Pulitzer Prizes, but he’s also been visited by the Secret Service, and his column was dropped by the Los Angeles Times. As Robert Frost wrote, “Freedom lies in being bold.”

Last week, I was invited to play on Michael Ramirez’s seven-member team at a charity bowl-a-thon. Hands of Hope International and Kristine Taylor Philanthropies are two local charities that have done fantastic work for cancer patients. They help with surgical reconstruction, providing medical equipment, wigs for cancer patients who have lost their hair during chemotherapy, transportation to and from treatments, and helping to rebuild lives.

I was excited for the charity bowl-a-thon and wanted to look the part. I bought from a vintage clothing store a brown polyester bowling shirt with “Markstein Beverage Co., Sacramento” stitched on the back, and the name “Hal” stitched over the front pocket.

The bowl-a-thon was held at the Tavern Bowl at The Triangle in Costa Mesa. It was a smaller underwriting event to provide the “seed money” for their big fundraiser next March. Last year, their gala raised $80,000 to help cancer patients.

When I saw Michael Ramirez for the first time at the bowling alley, he was wearing a Yankees baseball cap and looked considerably younger than his 54 years. We talked about baseball and growing up in Orange County. He graduated from Capistrano Valley High School and from UC Irvine.

I knew that Michael was very talented with his pen, now I wanted to see if he was as talented knocking down the pins. Let me tell you, he knows his way around the alleys, just like he knows his way around the galleys (had enough cartoon-bowling jokes yet?)

Our conversation continued in-between rolls. Michael told me a little bit about his recent USO tour, on which he went to several undisclosed military bases in the Persian Gulf with a contingency of other famous cartoonists, visiting our troops.

“Michael has such a huge heart. He is a great supporter of what we do at Kristine Taylor Philanthropies,” Kristine Taylor said. “He donates his time and talent to help us improve the lives of cancer patients.”

In the end, Team Ramirez showed the other teams no mercy. Hey, charity stops at the foul line! Our team won the championship, and a restaurant gift certificate for our efforts. We should have dumped a bucket of Gatorade on Michael’s head and carried him off on our shoulders, but instead we settled for a few high fives and “That-a-boys” and a team picture.

Meeting my favorite cartoonist in a casual setting while wearing rental shoes was a great experience. Plus, I was able to cross-off my long held bucketlist goal of “Bowling with a Pulitzer Prize Winner.” Next up: “Play Ping Pong with a Nobel Prize Winner” (story to follow).

Email David Jerome at dave@mrbucketlist.com.