Youth duck hunting

The S.C. Department of Natural Resources (DNR) is offering an opportunity for 25 youth to attend a duck clinic on Jan. 18 from 10 a.m.-3 p.m. in Georgetown County. The free clinic will introduce youth ages 10-17 to the basics of duck hunting. The clinic’s hands-on sessions include: game care and prep, duck calling, marksmanship skills, and how to keep it legal while hunting. Contact FSgt. Steve Simpson at simpsons@dnr.sc.gov and complete and return the application, which will be sent by email after contact is made.

Dove hunting survey

The S.C. Department of Natural Resources is conducting a survey of active dove hunters to determine their preferences for seasons and bag limits along with some requests about their hunting activities. The U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service annually sets the frameworks within which the individual states can select seasons, bag limits and methods of harvest for all migratory game birds including doves. An individual state, like South Carolina, can select options that are more conservative than the Federal frameworks but not more liberal. At this time, the Service allows for no more than 90 days of dove hunting with no more than three open segments to be scheduled between Sept. 1 and Jan. 15. The maximum daily dove bag limit is 15 birds per hunter per day. Active dove hunters can access the survey at www.dnr.sc.gov/doves/. The survey is now available and will be open until Jan. 8, 2016.

Reel Art submissions

The Reel Art program is accepting artwork submissions from students in South Carolina K-12 public and private schools. For details and the 2016 theme visit: dnr.sc.gov/aquaticed/reelart/index.html. This year’s theme for seventh-12th grade is “Adaptations for Survival.” Students must submit original works of art that have not been copied from published photographs or other works of art. Students may use any type of medium to create their artwork such as colored pencils, chalks, watercolors, acrylic paints, etc. Entries must be of a horizontal format, 9x12 without a matte. No computer generated images or other mechanical devices can be used to create the student’s entry. There should be no signatures or initials on the front of the artwork. Reel Art Entry Form must be completed and attached to the back of the artwork. This includes listing the animals and plants in the artwork. Artwork must be postmarked by Feb. 1, 2016, and addressed to: Reel Art, Attn: Sarah Chabaane, P.O. Box 167, Columbia, SC 29201.

Let Us Know

Items can be submitted by emailing braswell@postandcourier.com or by faxing to 843-937-5579.

Outdoors Calendar