Fans can watch the India vs. New Zealand cricket Test live online as the teams square off in the fifth and final day of the contest — if New Zealand chooses.

The Test has been a frustrating one for India, which came into the contest on a long losing streak. The team lost its One-Day International series with New Zealand last month, falling out of the No. 1 world ranking, and then lost its first Test as well.

In the second Test, India watched New Zealand put on a batting clinic. Brendon McCullum batted through the fourth day for New Zealand, creating a world record partnership of 352 for the sixth wicket along with BJ Watling.

Fans who watch the India vs. New Zealand cricket Test live online can see McCullum become the first New Zealand batsman to score a triple-century. But with New Zealand on 571 for six, for a lead of 325 runs, the team not decided whether to press for the win after already winning the first Test.

“Obviously we are 1-0 up in the series,” McCullum said after the fourth day. “We have worked really hard to get back into this contest, so that is one decision we have to look at, whether we try and push on for a Test win or we look to consolidate the lead that we have got knowing how far out of the game we were.

“Those are the decisions we have to mull over tonight. The decisions were not in our court a couple of days ago. It is nice to be able to be in that luxury position to make those decisions, and to know that you have worked incredibly hard to get into that situation to give you that luxury of making those decisions.”

Watling said the contest has already been a special one for New Zealand.

“It’s nice to get a hundred but its special to win a Test match too,” he said. “We weren’t thinking of records. We still have to do some work tomorrow first thing.”

Fans can watch the India vs. New Zealand cricket Test live online through a variety of sources. The match is being live streamed through Sony Liv, and viewers in the United States can turn to ESPN by clicking here, Those in the UK can click here, while New Zealand viewers can access the live video here.