As the city of Ventura continues its activities celebrating its 150th anniversary, final plans are being made for a legacy project that deserves our united support.

The city has a number of events this winter and spring that will lead up to its birthday bash April 2, the 150th anniversary of the date when the act to incorporate the town of San Buenaventura took effect. There will be a picnic and old-time family fair in Plaza Park in downtown Ventura followed by a concert in Mission Park with the city's most famous musicians, Big Bad Voodoo Daddy.

But that will fade from memory when the party's over, which is why the organizers agreed to create a visual legacy of the city's first 150 years in a mural along Main Street just past the San Buenaventura Mission.

Turning that idea into reality will be Ventura artist Michael O'Kelly and California Pottery and Tile Works. The plan is to create a 42-foot-long wall mural that, in tile, tells the history of the county's oldest city.

Mr. O'Kelly, the Welsh-born artist and musician who spent 10 years living and immersing himself in Latin American art before migrating here, is the perfect choice for this visionary task.

He joined three friends 20 years ago in creating the California Pottery and Tile Works, which has done incredible renovations such as at the Star Lounge and Watermark Restaurant in downtown Ventura, and created traditional and avant-garde designs in public places like the Santa Barbara Zoo and private homes up and down the coast. The company has also been involved in numerous projects for the Disney Co.

Their work is an extension of some of the remarkable historical California tile design effort, such as the stunning if short-lived efforts of Malibu Potteries in the 1920s that is best seen at the historic state-run Adamson House museum in Malibu.

Mr. O'Kelly intends the mural to be a flowing visual story that allows us to see and feel 150 years of the city. He has reached out to many local families and institutions to gain their support and involvement, and financial backing, to help make it a reality. The Ventura County Star has signed on as one of the sponsors.

The effort is about halfway toward its financial goal of $150,000. Donations are being sought through the Urban Encore nonprofit organization established for this project. To donate, you can contact them at 805-794-7670 or by mail to 420 E. Santa Clara St., Ventura CA 93001.

Donors of $1,000 or more will be listed on plaques that will border the mural. Those contributing $15,000 or more will have the unique opportunity to contribute an image that Mr. O'Kelly will incorporate into his tile project as part of the story.

This is a worthwhile chance to help leave a legacy for our children, and their grandchildren, that shows how we got here today in a unique and stunning tile mural. We hope you join us in creating this exciting story for all time.