Graduates, faculty and audience members stand after the playing of the national anthem at Middle Tennessee State University's commencement ceremony on Saturday morning. (Photo: Brian Wilson/DNJ)

MURFREESBORO — Graduates of Middle Tennessee State University were encouraged to aim for future and remain willing to give back by U.S. Sen. Bob Corker and Juvenile Court Judge Donna Scott Davenport during the university commencement ceremonies Saturday.

“I dare you­ — each one — I dare you to dream your greatest dreams and reach for your highest goals,” Davenport told the graduates during the morning ceremony.

University officials said 1,841 students were set to cross the Murphy Center stage Saturday during the event marking the end of the fall semester at the Murfreesboro university.

“With this ceremony, you now become part of the distinct history and tradition of this institution,” said MTSU President Sidney A. McPhee.

Even after the ceremony, tears were still likely to come for some graduates as they realized they had finished their degrees, said Savannah Green, who graduated from the College of Education on Saturday.

“There’s just no way to explain this,” Green said moments after receiving her diploma. “It means so much with all of the hard work going into it.”

Corker, who spoke at the afternoon ceremony, called on graduates to do three things as they moved on from the institution — master something, have a bold vision and give back.

“Make sure you are indispensable in whatever you pursue after today,” the senator said.

Corker also noted the strength of Rachel Ruppe, who graduated with a bachelor’s degree in English after suffering from injuries sustained in a car wreck in 2011.

After relearning how to walk and talk again at a rehabilitation center in Knoxville, Ruppe was able to complete her final semester of courses online, according a news release from the university.

The standing-room-only crowd roared as Ruppe used her walker to cross the stage and receive her degree.

“She has probably had to persevere more than anybody here,” Corker said during his remarks.

The day also capped years of work for state Rep. Mike Sparks, who graduated with a degree in university studies Saturday afternoon.

The Smyrna lawmaker took a mixture of online and on-campus courses for years to complete his bachelor’s degree while serving in the state House and working nights at Nissan.

“I believe it’ll help me be a little bit more well-rounded,” Sparks said in the university release.

Davenport, who has served as Rutherford County’s Juvenile Court judge since 2000, told students during the morning graduation ceremony that showing honesty, integrity and a sense of justice are crucial traits to keep as they move on from MTSU.

While financial gains could come to these graduates through their work and degrees, she said that material wealth is only part of their overall success.

“You’re going to be so much wealthier as you go through these goals if you keep your character intact,” Davenport said.

Before hundreds of students crossed the stage, she said their work and effort to earn their degrees would create the environment where future goals could be achieved.

“I know each one of you will be reaching for that success when you reach for that diploma today,” Davenport said.

Reach Brian Wilson at 615-278-5165. Follow him on Twitter @brianwilson17.

MTSU grads at a glance

Undergraduate degrees: 1,577

Graduate and specialist degrees: 255

Doctoraral degrees: 9

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/1QDtoqq