Environmentalist activists form a human chain representing the peace sign and the spelling out "100% renewable" Sunday on the sidelines of U.N. climate change conference in Paris. Michel Euler/AP

The historic Paris climate agreement is concluded. Every country in the world is now in the climate fight, to one degree or another. In its wake are three obvious and important markers for those who’ve paid attention:

First, President Obama’s legacy is likely secure – his suite of executive actions on climate change round out a trio of significant achievements with the U.S.-Iran nuclear deal and the Affordable Care Act as benchmarks for historians.

Second, 20 years of frustration in international climate negotiations are now in the dustbin of history. The Paris agreement erased all of that in a fortnight.

And, third, whatever remained of the contrived, artificial climate science “debate” in the media is gone for good. Now, the focus for global media is on immediate and impending climate impacts – such as the reason why millions are fleeing the desertification around the Sahel region in Africa.

So now what?

“We’re going to see a fundamental shift in the underlying energy mix,” Bank of America investment strategist Sarbjit Nahal told Bloomberg TV.

Entire industries will now respond to the clear signal sent by the Paris climate agreement – partially because extreme weather connected to climate now touches 10 percent of the planet (compared to less than 1 percent two decades ago) and is costing economies trillions of dollars; and partially because it will spur even greater new investments in renewable energy development, which has already reached a tipping point in the range of $300 billion or more, Nahal said.

The world’s largest companies most directly affected by the Paris accord (oil companies like ExxonMobil, BP, Shell and Chevron) have already begun to shift in anticipation, and will likely accelerate moves toward natural gas and away from coal and oil. This is almost certainly their exit strategy.

[READ: Nations Sign Historic Climate Change Agreement]

If a global price on carbon emerges in the next few years to augment the national emission targets enshrined in the Paris climate agreement, oil majors looking over the horizon may very well position themselves to move into new lines of business that reward investments in lower-carbon forms of energy.

ExxonMobil - the world’s largest energy company known for its support of climate policies championed by Republican Party leaders in Washington, D.C. - was first out of the gate.

“ExxonMobil takes global climate change seriously and the risks of rising greenhouse gas emissions warrant thoughtful action,” the company said in a statement. “The long-term objective of climate change policy should be to reduce the risks of serious harm to humanity and ecosystems at minimum societal cost.”

ExxonMobil also reiterated – as it has before, but more publicly now with analysts and media - that it believes a price on carbon is the best long-term solution in the marketplace.

“Climate change is a global issue and it requires global solutions,” it said. “ExxonMobil has for many years held the view that a revenue-neutral carbon tax is the best option to fulfill these key principles. Instead of subsidies and mandates that distort markets, stifle innovation, and needlessly raise energy costs, a carbon tax could help create the conditions to reduce greenhouse gas emissions in a way that spurs new efficiencies and technologies.”

The Paris accord has also sent a significant signal to investors in every corner of the world.

“Perhaps the most significant effect of the Paris agreement in the next few years will be the signal it sends to investors: the united governments of the world say that the age of fossil fuels has started drawing to a close,” the Economist concluded. “After Paris, the belief that governments are going to stay the course on their stated green strategies will feel a bit better founded—and the idea of investing in a coal mine will seem more risky.”

[MORE: Businesses Back Paris Climate Change Agreement]

Other financial analysts echo this sentiment. Barclays Bank told its clients that the Paris accord will weaken the long-term fundamentals of fossil fuel industries, while boosting capital goods and low-carbon power-generation sectors. Merrill Lynch said coal is now a “stranded asset.” Goldman Sachs noted that the four biggest U.S. coal companies lost 90 percent of market capitalization in 2015.

Global financial leaders said on the heels of the Paris accord that they are ready to invest significant resources in lower-carbon energy sources.

“The Paris outcome (is) an historic milestone on the road to a more sustainable economy,” said Stuart Gulliver, the group chief executive of banking giant HSBC. “The scale of the transformation demands the rapid mobilization of private finance. As a leading international bank, HSBC has a crucial role to play in the transition to a low-carbon economy. We stand ready to support our clients - across countries and sectors - in tackling the threat of climate change."

The Paris climate agreement goal to keep global warming to 1.5 Celsius above pre-Industrial Revolution levels also has major financial and scientific implications.

[LINK: Climate Change Is Happening, Here and Now]

“With a new target of 1.5 rather 2 degrees as a central part of the Paris Agreement…the financial market implications of stranded coal mine, coal fired power and coal-related rail and port infrastructure assets and carbon bubble risks are hugely increased,” said Tim Buckley with IEEFA. “We saw in the month leading up to and during the COP in Paris significant losses in the value of oil and coal stocks, as the financial markets increasingly factored in the prospect of a successful agreement being reached.”

Scientists who met extensively in the run up to the Paris talks as part of an expert dialogue sponsored by the United Nations’ climate team helped set the table for that shift to an even further carbon-constrained world.

“The longer we wait to bend the currently increasing curve of global emissions downward, the steeper we will have to bend it, even with negative emissions,” a panel of 70 scientific experts concluded in advance of the Paris talks in a U.N.-convened expert dialogue. “Limiting global warming to below 2 Celsius necessitates a radical transition (deep decarbonization now and going forward), not merely a fine tuning of current trends.”