During meetings of the health system board and the board that governs its medical center, a much rosier financial picture appeared. A year ago, the medical center was more than $5 million in the hole, and medical associates was flush only because of a big payment from the federal government for effectively using electronic medical records, said Anthony Wagner, chief business officer for the health system and Georgia Regents University.

The health system was “significantly underwater,” he said. This year, it is $8.2 million ahead, though not quite up to the $10.6 million it had budgeted, Wagner said.

“We’ve had good growth for this year and good year-over-year growth,” he said.

University System of Georgia Chancellor Hank Huckaby, who sits on the board, concurred.

“This is a tremendous turnaround from one year ago,” he said.

GRU President Ricardo Azziz, who chairs the boards, said the administration set “aggressive goals” for this fiscal year.

“And we’re almost there,” he said.

While expenses were a little high, many expenses – such as for increased information technology related to coding changes – were “frontloaded” in the first half of the year and will smooth out going forward, Wagner said.

“I think we’re in a good position to make a strong run in the second half of the year,” he said.

The environment will not be helpful, however, Azziz said. Rating agencies like Fitch Ratings and Moody’s have negative outlooks for nonprofit hospitals this year, he said.

“These are not good times for nonprofit hospitals and health systems,” Azziz said. That the health system is doing well in spite of conditions is “a tribute to the team on the ground,” he said. Because of state opposition to the Affordable Care Act, with Georgia refusing to expand Medicaid, “we will end up with the cost and the burden of ACA without any additional funding,” Azziz said.

The health system is also increasingly being called upon to help support the rest of the university because of cuts in federal and state funding. Since fiscal 2009, state support has been cut by $76 million, nearly one-third of its state funding, Azziz said.

“All of these things are really headwinds of significance,” he said.