HERE’S A LOOK AT THE DAY AHEAD

ELECTION 2016: Donald Trump holds a rally at 7 p.m. in Buffalo, N.Y. Sen. Ted Cruz holds a rally at 1:30 p.m. in Towson, Md. Ohio Gov. John Kasich holds a town-hall event in Syracuse, N.Y., at 11:30 a.m. and in Schenectady, N.y. at 6 p.m. Sen. Bernie Sanders holds a rally in in Long Island City in New York City at 7 p.m. Former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton holds a campaign event in Manhattan with Sen. Kirsten Gillibrand, former Rep. Gabrielle Giffords and Planned Parenthood President Cecile Richards at noon.

OBAMA ADMINISTRATION: President Barack Obama attends meetings at the White House. Vice President Joe Biden delivers remarks at the J Street 2016 Gala, a gathering of the pro-Israel, pro-peace organization, at 8:45 p.m. Treasury Secretary Jacob Lew conducts a bilateral meeting with Iraqi Deputy Prime Minister and Finance Minister Hoshyar Zebari in the morning. At 5 p.m., Mr. Lew, along with Federal Reserve Chairwoman Janet Yellen, participates in a Financial Stability Oversight Council meeting. Defense Secretary Ash Carter is on foreign travel to the Asia-Pacific region and the Middle East. Energy Secretary Ernest Moniz delivers remarks on the administration’s commitment to nuclear security and nonproliferation and discusses the Iran Nuclear Deal at Brown University at 4 p.m.

SUPREME COURT: The Supreme Court hears arguments in a blockbuster case examining the Obama administration’s plans to defer deportation for more than 4 million illegal immigrants. Oral arguments begin at 10 a.m.

CONGRESS: The Senate resumes consideration of H.R.636, the legislative vehicle for Federal Aviation Administration reauthorization, at 3 p.m..

ECONOMIC INDICATORS: The National Association of Home Builders releases the housing market index for April at 10 a.m.

THE PLACE THAT WANTS TRUMP MOST: There isn’t much Jody Bostic believes in these days. The government has abandoned him, he feels. Local coal mines have laid him off so many times he opened a T-shirt store to make a living. Big-city media treat him and his neighbors like know-nothings. His remaining hope: Donald Trump will become president and use his business skills to bring jobs to this Appalachian mountain county. “Hey, in this county, things are going downhill. People are getting laid off. People are leaving,” says the 39-year-old former miner. “If Trump don’t get it, it will be another blow.”

Benjamin Lowy for The Wall Street Journal

Mr. Trump won Buchanan County with 69.7% of the vote in the March 1 Republican primary, the highest percentage vote he has collected in any U.S. county so far. A close look at the white, working-class enclave, which is in Virginia’s southwest, provides a clearer picture of why Mr. Trump inspires supporters and poses problems for anti-Trump GOP strategists. Voters here say Mr. Trump understands their frustration and will fight the Washington establishment on their behalf. In an area awash in uncertainty—Will mines remain open? Will the river flood? Must the young leave to find work?—he is a reassuring presence, someone who has visited their living rooms for years via television. Bob Davis and Rebecca Ballhaus report.

CAROL E. LEE: U.S.-SAUDI RELATIONS IN FOCUS THIS WEEK

President Barack Obama arrives in Saudi Arabia this week at a low point in relations between Washington and Riyadh that are likely only to be set on a different course by whoever is elected to the White House in November. U.S. relations with Saudi Arabia have already been strained by Mr. Obama’s diplomatic outreach to Iran. Their relationship is growing more complicated as oil prices drop. Read Carol E. Lee’s full post in Washington Wire.

WSJ STORIES YOU SHOULDN’T MISS

AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE/GETTY IMAGES

BOTH PARTIES’ PRESIDENTIAL FRONT-RUNNERS INCREASINGLY UNPOPULAR: Both parties’ presidential front-runners are growing increasingly unpopular, a new Wall Street Journal/NBC News poll finds, with Hillary Clinton showing an especially steep decline over the past month. Among voters in both parties, 56% hold a negative view of Mrs. Clinton and 32% hold a positive view. That 24-point gap is almost twice as wide as in a Journal/NBC poll last month, when 51% viewed her negatively and 38% positively, a 13-point gap. GOP front-runner Donald Trump continues to be the candidate in either party viewed most negatively, with 65% of registered voters viewing him unfavorably and 24% favorably, a 41-point difference. Unlike with Mrs. Clinton, those numbers haven’t changed much over the past month. Sen. Ted Cruz of Texas, Mr. Trump’s nearest competitor for the Republican nomination, has an image problem of his own. Nearly half of voters see him in a negative light, while 26% view him positively. Janet Hook reports.

Plus: GOP voters reject the idea of convention delegates choosing a nominee who hasn’t run in primaries, polling found … The GOP presidential primary remains as unsettled as ever … Mr. Trump’s campaign manager on Sunday declined to apologize for an encounter with a reporter that led to a battery charge in Florida … This year’s presidential campaign at times seems more like a schoolyard brawl than a genteel debate-society competition, but there’s one thing the down-and-dirty tone won’t change: the Ivy League’s dominance among president-producing schools.

DEMOCRATS EYE NOVEMBER WITHOUT A CLEAR FOE: With growing uncertainty about who will emerge as the GOP presidential nominee, Democrats are assembling opposition playbooks against Donald Trump, Sen. Ted Cruz or a Republican-to-be-named-later. Early in the campaign, they mined the backgrounds of former Florida Gov. Jeb Bush and Wisconsin Gov. Scott Walker. At another point, they turned their attention to Florida Sen. Marco Rubio, and research of Ohio Gov. John Kasich is continuing. Still, they can’t entertain every “white-knight theory” that anti-Trump Republicans are floating in anticipation of a contested GOP convention in Cleveland in July. “If Ted Cruz is the nominee, we’ll be ready. If Donald Trump is the nominee, we’ll be ready,” said Justin Barasky, communications director for Priorities USA Action, a super PAC backing Democratic front-runner Hillary Clinton. “We’re very well prepared for at least five potential Republican candidates.…You can’t prepare for 100 people.” Colleen McCain Nelson reports.

Plus: The Democratic presidential candidates returned to the campaign trail Sunday in New York City for a two-day sprint to Tuesday’s primary here, with Mrs. Clinton and Bernie Sanders exchanging tough words across town.

TRUMP’S EDGE ON TWITTER CUTS BOTH WAYS: Republican front-runner Donald Trump has used Twitter to engage the public more aggressively than his rivals, and the potential pitfalls of that tactic are increasingly visible. The New York businessman’s broad appeal across the political spectrum, coupled with his approach to citing supportive tweets, has given him a sizable advantage over his opponents on the social media platform: Mr. Trump boasts 7.6 million followers, compared with 1.05 million for Texas Sen. Ted Cruz, his chief rival for the GOP nomination, and just 288,000 followers for Ohio Gov John Kasich. Mr. Trump is also ahead of Democratic candidates Hillary Clinton, with an audience of 5.93 million followers, and Vermont Sen. Bernie Sanders, with 1.97 million. Mr. Trump has also adopted a signature style on Twitter: Instead of using the platform’s retweet button when another user expresses excitement for a rally or offers compliments for a televised interview, Mr. Trump frames the tweets in quotes, sometimes adding a short expression of “great!” or “thank you!” He then sends the tweet from his own account, bringing attention to a wide range of users, not all of whom are known to the candidate. Natalie Andrews reports.

ALSO IN THE NEWS

The Supreme Court is scheduled to hear oral arguments on a case about protecting illegal immigrants from deportation in one of its biggest cases this term, though the February death of conservative Justice Antonin Scalia leaves the high court at risk of 4-4 ties.

Oil producers that supply almost half the world’s crude failed Sunday to negotiate a production freeze intended to strengthen prices.

After declining in 2015, more unaccompanied minors and families from Central America were apprehended as they crossed illegally into the U.S. during the first five months of the federal fiscal year.

Several months after North Korea sentenced Kenneth Bae to 15 years of hard labor on charges of trying to overthrow its government, the Korean-American missionary got an unexpected White House visit. South Korea’s president said North Korea appeared to be preparing for a fifth nuclear test, a possible act of defiance against international sanctions imposed after a nuclear detonation earlier this year.

The European Union this weekend pressed Iran’s leaders to use their influence with Syria’s ruling regime to help advance the country’s peace talks after the fragile negotiations resumed in Geneva.

A U.S. Air Force reconnaissance plane was intercepted by a Russian fighter plane over the Baltic Sea in what American officials said on Sunday was an unsafe and unprofessional manner, the second such instance in a week.

A U.S. probe of world soccer increasingly is focusing on the role of sponsors, broadcasters and banks.

The world’s financial leaders started the year worried about China’s decelerating economy dragging the world into another major crisis. Now, they are breathing a small sigh of relief.

Chinese Finance Minister Lou Jiwei called GOP presidential front-runner Donald Trump an “irrational type” and said the U.S. “wouldn’t be entitled to world leadership” if it followed Mr. Trump’s proposed trade policies toward China.

About a week before Pope Francis’ one-day trip to Lesbos, the Greek island that has borne the brunt of Europe’s refugee crisis, a Vatican official approached him with an idea to bring a group of migrants stranded in Greece back to Rome with him. The move was among the most provocative yet from a pope who has placed migrants’ rights at the center of his papacy.

Brazil’s Chamber of Deputies started voting Sunday on whether or not to send the impeachment process against President Dilma Rousseff to the Senate for trial.

TODAY’S VIDEO

VIDEO: TRUMP’S DELEGATE CHALLENGE

Donald Trump is challenging the delegate appropriation methods of states like Colorado and Louisiana. WSJ politics editor Aaron Zitner explains the Republican presidential front-runner’s strategy in the fight for the nomination.

WHAT WE’RE READING AROUND THE WEB

Italy’s finance minister tells the Financial Times that a British exit from the European Union would be a “major threat to Europe.” Pier Carlo Padoan said: “It would certainly damage the UK in the first place, but also the rest of Europe … particularly the political consequences.”

The Bernie Sanders coalition is a loose amalgam of groups, some with roots in the Occupy Wall Street movement, writes Arit John of Blooomberg: “The decentralized structure of the Sanders coalition is a double-edged sword. His surrogates and allies have often gone farther than the candidate himself in attacking Hillary Clinton.”

The Atlantic’s Ronald Brownstein writes that critics of the 1994 crime bill forget that the legislation was a bipartisan effort addressing a genuine need. “The bill followed years of elevated violence that had many cities reeling.”

The Washington Posts’s Chris Cillizza says Donald Trump’s lates moves, like stressing the idea that the whole process is “rigged” against him, may help him clinch the GOP nomination. “He has struggled of late because he became the very clear front-runner and didn’t really have anything or anyone to run against. Now that he can rail against the rigged system, he is right back in his messaging wheelhouse,” he writes.

MILESTONE

$777 million: Big U.S. banks added $777 million to loan reserves last quarter, a sharp increase from the prior period.

FEEDBACK: The Capital Journal Daybreak newsletter is The Wall Street Journal’s morning rundown of the biggest news stories and exclusive features from Washington on politics, policy, financial regulation, defense and more.

Send your tips, feedback and suggestions for recommended reading to editor Kate Milani at kate.milani@wsj.com.