The Fremont Campus of Pueblo Community College welcomes Kathy Herrin as its new Director of Academic Services. (Special to the Daily Record)

Herrin new director of academic services

Kathy Herrin spent more than 25 years in the Criminal Justice field prior to accepting the position as the director of academic services at the Fremont Campus of Pueblo Community College. She spent the last two years as a Probation Officer for Fremont County and was the Victim Services Officer for the Pueblo Probation Department for two years before that.

Herrin was with the Cañon City Police Department for more than two decades, where some of her duties included Field Training for new officers, Crisis Negotiation and Crime Prevention.

Sign up now for PCC's fall semester

The age-old adage that says the early bird gets the worm certainly would apply for students at Pueblo Community College's Fremont Campus. While the start of the 2015 fall semester Aug. 24 is still six weeks away, the window of opportunity is closing fast for having the best selection of classes.

Besides having increased choices of open class sections, dates and times, registering now instead of later has other benefits for both continuing and new students. There are more advising times, campus tours are available, and the stress level of being part of the hectic, late enrollment rush is eliminated.

Advertisement

Making an appointment with an advisor in the Fremont Campus' Go!Zone enrollment and advising center is encouraged, but walk-ins also are welcome. Besides taking care of the enrolling, advising and registering functions, students also can learn about upcoming events, services that are available to them, and the benefits that are offered through participation in student clubs and/or Associated Student Government.

Additional information about all enrolling, advising and registering procedures is available by calling Toni Roberts at 296-6100.

"We are very excited for this coming academic year and the start of the fall semester," said Lana Carter, the Fremont Campus' dean. "PCC was recently spotlighted as one of the top four colleges in the country for 'adding value' to a student's college years, and the Fremont Campus is ready to help make that happen for our students.

The Go!Zone and bookstore hours are 8 a.m. to 5 p.m. on weekdays through Aug. 7, with the hours extended to 6 p.m. Monday through Thursday from Aug. 10 through Aug. 21 (until 5 p.m. on Fridays). In addition, there will be special Saturday hours of 9 a.m. to 1 p.m. on Aug. 15.

Students should be aware that all financial aid paperwork must be submitted by Aug. 10 to ensure that aid is available by the start of classes. Information about financial aid assistance and scholarships is available by calling Eric Ingmire, director of student services, at (719) 296-6106.

When registering, new students should sign up for one of the two orientations that are scheduled in August. They will 5:30-7:30 p.m. Aug. 20 and 10:30 a.m. to 12:30 p.m. Aug. 21.

In addition, a community Education Pathways Fair will be 4-6 p.m. Aug. 6, on the Fremont Campus. The fair will provide information about career fields and the academic programs that can enable students to enter those career tracks.

Simas releases 10th novel

Former Cañon City resident Ann Simas recently released her 10th book, Heaven Sent, a supernatural thriller with a love story.

In the novel, Sophie Doyle has a near-death experience after being hit by a car, but when she arrives in heaven, she's given an assignment: Save a child from the dark place. Sophie formulates a plan, but will she succeed, and will she make it back from the dark place alive?

Simas now lives in Eugene, Ore., but grew up in Cañon City and attended Cañon City schools. During her college years, she wrote a monthly column for The Daily Record about events at College of the Cañons. She also attended Pueblo Community College, then known as Southern Colorado State College, and received her bachelor's degree from Humboldt State University, Arcata, Calif. She has a writing and graphics design background and is an award-winning newsletter editor. She served for two years on the Romance Writers of America Board of Directors, chairing the Outreach International Chapter and co-founded a local RWA chapter.

Simas is the author of three Romance Writers of America Golden Heart Finalists, Chloe's Spirit, First Star, and Blessed Are the Eagles. Other titles by Simas include Loose Ends and two inaugural mystery series, Holy Smoke and Dressed to Die.

Heaven Sent is published by Magic Moon Press and is available in ebook format through Amazon.com. It is also available in paperback through the author's website, annsimas.com (free shipping within the U.S.), from Amazon.com (free shipping with Prime), the CreateSpace Store, or through her publisher at POB 41634, Eugene, OR 97404-0386.

For more information about Ann Simas, visit annsimas.com or email ann@annsimas.com. She can also be found on Facebook at Ann Simas, Author.

Daily Record Staff