TEANECK, N.J., April 18, 2016 (GLOBE NEWSWIRE) -- Patients seeking surgical treatment for severe obesity and its related conditions have the opportunity to receive treatment at a nationally accredited program that meets the highest standards for patient safety and quality and is close to home. Sheryl Slonim, DNP, RN-BC, NEA-BC, APN-C, Executive Vice President, Patient Care Services, Chief Nursing Offficer at Holy Name Medical Center announced its bariatric surgical center has been accredited as a Comprehensive Center under the Metabolic and Bariatric Surgery Accreditation and Quality Improvement Program (MBSAQIP), a joint program of the American College of Surgeons and the American Society for Metabolic and Bariatric Surgery.

The MBSAQIP standards ensure that bariatric surgical patients receive a multidisciplinary program, not just a surgical procedure, which improves patient outcomes and long-term success. Accredited centers offer preoperative and postoperative care designed specifically for their severely obese patients.

"We are proud of our outstanding outcomes and quality in bariatric medicine, which isn't only about our work in the OR," says Stefanie Vaimakis, Chief of Bariatric Surgery at Holy Name. "As bariatric specialists, we are committed to thorough preparation and lifelong follow-up care for our patients, which maximizes the benefits of surgery and the patients' chances for success."

Holy Name Medical Center's commitment to quality bariatric care begins with appropriately trained staff and the leadership surgeons who participate in meetings throughout the year to review its outcomes. They seek continuous improvement to enhance the structure, process and outcomes of the center.

To earn the MBSAQIP designation, Holy Name met essential criteria for staffing, training and facility infrastructure and protocols for care, ensuring its ability to support patients with severe obesity. The center also participates in a national data registry that yields semiannual reports on the quality of its processes and outcomes, identifying opportunities for continuous quality improvement.

After submitting an application, centers seeking MBSAQIP Accreditation undergo an extensive site visit by an experienced bariatric surgeon, who reviews the center's structure, process, and clinical outcomes data. Centers are awarded a specific designation depending on how many patients it serves annually, the type of procedures it provides, and whether it provides care for patients under age 18.

"We conduct an extensive screening process with a bariatric surgeon, registered dietitian and a psychologist to determine eligibility for bariatric surgery," Slonim said. "We help to prevent side effects and complications, and promote successful long-term outcomes. Holy Name Medical Center's efforts help support a culture where we are prepared to manage morbidly obese patients with understanding and compassion and with appreciation for the burdens presented by disease comorbidities."

Holy Name is also the recipient of the 2016 Women's Choice Award® as one of America's Best Hospitals for Bariatric Surgery. This evidence-based designation is the only award that identifies the country's best healthcare institutions based on robust criteria that consider female patient satisfaction, clinical excellence, and what women say they want from a hospital. To learn about the benefits of weight-loss surgery and Bariatric Services at Holy Name Medical Center visit HolyName.org/bariatricservices.

ABOUT HOLY NAME MEDICAL CENTER

Holy Name Medical Center is a fully accredited, not-for-profit healthcare facility based in Teaneck, New Jersey. Founded and sponsored by the Sisters of St. Joseph of Peace in 1925, the comprehensive 361-bed medical center offers leading-edge medical practice and technology administered in an environment rooted in a tradition of compassion and respect for every patient. Holy Name provides high quality health care across a continuum that encompasses education, prevention, early intervention, comprehensive treatment options, rehabilitation and wellness maintenance. To learn more, visit HolyName.org.

Katherine Emmanouilidis Director, Public Relations & Marketing Holy Name Medical Center 718 Teaneck Road | Teaneck, NJ 07666 Tel: 201-227-6047