KINGSTON, N.Y. >> A former congresswoman who railed against Obamacare during her political tenure has been appointed to the board of directors of the Westchester County Health Care Corp.

Nan Hayworth, a Republican, represented the old 19th Congressional District, which encompassed areas south of Ulster County, as well a portion of Dutchess County. She was defeated by U.S. Rep. Sean Patrick Maloney, D-Cold Spring, in 2012. Maloney defeated Hayworth again in the race for the 18th Congressional District seat in 2014.

The Westchester County Health Care Corp. operates the Westchester Medical Center Health Network, which recently assumed operation of HealthAlliance hospitals on Broadway and Mary’s Avenue in Kingston.

Hayworth served in the U.S. Congress from 2011 to 2013. She served on the House Financial Services Committee and the joint House-Senate conference committee that addressed Medicare reimbursement levels.

Advertisement

During her congressional tenure, Hayworth was a strong opponent of Obamacare. She could not be reached for comment.

Hayworth’s husband, Scott Hayworth, is president and chief executive officer of CareMount Medical. The company provides medical services at 40 locations, including a building off U.S. Route 9W in the town of Ulster.

State Assemblyman Kevin Cahill, D-Kingston, who has expressed concern about the possible loss of full-service medical care in Kingston, did not respond to requests for comment on Hayworth’s appointment.

HealthAlliance did not respond to requests for comment on Hayworth’s appointment.

Westchester County Health Care Corp. board Chairman Mitchell C. Hochberg stated in a press release that Hayworth was well-suited for the position.

“Nan Hayworth’s healthcare experience and commitment to the people of our region will complement our existing board as we work collaboratively to continue to fulfill WMCHealth’s mission,” Hochberg said.

“With the recent expansion of Westchester Medical Center Health Network to welcome HealthAlliance of the Hudson Valley, our organization has grown to include 10 hospitals in eight counties and a workforce of more than 12,000 committed to providing the very best healthcare services for residents of the Hudson Valley close to home,” Hochberg said.

Hayworth is a board-certified ophthalmologist and currently is a consulting medical director with The Kinetix Group.

She previously ran her own medical practice.

Hayworth earned a medical degree from Cornell University Medical College and a bachelor’s degree from Princeton University.

She serves on the boards of ConservAmerica, the Goodman Institute, the Independent Women’s Forum and United Way of Westchester and Putnam counties.

On March 29, hospital officials announced that the Westchester Medical Center Health Network would take over the HealthAlliance of the Hudson Valley’s operation of city hospitals.

Two weeks later, the medical service provider said the official agreement would be released in a week.

The document has not yet been made public.