Rudy resident Derek Goodlin announced Friday he will seek election to the Arkansas House of Representatives.

Goodlin, 45, is a Republican seeking to represent District 81, which includes parts of Washington and Crawford counties. The seat is occupied by Rep. Justin Harris, R-West Fork, who announced he will not seek re-election.

Goodlin is the president of Stein LTC, a long-term care management organization, and is a local small business owner. He runs both Homebase Properties, a real estate management company, and ViaCare Therapy Services, which serves home health patients.

“I believe our state is at an opportune time for economic growth and prosperity,” Goodlin said in a news release. “We can encourage job creation and fiscal responsibility by reworking our tax code, ending excessive regulations and stopping the government programs that discourage people from working.”

Goodlin, who is a deacon and treasurer for his church in Alma, says his faith taught him the importance of protecting traditional values. He wants voters to know he can be counted on to protect life and family values.

In addition to his career and consistent with his pro-life and pro-gun priorities, Goodlin is active in several community organizations. He is the treasurer and acting chairman of the board for the River Valley Pregnancy Medical Center, a not-for-profit organization that reaches out to women and families facing unplanned pregnancies. Having been certified by the Arkansas Game and Fish Commission, he is the volunteer head coach of the Minutemen Youth Trap Shooting Team. Through this program students from sixth to 12th grade learn safe gun handling, sportsmanship, hunter education, wildlife identification and conservation.

He is an NRA life member, a concealed carry license holder and a defender of Second Amendment rights.

“As a conservative, I believe we should keep government limited and local,” Goodlin said in the release. “Big government is responsible for invasive programs like Obamacare and Common Core. As state representative, I will fight for real solutions that keeps government out of our everyday lives.”

Goodlin and his wife of 18 years, Janice, raise their six sons and one daughter in Rudy where they all can enjoy the benefits of country living, which include trap shooting, pond fishing and free-range chickens.

He earned a degree in industrial engineering from Pennsylvania State University and a master’s degree in business administration from the College of William and Mary.

Prior to his work in health care, he spent 13 years in the automotive manufacturing industry with two Fortune 100 companies.

Members of the Arkansas General Assembly earn $39,400 annually.