TRENTON — Bracing for a possible U.S. Supreme Court decision on the Affordable Care Act that threatens millions of dollars in tax credits 172,000 New Jersey residents use to pay their premiums, a state senator told her colleagues Friday that New Jersey should set up a contingency plan by launching its own scaled-back version of a health insurance marketplace.

State Sen. Nia Gill (D-Essex) says New Jersey should copy what is being set up in Pennsylvania and Delaware and create a "hybrid marketplace" that may be the most "cost effective and viable alternative" and spare residents from losing out under Obamacare.

"I firmly believe that it was Congress' intent to provide subsidies for people who purchase insurance on both the state and federally facilitated marketplaces. While we cannot predict the outcome of the case, we can work to ensure that no matter the outcome, the people of New Jersey are protected against any adverse decision," Gill wrote to members of the Senate Task Force on Health Exchange Implementation, which she chairs.

The U.S. Supreme Court case, King V. Burwell, involves David M. King and three other Virginia residents who sued the federal government for allowing the 34 states for whom the federal government runs an exchange — the online portal to shop for and buy insurance — to share in federally funded tax credits to lower premium costs for 6.4 million people. The case comes down to the interpretation of the phrase in the law that says people are entitled to subsidies if they use an "exchange established by the state."

The plaintiffs say a strict reading of a passage in the law said those subsidies shall only go to the 16 states that run their own marketplace. New Jersey is not one of them.

The Obama administration said the errant phrase should be read in the context of the entire law which intended health coverage would be available for everybody.

A decision is expected by the end of the month.

Noting that Gov. Chris Christie has twice vetoed legislation that called for building a health exchange from scratch, Gill wrote that under such a "hybrid" plan, the state would not have to spend money on overhead by relying on the federal government's HealthCare.gov website New Jerseyans already use to shop for and buy coverage.

The Obama administration recently gave Delaware and Pennsylvania permission to use the Obamacare website, while making these states responsible for regulating the plans and administering the program.

New Mexico, Nevada, Oregon and Hawaii also created the legal framework for a hybrid marketplace, Gill noted.

"Not only does the 'hybrid marketplace' save the states significant money in technology costs, it also allows them to ensure that their residents are not affected by King v. Burwell," Gill wrote.

Gill, a lawyer, said the hybrid could be created by legislation or by the governor's executive order.

When asked Friday whether the Christie administration was working on a contingency plan, his spokesman Brian Murray referenced the governor comments earlier this month saying Congress should correct the law and avoid the loss of subsidies.

"If Congress messed up the statute, the Congress and the president created this statute, they should fix it. If they're saying that's not what they intended, then go back and fix it. It's an easy thing to do," Christie said during a June 5 visit in New Hampshire. "We're out in the states trying to make this system work and, you know, the president and Congress should get together. And if that's what the Supreme Court does, we'll see what they do."

Gill said the state shouldn't rely on Congress.

"Unfortunately, the Governor has stated that he does not plan to lead on this issue and has abdicated all responsibility to Congress," she wrote. "Regrettably, the current Congress cannot be relied upon to act in our state's best interest, therefore, we, as legislators, have a responsibility to lead and take action following the Court's decision."

An analysis by the left-leaning think tank New Jersey Policy Perspective said Thursday an additional 136,000 people who bought coverage on the individual market on their own will also see their premiums rise. Insurance companies will raise rates to make up for the exodus of healthy people who lose subsidies, at an average of $313 a month.

Gill on Friday said she hasn't ruled out pursuing legislation again that would put New Jersey in total control over its marketplace, also called a health exchange. She wants to hear what the committee has to say.

"No one knows how to move until the decision is rendered," she said. "We will meet after the ruling and have further conversations."

Susan K. Livio may be reached at slivio@njadvancemedia.com. Follow her on Twitter @SusanKLivio. Find NJ.com Politics on Facebook.