Vincent Pizzolato, 44, of Monroe, is facing charges after accidentally shooting his 11-year-old son in the cheek, according to police.

A Monroe dad is facing assault charges after accidentally shooting his 10-year-old son in the cheek over the weekend, according to police.

Police said Vincent Pizzolato, 44, of Partridge Drive in Monroe, had just returned from target shooting at a local gun range with his wife when he went to secure two pistols in the basement Sunday afternoon.

Boy Recovering in Hospital After Father Accidentally Shoots Him

An 11-year-old boy is recovering in the hospital after his father accidentally fired his gun in Monroe on Sunday, striking his son in the cheek and the state's attorney will be determining whether charges will be filed. (Published Monday, March 9, 2015)

While he was putting the firearms away, Pizzolato checked a 9mm handgun and pulled the trigger, believing it was empty. The pistol fired one round. Police said the bullet pierced a wall and struck Pizzolato's 10-year-old son in the cheek.

"He was putting his weapon away in a safe," said Monroe Police Capt. Michael Flick. "Didn't realize he had a live round in the chamber."

11-Year-Old Boy Accidentally Shot in Monroe

(Published Sunday, March 8, 2015)

No one else in the home was hurt, according to police, who said Pizzolato was shaken up after the incident.

The boy was taken to Bridgeport Hospital, then transferred to Yale-New Haven Hospital for treatment. Police described his injuries as substantial, but said they expect him to be OK.

Pizzolato turned himself in Tuesday evening. He was arrested and charged with unlawful discharge of a firearm, second-degree reckless endangerment and second-degree assault with a firearm.

Pizzolato was released on a promise to appear and is due in court March 25.

There was no answer at the door of the Pizzolato home when NBC Connecticut went to the family's home on Monday.

Police initially said the boy was 11 years old due to misinformation from his parents, according to Flick.