Last night I had the distinct opportunity to give the Republican Spanish-Language response to the State of the Union. In my remarks, I highlighted many of the concerns facing Americans today and how President Obama has failed at implementing policies that would lead to robust economic growth and a brighter future for all.

While the Bureau of Labor Statistics’ most recent report shows that 252,000 jobs were added last month and the unemployment rate has dropped down to 5.6 percent, the report also reveals alarming trends about the status of the American workforce that must be addressed. Today, 8.7 million Americans still remain unemployed, and the number of the long-term unemployed (those who have been searching for work for more than 27-weeks) has remained unchanged. In addition, the size of the labor force fell by 273,000. These are people who have dropped out of the labor force, possibly giving up on the job search entirely. Despite the rising costs of everyday items, wages have decreased on average by five cents in the past month, creating additional stress on young families.

While these statistics are troubling, Congress is ready for the challenge. Since convening the 114th Congress just two weeks ago, House Republicans have already been working towards legislative solutions that strengthen the economy from the ground up.

As one of our first actions, we passed the Hire More Heroes Act of 2015, aimed at assisting veterans by eliminating parts of Obamacare that unnecessarily require small businesses to provide health care for veterans that are already covered through the VA or TRICARE. By removing these restrictions, veterans will see a boom in employment opportunities as small businesses around the country are free to hire them without facing burdensome regulations. This is the least we can do for our heroes.

In addition, we passed the Save American Workers Act of 2015, repealing the harmful 30-hour rule within Obamacare that reduces hours and wages for thousands of Americans. Repealing this rule would afford Americans the opportunity to earn higher wages and grow in their jobs. Lastly, my Republican colleagues and I voted to pass the Keystone XL Pipeline Act, estimated to create over 42,000 new jobs, lower energy costs at home, and decrease our country’s dependency on foreign oil produced by enemy states.

While the employment numbers are not nearly where we want them to be, we remain optimistic that our common sense solutions will put us on the right path towards a healthy economy in the years to come. If those struggling the most have an opportunity to rise in our country, it means we have successfully preserved the promise of our great nation for all Americans. It’s the new Republican Congress’ policies that will make this a reality.