Lafayette Fire Chief Gerry Morrell, left, photographs model Shelby Schultz, right, sitting on a Indian motorcycle in front of the Coca-Cola mural discovered during recent demolition at the La Familia building in Lafayette. Police officer Robert Howard, a photographer like Morrell, arranged for the vintage photo shoot. The mural, which is due to be removed and preserved, was uncovered for a few hours Monday to allow residents to take photos of it. ( Mark Leffingwell / Staff Photographer )

If you go What: Lafayette City Council meeting When: 6:30 p.m. Tuesday Where: City Hall, 1290 S. Public Road More info: cityoflafayette.com

CORRECTION: The original story incorrectly identified the material on which the mural is painted.

Following the discovery of a more than 50-year-old Coca-Cola advertising mural in June, Lafayette's Historic Preservation Board aims to expand city landmarking criteria and demolition review process to protect historic properties and artifacts.

On Tuesday the historic preservation board will ask the City Council for the green light to halt demolition if new historic features emerge.

The proposal is based on similar previsions at the federal level, said Paul Rayl, Senior Planner and Historic Preservation Board Liaison.

"If you find dinosaur bones the federal government can put a stop or stay on demolition they can get in there and take a look," Rayl said. "I don't think we're going to find dinosaur bones in Lafayette, but it could still be a useful tool for us in the future."

The city doesn't currently have the authority to stop work on private property for historical discoveries, such as the Coca-Cola mural uncovered during demolition of the former La Familia building at 201 N. Public Road.

The property's owners, Vhim Rai and Kamala Ghimire Rai, and architect Erik Hartronft voluntarily stopped work to allow the city to move the mural to the firehouse, where it is protected from weather, while discussions were held about a permanent location.

City spokeswoman Debbie Wilmot said the proposal has been in the works for a couple of years and isn't a reaction to the mural, but it illustrates the need for a policy.

Sally Martin, a Lafayette resident who launched an ad hoc group advising the mural preservation efforts, said members will be scouting possible locations for the mural this weekend to bring to council at a future meeting.

The size of the 14-foot by 26-foot mural, which is painted on a wood wall, is making finding a suitable location difficult, Martin said.

City Council will also consider extending city landmarking criteria by adopting some national standards recognizing the significance of archaeological deposits, building materials and background information on a structure.

Under the extended conditions, a home built by Lafayette's founder Mary Miller would be considered during the landmarking process, Rayl said. Currently, that background is not grounds for landmarking, he said.

"It will primarily be property owners utilizing those tools to support their request," Rayl said. "They're just additional tools to look at when considering a local designation."

Whitney Bryen: 303-473-1113, wbryen@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/soonerreporter