Both candidates have flaws, but Gov. Scott Walker has put us on the right track.

Gov. Scott Walker is overseeing a growing economy and addressing important workforce development issues. (Photo: Benny Sieu, AP)

About those 250,000 jobs. In his 2010 campaign, Gov. Scott Walker was absolutely explicit that they would be the central feature of his re-election campaign. Voters should stick the promise to the refrigerator and hold him accountable for it this year.

Well, the governor did not oversee the creation of 250,000 private-sector jobs, but rather around 102,000. That's clear forward progress, but it still amounts to, depending on your partisan loyalties, either a promise broken or an ambitious goal the state fell short of accomplishing.

Either way, it is a significant issue, possibly the significant issue, in Walker's re-election campaign. Because beneath the surface promise is the big question about the state's economy. Wisconsin's economic growth has been sluggish through the last four years, though September appears to have been a good month and there is no question that we have come a long way since the depths of the Great Recession. A number of things about Wisconsin's economic performance are not in the direct control of any governor: the state's manufacturing base and the population's education level, the manufacturing base's dependence on housing growth and, especially, the overall direction of the national economy.

There are specific policies of Walker's that have likely hampered economic growth — the decision to turn down federal funds to expand Medicaid, austerity cuts to the state budget and public employee pay. But here is the fundamental fact: Today, the state's economy is growing. Unemployment is down and labor force participation rates are up. And through job training investments such as the package of initiatives known as Wisconsin Fast Forward, state policies promoted by Walker are now helping Wisconsin to grow and continue to move forward.

To her credit, Walker's Democratic opponent, Mary Burke, has focused on pragmatic initiatives and her own business experience rather than on a broad, recall-like project of repealing Walker initiatives. But Burke's campaign has been uncreative and she has not offered enough in the way of a vision for Wisconsin's future. She puts forward some solid proposals; she is qualified for the job by her public service and private-sector experience. But she does not articulate enough of a positive vision separate from Walker.

Our Editorial Board discussion revealed our discomfort with both candidates. The list of things we disagree with Walker about is considerable: Common Core implementation (we're for it; he has called for it to be ended), voter ID (it's unnecessary and potentially harmful), Medicaid expansion. And in Walker's interviews and public statements, it is hard to avoid a sense that he is not always being straightforward with the public. All of these things are problems for us.

But while the election is being treated by many voters as a referendum on Walker, it isn't. And Burke has serious problems as a candidate, too. Neither of her signature issues, Medicaid expansion and a minimum wage hike, are likely to pass with the Republican-held Legislature that most predict Wisconsin will retain. Her plans to deal with a possible looming deficit include the promise to review the budget "line by line," a political cliche because it sounds serious but does not convey any actual information. And the areas where a Gov. Burke would seem likely to be able to successfully work with the Legislature are on things such as job training and policies to address the "skills gap" between the state's economy and its workforce. And these are the specific areas that have already seen some fruitful advances under Walker.

Both politicians in this race face a gap between what they say and what they can do. Like it or not, Walker has demonstrated that he can advance an agenda, and recent job growth shows Wisconsin to be on the right track. We endorse Walker for a second term.

Editorial: Why we (still) endorse candidates

Watch:Get informed: Find video of local candidates here

Editor's note: The byline of this piece has been updated. It is an endorsement of the Gannett Central Wisconsin Media Editorial Board. An earlier version read "Gannett Wisconsin Media Editorial Board." We regret the error.

Read or Share this story: http://wdhne.ws/1wsM4hI