A new law in Mississippi is putting the brakes on DUI offenders.

Ignition interlock devices are about the size of a cell phone. Designated drivers typically take your keys after you've been drinking. These devices will stop DUI offenders from cranking up, even if no one's around.

Jackson Communications co-owner Jay Cole is demonstrating what will become the norm for DUI offenders who want to keep driving. The handheld device is sensitive. It won't give you a blood alcohol reading, just a pass or fail. If folks think they'll be sneaky and get a friend's help, the system is set up to catch you on camera.

"Basically just takes a picture of what's behind the steering wheel that way if someone were to have their friend blowing it then it's going to take a picture of a blue one," Cole explains. "It's going to be considered a temper when it's downloaded."

Co-owner Bill Roberts says the technology also doesn't let you get away with failed attempts.

"If you're drinking, obviously the cars not going to start if you're not drinking and start," Roberts points out. "And every 30 days you're coming in for calibration so there's a very good data trail of what's going on."

Lawmakers are hoping that these added steps of having to use one of these devices before you can ever get the car started, then passing the test, will deter folks from ever even getting behind the wheel after they've had a drink. Representative Andy Gipson pushed for the changes.

"First time offenders can actually have the record absolved if they will agree to this interlock program, if the judge will allow it," Rep. Gipson explains.

Gipson looks at the law as a way to keep the public safe on the roads.

"Under the old law, there was an automatic suspension," Gipson adds. "People were continuing to drive and drive drunk."

DUI offenders will be responsible for paying for these devices if the judge orders it. There are locations around the state where offenders can have these devices installed and checked.