Topics: aol_on, Barack Obama, Editor's Picks, Elections 2016, Iowa, Pastor Rafael Cruz, Race, Religion, Ted Cruz, News

RealClearPolitics.com has Donald Trump still leading in national polling, followed by Dr. Ben Carson in second place, and Carly Florina in third. Ted Cruz is tied for fourth with Marco Rubio. While we will learn more about the strength and weaknesses of these candidates as the campaign progresses, one of them has a formidable asset in conservative circles all others lack.

Pastor Rafael Cruz, father of Ted Cruz, is a conservative, evangelical force to be reckoned with. At least that’s how it looks from my seat in the front row of the first-in-the-nation caucus state of Iowa.

I sat at a corner table when the senior Cruz spoke recently to a standing room only crowd of about 60 people at a coffee shop in Knoxville, Iowa, population 7,200 (more or less). My guess is that all were Republicans, and most, if not all, are Christians in a world where they see Christian influence waning, if not under attack. Historic and current global persecution of Christians is part of their intellectual DNA, and they take this persecution personally, despite the fact that Christians in the United States are arguably the most privileged religious group in the history of the planet.

All were white, and middle- and lower-middle-class economically. Perhaps a quarter of adults in the audience — both men and women — are veterans. Most would tell you they want less government, less meddling in their lives from Washington, D.C., and from the statehouse in Des Moines. They believe Washington has created a dependent class that is taking money from their pockets, and bleeding Americans of the will to work. They see economic reality in stereotypes; e.g., Democrats as spendthrifts and Republicans as fiscally responsible, despite lots of historical evidence to the contrary.

While most will admit privately the presidency of George W. Bush was a failure, the ideology of being conservative is bone deep. Obama is weak on terrorism and defense, Obamacare is socialism, and the world is going to hell because of liberals. Many of the folks in the audience come from humble beginnings, pulled themselves up by their clichéd bootstraps, and see themselves as successes because of the opportunities our country offered for their determination, their hard work, their family, and their faith. Their news filter is Fox News, although they might tune to MSNBC once in a while for laughs.

Cruz has instant credibility in this world, and during his speech he made them part of a compelling story where he, the audience, and his son Ted were partners on a shared journey where together they could save America from the abyss.

Born in Cuba in 1939, the 79-year-old Cruz has a story that reaffirms their own world view. He suffered beatings, torture, and imprisonment for his participation in the revolt against Cuban dictator Fulgencio Batista. He fought for Fidel Castro, and became disillusioned when he learned Castro was a communist. In 1957, at age 18, he fled Cuba with $100 sewed into his underwear to enroll as a student at the University of Texas. He received his degree in math and became a U.S. citizen in 2005.

His origin story and personal epiphany about Castro was the starting point of his speech to the crowd. And what a speech. It began quietly, and slowly raised the audience’s passion until he received a standing ovation at the end. Like some of the more effective church services I have attended, it was punctuated by “amens,” “yeahs,” “that’s right,” and other exultations by the audience. The main themes? There were two. To borrow a phrase from Hunter Thompson — Fear and loathing.

To Cruz, there are many things to fear, and many people to loathe. And he was masterful at getting us to make the connection, and used thoughtful and well-researched historical anecdotes punctuated with Bible verses, hyperbole, and passionate exaggeration sprinkled with the truth to make his points.

He began with a reference to a charismatic leader from his youth, who spoke of hope and change and who appealed to the younger Cuban generation, only to eventually betray them and their country. He repeated the phrase “hope and change” so often I could see the iconic 2008 Obama “Hope” poster transformed in my mind’s eye to an image where Obama’s portrait was replaced with one of a cigar smoking Castro.

Equating Obama and Castro drew applause from the audience—it doesn’t matter that Castro’s actual slogan and motto of the Cuban Revolution was Patria o Muerte (Homeland or Death), as it set the stage for not only fearing Obama but also loathing him as much as one might a communist dictator.

And why not, as Cruz believes that Obama is a communist who wants to turn our nation into a communist one? There is plenty of fear and loathing for Hillary Clinton as well, and here I’m going to quote Cruz directly.

“Our country’s on the edge of a precipice. If Hillary Clinton becomes president in 2016 you can kiss this country goodbye. This country cannot survive another four years, let alone eight of these failed economic policies of this failed Obama administration. We have had the most lawless administration in the history of this country. We have an administration that tramples on the Constitution, tramples on the Declaration, tramples on the separation of powers, tramples on the rule of law, and basically is destroying this country at an accelerated pace. And I will tell you what, Hillary is no better than Obama. Hillary is a Saul Alinsky follower just like Obama. Read Alinsky’s rules for radicals and the Communist Manifesto, they look identical. Alinsky was a communist and his teachings are marxist…They are trying to take this country down the same road.”

Cruz regularly reminded his audience that he and they are victims. To Cruz, and to many in his audience, Christianity is under attack from a variety of fronts.

“We have a lot of religious persecution in America. More specifically, we have a lot of Christian persecution in America.”

Even when Obama talks about his support for the freedom of worship, Cruz sees it as a repudiation of Christianity.

“The Obama administration has been talking about freedom of worship. Most of us don’t see anything wrong with that. [But] freedom of worship and freedom of religion are two entirely different things. Freedom of worship is what you do in a house of worship. In all communist countries you have freedom of worship…Obama is trying to restrict our freedom of expression in the marketplace. That is not America. America is the only country on the face of the earth that was founded on the word of God. Don’t believe this garbage from Obama that this is not a Christian nation, this country was founded by Christians; was founded as a Christian nation.”

Cruz’s reference to Obama saying this is not a Christian nation probably refers to a 2006 speech Obama gave regarding the plurality of religions in America. Many other Christians have also interpreted Obama’s remarks in a manner similar to Cruz.