The Connect for Health Colorado board of directors agreed to spend an additional $322,000 through the end of February to try to sign up applicants stalled in the state health insurance exchange’s online enrollment system.

Interim chief executive Gary Drews said the emergency expenditure was needed to resolve about 1,900 outstanding reports of problems — down from as many as 4,800.

However, Drews said, the numbers didn’t necessarily represent individuals. Some people had called or e-mailed repeatedly while trying to enroll, and each person could have generated several problem tickets.

“We don’t know what that means in terms of people,” Drews said.

Part of the problem is that the system is having trouble dealing with each family’s complicated circumstances.

“To say I’m disappointed is an understatement,” said board member Nathan Wilkes, founder and principal consultant of Headstorms Inc.

“It confounds me. How did we build a system that couldn’t handle changes like this,” Wilkes said. “I’d like to understand how we got here.”

Staff indicated it’s likely not the technology vendors’ fault the system hasn’t worked smoothly. Implementation manager Adele Work said it appeared contractor CGI wasn’t given a full list of system requirements. A full review is planned.

Last year was the first year for state health insurance exchanges under the Affordable Care Act, and some Coloradans enrolling through the marketplace experienced bumps and delays. This year, Connect for Health officials promised a more user-friendly and streamlined website — offering one portal for consumers to determine if they were eligible for Medicaid or for tax credits toward private insurance. Yet issues multiplied.

The exchange already had paid about $6 million for its part of the upgrade, with state Medicaid officials overseeing development of the new interface between programs. Drews said the exchange didn’t know how much it ultimately would cost to clean up the enrollment process.

The exchange, funded by federal grants, private grants and program revenues such as fees charged insurance carriers, must become financially self-sustaining as the grants run out, but continuing large outlays for technology could threaten that. About $41 million was budgeted for technology in 2014. And the 2015 technology budget for maintenance, support and upgrades is $28 million.

Open enrollment for 2015 health plans, which began Nov. 15, has seen more than 121,000 individuals sign up for medical and/or dental plans. Of those, about 63,000 were automatic renewals and didn’t require active enrollment. Others actively shopped before enrolling in different plans or re-enrolling in their existing plans.

About 23,000 people are new customers. The problems were concentrated among those seeking financial assistance — either through tax credits available on the exchange or through Medicaid eligibility. They account for a little more than half of enrollees.

More than 20 system features or glitches prevented many applicants from completing the process.

“We do need to get people moved through the system right now,” Drews said in asking for the $322,000. He said it wouldn’t provide the long-term system fixes needed, but it would provide a workaround for those currently stuck.

“It doesn’t appear we have a choice. This is about service to members,” said board member Eric Grossman, chief executive of NextHealth Technologies.

Board member and state insurance commissioner Marguerite Salazar said the enrollment deadline of Feb. 15 was bearing down.

“There are real people out there who are very afraid they are not going to have coverage when enrollment is over,” Salazar said.

Work said staff focus hasn’t been on assessing blame, but on getting people enrolled.

Dr. Mike Fallon, with the North Colorado Medical Center, said the questions weren’t about assigning fault.

“It’s not blame,” Fallon said. “It’s: ‘Let’s get what we paid for.’ We paid somebody to do this.”

Work disagreed it likely was a contractor failure.

“It’s not a vendor problem. It’s a specificity of requirements problem,” Work said. “Our (specified) requirements weren’t enough to build the interface (between Medicaid and the state’s insurance exchange).”

Electa Draper: 303-954-1276, edraper@denverpost.com or twitter.com/electadraper