The Eye

Demi Lovato Reveals A Painful Arm Injury Prior To Her Demi Lovato: World Tour Concert

SIGN UP TO RECEIVE THE LATEST NEWS FROM FASHION&STYLE

(Photo : Instagram) Demi Lovato posted this photo just hours prior to her concert in San Antonio

Demi Lovato may be making the rounds on her world tour, however, this latest injury may slow down the "Really Don't Care" singer.



Daily Mail reports that the 22-year-old pop star shared what looked to be a painful injury to her arm via Twitter on Friday just hours prior to her Demi Lovato: World Tour concert in San Antonio, Texas.



Lovato snapped the photo from the chin down, keeping the focus on her right arm in a brace supported by a sling strapped around her shoulder.



Despite what looked to be a major setback for the upcoming show, Lovato remained in good spirits: "Looks like I won't be playing guitar, piano OR drums tonight. San Antonio...Why did you have to go and make me fall so hard for you?!! ??????? #demiworldtour ?????"



Although she would not be playing instruments, Lovato indicated that the show would go on despite her injury.



The sprain in her arm isn't Lovato's first mishap of the summer.



In July, the singer shared with her followers that she had injured her ankle.



"Umm soooo....I guess when I went running and twisted my ankle I actually did hurt myself....AGAIN. Hahaha," she wrote.







In other news for Lovato's highly anticipated tour, the singer announced that she hired activist and public speaker Spencer West to share "his empowering message" before she takes the stage each night in favor of having a musical act as her opener.

Lovato announced the news on her Facebook page on Friday, writing, "Spencer West is not only a really great friend of mine, but a huge inspirational speaker. After I spent some time around him and realized what an amazing person he is and how incredible he is at speaking, I decided to bring him on tour."



SIGN UP TO RECEIVE THE LATEST NEWS FROM FASHION&STYLE

© 2015 Fashion & Style.com All rights reserved. Do not reproduce without permission.