Breaking news. Broncos quarterback Peyton Manning can’t keep defenses honest anymore, so Baltimore will load the box, impacting C.J. Anderson’s running ability. Prediction: Baltimore 21, Denver 20.

Braxton, nervous about the season opener

Kiz: O ye of little faith. The game that should make Broncos Country nervous is Thursday at Kansas City, not the home opener at Sports Authority Field at Mile High, where a pumped-up crowd should be worth at least three points to Denver. Yes, there’s legitimate concern Baltimore pass-rushing specialist Elvis Dumervil will return to town and make himself at home in the Broncos’ backfield. With that in mind, here’s what I’d like to see: On the first snap of Denver’s first offensive possession, Manning lines up under center, fakes a handoff to Anderson and throws deep to Emmanuel Sanders. The Broncos will win 23-17.

Good to go. You have to feel pretty good about this football team if Manning is the weakest link. Go, Broncos!

WATCH: Will we see more of a Peyton Manning offense on Sunday?

Colleen, Casper

Kiz: While Manning is everybody’s buddy in television commercials, there’s a hard edge to him on the football field. Or have you forgotten how he told KOA radio that critics could “shove it where the sun don’t shine” after the Broncos scored 51 points on a frigid afternoon in 2013? I’ve suggested Manning is showing signs of irreversible decline inevitable with age. And I have not been alone. Will the old dog takes a bite out of the Ravens to prove doubters wrong?

Never say never. I hate to inform you of the truth, but you are very naive and somebody has to wake you up from your never-never land dream. Gary Kubiak can’t coach his way out of a paper bag. The Broncos will have a losing record under him, probably finishing 6-10.

Peter, Denver

Kiz: Never-never land? Isn’t that what folks who dream of finding a nice, two-bedroom apartment for under $2,000 per month call LoHi? During eight seasons as the head coach with Houston, Kubiak’s record was 61-64. Very mediocre. Indeed. But Kubiak also turned quarterback Matt Schaub into a two-time Pro Bowler. I’d say that was more miraculous than teaching a boy how to fly.

Serena slammed. And today’s parting shot is a rebuke of my praise of tennis star Serena Williams for winning 33 straight Grand Slam matches before being upset by Roberta Vinci in the U.S. Open semifinals.

Serena isn’t even close to great. But most of the rest of the field is so atrocious, she appears to be better than she is. Calendar-year Grand Slam? Over. LOL.

Sonny, admires Steffi Graf

Mark Kiszla: mkiszla@denverpost.com or twitter.com/markkiszla