White Township resident Phil Mitchell used to drive more than an hour each way for his wife to receive medical care for her Parkinson's disease.

But after five years, the regular trips to Robert Wood Johnson University Hospital in New Brunswick, N.J., had become too much for both of them, especially for Lois Mitchell, who now uses a wheelchair. The Mitchells next went to a doctor in Phillipsburg, but they didn't care for the doctor's service and the regular car trips were still taxing.

Phil Mitchell sought recommendations from his Brookfield neighbors, who pointed him in the direction of Dr. John Fritz in Belvidere. The office serves Brookfield's assisted-living facility, The Chelsea, and may be able to visit you, as well, Mitchell was told.

In July 2012, office nurse practitioner Laura Melton paid a house call to the Mitchells and has continued to provide home visits to Lois Mitchell, 72, whenever they're needed. Phil Mitchell says she's saved both their lives -- his figuratively and his wife's literally.

"It's been so emotionally draining -- at times I just want to throw my hands up," Phil Mitchell, 74, said. "If it wasn't for her, my wife wouldn't be here right now."

Doctor house calls sound like a thing of the past, or at least a thing of rural America. But for Melton and Fritz, it's a significant part of their practice.

Fritz started performing house calls when he worked at Warren Hills Family Practice in Washington Township, N.J. Another doctor there provided on-site care for a residential-care facility in Glen Gardner but had grown tired of the practice so Fritz took over.

Fritz continued serving the Glen Gardner facility when he opened Pequest Family Practice in 2000 and the office's home visit service has only grown. In addition to The Chelsea and the Glen Gardner facility, the office also serves two other residential-care facilities in Harmony Township and Flemington as well as performs house calls throughout Warren County, northern Hunterdon County and northeast Northampton County.

Fritz and Melton feel house calls are an essential part of their office's services, even if it's not the most lucrative. Time spent in the car is time that's not billable.

They fear they may have to end the practice if they join a hospital network, a regular pressure for independent doctors' offices. Hospital networks are interested in purchasing successful practices, and it's tempting as insurance and Medicare and Medicaid billing becomes more complicated, Fritz said.

"Most of these hospitals buying up these outpatient offices aren't going to offer the (home) services," Melton said. "It's not efficient."

Melton and Fritz try to make their house calls as efficient as they can by seeing multiple patients in a row at the residential-care facilities. But it's still far from lucrative, and servicing the facilities isn't a desirable business, they say. The facilities in Glen Gardner, Harmony and Flemington have significant populations that came from Hagedorn and other closed psychiatric hospitals.

"It's such an underserved population -- no one else is doing this," Melton said.

They go on individual house calls to longtime patients who are now housebound or others who hear about their home visit policy, Fritz said. He recently visited a Phillipsburg woman housebound by a stroke who hadn't had medical care in a year.

"When you do a house call, people are grateful. Otherwise, they'd have no access," Fritz said.

Although there's nothing financially efficient about the individual house calls, Fritz and Melton say, it's still important to do them, especially because so many other doctors don't. Some doctors will perform house calls for longtime patients but few do it for new patients, they said. Melton, who lives in Lower Saucon Township, said she knows of a few Northampton County doctors performing house calls but essentially none in Warren County.

"There's just been a need," Fritz said. "When you do one and someone finds out, others ask."

Medicare reimburses for house calls for housebound patients but standard insurance does not, they said. As a doctor and nurse practitioner, they're able to provide many more services than visiting nurses, including writing prescriptions, inserting catheters and drawing blood.

Fritz and Melton believe insurance should cover house calls and that hospital networks should perform them because they can reduce inpatient hospital re-admissions, a major initiative under the Affordable Care Act.

"There is this push for outpatient care but most of these networks stop at the outpatient office visits," Melton said. "There are so many people who need this service."

The Mitchells are among those people, Phil Mitchell said. He said he can't imagine caring for his wife without the home visits from Melton, who successfully suggested a feeding tube to improve his wife's nutrition and has helped cure her of bedsores and a urinary tract infection.

"If anybody questions if we need Laura, I need her more than I need anybody," Mitchell said.