Jeb Bush (Credit: Bloomberg / Max Whittaker) QUOTE 1: "I was opposed to the decision, but we -- you can't just say, 'Well, they -- gays can't get married now.' But this woman (Kim Davis), there should be some accommodation for her conscience."

QUOTE 2: "Under Hillary Clinton, and Barack Obama, we have seen a weakness that now creates huge problems for the next president of the United States. So I'll have a team that will be following the doctrine I set up, and it will be peace through strength."

QUOTE 3: "As it relates to my brother, there's one thing I know for sure. He kept us safe."

QUOTE 4: "So 40 years ago I smoked marijuana, and I admit it. I'm sure that other people might have done it and may not want to say it in front of 25 million people. My mom's not happy that I just did."

QUOTE 5: Bush said his Secret Service code name would be "Eveready. It's very high-energy, Donald."

Carly Fiorina (Credit: AP / Mark J. Terrill) QUOTE 1: "I am prepared to lead the resurgence of this great nation."

QUOTE 2: "Having met Vladimir Putin, I wouldn't talk to him at all. We've talked way too much to him."

QUOTE 3: Asked about Trump's previous comments about her, she said, "I think women all over this country heard very clearly what Mr. Trump said."

QUOTE 4: "I very much hope I am the only person on this stage who can say this, but I know there are millions of Americans out there who will say the same thing. My husband Frank and I buried a child to drug addiction. So, we must invest more in the treatment of drugs."

QUOTE 5: "The marijuana that kids are smoking today is not the same as the marijuana that Jeb Bush smoked 40 years ago. Sorry, Barbara."

Donald Trump (Credit: AP / Mark J. Terrill) QUOTE 1: "What I am far and away greater than an entertainer is a businessman, and that's the kind of mindset this country needs to bring it back, because we owe $19 trillion right now, $19 trillion, and you need this kind of thinking to bring our country back."

QUOTE 2: "And believe me my temperament is very good, very calm, but we will be respected outside of this country. We are not respected now."

QUOTE 3: On Kentucky Sen. Rand Paul: "I never attacked him on his look, and believe me, there's plenty of subject matter right there."

QUOTE 4: On former New York Gov. George Pataki: "He wouldn't be elected dog-catcher right now. I heard what he had to say."

QUOTE 5: On Fiorina: "I think she's got a beautiful face and I think she's a beautiful woman."

QUOTE 6: "Wait a minute, Carly, wait -- I'll let you speak."

QUOTE 7: "I'm a very militaristic person, but you have to know when to use the military. I'm the only person up here that fought against going into Iraq."

QUOTE 8: Said his Secret Service code name would be "Humble."

ADVERTISEMENT ADVERTISE HERE

Rand Paul (Credit: Bloomberg / Patrick T. Fallon) QUOTE 1: On the Iran deal: "Should we cut up the agreement immediately? That's absurd. Wouldn't you want to know if they complied?"

QUOTE 2: On Syria: "Sometimes both sides of the civil war are evil, and sometimes intervention sometimes makes us less safe. This is real the debate we have to have in the Middle East. Every time we have toppled a secular dictator, we have gotten chaos, the rise of radical Islam, and we're more at risk."

QUOTE 3: On birthright citizenship: "Well, I hate to say it, but Donald Trump has a bit of a point here."

QUOTE 4: "There will always be a Bush or Clinton for ya if you want to go back to war in Iraq." The so-called "boots on the ground," Paul said, need to be people who live there. "Why are we always the world's patsies that we need to go over there and fight their wars for them?"

Marco Rubio (Credit: AP / Mark J. Terrill) QUOTE 1: "He's (Putin's) exploiting a vacuum that this administration has left in the Middle East."

QUOTE 2: "There is a lunatic in North Korea with dozens of nuclear weapons and a long-range rocket that can already hit the very place in which we stand tonight."

QUOTE 3: "We are eviscerating our military, and we have a president that is more respectful to the ayatollah in Iran than he is to the prime minister of Israel."

QUOTE 4: After Trump criticized his voting record in the Senate: "And you're right I have missed some votes, and I'll tell you why Mr. Trump. Because in my years in the Senate, I've figured out very quickly that the political establishment in Washington, D.C., in both political parties is completely out of touch with the lives of our people."

Ben Carson (Credit: EPA / Max Whittaker) QUOTE 1: "I am extraordinarily concerned about the direction of this country, the divisiveness that's going on, the fiscal irresponsibility, the failure to take a leadership position in the world."

QUOTE 2:"I suggested to President Bush that he not go to war. OK. So I just want that on the record."

QUOTE 3: "We're talking about global jihadists who actually want to destroy us. They are an existential threat to our nation."

QUOTE 4: "You know, I was a radical Democrat before I started listening to Ronald Reagan. And he didn't sound like what they said Republicans were. He sounded logical."

Chris Christie (Credit: TNS / Los Angeles Times / Robert Gauthier) QUOTE 1: To Fiorina and Trump: "The fact is that we don't want to hear about your careers, back and forth and volleying back and forth about who did well and who did poorly. You're both successful people, congratulations. You know who's not successful? The middle class in this country who's getting plowed over by Barack Obama and Hillary Clinton."

QUOTE 2: "I agree with Marco. We shouldn't be destroying our economy in order to chase some wild left-wing idea that somehow us by ourselves is going to fix the climate. We can contribute to that and be economically sound."

QUOTE 3: On the woman he'd want on the $10 bill: " I think the Adams family has been shorted in the currency business. Our country wouldn't be here without John Adams, and he would not have been able to do it without Abigal Adams, so I'd put Abigail Adams on the bill."

QUOTE 4: "A Christie presidency won't be about me. It will be about you."

Mike Huckabee (Credit: TNS / Los Angeles Times / Robert Gauthier) QUOTE 1: "I'm here to say that I think we are, in fact, the A-Team."

QUOTE 2: I think we ought to get rid of all the taxes on people who produce," he said, advocating a "fair tax."

QUOTE 3: After Carson momentarily referred to him as a doctor, Huckabee quipped, "You don't want me operating on you, I can assure you of that."

QUOTE 4: On his Secret Service code name: "I'd go with Duck Hunter."

ADVERTISEMENT ADVERTISE HERE

John Kasich (Credit: AP / Mark J. Terrill) QUOTE 1: "By the way I think I actually flew on this plane with Ronald Reagan when I was a congressman, and his goals and mine are pretty much the same."

QUOTE 2: "If I were sitting at home and watching this back and forth, I would be inclined to turn it off."

QUOTE 3: "We believe that we operate better in the world when our allies work with us."

QUOTE 4: "America was never great because we ran America from the top down. America is great because we have run America from the bottom up."

Ted Cruz (Credit: AP / Mark J. Terrill) QUOTE 1: The Texas senator said: "The single biggest national security threat facing America right now is the threat of a nuclear Iran. We've seen six and a half years of President Obama leading from behind. Weakness is provocative, and this Iranian nuclear deal is nothing short of catastrophic."

QUOTE 2: "We need to stop surrendering and start standing for our principles."

QUOTE 3: Cruz said he is "proud to stand for life. These Planned Parenthood videos are horrifying. I would encourage every American to watch the videos. See -- seeing your Planned Parenthood officials callously, heartlessly bartering and selling the body parts of human beings, and then ask yourself, 'are these my values?'"

QUOTE 4: Cruz, a noted critic of the Affordable Care Act, called John Roberts an "amazingly talented lawyer," but said "it was a mistake when he was appointed to the Supreme Court. He's a good enough lawyer that he knows in these Obamacare cases he changed the statute, he changed the law in order to force that failed law on millions of Americans for a political outcome."