With two weeks until the midterm elections and both sides desperate for any help they can get, you’d think some guy named “Ebola” was on the ballot somewhere.

On the left, some want to tie Ebola to everything from Texas Gov. Rick Perry to Republican spending cuts (that the President also pushed for, but never mind). And on the right, it seems some conservatives have forgotten their animus for czar appointments, suddenly demanding more bureaucratic oversight, of all things — and then, when the President capitulates, complaining that the appointment of Ron Klain was too “political.” Huh?

As for the President’s role, Dems are remaining fairly quiet regarding his handling of the situation, which isn’t a great sign. Some in tough elections — like Sen. Kay Hagan in North Carolina and aspiring governor Wendy Davis in Texas — are even breaking with the President and calling for a travel ban to and from affected countries.

Republicans, for their part, are finding creative ways to blame everything from President Obama’s lax border policies to his supposedly nefarious desire to make America more like Africa, as Phyllis Schlafly actually suggested. Ugh.

And Obama is blaming the media for making more of Ebola than it really is. “The Ebola crisis . . . (which) has been the only story here in the United States for the last couple of weeks, is not an outbreak and epidemic here,” he assured donors at a Chicago fund-raiser.

This — and only this — is the President’s problem. Obama is repeatedly the man who cried, “Don’t worry about it.”

While good leaders know that overreacting can foster panic, they also know that underreacting fosters insecurity. And time and time again, Obama underplays developing scandals, crises and failures to create the appearance of control. The result is often the opposite.

Worried about the Affordable Care Act affecting your health care and your bottom line? Don’t be, the cool and collected President assured us. If you like your doctor, you can keep your doctor. If you like your health care plan, you can keep your health care plan. Your insurance premiums will go down, he told us.

Concerned that the IRS, one of the largest and most powerful bureaucracies in the world, is targeting American citizens for their political proclivities? Nonsense. Despite stonewalling by top officials and the disappearance of countless “unrecoverable” emails, Obama insisted there’s “not even a smidgen of corruption.” Nothing to see here.

Anxious about terrorism? Don’t be silly. Al Qaeda has been “decimated,” and ISIS is just Al Qaeda’s “jayvee” team.

Uneasy about the NSA’s data-collection program? What for? Obama proposed reforms that he said “should give the American people greater confidence that their rights are being protected” — even though the ACLU, a left-right coalition of 125 House members and the President’s own review group said they didn’t go far enough.

Shocked that a mentally disturbed, knife-wielding fence-jumper made it all the way into the East Room of the White House? Rest assured the President has “complete confidence” in the Secret Service, despite numerous security breaches over the past couple of years.

Incidentally, at one time or another, Obama has also expressed “complete confidence” in then-Health and Human Services Secretary Kathleen Sebelius, Treasury head Timothy Geithner, Attorney General Eric Holder and VA director Eric Shinseki. That’s hardly an illustrious list, but proof once again that even in the midst of obvious turmoil, Obama remains not just unfazed but alarmingly unfazed.

So media outlets will fill the void left by a shoulder-shrugging President who seems to care less than the average person about these failures, and not surprisingly, this trickles down to voters.

According to Gallup, 1 in 5 Americans are worried about contracting Ebola, despite the President’s confidence, and the disease now ranks among the top 10 issues Americans consider to be the most important.

Journalist Tina Brown explained on MSNBC why she thinks Obama is now under water with female voters in battleground states: “(Women) feel unsafe economically; they’re feeling unsafe with regard to ISIS; they’re feeling unsafe about Ebola. What they’re feeling unsafe about is the government response to different crises.”

The President forgets that, whether people are right or wrong about their fears, politics is perception.

Obama didn’t invent Ebola. He didn’t “bring it here” and he doesn’t “want it here.” But he could act a little more alarmed that it’s here. Someone needs to tell him that when surrounded by wolves, it’s OK, every once in a while, to cry wolf.

Contact Cupp at www.thesecupp.com.