Colorado officials are divided on their opinions about President Barack Obama’s plan to make two years of education at community colleges free.

The plan would allow any student to go to community college without paying, so long as they maintain at least a 2.5 grade-point average and stay on track to graduate. The federal government would provide about 75 percent of the costs, and states would have to commit to cover the rest. The states also would have to show that they are working to improve the quality of that education.

Obama is expected to release an estimate of those costs later this month. The Washington Post quoted an administration official as estimating the cost at about $60 billion over 10 years.

Colorado Lt. Gov. Joe Garcia, also the executive director of the state’s Department of Higher Education, said Friday the plan would support the state’s goals of increasing the number of adults with higher education.

“People often say you don’t need to go to college to get a job. That was true when I graduated. It’s less true now,” Garcia said. “I hope this would get more individuals — not just 18-year-olds, but 38-year-olds — to go to a community college.”

Officials cited a report from Georgetown University that estimates almost 74 percent of jobs in Colorado by 2020 will require more than a high school education.

State Sen. Kent Lambert, R-Colorado Springs, opposes Obama’s plan because of the federal involvement and a lack of student investment and says the need for higher education in today’s workforce might actually be reflecting a failure of the K-12 system.

“The federal government should be getting out of the education role. It is unfortunate that we have to get a lot of our job training out of community colleges,” Lambert said. “But why are we delaying that education until students are 18 to 20 years old? They should be getting that education when they’re in high school.”

Lambert said he is supportive of dual enrollment programs in Colorado that already allow high school students to earn free college credit — often an associate’s degree worth — while in high school.

Enrollment in those programs has been increasing.

According to the Department of Higher Education, there were 26,935 Colorado high school students taking college classes in the 2012-13 school year, which is up from 20,786 in 2010-11.

Nancy McCallin, president of the Community College System, said the Obama plan would provide an opportunity for more people — and one that wouldn’t be possible otherwise.

“We have to be realistic,” McCallin said. “There’s no way the state could afford to do this on its own.”

U.S. Sen. Michael Bennet was not available for comment, but the Democrat released a statement saying the plan aligns to the mission of a bill he is sponsoring that would make it easier for college students to apply for financial aid.

“At a time when other countries are graduating more students from college, we should be focusing our efforts on ensuring that any student that wants to go to college can,” Bennet said.

Garcia said that it’s likely, even under the proposed plan, that Colorado would need to partner with private businesses to raise the necessary matching funds.

Mark Ferrandino, chief financial officer for Denver Public Schools and former state House representative, said if the plan moves forward at the federal level, it would “be silly not to figure out how to raise that money here.”

McCallin said the biggest question remains.

“President Obama views this as a game-changer, and I would absolutely agree,”McCallin said. But she added, “Given the climate in D.C., does anything really have the ability to pass? That is a fundamental question.”

Yesenia Robles: 303-954-1372, yrobles@denverpost.com or twitter.com/yeseniarobles