Republican presidential candidate Donald Trump addresses supporters during a campaign rally at the Greater Columbus Convention Center on November 23, 2015 in Columbus, Ohio. Trump spoke about immigration and Obamacare, among other topics, to around 14,000 supporters at the event. (Photo by Ty Wright/Getty Images)

4822081

The largest Arab-American organization in the U.S. just called for Republican presidential candidate Donald Trump to drop out of the election because of hateful rhetoric.

The American-Arab Anti-Discrimination Committee (ADC) is convinced Trump is responsible for an uptick in attacks against Arab and Muslim Americans. According to ADC, Trump has “spewed hate rhetoric” ever since he started his campaign, leading to an inordinate number of hate crimes.

“Trump is an embarrassment to the American electoral process, the Republican Party, democratic principles and the country,” the ADC’s press release reads. “His words and actions continue to exhibit the worst America has to offer by playing into people’s fears and biases through lies, deception and faulty logic.”

What this means, apparently, is that both the Republican Party and the Republican National Committee need to “distance themselves” from Trump because he’s attracted support from people who know people who are affiliated with supposed hate groups.

“With the enormity of the challenges we face as a nation it is imperative that Trump end his campaign,” ADC President Samer Khalaf says in the press release. “His words have led to violent acts of hate, and it is clear that he is not good for the country. As put by the White House – Trump’s plan to ban Muslims from entering the U.S. disqualifies him from being President. It is time for Trump to do the nation a favor and drop out of the race for the Republican Presidential nomination.”

However, Trump’s plan to ban Muslims does seem constitutional, despite protest from lawmakers like Speaker of the House Paul Ryan and advocacy groups. Even GOP presidential candidate Sen. Marco Rubio , himself a law graduate, complained the proposal is unconstitutional. Two prominent law professors, one in support of the plan and one opposed, say the plan is constitutional. It also happens to court wide favor with nearly two-thirds of Republican primary voters and even a sizable number of Democrats.

Follow Jonah Bennett on Twitter

Send tips to [email protected].

Content created by The Daily Caller News Foundation is available without charge to any eligible news publisher that can provide a large audience. For licensing opportunities of our original content, please contact [email protected].