Beneath the placid surface of the May municipal election in Denver, a political tremor has shaken the city’s establishment.

In key City Council races, voters chose upstart candidates who tend to favor neighborhood stability over development. June runoff elections will force some candidates to reckon with the new power of neighborhood politics. Across the city, diverse neighborhoods are anxious or angry about more dense development, and that suggests a new balance between growth and stability must be struck in the Mile High City.

Denver has been on a pro-growth path under the last five mayors. They pursued mega-projects to chart the city’s comeback after the turbulent 1980s, when the oil crash, real estate meltdown and savings and loan crisis devastated the economy. By investing billions to build Denver International Airport, Union Station and the Central Platte Valley redevelopment, Civic Center projects, museums, libraries, sports arenas and even the Cherry Creek Shopping Center, Denver laid the foundation for the economic benefits and cultural amenities that it now enjoys.

The pro-development consensus that governed and shaped Denver for the last three decades has been shaken, possibly shattered. This consensus was developed in extensive public processes that led to repeated voter approvals of more than $10 billion in investments in projects benefiting Denver: Denver International Airport ($4.9 billion, 1988/1989); Citizens for Denver’s Future ($242 million, 1989); Coors Field ($100 million-plus, 1990); neighborhood and school improvements ($403 million, 1998); Mile High Stadium ($325 million, 1998); FasTracks ($4.7 billion, 2004); Better Denver ($550 million, 2007); and Denver Public Schools ($454 million, 2008, and $466 million, 2012).

These massive public investments were supported and framed by land-use plans and regulations also adopted after thousands of hours of public participation. Blueprint Denver, the city’s framework development plan, was approved in 2002, and an entirely new zoning code was adopted in 2010 after five years of community meetings.

Little development occurred in the years after the new zoning code due to the Great Recession, but the plan was in place, and today we are both the beneficiaries and victims of these plans now that development has returned with a roar. Since the end of the Great Recession, a new phase of development has come at a price to Denver’s neighborhoods, with increased traffic and congestion, expensive rents and parking, and conflicts over more dense development raising neighborhood ire. The flip side of this ire is the remarkable vibrancy of our economy and our cultural, recreational and dining scenes, and the rising home values that have buoyed lucky homeowners’ balance sheets.

City leaders, planners and developers need to take note of the May 5 election results and rebalance their priorities. A look back at one key project that started Denver on a revolutionary new course contains important lessons.

Twenty years ago, Denver opened its rebuilt Central Library, a unique blend of old and new, that launched the city into a new era of great building. The project was a collaboration between Denver architect Brian Klipp and Princeton, N.J.-based Michael Graves, whose sometime playful use of large geometric shapes reignited public interest in design.

As a sign of how little the city recognizes this significant turning point in its history, neither the 20th anniversary of the library nor Graves’ death in March after a long struggle with a debilitating spinal infection got much official notice.

However, in a conversation about the process that led to one of Denver’s great buildings, Klipp recalled the huge risk that then-Mayor Federico Peña and his planning director, the late Jennifer Moulton, took by including money for design into the proposed bond issue. For most of the last century, “Denver had built mainly utilitarian public buildings,” Klipp recalled. “It was a lingering residue of our ‘cowtown’ heritage.”

The challenge of the Denver Public Library project was that it required the re-use of the classic Burnham Hoyt Central Library, a challenge to blend the old with something new. The way to get there was an extended public process. Klipp recalls that the design competition forums, held at the Denver Convention Center, attracted “hundreds of people” and led to a process of “critique and rediscovery.”

The library project, he said, “was a critical moment for Denver. We had a real sense of wanting to emerge from our cowtown-era roots.”

At roughly the same time, the soaring “teepees” of the new Denver International Airport, designed by Denver architect Curt Fentress, were taking shape. Problems with the baggage system triggered overruns and delays caused their own political crisis. Klipp, who now heads the Denver office of GKKWorks, recalls getting phone calls from then-Mayor Wellington Webb. The message: “Tell me I’ve got one project that’s on time and under budget.”

Along with public process and the pressure to keep things on track came the relentless energy of Graves, who would storm into Denver the night before a major deadline and refuse to buckle under pressure. “We’ve still got 14 hours, why are you worried?” Graves would tell the Klipp design team.

With the hole for the foundation dug and footings for the library addition already poured, Graves phoned Klipp after a moment of epiphany. “I’ve got a new design for the top of the drum,” he said. And shortly after he sent over the drawings for the copper platform that’s now an iconic part of the building’s signature.

“The chemistry was instant,” Klipp recalled about meeting Graves after a Boston-based firm dropped out of the project. “He was very pleasant, very brilliant and very academic,” he said. “And he was a relentless designer.”

Citizen activism spurred the library competition and the success of the library process then shaped the design of Coors Field, whose original concept was rejected as too utilitarian. Only a subsequent design acknowledged the brick warehouses of LoDo and its architectural gems, including Union Station.

The original design for Coors Field “was dead on arrival,” Klipp said. “Richness, complexity and sense that we care about the place” came to define Denver as it emerged in the 1990s. “You need a good process. You need public scrutiny. And process is a public event, especially for larger projects,” Klipp said.

More recent experience, such as the unfortunate addition of the Denver International Airport hotel — derided as a giant butterfly wing or outsized mustache — suggest that less civic participation leads to lesser quality. “I think it’s terrible,” offered Klipp.

With projects such as the redevelopment of the National Western Stock Show on the horizon, the city may get a second chance to rediscover citizen engagement and build a project that mixes broad community support with strong design. It might even find that recapturing the city’s long-suppressed cowtown spirit could spur some excitement.

“The big idea that’s gotten lost is a sense of continuity,” said Klipp. The current pushback over construction and congestion is a reminder of “how far removed the city is from the process that led to the DPL project.”

Twenty years ago, with the city on the economic ropes, there was a lot more concern about getting things right because there was a lot more at stake. But the rewards of process and creativity are long-lasting. Graves, Klipp recalled, was a tough task-master. “He got upset if we weren’t willing to push ourselves.”

What the voters seem to be saying is that they want our leaders to push themselves just a bit harder, too. And, based on Denver’s history of citizen participation in shaping the direction of the city, the voters want a seat at the table again.

Henry Dubroff is an entrepreneur who splits his time between California and Colorado. John J. Huggins is an entrepreneur and investor in Denver. Check out their occasional series, “What ails America’s economy,” here.

To send a letter to the editor about this article, submit online or check out our guidelines for how to submit by e-mail or mail.