Letters to the editor: letters@tennessean.com (Photo: The Tennessean.com)

Haslam lacks leadership

In 2014 Gov. Bill Haslam was given a C grade by the NRA. I’m sure after this week he’s been given an A plus.

Employers did not want their employees to bring guns to the workplace, but Bill said it was OK to have guns in their trunks. Citizens did not want guns in their parks, but Bill said that wasn’t a problem.

Now he has let a bill pass that will allow employees on Tennessee college campuses to carry guns. The governor of Georgia vetoed this bill the same day that our governor let it pass into law without signing it. How spineless.

As governor, he is to provide leadership and work for the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of this state.

Bill didn’t want to go along with Obamacare so he took his time and came up with his own plan. He presented it to the legislators and then walked away. He has never tried to work with them to endorse the plan.

Poor, sick people are not those that he or our legislators care about.

Bill had to get into the business of discrimination by signing the recent therapist bill that tells therapists it is OK to discriminate. The American Counseling Association was against this bill and was to hold its annual conference in Nashville in 2017. Let’s hope they cancel this event. I feel badly for businesses if they do this but it needs to be done as money is the only thing that matters to a billionaire like Bill Haslam.

Debra Obroc, Hendersonville 37075

Some MNPS director candidates lack qualifications

Of the six candidates originally presented to the school board for the director of Metro schools, three of the candidates do not have a doctorate and one does not even have a master’s degree.

The salary for this position is in the vicinity of a quarter of a million dollars per year. The mayor of Nashville makes $180,000 a year.

For such a lofty payout, do we not deserve a more qualified choice? The man charged with conducting the search and presenting the final list of candidates was brought to tears when asked how he felt about his choices. My guess is that his tears were those of joy because he is getting compensated at least $50,000 for his work.

For this process to have taken as long as it has, most would wonder why half of the choices for such an important position do not have the required educational background necessary to make this hire a competent one.

Randie Arnold, Nashville 37221

Parenting key to raising nonviolent youth

When I began to practice adolescent medicine I saw myself as teenagers passed from delinquents to law-abiding adults.

It didn’t take long to learn that most teens are well rooted in their value system and while changing behavior and attitudes at that age are possible, it is difficult at best.

The time to start parenting teenagers starts when they are born if not before.

Kids of all ages need two parents, so I suggest that every pregnant, single woman find a man of character — her brother, father, uncle, other relative, or neighbor — who can be present for the life of her child. Together they become guides that lead the child to being a person of character.

When parents of character love and respect each other, their families, and their community, the children will show that same love and respect and become character-filled, non-violent youth and adults.

The secret is to be the person you want your child to become. And that doesn’t even cost any money.

Parnell Donahue, Brentwood 37027

Mending fences; building walls (Photo: Cagle Cartoons)

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/275vt6w