Ellis, Glens Falls hospitals keep patients' returns to minimum Ellis, Glens Falls hospitals save money on drop in patient returns

















Image 1 of / 5 Caption Close Image 1 of 5 ..... ..... Image 2 of 5 Craig Ritchie, an Ellis Hospital nurse practitioner, visits with patient Fessitcoe Mitchell at his room at the YMCA in Schenectady this summer. Ellis managers identified Mitchell as a patient at high risk for returning to the hospital. Ritchie's regular visits have kept him out of Ellis for nine months. (Olivia Nadel/special to the Times Union) less Craig Ritchie, an Ellis Hospital nurse practitioner, visits with patient Fessitcoe Mitchell at his room at the YMCA in Schenectady this summer. Ellis managers identified Mitchell as a patient at high risk for ... more Image 3 of 5 Craig Ritchie, an Ellis Hospital nurse practitioner, visits with patient Fessitcoe Mitchell at his room at the YMCA in Schenectady this summer. Ellis managers identified Mitchell as a patient at high risk for returning to the hospital. Ritchie's regular visits have kept him out of Ellis for nine months. (Olivia Nadel/special to the Times Union) less Craig Ritchie, an Ellis Hospital nurse practitioner, visits with patient Fessitcoe Mitchell at his room at the YMCA in Schenectady this summer. Ellis managers identified Mitchell as a patient at high risk for ... more Image 4 of 5 Craig Ritchie, an Ellis Hospital nurse practitioner, visits with patient Fessitcoe Mitchell at his room at the YMCA in Schenectady this summer. Ellis managers identified Mitchell as a patient at high risk for returning to the hospital. Ritchie's regular visits have kept him out of Ellis for nine months. (Olivia Nadel/special to the Times Union) less Craig Ritchie, an Ellis Hospital nurse practitioner, visits with patient Fessitcoe Mitchell at his room at the YMCA in Schenectady this summer. Ellis managers identified Mitchell as a patient at high risk for ... more Image 5 of 5 Craig Ritchie, an Ellis Hospital nurse practitioner, visits with patient Fessitcoe Mitchell at his room at the YMCA in Schenectady this summer. Ellis managers identified Mitchell as a patient at high risk for returning to the hospital. Ritchie's regular visits have kept him out of Ellis for nine months. (Olivia Nadel/special to the Times Union) less Craig Ritchie, an Ellis Hospital nurse practitioner, visits with patient Fessitcoe Mitchell at his room at the YMCA in Schenectady this summer. Ellis managers identified Mitchell as a patient at high risk for ... more Ellis, Glens Falls hospitals keep patients' returns to minimum 1 / 5 Back to Gallery

Two Capital Region hospitals are receiving a reward of sorts from the federal government for reducing the number of Medicare patients who return to the hospital within a month after being treated.

The reward is actually the lack of a penalty — in the form of reduced payments — for Schenectady's Ellis Hospital and Glens Falls Hospital.

While it may sound like faint praise to say hospitals are not being penalized, that status puts the two institutions in the minority in the area, the state and the nation. More than half of the nation's hospitals, over 2,500, will receive lower payments for each Medicare patient seen beginning with the start of the 2016 federal fiscal year on Oct. 1, while 77 percent (140) of New York's hospitals will see lower payments, according to an analysis of federal data by Kaiser Health News.

All other Capital Region hospitals will see payments lowered, from as little as 0.01 percent for Saratoga Hospital to 1.79 percent for Nathan Littauer Hospital in Gloversville. The largest penalty imposed by Medicare is a 3 percent cut.

The percentages may seem minuscule, but they amount to real money when applied to a relatively large group of patients with some of the most severe and costly conditions, hospital officials said.

"It's a small percentage off millions," said Dr. David Liebers, chief medical officer at Ellis.

Reducing costly hospital readmissions has been an aim of the federal Affordable Care Act, widely known as Obamacare. The idea is to reward hospitals for high-quality care rather than paying them for less effective services that require repeated treatments. This is the fourth year that Medicare has analyzed hospital readmission rates and lowered many of the institutions' payments.

Officials at Ellis and Glens Falls hospitals credit their success at reducing readmissions this year to multiple initiatives that help patients navigate the health system and provide follow-up guidance and care after discharge. Similar efforts by primary care doctors to get services to patients early, and keep them out of the hospital, have bolstered the hospitals' efforts, they said.

"This is a long-term journey. It's not something that happens overnight," said Brian McDermott, senior vice president for clinical integration at Glens Falls Hospital. "We've spent years working both internally and externally with partners in the community."

This is the second time in four years that Ellis Hospital has received no payment cut from Medicare for readmissions. It had relatively minor reductions in 2013 (0.10 percent) and 2015 (0.07 percent).

Officials credited programs put in place that identify patients admitted to the hospital who may need a primary care doctor, insurance coverage or help managing their conditions. The hospital has created a department called Care Central and hired a staff of nurse "navigators" to help such patients with needs, including one as diverse as transportation to doctors. Other programs provide education to asthma sufferers who don't know how to keep their condition from flaring up, palliative care to patients with advancing chronic illness, and house calls from a nurse practitioner for patients whose conditions put them at high risk of returning to the hospital.

In interviews conducted over the last two years, patients getting assistance through these efforts have expressed gratitude for the additional help.

McDermott of Glens Falls also emphasized the importance of what his institution calls "transitional care managers" — nurses whose job is to follow up with patients who are most at risk for a readmission. Like Ellis' navigators, these nurses contact patients to make sure they are able to see community doctors for follow-up visits, get their prescriptions filled, schedule physical therapy in their home or order a wheelchair, for example.

He also stressed the importance of electronic medical records in sharing information between the hospital and outpatient sites.

Medicare's method for analyzing readmission data makes hospitals' task of lowering the rates extremely challenging, hospital officials said. For one, Medicare counts a patient's readmission within a month even if the patient returns for something unrelated to the original illness or a malady that doctors could never foresee — like an injury from an accident. For another, hospitals' readmission rates are compared to their performance from the year before, so hospitals must make continual annual improvements, even if they reduce patients' returns significantly.

Louis Filhour, senior vice president at Albany Medical Center Hospital, described similar initiatives as those in place at Ellis and Glens Falls in following up with at-risk patients. Yet Albany Med has seen its Medicare payment penalties increase in each of the last four years, from a cut of 0.04 percent in 2013 to 0.36 percent for the upcoming year.

Albany Med has a challenge other area hospitals don't have, however, Filhour said. It sees patients from a 25-county region, who may be readmitted to another hospital after they return home. That readmission is included in Albany Med's count, but hospital staff has less ability to manage the patient after discharge.

"We have better control over the patients that come back and see our physicians and our practices for follow-up care," Filhour said. "We are on top of that."

chughes@timesunion.com • 518-454-5417 • @hughesclaire