Medicare plans could limit antidepressant coverage

If approved, changes would go into effect for the 2015 plan year. CMS, which gained the authority under the Affordable Care Act to make the rules regarding protected medications, is gathering public comments on the proposals through March 7.

The agency is changing the criteria for protected drugs to include only those where patients would die, be disabled or hospitalized if they went without the medications for seven days, which CMS says doesn't include antidepressants or immunosuppressants (primarily used for organ transplant recipients, or those with autoimmune diseases like lupus). Plans will have more freedom to negotiate better prices for their customers, CMS officials said, if they aren't required to carry all the drugs in a class.

CMS officials said the changes were designed to "improve health care quality, reduce costs for Medicare beneficiaries … and combat fraud, waste and abuse."

These proposals include removing antidepressants as well as immunosuppressants from the current six classes of "protected" drugs that receive special oversight (because they are considered vital to seniors' health). Doing so would mean any private Medicare plan offering a Part D drug benefit, either through a health-care plan or prescription-only policy, would no longer be required to cover all of those types of medications on the market.

The Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS) has announced rule reforms for drug coverage under the HMO-style Medicare Advantage health-care plans and stand-alone prescription plans issued by private insurers.

Seniors dealing with depression — a growing health concern in South Florida — could have a harder time getting medications under newly proposed federal changes to Medicare.

Proposed changes would affect coverage for antidepressants such as Prozac,… (Darren Staples/Reuters…)

Any tinkering with private Medicare plan rules especially affects Florida, which has a high percentage of seniors enrolled in them and more plans to choose from than almost anywhere else in the country. There were 81 Medicare Advantage plans offered in Broward County and 67 in Palm Beach County for 2014.

"Proposed changes to protected classes are a rollback on consumer protections, no way around it. We are hoping that CMS will get a flood of comments and back off," said David Lipschutz, policy attorney for the Center for Medicare Advocacy in Washington, D.C.

But while advocates are circling the wagons to fight protection modifications, they said some of the 2015 change proposals could benefit consumers. Among them: Limiting insurers to two stand-alone drug plans offerings — one basic policy and one enhanced policy — in each market, which would make it easier for consumers to shop for coverage.

Another proposal would allow more network pharmacies to be preferred providers, which are the retailers with the lowest drug prices.

"This should enable patients to go to a wider network and get lower prices," said Juliette Cubanski, an associate director at the Kaiser Family Foundation, a health-care policy analysis nonprofit.

Depression is a serious and widespread problem among seniors, often overlooked but now gaining attention. About 6 million of the 40 million Americans older than 65 suffer from depression, according to the Geriatric Mental Health Foundation, a nonprofit dedicated to raising awareness about late-in-life mental illness.

Florida psychiatrists working with geriatric mental health patients say rescinding protection for antidepressants could have a huge negative impact on effectively treating depression, as seniors on private plans probably would no longer have coverage for all drugs. Depression is particularly tricky, they said, as multiple medications often must be tried to find the one that works.

"Insurance strategies to restrict options may save companies money, but it makes physicians' jobs harder and reduces the quality of care," said Dr. Raymond Ownby, professor and chairman of the Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Medicine at Nova Southeastern University. He estimated about 60 percent of his depression patients don't respond to the first drug tried, and many need multiple medications to control the condition.

Antidepressants also help seniors with medical issues other than depression, including anxiety and chronic pain disorders. "These are complex cases. And without proper treatment, patients and their caregivers suffer horribly," said Dr. Marc Agronin, a geriatric psychiatrist who is medical director of Miami Jewish Health System's Mental Health and Memory Center.

CMS also is considering removing antipsychotics, used for severe mental disorders such as schizophrenia and bipolar, from the protected classes in 2016.

dlade@tribune.com, 954-356-4295

Sound off

The Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services is accepting public comments on its proposed changes for Medicare Advantage and stand-alone drug plans. Comments must be received by 5 p.m. March. 7. When submitting your comment, refer to file code CMS-4159-P.

By mail: Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services, Department of Health and Human Services, Attention: CMS-4159-P, P.O. Box 8013, Baltimore, MD 21244–8013.

Electronically: Go to regulations.gov. Click on "How do I submit a comment?" on the right-hand side.