"I'm scared and need help of any kind," wrote a mother of five children whose father is on his way to prison. Her utilities were about to be disconnected, and she could not afford rent. "I don't know what to do ... and don't want to let my babies down."

Situations like this one are all too common. There are 2.7 million children nationwide with at least one parent behind bars and untold thousands of adults trying to raise them under less than ideal circumstances.

There’s no single profile of those caring for a prisoner’s child. He might be a retiree, trying to stretch his social security income to feed and clothe his grandchildren. She might be the family’s oldest child, a teenager working as a waitress after high school to keep her siblings out of foster care. Or she might be the mom in the pew next to you at church, who quickly brushes away questions about the children’s conspicuously absent father. But all these caregivers have one thing in common: They never planned to be raising a child with an incarcerated parent.



[SEE: Editorial Cartoons on the Economy]

It is devastating for someone convicted of a crime to face a long sentence, but the difficulties their families face can be equally overwhelming. Through no fault of her own, a suddenly single parent can find his or her family confronting hunger and homelessness, and with no hope of providing anything special for Christmas or birthdays. To make matters worse, the stigma of the incarcerated parent's crime can fall on their loved ones. I know one mom, named Ann, whose husband went to prison. She and her family were asked to leave the church they attended. They were no longer welcome there.

The nation’s incarcerated population has skyrocketed in recent decades, and the number of families struggling to cope has gone up with it. Christmas is an especially difficult time, because it highlights families’ social isolation and physical need. One mom, Lisandra, told Prison Fellowship, the nation’s largest prison ministry which I lead, that she hated it when Christmas came around, because she had no way to provide gifts and special meals for her children. Lights were up around town, and the malls were full of shoppers, but for Lisandra’s family, Christmas simply wasn’t coming.

Christmas is a joyous season, but sometimes it only magnifies the heartache of those mourning the confusing, isolating loss of a loved one to prison. But the holidays need not be so dark for prisoners’ families. In fact, these families have a lot to remind us about what Christmas means.



[SEE: Immigration Cartoons]

Jesus, too, was born into a stigmatized family, with rumors and judgment swirling around them. Unable to find a warm, welcoming environment, Mary and Joseph wound up in a stable for the delivery of their child. Like the families of many prisoners, they moved from place to place, struggling to make a safe home in an uncertain world. Reaching out to the family of an incarcerated parent is a wonderful way to remember the spirit of the first Christmas, which was about God’s incarnate love and compassion, not the usual excess and stress that too often accompany the holidays.

Christmas is the perfect opportunity to extend our circle of love and empathy beyond our immediate family and close friends. You and I need not look far to find someone for whom Christmas seems not to be coming. Every year my wife and I deliver gifts to prisoners’ children through Prison Fellowship’s Angel Tree program, and it’s a highlight of our Advent celebrations. Other organizations do great work reaching out as well, and all rely on the time and generosity of volunteers. If you know a prisoner’s family personally, go out of your way to let them know they are welcome at your church’s worship services. Offer to watch an incarcerated parent’s children so that their caregiver can have a day off or time to run holiday errands. Buy them a tank of gas so children can visit their parent at prison. Care for them in the same way you would care for any family with a deep need, without holding them responsible for their loved one’s mistakes.