Michael Fassbender, Marion Cotillard and director Justin Kurzel, shown at the Cannes Film Festival in May, are teaming up together for ‘Macbeth’ and ‘Assassin’s Creed’ Agence France-Presse/Getty Images

For Marion Cotillard, finding a balance between two passions, acting and activism, used to be a struggle. A few years ago, the Oscar-winning actress, who is currently closing out the New York Philharmonic’s season playing Joan of Arc, thought she might put aside performing in favor of working with environmental group Greenpeace.

“I was too passionate about my job to start to get angry,” she told Speakeasy in a recent interview at the Alliance Française in Manhattan’s Upper East Side neighborhood. “But I need to be creative.”

Marion Cotillard attended the ‘Ice & Sky’ launch Dennis Van Tine/Zuma Press

Looking fresh-faced and comfortable in a red-and-black checked dress paired with oxfords, Cotillard moves briskly along a corridor buzzing with French-speaking passers-by until—spotting a toddler playing nearby on the floor—she pauses to smile and wave.

“I’ve always thought about the next generation, but now it’s not just words,” said Cotillard, who has a four-year-old son with partner Guillaume Canet. “I’m connected to the next generation.”

While she hasn’t shied away from personally participating in demonstrations, like climbing into a cage and calling for the release of 30 Greenpeace activists in 2013, the 39-year-old actress also lends her voice to other causes.

The latest is Ice & Sky, a climate-change initiative by “March of the Penguins” director Luc Jacquet that has film, television and educational components. It will also involve an expedition back to Antarctica, ten years after “Penguins,” to document environmental changes that have taken place there.

The movie, which closed the Cannes Film Festival this year and will be released in France and the rest of Europe at the end of October, follows the career and discoveries of glaciologist Claude Lorius, who—over the course of decades—collected and analyzed ice samples going back hundreds of thousands of years, and found that consistent intervals of warming and cooling occurred in regular patterns until about 150 years ago, when a spike in temperatures emerged in the data.

“The validation of scientists is very important today to share because now there are no questions anymore about are we responsible for the climate changes,” said Cotillard, punctuating her remark with a look of intensity familiar from her on-screen roles.

She’s unfazed by skeptics, too. “When I was younger, I would fight to try to make this set of people understand that they were wrong,” she said, taking a sip of tea from a stainless-steel travel mug.

“Today, I want to focus on people who want to make a difference and who want to be aware of our impact.” That means influencing governments, and forums like the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, which takes place in Paris starting in November.

Still, the impact of Cotillard’s activism is largely dependent on her blazing career, which has adroitly pivoted from art-house films like “Two Days, One Night” to blockbusters like “Inception” and “The Dark Knight Rises.” Her upcoming turn as Lady Macbeth, opposite Michael Fassbender, has already generated considerable buzz. And she’s also set to start filming “Assassin’s Creed,” a movie based on the popular Ubisoft videogame, this fall.

“I feel so lucky that today I can go from Shakespeare to ‘Assassin’s Creed,’ to a French movie to a Belgian movie,” she said. “That’s what I wanted when I was a kid—I wanted to jump from a world to another and I was the biggest fan of Peter Sellers, who was able to do this.”

It was time for her next appointment in a jam-packed schedule and, turning back to the topic of climate change, she flashed that intense look again. “We’re super late,” she said, standing up to leave. “So we need to get the party started—the green party started.”

Write to Robin Kawakami at Robin.Kawakami@wsj.com. Follow @robinha