DUBLIN--(BUSINESS WIRE)--Research and Markets (http://www.researchandmarkets.com/research/n2c26z/2015_policies) has announced the addition of the "2015 Policies, Procedures & Benefits Survey of Architecture, Engineering, Planning & Environmental Consulting Firms " report to their offering.

The 2015 Policies, Procedures & Benefits Survey of Architecture, Engineering, Planning & Environmental Consulting Firms underwent a total overhaul in 2015 to bring you the most up-to-date and relevant information in a new easy to read format. This study will help you benchmark your firm against industry standards so you can find out if you're under or overspending on benefits and compensation. The survey will also provide you with industry norms on policies and procedures so you can support your policy decisions with hard data. Get all the benchmarks you need on compensation policies, benefits, HR staff, and other major HR issues.

Details

Use the 2015 Policies, Procedures & Benefits Survey to

- Identify HR operating expenses that you can-or can't-afford to cut

- Benchmark your firm's medical, dental, and life insurance packages against those of your peers to see if you can cut back on this costly expense

- Support your firm's paid time off procedures and other firm policies with hard data on industry norms

- Find out if firms are projecting salary increases for 2015 and make sure your salary budgets are in line

- Get data on HR directors' typical backgrounds, education, roles, and compensation and find out how your HR staff stacks up

In addition to the topics typically included in this survey such as personnel-related issues, hiring practices, and performance reviews, we have listened to your suggestions and added new questions about telecommuting, social media in the workplace, the impact of the Affordable Care Act, and other relevant topics that will help you manage and grow your business!

The key to growing your firm and reaching your strategic goals often rests with the quality of your employees, and the quality of your firm's policies, procedures, and benefits is critical to hiring and retaining a top-notch workforce. The data presented in this survey is broken down by firm type, size, region, and other factors so you can make comparisons between your firm and others just like it. All information is the most current available, so decisions about your firm's policies and procedures can be made with confidence.

Key Topics Covered:

1. About the Survey

2. General Policies

3. Telecommuting

4. Time & Travel

5. Human Resources Staff

6. Staffing Policies

7. Compensation

8. Group Insurance Benefits

9. Leave Policies

10. Career Development

For more information visit http://www.researchandmarkets.com/research/n2c26z/2015_policies

About Research and Markets

Research and Markets is the world's leading source for international market research reports and market data. We provide you with the latest data on international and regional markets, key industries, the top companies, new products and the latest trends.