Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share People packed Scarsdale Public Library to hear the debate on whether New York State should have "aid in dying" legislation on April 25, 2016. ( Carucha L. Meuse / The Journal News )

Debate on the right to life-ending medication makes clear that quality end-of-life care is often lacking

Buy Photo People packed Scarsdale Public Library to hear the debate on whether New York State should have "aid in dying" legislation on April 25. (Photo: Carucha L. Meuse/The Journal News)Buy Photo

On Monday, we moderated a debate on a bill that would allow a terminally ill patient the right to receive life-ending medication from a doctor, which the patient could decide when, or if, to take. Panelists provided key personal testimonials on both sides of the issue. They talked about the right to self-determination, or the mistakes medicine could make. They talked of quality of life, and quality of death.

But the underlying discussion was really about this: Can we provide a better way for people to die?

That is the aim of "Aid In Dying" laws: to provide people in the face of painful, impending death the means to end their lives on their own terms. New York's legislation would allow a physician to supply a fatal dose, which would be self-administered.

It is a different kind of medical intervention, to be sure, than the life-extending treatments and machines that so often are the main players in a traditional hospital death.

As many have a longer, and therefore more painful demise due to medical interventions, is the answer to end that suffering with even more intervention?

COVERAGE: The Journal News holds 'aid in dying' debate

VIEW: New York needs another option for end of life

VIEW: 'Aid in Dying' devalues people with disabilities

"The choice for my patients and their families shouldn't be an assisted death versus months to weeks of intolerable suffering," said Dr. R. Sean Morrison, professor of palliative medicine at Mount Sinai Hospital in Manhattan. Palliative care focuses on improving quality of life for both patients and their families, from providing pain relief to understanding treatment options.

As Dr. Atul Gawande, a surgeon, New Yorker staff writer and author of "Being Mortal: Medicine and What Matters in the End" put it in a 2015 lecture at Mount Sinai, "The goal isn't a good death — it is to have a good a life as possible in the final phase."

For every person, the path to achieve a good life's end is different.

Dr. R. Sean Morrison, professor of palliative medicine at Mount Sinai Hospital in Manhattan. (Photo: CONTRIBUTED/Andrew Lichtenstein)

But Morrison on said most physicians haven't received training in pain management or core communications skills that would help figure out a patient's path. "They are not taught to ask very difficult, uncomfortable questions that lead to why patients want to hasten death. ... Doctors don't know what they don't know."

There is the cost for that level of care, which many poor New Yorkers can't obtain, and which insurers could be reluctant to cover. Morrison put it bluntly: "Aggressive palliative care requires a team-based approach and requires money. And Seconal is very inexpensive."

Pain, fears bared

Several of six panelists at Monday's debate on New York's proposed Aid In Dying legislation shared more than their views on a piece of legislation now pending in the New York Legislature: They bared their pain and their fears during the two-hour talk at Scarsdale Public Library, and spoke passionately about how they have come to either support or protest the ability of terminally ill patients, with the aid of physicians, to end their life, and suffering.

The bill, now in committee in the Assembly, would allow a terminally ill patient, with less than six months to live, access to lethal medication to end his or her life. Stringent rules — including two doctors' approvals and assurances of mental health and awareness — would prevent abuse, say proponents, including the bill's author, Assemblywoman Amy Paulin, D-Scarsdale. Paulin recalled her sister's death from cancer, and recounted the weeks it took, in hospice, for her to pass away, existing with intractable pain.

Stacey Gibson, a panelist who supports Paulin's bill, recounted the inevitable and painful death of her husband and said she supported a better alternative for others. The volunteer advocate for Compassion & Choices said that, for her husband, who had a degenerative disease, "the end actively came; he suffered."

Another, J.J. Hanson, spoke of his terminal brain cancer diagnosis, when doctors told him — now years ago — to prepare for impending death. Now the president of the Patients’ Rights Action Fund, he said Aid In Dying offers a dangerous window; after several months' treatment, he suffered a crashing depression and could have chosen such an option. But today, he said, he is in remission.

And there was Anna Fay, who sat a couple steps down from the other panelists. Fay, a board member of Westchester Disabled on the Move and vice president of Independent Living Services in New York City, could not reach the dais, as she uses a wheelchair. It was a poignant backdrop as she said people with disabilities, so often devalued, even by medical professionals, could feel threatened by Aid In Dying laws. "There are many myths about our lives," she said.

Wrong time

The panelists' personal testimony made clear that effective and sensitive care of people at the end of their lives is often lacking — in pain relief, in support, in compassion.

Now the focus is on Aid In Dying as a legislated right. Yet, discussions on end-of-life care and priorities are still pushed off — by families struggling to face the end; by doctors whose goal is to "fix" people and sustain life rather than ease the path to death; even by the public — remember the pushback about so-called "death panels" when the Affordable Care Act attempted to encourage end-of-life counseling?

Morrison, director of the Hertzberg Palliative Care Institute at the Mount Sinai, said that Aid In Dying "may not be the wrong debate, but it's certainly the wrong time to be doing it."

Just think about this: we are focusing the discussion on whether patients should have control over a medication that can end their lives, rather than figuring out how to ensure optimal end-of-life care for all.

Those facing death deserve a right to dignity. Everyone's life, after all, will include death. And we all deserve a good life, on our own terms, to the very end.

Audience questions/comments

Many in the audience offered their own questions and perspectives, passing on notes to the moderators. Here are some of the submissions:

"The proposed legislation allows people who don't believe in Aid In Dying — both patients and doctors — to opt out. This means nothing changes for those with, say, a religious belief that doesn't allow for Aid In Dying," one writer said, asking those who argue against the legislation: "Why do you oppose allowing people who don't share your faith to access this kind of compassionate care at the end of their lives?"

One questioner decried the American Medical Association's support for legal abortion services, and asked: "Since when does homicide qualify as medicine? The Hippocratic Oath has forbade abortion and euthanasia for thousands of years."

An audience member asked about how safeguards for the disposal of unused fatal doses of drugs would be enforced, considering hospitals have been cited for failing to follow existing protocols in dispensing medications.

A questioner cited Dr. Timothy Quill, who in 1991 wrote in The New England Journal of Medicine about assisting in the suicide of a patient — the basis of a 1997 U.S. Supreme Court New York ruling that upheld New York's ban on physician-assisted suicide. The audience member asked what guarantees the legislation would provide that doctors could be criminally prosecuted if they went beyond the proposed law.

An audience member wrote: "This law would allow dying people to make their own decisions about their end of life. It gives people the respect of their autonomy." Referencing concerns expressed by many people in the disabilities community, the writer added, "Isn't this what people with disabilities have found for for so long? For the right make their own decisions?"

Another writer asked why the proposed law is limited to people with a terminal illness. "Why not disability," the note stated. "Someone who is totally disabled and trapped in their body ... should also have a choice."

Many believed that Aid In Dying could be interpreted as condoning suicide. "Recent statistics were just released showing a dramatic increase in suicide among young women," an audience member wrote, "by legalizing suicide at the end of life isn't this an encouragement for people who are having emotional problems to commit suicide?"

Read or Share this story: http://lohud.us/26wziRZ