Republican presidential candidate Marco Rubio speaks at the Republican Jewish Coalition Presidential Forum in the Ronald Reagan Building in Washington on Dec. 3. (Photo: EPA)

WASHINGTON — It’s less than a year until the election and “unsure” is running away with the Florida Senate race.

Many voters still have no idea whom they like among the candidates running to succeed Republican Sen. Marco Rubio in 2016.

The latest evidence came this week from the Saint Leo University Polling Institute, which polled likely voters from both parties and found little enthusiasm for either slate.

In the Republican field, “unsure” received 56.5 percent, followed by Rep. David Jolly (11.6 percent), Lt. Gov. Carlos Lopez-Cantera (8.2 percent), entrepreneur and combat veteran Todd Wilcox (6.8 percent), Rep. Ron DeSantis (6.1 percent) and writer Ilya Katz (4.1 percent). “Someone else” got 6.8 percent.

On the Democratic side, “unsure” led with 46.9 percent, followed by Rep. Patrick Murphy (16.9 percent), Rep. Alan Grayson (7.1 percent), life coach Lateresa Jones (6.3 percent), and lawyer and Navy veteran Pam Keith (4.4 percent). “Someone else” got 7.7 percent.

The margin of error was large — plus or minus 8 percentage points for Republicans and plus or minus 7.5 percentage points for Democrats) — but Floridians don’t seem to be paying much attention to the Senate race.

The results of an August poll by Quinnipiac University were even less revealing.

“None of the possible candidates in the 2016 race for Rubio's Senate seat has achieved enough voter recognition for a valid measure of their favorability,” that poll concluded.

Rubio adds another deep-pocketed donor

Marco Rubio is on a roll, picking up the endorsement Thursday of yet another big-name Republican fundraiser.

North Carolina discount store magnate Art Pope told the (Raleigh, N.C.) News & Observer that he intends to raise money for the Florida senator’s presidential campaign.

“I think he’s the best-qualified candidate based on his public service and life experiences, and I agree with him on most of the issues,” Pope told the paper.

While Pope may not be a household name, he’s an influential player in conservative politics. The owner of Variety Wholesalers, he’s the former budget director for North Carolina Gov. Pat McCrory and a long-time ally of libertarian billionaire Charles Koch (who hasn’t endorsed anyone in the GOP primary).

Pope’s move comes a day after Chicago hedge-fund billionaire Ken Griffin announced his support for Rubio. The freshman senator also has picked up endorsements from financier Paul Singer and Idaho businessman Frank VanderSloot, a top fundraiser for Mitt Romney’s 2012 campaign. He’s also being backed by Miami auto magnate Norman Braman.

Bush picks up

needed endorsement

Jeb Bush, hovering around 4 percent in national polls, got some good news on the campaign trail this week.

Sen. Thad Cochran of Mississippi endorsed Bush’s bid for president on Tuesday, calling the former Florida governor a “proven leader.’’

Cochran, chairman of the powerful Senate Appropriations Committee, is the fourth senator to endorse Bush’s campaign for the GOP nomination. The others are Republican Sens. Susan Collins of Maine, Orrin Hatch of Utah and Dean Heller of Nevada.

Cochran’s endorsement comes after recent trips by Bush to Mississippi. Bush attended a fundraiser in Jackson on Monday, and he visited the state last month for a tailgate party at the Egg Bowl between Mississippi State and the University of Mississippi.

“Jeb Bush is the proven leader the American people need as we face grave threats from abroad and continued economic challenges at home,’’ Cochran said in a statement released by the Bush campaign. “Jeb is a serious leader with executive experience and a forward-looking vision. He offers real solutions to lead our nation, to return more power to the states and to keep us secure.”

Cochran and the Bush family have a long history. Cochran worked with Bush’s father, George H.W. Bush, when he was president and when he served as chairman of the Republican National Committee in the 1970s. Cochran also worked closely with Bush’s brother, former president George W. Bush, when he sought federal aid and help after Hurricane Katrina in 2005.

The Republican primary in Mississippi is March 8.

Healthcare sign-ups

approach 600K

With a crucial deadline approaching, nearly 590,000 Floridians already have signed up for health coverage under the Affordable Care Act during the current enrollment period, the Obama administration reported Wednesday.

Enrollment began Nov. 1 and runs through Jan. 31. People who want coverage starting Jan. 1 must sign up by Dec. 15 on HealthCare.gov or its Spanish-language counterpart, CuidadodeSalud.gov.

Florida is one of 38 states where people use the federal exchange — rather than a state-run exchange — to shop for health care plans and learn whether they qualify for a subsidy in the form of a tax credit. More than 90 percent of state residents who got coverage on the federal exchange during the previous enrollment period qualified for a subsidy.

People who choose to go uninsured face a penalty equal to 2.5% of their household income or a dollar amount based on the number of people in their household who lack coverage — whichever is higher. The per-capita penalty could run as high as $2,085, according to the federal government.

Contributing: Fredreka Schouten and Deborah Berry, USA TODAY

Contact Ledyard King atlking@gannett.com; Twitter:@ledgeking

Read or Share this story: http://on.flatoday.com/1QDJ0u5