Casting herself as a "progressive who likes to get things done," Democratic presidential front-runner Hillary Clinton held a spirited rally in a north suburban gymnasium Thursday night aimed at bending turnout in Tuesday's Illinois primary in her favor.

Clinton's visit to Vernon Hills marked the first return to her native state since she suffered an upset defeat two days earlier in Michigan, where Vermont Sen. Bernie Sanders rallied in the final days to score a narrow victory and secure a much-needed boost for his underdog campaign.

While she criticized Sanders' college tuition plan and his votes against the Brady gun control legislation, Clinton saved her sharpest lines for the field of Republican candidates, whom she characterized as being against much and in favor of little.

(Erin Hooley/Chicago Tribune)

"You know, it's easy to say what you're against. It's easy to tear down other people," she said. "What we got to start doing in America again is decide what we're for, get to work, roll up our sleeves and start building that future."

Clinton then zeroed in on Republican front-runner Donald Trump and his "Make America Great Again" slogan.

"I listen to some of the other candidates, they are so pessimistic, so negative about us. I'll tell you that's not how I see us and our country," Clinton said. "I don't think you make America great by tearing down everything that made America great in the first place."

Clinton spoke before an enthusiastic crowd of 800 people – the limit the fire marshal allowed into the gymnasium at the Sullivan Community Center. A few hundred more were let into an overflow room where they could listen to the rally on speakers, and a long line remained outside when the Secret Service closed the doors shortly before Clinton took the stage around 9 p.m., 90 minutes behind schedule.

Hillary Clinton supporters Erin Hooley / Chicago Tribune Hundreds of people wait in line to see Democratic presidential candidate Hillary Clinton speak March 10, 2016, at the Sullivan Community Center in Vernon Hills. Hundreds of people wait in line to see Democratic presidential candidate Hillary Clinton speak March 10, 2016, at the Sullivan Community Center in Vernon Hills. (Erin Hooley / Chicago Tribune)

The former secretary of state spent Thursday campaigning in three key states that vote Tuesday. Before arriving in suburban Chicago, Clinton gave a morning speech on infrastructure in Tampa, Fla., and an afternoon address in Durham, N.C. on education. Her speech in Vernon Hills was broader, focused mostly on economic issues.

Clinton stressed the importance of clean energy, criticized Republicans for "not wanting to make things anymore in America" and proclaimed she'd be the "small business president."

She also sought to accentuate her credentials as a progressive, by emphasizing her support for equal pay for women, gay rights and immigration reform. Clinton also spent a significant portion of the speech discussing the need to continue to make health care more affordable.

Though she did not criticize Sanders' push to scrap Obamacare for a Medicare-for-all program, Clinton vowed to build upon the existing Affordable Care Act and push to make prescription drugs more affordable.

"Before they called it Obamacare, they called it Hillarycare!" a hoarse Clinton shouted as the crowd cheered.

Clinton, who called her return to Illinois emotional because she was born in Chicago and grew up in suburban Park Ridge, continues to hold a delegate lead over Sanders.

She's collected 1,223 delegates to his 574, according to an Associated Press tally. At least 2,383 delegates are needed to wrap up the nomination at this summer's Democratic National Convention in Philadelphia, and Clinton's lead has been bolstered by the support of hundreds of so-called superdelegates – party leaders and elected officials who are free to support whomever they choose regardless of a state's election results.

In Illinois, 182 delegates are at stake in Tuesday's election, including 102 from the state's 18 congressional districts. A Chicago Tribune poll published Tuesday showed Clinton with a commanding lead, with support from 67 percent of voters compared with 25 percent for Sanders. Another 8 percent were undecided.

Despite the poll numbers, and perhaps because of them, Clinton's surrogates were urging supporters not to be complacent.

"Michigan was very close a couple days ago. We need your help in Illinois," former Highland Park state Rep. Lauren Beth Gash, told the crowd. "Every single thing we do literally can be the difference between Hillary winning and losing."

Both candidates have stepped up their presence in the state in recent days. Clinton's aides said they anticipate her making another appearance in the state before the primary, likely Monday. On Friday, Sanders will hold a rally at Argo High School in south suburban Summit while Bill Clinton will stump in Downstate Peoria.

On the Republican side, Ohio Gov. John Kasich campaigned in the suburbs on Wednesday, Trump will hold a rally Friday night at the University of Illinois-Chicago and Texas Sen. Ted Cruz will hold a private fundraiser for Gov. Bruce Rauner and an event Friday in Rolling Meadows.

Clinton's campaign appearance here came on the same day Sanders began airing three new 30-second TV ads in Illinois, including one that takes Clinton to task for her relationship with Mayor Rahm Emanuel, who served as a senior White House adviser to former President Bill Clinton.

"In Chicago, we have endured a corrupt political system. And the chief politician standing in the way of us getting good school is our mayor," Blaine Elementary School principal Troy LaRaviere, a frequent Emanuel critic, says in the ad. "If you have a presidential candidate that supports someone like our mayor, you have a candidate who is not willing to take on the establishment."

Another one of the new Sanders ads features Cook County Commissioner Jesus "Chuy" Garcia, who forced Emanuel into a runoff election last year. In both ads, Sanders' campaign appears to be trying to leverage widespread minority dissatisfaction with Emanuel, who faced calls for his resignation and repeated street protests in the fallout from the Laquan McDonald police shooting scandal.

In her stump speech Thursday night, Clinton dismissed Sanders' plan to provide free tuition at state universities, instead pushing her plan to allow those with student loans to refinance their debt.

"I don't believe you should get free college if you can afford it," Clinton said. "In our debate, when Sen. Sanders was asked, 'You mean you're going to give free college to Donald Trump's kids and grandkids?' He said, 'Of course.' Well, not for me."

Often when either of the Clintons appears in the Chicago region, Emanuel appears at their side or introduces them on stage. That has not been the case in recent months as Emanuel remains widely unpopular in Chicago, with his approval rating sinking to a record low 27 percent in a Tribune poll published last month.