Like many people, Christina Conti, 44, a personal assistant from Wantagh, N.Y., was seeking a more youthful appearance.

"I have a very thin face, and with that signs of aging come much faster," she said. "I lost volume in my face over the years."

Conti tried fillers in her nasolabial folds, the so-called marionette lines that run from the nose to corners of the mouth.

"It helped with those wrinkles but didn't give me back volume," she said. "Doing the folds wasn't enough."

Then her dermatologist at Spatique Medical Spa in Smithtown, N.Y., Dr. Marina I. Peredo, suggested injecting filler not into Conti's wrinkles but into the flesh of her cheeks.

"It gave me back definition I had 15 years ago," Conti said. "People said; 'Wow, you look great. You look happy.'"

There's a reason for the phrase "baby face." Round, plump cheeks look young. Saggy, sunken ones look old. Increasingly, dermatologists and cosmetic surgeons are turning their attention from smoothing out wrinkles to increasing volume.

Dr. David E. Bank, the director of the Center for Dermatology, Cosmetic and Laser Surgery in Mount Kisco, N.Y., said that he and his colleagues "used to take a very two-dimensional approach to facial rejuvenation. We'd see a line and fill it."

While filling in wrinkles could make people look better, it did not necessarily make them look younger.

"Instead of looking 25 again, they just look like a 45-year-old without wrinkles," Bank said.

But when volume is restored to the face, it conveys youth, he said.

Joel L. Cohen, the director of About Skin Dermatology and DermSurgery in Englewood, Colo., said that "we're filling the smile lines less often and hitting the key points in the cheeks instead." Doing that, he said, not only adds volume to the cheeks but also softens and helps lift the folds by the mouth.

Patients have been slow to come around to this newer thinking, doctors said.

"Nine times out of 10, people don't realize what the real problem is," said Peredo, who is also a clinical professor of dermatology at the Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai in New York.

But this may change with the expected approval by the Food and Drug Administration of Voluma, a form of Juvéderm formulated (and marketed) to address midface volume loss. It is already being used to plump up cheeks in Europe and Canada.

Young faces conform to what dermatologists call the "triangle of youth." That means that if you drew a line across the highest part of the cheeks from ear to ear, and then completed the triangle by drawing lines down to the chin, the widest part of the face would be at the cheeks.

"But as we age, the cheeks deflate and excess skin falls toward the jawline," Peredo said. "That makes the triangle flip upside down so that the widest part of the face is now at the jawline."

Several factors cause faces to deflate as they age. The skeletal structure thins, so the cheekbones actually recede and get smaller. The medial fat pad, which gives young cheeks their pleasing plumpness, thins out and moves down, tugged by gravity's relentless toll. And collagen production slows, so skin is no longer as thick and firm as it once was.

The cost of new cheeks varies, depending on how much reinflation the face needs, but expect to spend about $1,200 to $1,600, Bank said. Fillers can last up to a year.

Moreover, he said, "Injectable fillers stimulate the skin to make more of its own collagen, so each subsequent time you may need less and be able to go longer between treatments."