Topics: From the Wires, Entertainment News, News

The race, date and place are set for American Pharoah’s next start: the Haskell Invitational, Aug. 2, Monmouth Park in Oceanport, New Jersey.

Perhaps the coolest part of Thursday’s announcement involves Bruce Springsteen possibly performing at the track just a few furlongs from his hometown of Freehold.

“I want to approach Bruce Springsteen about coming to the track; he’s a Jersey guy,” says Ahmed Zayat, the owner of racing’s first Triple Crown winner in 37 years. “Monmouth is a beach town, geared to a younger crowd. It’s a party. It’s festive. I think there’s more spark (for the sport) by coming here.”

Haskell tradition has Springsteen’s “‘Born to Run” anthem played over the sound system as the horses enter the track before the race. To maybe have The Boss play live? Nice touch.

Here are a few Springsteen-inspired reasons it’s a good thing for Triple Crown winner American Pharoah to make his next start in the Haskell:

___

LUCKY TOWN

Not exactly his hometown, but American Pharoah trainer Bob Baffert has had nothing but good luck in Oceanport. Not only has he won a record seven Haskells — all since 2001 — but he won two Breeders’ Cup races at Monmouth Park in 2007. He doesn’t often show up for the Haskell, but he’ll be there for this one. His sunglasses will come in handy since the beach is nearby. Owner Ahmed Zayat also lives about 60 miles north of the track in Teaneck. He and Baffert won the 2012 Haskell with Paynter. Springsteen, it should be mentioned, has a home — mansion — in Rumson, about seven miles away.

___

GLORY DAYS

With or without Bruce, Monmouth Park is anticipating a record crowd for American Pharoah’s show. All 13,000 reserved seats were sold a few weeks ago, and the current mark stands at 53,638, when 2003 Derby and Preakness winner Funny Cide showed up. Track officials are planning all sorts of concerts, contests and giveaways for the race (on a Sunday) — and are billing the three-day weekend “The Pharoah Phan Phestival.” Even NBC — not NBCSN — is in and will televise the race as part of its Breeders’ Cup Challenge series. Zayat hopes the race will attract entertainers, athletes and politicians. Along with Springsteen, he mentioned Jon Bon Jovi, Kobe Bryant and New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie. Also possible? Track officials are reaching out to Springsteen’s daughter Jessica, a world-class show rider, about leading the post parade.