BERKELEY -- UC Berkeley's plan to close a $150 million budget deficit has created great uncertainty across campus -- and perhaps nowhere more than at a unique medical school program that mints some of the country's most desperately needed doctors: primary care physicians.

The possible shuttering of the nearly 40-year-old Berkeley-UCSF Joint Medical Program -- which trains physicians for three years before they begin their clinical rotations at UCSF -- comes as the state desperately seeks doctors to treat millions of Californians newly covered as a result of the Affordable Care Act.

The program is small, but roughly two-thirds of its 16 graduates each year fill primary-care jobs, specializing in family medicine, internal medicine or pediatrics, a rate three times the national average.

"They are perfect for what California needs right now," said the medical program's director, John Balmes.

While health-care budget debates commonly involve figures in the millions or billions, the fate of the joint medical program could rest on a $600,000 subsidy it receives each year from UC Berkeley's School of Public Health, which houses the program. The remaining $1.3 million is covered mostly by student fees.

The school's dean learned this spring that he needed to cut more than $1 million -- 3 or 5 percent of its budget, depending on the calculation -- making it difficult to continue the subsidy, said Linda Anderberg, the School of Public Health's communications director.

Program alumni like Dr. Vijay Bhandari said the debate makes no sense.

Advertisement

"Losing that school would be a tragedy, especially at this juncture in the history of our health care," said Bhandari, a 39-year-old hospitalist and clinical doctor at Contra Costa Health Services whose wife also graduated from the program and works as a psychiatrist for the underserved. "We have a primary care crisis in this country, and patients are having a harder and harder time getting access to care."

The Berkeley-UCSF Joint Medical Program, created in the late 1970s, takes a different approach than most medical schools; rather than attending lectures, students teach each other, studying scores of cases under the guidance of medical faculty. In addition to clinical placements, many volunteer their services at such places as the Suitcase Clinic, which treats youths, the homeless and transgender patients.

Another unusual feature of the program is that students spend a third year at Berkeley earning an academic master's degree related to health or science before beginning their hospital rotations at UCSF.

Daniel Morberg, of Berkeley, right, a medical student at the UC Berkeley-UCSF Joint Medical Program, listens to Bert Boyd, of Stockton, at the Suitcase Clinic in Berkeley, Calif., April 26, 2016. (Doug Duran / Bay Area News Group)

Sarah Schear, a first-year medical student from Maryland, said she considered East Coast medical schools but was drawn to the Berkeley-UCSF program's spirit, its "adventurous curriculum" and her fellow students' commitment to the disadvantaged. "There was something that seemed really brave about the JMP," she said.

Dr. Coco Auerswald,﻿ an associate professor at the School of Public Health who directs the academic master's program, said the students learn the social context of health, and do "cutting edge work" on health disparities in the state.

"There isn't any program like it in the country," she said.

That the program's future could be decided over such a small sum is astounding, given the state's shortage of primary care physicians, said Dr. Lee Ralph, incoming president of the California Academy of Family Physicians.

Preventing even one pregnant woman from going into premature delivery with a newborn baby who is eight to 10 weeks early, he said, could easily save the U.S. health care system $1 million -- just for the hospital care of the baby. Continuing the program, Ralph said, "seems like a very small investment for a very big return on providing access to care and great health care to an underserved population in California.''

But UC Berkeley spokesman Dan Mogulof said the campus is deferring to its individual divisions -- such as the School of Public Health -- to make those budgetary decisions; each has been asked to make cuts ranging between 1 and 6 percent this summer for a total savings of roughly $20 million per year. The campus does not plan to cut faculty, he said, but it expects to shrink its administrative staff by about 6 percent, or 500 positions, to save $50 million each year.

To close the remaining gap, the campus aims to raise revenue and restructure some of its debt. Construction projects, including seismic-safety upgrades, were one explanation campus officials gave for the budget crisis, which appears to be affecting only the Berkeley campus.

Anderberg said the school was "looking for ways to protect" the medical program and its current and recently admitted students, who have been assured they will be allowed to complete their studies, regardless of the decision.

The consequences will reach far beyond campus. A recent report released by the California Primary Care Association said not only will California need an estimated 8,243 additional primary care doctors by 2030, but that the state's ratio of full-time primary care doctors participating in Medi-Cal is estimated at 35 to 49 per 100,000 Medi-Cal enrollees, well short of the 60 to 80 the federal government estimated are needed.

And this month, for the first time, the state will move 170,000 children who are undocumented immigrants into Medi-Cal.

"We are facing a primary care shortage in California that truly threatens to undermine the health care of all Californians,'' said Ben Avey, assistant policy director for the association. "We certainly can't eliminate programs" like the Berkeley-UCSF Joint Medical Program.

Follow Katy Murphy at Twitter.com/katymurphy.