Snow has markedly picked up in intensity across New Jersey in the last hour and the National Weather Service now warns that snowfall rates of up to two inches per hour are possible for the balance of the evening.

Winter storm warnings remain in effect for much of the northern half of the state through early Sunday morning, where forecasters predict between 4 and 10 inches could fall before the storm departs.

“Overall, the forecast thinking is staying pretty close to what we’ve had,” said Mitchell Gaines, a meteorologist with the National Weather Service’s Mount Holly office.

The snow has already canceled or delayed scores of flights across the region and secondary roads were quickly becoming snow covered by the early afternoon.

The state Department of Transportation has mobilized more than 1,500 plow trucks and 560 salt spreaders as part of a statewide mobilization. A spokesman noted that snow has started to accumulate on roads, particularly in northwestern New Jersey, and plows are starting to go into operation.

"Basically we're busy now and we expect to be busy later," said Joe Dee, a spokesman at for the agency.

The forecast for the remainder of the day remains difficult, however.

A stubborn area of high pressure is allowing cold air at the surface to remain deeply entrenched across much of the state, a phenomena known as cold-air damming.

Warm air is expected to push into portions of the state as a coastal low pressure system takes over, but how far it encroaches will ultimately determine where a changeover to sleet, freezing rain or rain is possible.

“This storms is setting up to be very, very tricky for central New Jersey,” said Steven DiMartino, who noted short-term forecast models are not accurately picking up current conditions, potentially throwing their forecasts off. “That high pressure system is putting up a hell of a fight.”

Forecasters are urging travelers to be very careful, as conditions could change dramatically in the span of just a few miles.