Does anyone else miss cigarette commercials on TV?

Not cigarettes themselves, of course, and certainly not emphysema, heart disease, lung cancer, house fires and all the rest of smoking's dire consequences.

But I used to love the stoic Marlboro man riding his horse through a national park out west or the man and woman skiing behind a speedboat while puffing on "refreshing" Oasis menthol cigarettes or Lucky Strike's dramatic tobacco auction, in which the auctioneer announces the winning bid of the finest bundle of tobacco leaves as being "sold to American," meaning to the American Tobacco Co.

While you can view many of the old commercials on YouTube, readers under 40, raised on high-tech advertising and special effects, may be puzzled about why I characterize the old ads as so alluring.

Well, they were the best thing on TV in the 1950s and '60s. Big Tobacco was obscenely rich because nearly half of all Americans bought their products every day. And cigarettes were essentially a guaranteed cash cow because the customers became hopelessly addicted and literally had to cough up the money.

Corporations such as R.J. Reynolds, Phillip Morris and Lorillard had farm silos full of cash with which to hire the best advertisers in the world to create commercials that ran on TV day and night.

And to ensure prodigious profits for generations to come, they even ran commercials on children's cartoon shows such as "The Flintstones" and partnered with confectionary companies to make candy cigarettes — with packaging and names identical to the real thing (my favorite brand in grammar school was Kool peppermint).

Today, less than 20 percent of American adults smoke cigarettes. The decline is chiefly due to the U.S. Surgeon General's office linking cigarettes to cancer and heart disease in 1964, and the public's slow but sure education through subsequent studies irrefutably proving those links.

Beginning in 1966, the federal government forced Big Tobacco to inscribe cigarette packages with labels that warned consumers about the dangers of smoking. This was a groundbreaking and ironic punishment, sentencing cigarette makers to pay money to persuade Americans not to buy their product.

And in the 1990s, individual plaintiffs and state governments began to successfully sue Big Tobacco — winning huge financial settlements by arguing that cigarette manufacturers had knowingly hidden from the public what they had known for decades about nicotine's addictive and carcinogenic properties.

For example, in 2000 Philip Morris was ordered to pay a record-breaking $51.5 million to a single smoker with lung cancer. And in 1998, all tobacco companies were ordered to contribute $216 billion to 46 states to help cover what the states had paid for health care for smokers' illnesses.

Cigarette companies being compelled to pay for the care and treatment of patients sick from smoking is both a fair and intriguing idea and one the Republican candidates for the presidency ought to consider. After all, while all 16 have denounced Obamacare, none has offered a better substitute.

So how about replacing the Affordable Care Act with the Multiple Payer Private Health Insurance Initiative (MPPHI, or "Miffy"). Under Miffy, American citizens would get free, universal health care, paid for by the corporations responsible for their illness or injury.

If a smoker, for example, needs a triple bypass or a lung transplant, the hospital and doctor will be paid by Big Tobacco. And if a patient is stricken with any one from a list of multiple other cancers, we send the bill to the giant chemical corporations that manufacture pesticides, herbicides and inorganic food additives.

Or if it's melanoma, then luxury beach hotels. Hospitalization and rehabilitation following a traffic accident? Ford, GM, Toyota and Anheuser Busch.

In other words, for every disease or injury, there is some industry fully or partially responsible. Heck, even a common cold might justifiably be blamed on all the coal-burning electric companies.

So instead of defending countless lawsuits, these conglomerates would pay into an escrow fund from which corresponding health care payments could be drawn. Programmers and accountants for Miffy can devise a nationwide code for the equitable allocation of costs for every treatment.

Americans will get free health care. And Republicans will finally have something to replace Obamacare, an expansion of something we've been doing for 30 years. It will be funded entirely by the private sector, without the government intruding or having to spend a single dime.

What's not to like?

David McGrath, a former resident of Evergreen Park and Oak Forest, is an emeritus professor of English at the College of DuPage.