From left, Zander, Raymond, Xzavyer and Esmeralda Guillea, paint and decorate pumpkins at the Harvest Fest hosted by Abiding Love Lutheran Church on Sunday. Kids were able to decorate pumpkins, play games and enjoy food at the event. ( Lilia Munoz )

Owen Yost plays a bottle fishing game during the Harvest Fest event at Abiding Love Lutheran Church on Sunday. Despite the rainy weather people dressed up and enjoyed all the activities at the event. ( Lilia Munoz )

Attendance may have dropped due to rain, but there was still plenty of fun to be had indoors at this year's Harvest Fest for Kids on Sunday.

"We were setting up outside and at the last second the weather turned, so we thought we better bring it in," said Angela Eckert, the event's organizer.

Loveland's Abiding Love Lutheran Church hosts the Harvest Fest around this time each year. The family-oriented festival took place from 2 to 5 p.m. inside the church at 2825 E. First St.

Halloween Events Looking for more Halloween season events? Visit for an early roundup of events. The Reporter-Herald will publish another list of Halloween events in Friday's Go section.

"Every year we invite the community out to our event. Everything is free of charge," Eckert said. "We've never had it inside before though."

"Our attendance is down, but people are still enjoying the activities," Eckert said. "And it's usually a costumed affair, but I think the weather made it more of a hassle for parents."

Despite the rain adding an extra layer of inconvenience to squeezing excited children into Batman, princess or baby monkey outfits, many kids did come to play games for treats dressed in the Halloween spirit, but without the morbidity of zombies and ghouls. Each year the event promises a non-scary and entertaining environment for younger children.

"It's a fun activity for the kids to enjoy," said Maureen Elbert of Loveland. "We weren't sure they were going to have it today, but we decided to go anyway.

Advertisement

This was the third year attending the Harvest Fest for Elbert and her two children, Owen and Nicole Yost, who are not affiliated with the church. Owen, 6, was dressed as Leonardo of the Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles and Nicole, 5, was dressed in a purple princess' dress.

Eckert said the activities and games typically take about two to three hours for kids to get through, but a lot of them had to be left out this year because of space constrictions. But there were still a variety of homemade carnival-style games to choose from.

"We change up the games every year," Eckert said.

A few activities included beanbag tossing, face painting and pumpkin decorating.

The church purchased 125 pumpkins for the event this year. Eckert said the farm the pumpkins are typically purchased from was damaged in the flood.

"This year Bartels Farm gave us a discount on the pumpkins," she said.

Outside in the rain was the unused inflatable bounce house and the enduring Balloon Pop game, manned and constructed by church volunteer Patrick Manly of Johnstown. Kids could throw darts at the balloons to claim prizes.

"I made this specifically for Harvest Fest. This is by far the most popular game. When it's nice out there are 20 to 30 kids jumping up and down to play," he said. "But it's a little dangerous to be throwing darts inside."

Also offered free of charge were hot dogs, cookies, chips, hot cider, hot chocolate, popcorn and more.

"It's a service to bring the community together at have something for everyone," Eckert said. "It's especially for families."

"Rain or shine, we're doing it," she said enthusiastically.

James Garcia can be reached at 970-635-3630 or garciaj@reporter-herald.com. Follow him on Twitter: @JamesGarciaRH.