TRENTON — A program intended to tamp down on expensive public employee health benefits that was championed by state Senate President Stephen Sweeney is set to get a trial in New Jersey.

The State Health Benefits Plan Design Committee, which oversees public worker health plans, on Monday voted 9-0 with 3 abstentions to approve the "patient-centered" pilot program to begin in 2016, according to Sweeney.

"This is going to be a great outcome. It really is, and it's not because I'm involved in it. I'm not the original creator of it. I've seen it in other places," Sweeney (D-Gloucester) said. "This just gives a whole new approach to medicine."

The program's approval comes months after a panel formed by Gov. Chris Christie recommended having public workers pay more for less generous health care benefits. Public worker unions oppose that, and Sweeney negotiated with them on a plan that seeks to lower costs through other means.

Teachers would not be eligible to participate in the program unless a separate panel that oversees their health benefits also approves the pilot program. Sweeney said he's "optimistic" that will happen.

State officials are also in a rush to lower health care plan costs before a federal tax on expensive "Cadillac plans" held by many public workers hits under the Affordable Care Act.

The three-year pilot program, rolled out by Sweeney and several unions in February, would shift doctors away from a fee-for-service system, paying them a base salary and a bonus for good outcomes and patient satisfaction. Participating doctors would be limited to having 1,000 patients.

Participation in the plan, which would be implemented in several locations around the state, would be voluntary, with no cap on the number of people allowed to participate. Patients seeing their primary care doctors would not be subject to co-pays or deductibles.

Although there are some differences between what the committee approved and what Sweeney proposed in February, Sweeney said it's essentially the same.

Supporters in February said Vermont saved at least 9 percent of its public employee health care costs when it implemented a similar plan in 2006.

The approval comes despite increasing political distance between Sweeney and his former Republican ally Christie. Christie is campaigning for president, while Sweeney is laying the groundwork for a potential 2017 run for governor.

"Getting this kind of thing done in the environment we're in right now is enormous," Sweeney said. "With the issues going on and the mistrust, the administration — I've got to give them credit — they came to the table, too."

State Treasury Department spokesman Chris Santarelli said the pilot program was part of a package of several measures that the state expects will save $100 million, including discontinuing reimbursements under the Prescription Drug Program for some compound drugs and increasing emergency room co-pays by $25 when the current co-pay is less than $100.

"We are gratified that this committee was focused on improving health outcomes and finding savings for the health benefits program," Santarelli said. "That said, this progress in no way absolves the Legislature from its responsibility to join the Governor in enacting long-term reforms to make the State Health Benefits System sustainable for both beneficiaries and taxpayers."

MORE POLITICS

Matt Friedman may be reached at mfriedman@njadvancemedia.com. Follow him on Twitter @MattFriedmanSL. Find NJ.com Politics on Facebook.

"