ST. LOUIS — The calm before the storm is, well, a storm.

Thun-der!

Before the lightning flurry that is a Mark Melancon ninth inning, he enters the game to “Thunderstruck,” the searing storm of an AC/DC song, which gives a fan’s arm goose bumps and a batter’s throat lumps.

Oh-wow-ow-ow-ow-oh.

Thun-der!

Oh-wow-ow-ow-ow-oh.

But this only occurs when he’s at home — well, not home home, which is back in Golden — but Pittsburgh home. Here in St. Louis, on the road Thursday, the Pirates’ closer jogs out to the Jell-O bouncy beats of J-Lo.

Let’s get loud, let’s get louuud — turn the music up to hear that souuund!

They surely play this song to pep up the ballpark, but it feels like they’re just trolling Melancon, anything to get him off his game.

But in a matter of minutes, a smattering of mastery. One, two, three, and Melancon is done with work, ho-hum.

“He has been a fantastic executor of pitches,” said our old friend Clint Hurdle, the former Rockies manager who has been Pittsburgh’s skipper since 2010. “He has intent, he has commitment, he has execution.”

Is the best closer in baseball a Denver-area native?

It appears that way, although the Alydar to this Affirmed is here in St. Louis — Cardinals closer Trevor Rosenthal, Melancon’s fellow all-star. Each reliever entered the weekend with 35 saves, the most in baseball. Melancon has blown a lone save, Rosenthal two. Their ERAs are similarly minuscule, and Melancon whips him in WHIP (walks and hits per innings pitched): 1.02 to 1.16.

As we head into late August, with the Rockies again irrelevant, it’ll be worth following the Golden High golden boy, as his Pirates plunder the National League for wins.

They’ve made the playoffs the past two seasons, and Pittsburgh entered Friday with 66 wins, the third-most in baseball. Alas, St. Louis has 73, so the Pirates are in second place in the National League Central, battling daily for a playoff berth, wild card or otherwise.

In the Pirates’ clubhouse, before Thursday’s game, I asked Melancon if there’s still that little boy from Golden in his big-league persona.

“Oh, yeah, for sure — without a doubt,” the 30-year-old said. “Every day. It’s a dream come true.”

He grew up like you. Before “Thunderstruck,” he was awestruck, watching the Blake Street Bombers massacre curveballs. He played on numerous youth teams, making varsity for three sports as a Golden High freshman. He was drafted in the ninth round out of the University of Arizona in 2006, and he made the bigs in 2009, playing for the Yankees and Astros and Red Sox and now the Pirates, who are good at baseball.

Now, we sports fans and journalists often succumb to neatly fitted comparisons. Like, he has a big heart for his family … and his teammates! But with this said, I will say that Melancon is as fearless (here we go!) off the field (don’t do it, Ben!) as he is (cover your eyes!) on the field.

Yes, the high-pressure closer has also literally swum with sharks — OK, he was in a protective cage — and so, they call the Pirates’ bullpen the “Shark Tank.”

And when “Thunderstruck” (or even “Let’s Get Loud”) blares, “It’s right where I want to be, you know?” Melancon said. “It’s just special. You don’t take it for granted.”

Benjamin Hochman: bhochman@denverpost.com or twitter.com/hochman