Except for my occasional forays into speechwriting on behalf of the 2012 G.I. Luvmoney campaign, I ordinarily resist the temptation to give political advice to my fellow primates who identify as Republicans. But here's a nickel's worth for free -- if you want to rid yourself and your 2016 primary process of Tailgunner Ted Cruz, stop picking on him. That means you, Megyn Kelly. The man feeds on his own outrage that his inherent genius goes unacknowledged. Asking him "what he's accomplished" only gives his engine more fuel to burn. (Why do they laugh at his mighty sword?) He knows what he's accomplished in this life. He's become Ted Cruz.

Advertisement - Continue Reading Below

And, anyway, it's not like he won't skateboard on his own dick. In just the past two days, he's said some amazing stuff. For example, because Heidi Cruz has been forced to take a leave of absence from Goldman Sachs so that the conflict of interest won't be so glaringly obvious, the Tailgunner has decided to sign up for the Affordable Care Act.

"We'll be getting new health insurance and we'll presumably do it through my job with the Senate, and so we'll be on the federal exchange with millions of others on the federal exchange," Cruz said. Asked whether he would accept the government contribution available to lawmakers and congressional staffers for their health care coverage through the ACA, Cruz said he will "follow the text of the law." "I strongly oppose the exemption that President Obama illegally put in place for members of Congress because (Senate Minority Leader) Harry Reid and the Senate Democrats didn't want to be under the same rules as the American people," Cruz said, before repeating: "I believe we should follow the text of the law."

Most Popular

We all know what's coming, right? The first time the Tailgunner gets lost in some medical phone-tree, or the first time the local pharmacist is three minutes late with a prescription, the Tailgunner is going to be all over the electric teevee machine screaming about his "personal experience" with the debacle that is the Affordable Care Act.

And then there's his brief -- and genuinely weird -- foray into music criticism.

"My music taste changed on 9/11," Cruz said. "I actually intellectually find this very curious, but on 9/11, I didn't like how rock music responded," he said. "And country music, collectively, the way they responded, it resonated with me."

Let us assume for the moment that the optimal age for the beginning of a person's interest in pop music is 13. Ted Cruz was 13 in 1983, and he was living in Texas. By then, the Austin music scene was into its second generation. Willie Nelson had released Red Headed Stranger almost a decade earlier. Steve Earle was bouncing back and forth from Austin to Nashville and warming up to release Guitar Town. Townes Van Zandt was at the peak of his powers, so much so that Bob Dylan was hankering to meet him, and Guy Clark already had two Greatest Hits albums. Hell, Loretta Lynn had broken through so thoroughly that Sissy Spacek won an Oscar playing Ms. Lynn in a movie. And yet it took 18 more years, and 13 murderous Saudi fanatics, to clue the Tailgunner into country music. And why do I think the pivotal point in his esthetic evolution came the first time he heard Toby Keith's idiotic "Courtesy Of The Red, White, and Blue"?

And Ted? Here's how rock and roll "responded" to those events, dipwad. The late Mr. Entwistle alone puts paid to your nonsense, lad.