The Federal Communications Commission announced this week it is awarding Windstream Communications $28.7 million in ongoing annual support to expand and support broadband in rural Iowa, of which more than $5.5 million will be used in Story County over the next six years.

Mark Wigfield, spokesperson with the FCC, said the study identified 1,559 homes and businesses in rural Story County areas where costs of providing broadband are more expensive. These funds from the federal government will subsidize Windstream’s expenses so it can avoid charging rural area customers more for services.

In total, this support from the FCC will allow Windstream to deliver broadband to approximately 44,930 homes and businesses in Iowa.

As for broadband access, Rick Sanders, chair of the Story County Board of Supervisors, said there are few areas left in the county without access.

“I think Story County is almost 100 percent covered now,” Sanders said.

Earlier this year, the county received a Connected Community certificate from Connect Iowa to celebrate the county’s progress in expanding high-speed Internet to residents. Story County residents are served by 26 broadband providers, including Windstream.

“It is how we live today,” Sanders said. “I don’t see technology going away … It is a fundamental component of our daily lives.”

Although most of the county has access to broadband, Sanders said the goal moving forward is ensuring the county has access to high-quality Internet.

“We need to be on the cutting edge,” he said, noting that having high-speed Internet will be necessary for the work being done at Iowa State University, along with the increase in farming equipment that uses broadband.

“We need to be near the top in what is happening across the nation,” Sanders said.

According to the FCC, the benchmark for broadband speed is 25 megabits per second for downloads. The services provided by Windstream will be at speeds of at least 10 megabits per second.

State Rep. Lisa Heddens, of Ames, said the bill the state Legislature passed this past session defines high-speed Internet based off the FCC standard.

“We are connected more,” Heddens said. “In the 21st century, (we need) more and more accessibility to broadband.”

The law creates a property tax relief program for high-speed Internet providers, specifically targeting rural businesses and communities.

Heddens said it is important to have the capability to provide for the high-speed Internet needs of Iowa businesses, allowing them to compete in the national and global market.

“A lot of them, this is how they are communicating and connecting,” Heddens said.

The federal money awarded to Windstream to be used in Story County is specifically funded through the Connect America Fund, with the goal to “ensure all Americans have access to robust, affordable broadband.” Windstream is headquartered in Little Rock, Ark.