A laptop shows the HealthCare.com website during an enrollment event on Feb. 12, 2015 in Fort Worth, Texas. LM Otero/Associated Press

The Republican Study Committee unveiled its blueprint for overhauling U.S. health-care if the Supreme Court cripples the federal health law in a decision expected later this month.

The official plan from the group of 170 House conservatives would repeal the entire 2010 Affordable Care Act starting Jan. 1, 2016. It would then replace the ACA’s centerpiece tax credits to help low and modest income people pay premiums and its requirements that insurers sell coverage to everyone regardless of their medical history with tax deductions and new insurance plans for people with pre-existing conditions.

Under the RSC plan, individuals would get a standard tax deduction of $7,500 a year, rising to $20,500 for families, for buying health insurance. That would apply to everyone with private insurance, including the majority of Americans under the age of 65 who get coverage through a job.

Some Republicans, including 2008 presidential nominee Sen. John McCain, have long favored the idea, arguing it’s good tax policy, gives everyone the same choices, and doesn’t give people incentives to buy more expensive insurance.

It’s been a tough to sell, however, to people with employer-sponsored insurance since their insurance benefit would likely change considerably. Lower-income Americans would likely get less help buying coverage than they do from the health law’s current system of premium subsidies, and people who pick more expensive health plans would also likely pay a lot more.

The plan wouldn’t revive the ACA’s requirements that insurers let everyone buy coverage equally, sick or healthy. Instead, it brings back state high-risk pools, widely used before the health law — and still in operation in some parts of the country — to deal with insurers’ refusals to sell coverage to people with pre-existing conditions. The pools would get $25 billion in federal funds over 10 years and would be required to cap premiums at twice the amount of the average premium in the state.

Rep. Phil Roe of Tennessee is set to introduce the plan as legislation Thursday morning, and 31 members of the group are signed on as the first sponsors.

The plan has much in common with previous health-care proposals from the committee. Its reappearance comes weeks before the court rules on the validity of the health law’s subsidies in some three dozen states.

For weeks, GOP lawmakers have been offering responses to the possibility the court could void the health law’s tax credits for people who buy insurance coverage through the federal exchange, HealthCare.gov. As we reported earlier this week, there will be no effort by leaders to gather the party behind a single plan until after the court rules.

Sen. Ron Johnson of Wisconsin’s plan would extend the tax credits through August 2017 and repeal most of the rest of the law, most notably the requirements for insurance to offer a list of essential benefits that have made premiums higher. Sen. Bill Cassidy of Louisiana has sought to build on that with an idea that would let states take money they would have received under the law and give it to their residents to pay for health insurance in other ways, primarily health savings accounts.

Senate leaders John Barrasso of Wyoming, Lamar Alexander of Tennessee and Orrin Hatch of Utah have said they want to preserve credits in the short term and then let states take over most of the rules for how insurance should be priced and sold if they want. House leaders Paul Ryan of Wisconsin, John Kline of Minnesota and Fred Upton of Michigan have come out in favor of new, advanceable and refundable tax credits.

–Kristina Peterson contributed to this post.