It’s time for the Big Draw

The sixth annual Ruskin Big Draw will take place from 3 to 7 p.m. this Saturday at the Firehouse Cultural Center, 101 First Ave. N.E. The free event, which is sponsored by the Arts Council of Hillsborough County, SouthShore Arts Council, Firehouse Cultural Center and Tampa Museum of Art, includes a variety of drawing activities and games for folks of all ages; music by DJ Seth Dugan; and food and beverage sales. Come learn to draw with light, make photo drawings in the darkroom and more.

For additional information, call (813) 645-7651.

Meeting scheduled on health care law

The Affordable Care Act, a k a ObamaCare, will be the topic of a meeting of the South Shore Democratic Club at 1:30 p.m. Oct. 10 at the SouthShore Regional Library, 15816 Beth Shields Way, Ruskin. Key pieces of the went into effect yesterday amid much misunderstanding about buying insurance through health exchanges, subsidized coverage, the state’s role or nonrole, and eligibility.

Michael van Hoek, a trained navigator with Suncoast Community Health Centers, will make a presentation and answer questions.

All Democrats and like-minded persons are invited to the meeting. For more information, visit, www.southshoredemocraticclub.org.

Tickets are on sale

The Performing Arts Company of Sun City Center opens its new season on Oct. 30 at the Rollins Theater with an original musical comedy called “The GAME.” Taking place at Sunny Acres, a retirement resort and spa for the discerning woman, the production is sure to tickle the funny bones of young and old alike. Evening performances are at 7:30 p.m. Oct. 30-31, Nov. 1-2 and 7-9, with a matinee show on Nov. 9 at 2:30. Tickets are $10 and available weekdays from 9 a.m. to noon at the Atrium kiosk or by credit card at (813) 400-7803. Season tickets are also available.

Rollins Theater is at 970 Cherry Hills Drive, Sun City Center. For further information, visit www.performingartsco-scc.org.

Fight the Blight: Gibsonton yields big results

Hillsborough County Code Enforcement recently concluded its 14-day Operation Fight the Blight cleanup campaign in the Gibsonton area. This effort resulted in the collection of more than 60 tons of trash, debris and junk from residents who participated in the program. Thirty square feet of graffiti also was removed.

The boundaries of the operation Ohio Avenue to Gibsonton Drive and Alafia Street to Lula Street. Residents who lived in the boundaries and wished to participate in the program were asked to show proof of residence.

Code enforcement officers partnered with several other county agencies, including Animal Services, Public Utilities and Public Works, the Hillsborough County Sheriff’s Office and Tampa Electric Company.

Operation Fight the Blight: Gibsonton was the fourth cleanup campaign this year. Previously efforts took place in Palm River, Timberlane and Wimauma, resulting in the removal of more than 257 tons of discarded items and the inspection of more than 1,600 properties.

Calvary Lutheran Church gets new minister

Members of Calvary Lutheran Church have welcomed Jeff Daignault as the congregation’s new minister of worship. Daignault is an experienced church leader with considerable musical talent who most recently was director of music for a large church in Chicago. He holds bachelor degrees in church music and philosophy, master’s degrees in music theory and theology and has successfully led multiple choirs, bands and musical ensembles throughout his career.

His wife, Vickie is an actress and singer, whose work has taken her from New York to the Netherlands, allowing her to collaborate with major recording artists and entertainment personalities.

Daignault’s position is new for Calvary. He will be responsible for theming services by selecting and coordinating biblical text, music, audio-visual components and special features. He will also lead the congregation, choirs and bands in worship, as well as identify and recruit worship leaders, musicians, technicians and ministry volunteers, equipping them with resources and training.

Send items of community interest to lkindle@tampatrib.com.