RENTON, Wash. — Mariners ace Felix Hernandez punches his time card Tuesday night at Safeco Field. He represents the American League’s best pitcher. And yet the Seahawks might talk more about the strike zone than the Mariner’s King.

Seattle revels in its reputation as a fast, physical defense. Anyone who saw the Seahawks face the Broncos in the Super Bowl know they are violent. But they are smart.

Rather than bemoan the new safety rules preventing targeting with the head and crushing defenseless receivers, defensive coordinator Dan Quinn promotes proper tackling by using a “strike zone.”

“We went the other way with it. How can we do it the right way and be physical. So we talk about a strike zone, just like a pitcher would have with a batter,” Quinn said Tuesday, showing a visitor how his defenders approach the issue. “You target specific areas, have a plan of a attack and take the head out of it.”

Coach Pete Carroll released a 20-minute video for youth football organizations recently, showing proper techniques. The Seahawks focus on shoulder hits, resembling those seen in rugby.

They have bought into the philosophy, starting with the defensive backs. The Seahawks’ secondary is so close, Quinn said, that it’s not uncommon for the Legion of Boom to meet on their own to dissect plays and coverages.

“(Safety) Earl Thomas watched every game from the last two years, looking for ways to improve,” Quinn said.

Seattle will not be at full strength for Thursday’s exhibition opener at Sports Authority Field at Mile High. Strong safety Kam Chancellor continues to recover from offseason hip surgery.

“I am fine. No problems. I will be back out there soon,” Chancellor said Tuesday.

Footnotes

The Seahawks’ practices feature a soundtrack. It is approved by coaches, but executed by DJ DV One. He plays everything to Guns N’ Roses to old school hip-hop. He’s featured in the video below. … Former CU receiver Paul Richardson caught a long touchdown pass on a go route down the left sideline. … Quarterback Russell Wilson connected with Percy Harvin on a bomb down the middle, leading to loud cheers from the estimated 2,800 fans in attendance. … Running back Marshawn Lynch, who held out at the beginning of training camp, is working back in form quickly. He made several nice runs in team drills, including a touchdown that ended with cornerback Richard Sherman playfully slapping the ball out of his hands after Lynch scored.