A trip to the grocery store could soon make you ponder your mortality.

A temporary art exhibit, across the street from Trader Joe’s is encouraging shoppers to consider what they want to accomplish before they die.

The wall is part of the “Before I Die…” interactive global art project that “invites people of all ages to share their personal Bucket List aspirations” in a public space.

Distinctive Life, a Houston-area based funeral home with businesses in Dallas and Austin, partnered with the Lowest Greenville Collective, a business association for the more than 70 businesses along Greenville Avenue, to bring the wall to Dallas.

Mark Brinkerhofff, the founder of Think Brink Communications, who represents Distinctive Life said the funeral home helped first bring the wall to Houston.

Brinkerhoff said he and Leah Vargas, the vice president of marketing for Distinctive Life, then reached out to Jessica Burnham, the executive director of the Lowest Greenville Collective to bring the exhibit to Dallas for the first time.

The wall will be officially unveiled Tuesday at 6:30 p.m. at 1931 Greenville Avenue, near Sears Street, on the EZ Pawn wall across the street from Trader Joe’s.

Greenville Avenue Pizza Company will be hosting a social for guests prior to the unveiling, Burnham said.

Burnham, who is a graduate student at the University of North Texas, said the goal of the collective is to “open communication within the businesses, the surrounding neighborhoods and the city at large.”

She said there has been a lot more foot-traffic in the area since renovations in the past few years.

“The whole area has changed for the better,” Burnham said. “This couldn’t be a more perfect art exhibit to bring the community in and have the community leave their mark.”

The wall will be cleared before its unveiling and people are encouraged to write down anything they may have on their bucket list. Chalk will be provided.

Some examples that could be seen on the wall earlier this week included people wanting to “fall in love”, “run a marathon” and “see my family stress free.”

The wall was created in 2011 by New Orleans-based artist Candy Chang after she lost “a significant loved one.” According to a news release, “following a significant period of grief and depression she found clarity in her life by contemplating death.”

Chang painted the side of an abandoned house in New Orleans with the sentence “Before I die I want to…”. The next day it was full of responses.

Since then, more than 430 walls have been recreated in 29 languages in more than 64 countries, the release said.

The display will be open to the public through the spring and possibly into the summer, Brinkerhoff. He hopes it will move to another location in the city in the fall.

To learn more, visit beforeidie.cc.