It began just after I started to show. Friends, acquaintances and even strangers began to lecture me about breast-feeding. I was moved when mothers described the joy of bonding this way, but people talked a lot about antibodies, too. One night at a party, a woman I barely knew told me all about colostrum, racial disparities in breast-feeding rates and how I absolutely had to have a hands-free pump.

By the time the teacher at our hospital birth class announced that she wouldn’t explain how to use formula because it was against hospital regulations, I was pretty fed up. I wasn’t sure if it was formula itself or talking about it that was against the rules, but either way I had had enough of the righteous zeal that surrounds breast-feeding. Surely a mother could bond with her baby if she was feeding her with a bottle?

It turns out that American mothers breast-feed just as much, and often for much longer, than women in many other Western countries. Seventy-nine percent of American mothers initiate breast-feeding, and 49 percent are still breast-feeding at 6 months. We come close to Canada, where just over half of women are still breast-feeding at 6 months, and we are way ahead of Britain, at 34 percent. Yes, Norway is higher, but France is much lower. In 2011, we met or exceeded most of the 2010 Healthy People Goals set by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Yet the moral fervor surrounding breast-feeding continues unabated, with a steady stream of advocacy and education campaigns, hospital initiatives, social pressure and workplace and insurance regulations designed to push breast-feeding numbers still higher.

A lot of what passes for breast-feeding advocacy, though, actually promotes breast pumping, not breast-feeding. In 2010, the Affordable Care Act amended the Fair Labor Standards Act so that it now requires employers to provide “reasonable break time” and space for women to pump breast milk at work. Not that the law requires them to be paid for those breaks. Since 2013, the ACA has also required insurance companies to reimburse mothers for breast pumps. Faced with the gap between the standard recommendation to breast-feed exclusively for six months and the absence of federally mandated paid maternity leave, women are expected to pump on the job so that someone else can feed their baby breast milk from a bottle. One large study of American women found that roughly 85 percent of those who breast-fed were also using a pump. Nowhere else in the world is pumping so widespread.

Oddly, the fervor of breast-feeding advocacy has ramped up even as medical research — published in The Journal of the American Medical Association, BMJ in Britain and The American Journal of Clinical Nutrition — has begun to report that the effects of breast-feeding are probably “modest.”

Some sobering results have come from Dr. Michael Kramer’s Probit trial, which has studied a wide range of outcomes among about 14,000 mother-infant pairs for 16 years. Kramer’s research does not compare breast-feeding with non-breast-feeding, but by measuring dose response effects in a large group of subjects, his research challenges the findings of many observational studies. While Probit found that breast-feeding had some benefits, including for cognitive development, it did not reduce the risk of obesity, asthma, allergies, dental cavities or attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder.

The benefits associated with breast-feeding just don’t seem to warrant the scrutiny and interventions surrounding U.S. infant feeding practices. A recent British study found that breast-feeding has no effect on IQ from toddlerhood through adolescence. And a meta-analysis of the research on breast-feeding done by the U.S. Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality in 2007 concludes that much of that research is weak: Some studies are too small, or they fail to control for confounding variables. The findings themselves are often inconclusive. One study will find evidence of an effect and another won’t — so we just don’t know which results to trust.

I had my doubts from the start that breast-feeding would protect my children from everything from Crohn’s disease to cancer, but in the end, I breast-fed for a long time. Years. The truth is that it was easy for me, it worked for my family, and I always felt like this time was precious, something I would never be able to do again. But even though I wasn’t breast-feeding primarily for the health benefits, wading into this research was pretty disappointing.

Doctors and researchers generally do agree that breast-feeding reduces the risk of infection, at least during the period a baby is actually breast-feeding. That is certainly not nothing, but here, too, we shouldn’t get carried away. As the director of the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality explained in 2009, if six babies are breast-fed exclusively for six months, one of them will not get an ear infection she otherwise would have had. That’s about 5,400 hours of breast-feeding to prevent one ear infection. If 26 women breast-feed exclusively for six months, they can collectively prevent one hospitalization for a respiratory tract infection.

So where does all of this moral fervor about breast-feeding come from?

Counterintuitively, for those of us who identify formula manufacturers with big business, the contemporary obsession with breast milk is also driven in part by big business — including the companies that manufacture breast pumps, the companies that make breast-milk-based nutritional supplements, and the companies that sell breast-feeding accessories. The ACA regulation requiring insurance to cover the cost of breast pumps hands breast-pump manufacturers a substantial subsidy. Market analysts predicted that this regulation alone would expand the breast-pump market by more than 50 percent, to almost $1 billion a year in the United States alone, by 2020.

The breast-feeding accessory market, for things like clothes, pillows and nutritional supplements, will be roughly double that. Not surprisingly, some of the research that corroborates the benefits of human milk for infants is funded by companies like Medela, which makes breast pumps, and Prolacta Bioscience, a company that makes infant nutrition supplements from human breast milk. This does not mean that the research is false, but it does mean they have a vested interest in the outcome. It also supports a subtle shift from breast-feeding to the consumption of human milk — a commodity that now routinely trades on the open market.

Most of the intensity surrounding breast-feeding, however, has nothing to do with profits. Breast-feeding has become an important marker of who we are and what we believe in. For some it signals a commitment to attachment parenting, for others it is an environmental issue, and for still others it is a protest against the predatory marketing practices of the big formula companies. Some parents on the Christian right see breast-feeding as a sign of the rightness of heterosexual marriage, with different roles for men and women, and some feminists believe it is an emblem of female empowerment and the life-sustaining force of female bodies.

Recently, breast-feeding advocacy has begun to generate a backlash as some women, including some feminists, chafe against the message that women who don’t breast-feed are bad mothers. We all want to protect our children from every danger that we can, but some experts believe that up to 15 percent of women don’t produce enough milk to feed their babies. And it’s a lot easier to comply with the recommendation to breast-feed exclusively for six months if you are a stay-at-home mom with a breadwinning partner. In a country where the average working mother who goes on maternity leave returns to work 10 weeks after having a baby (and nearly 30 percent of new mothers take no maternity leave at all), breast-feeding for any length of time is very hard to do.

The effect of the moral fervor surrounding breast-feeding goes beyond mere shaming. It also reflects, and reinforces, the divisions of race and class that have long characterized U.S. social life. Although 91 percent of women in the top income quintile breast-feed, 71 percent of those below the poverty line initiate breast-feeding. Whereas 81 percent of white women breast-feed, 62 percent of black women do. Breast-feeding is a lifestyle choice the majority now make, but it is more common among white middle- and upper-middle-class parents.

In other words, the breast-feeding imperative has elevated the parenting habits of that relatively privileged minority to a universal standard of good parenting. In 2012, the surgeon general and the American Academy of Pediatrics identified breast-feeding as a public health issue. Although that designation doesn’t mean much, practically speaking, it was intended to make clear that breast-feeding is a civic responsibility and a matter of public interest, not just a personal choice. In so doing it portrays women who don’t breast-feed — who are more likely to be poor and African-American — not only as bad parents, but also as irresponsible citizens.

Demographic differences in breast-feeding rates also justify government interventions that punish poor women who do not breast-feed. This isn’t just the unobtrusive little “nudge” in the right direction, designed to compel people to make better decisions. It’s more like a shove, with a kick for good measure.

Middle-class women primarily experience breast-feeding advocacy in the form of education campaigns and limits on their access to formula in hospitals. Poor women are vulnerable to more explicit coercion. The Special Supplemental Nutrition Program for Women, Infants and Children, known as WIC, which serves more than 50 percent of infants born in the United States every year, offers different benefits to breast-feeding and non-breast-feeding mothers and babies.

Women who breast-feed are eligible for WIC for twice as long as women who do not breast-feed, and they get an “enhanced food package,” which includes vouchers for a wider range of more nutritious food. Unlike formula-fed babies, who are eligible only for infant cereal and fruit and vegetable-based baby food, breast-feeding babies also receive meat-based baby food, which is richer in iron. The difference in benefits is intended to create incentives for poor mothers to breast-feed, but withholding food from mothers at nutritional risk, and from their babies, seems more like punishment to me.

And that is just the problem.

All too often, breast-feeding advocacy crosses the line from supporting a woman in her decision to breast-feed into compelling a woman to breast-feed. If breast-feeding is the measure of our moral worth, it isn’t long before the idea of a mother not breast-feeding her child summons the familiar tropes of bad parenting and irresponsible citizenship that we have long deployed against poor women and minorities.

Does all this mean that women should stop breast-feeding? No. If you want to, if it’s easy for you, if you are healthy, if your baby is thriving on breast milk, if it’s important to you, then by all means do it. If I had to do it all over again, I probably would. But it would be different. Even though I might breast-feed as a way to nourish my baby, I could no longer use it as a talisman to ward off evil and disease. It’s a perfectly good choice, but it’s not the only choice, and it may not always be the better choice.

Surprisingly, the question of choice, which is central to so many women’s issues, is almost totally absent from discussions about infant feeding. Some breast-feeding advocates actually identify “choice” as the language of the enemy. Breast-feeding, they insist, is a maternal obligation.

But it is not choice that is the enemy. There is a difference between supporting a woman’s decision to breast-feed through policy changes like improved maternity leave, flexible work schedules and on-site day care facilities, and compelling women to breast-feed by demonizing formula. A woman should breast-feed because she wants to, not because someone tells her she has to.

Courtney Jung is a professor of political science at the University of Toronto and the author of “Lactivism.” Reach her at courtney.jung@utoronto.ca.