You’ll need a bigger scythe to hack through the small-screen jungle this fall. From broadcast networks to cable and streaming services, a profusion of outlets are sprouting original programming.

Comic book heroes will vie for attention as “Constantine” tackles Hellblazer, “Gotham” envisions the Batman origin story and “The Flash” finds his super powers in a spinoff of “Arrow.” Most of these won’t be as long-lived as their source material.

Minorities will be abundant. “Black-ish,” “Cristela” and “Jane the Virgin” are just the most obvious series delivering diversity onscreen, poking fun at ethnic and racial stereotypes and toying with identity politics. The upward mobility of immigrants in the workforce will be a frequent source of dramedy. While African-Americans and Hispanics are most prominent, they’re not alone. The Henry Higgins-Eliza Doolittle class formula of Pygmalion/My Fair Lady is recast with an Asian male instructing a younger, “selfie”-obsessed Caucasian female. TV is moving on from requisite gay characters to a broader rainbow coalition.

SEE ALSO: List of new shows, night by night

Strong women will be omnipresent, some in silly portrayals (she’s a cop! she’s a mom! she’s Debra Messing!), some in politically relevant ones. “State of Affairs” stars Alfre Woodard as the president and Katherine Heigl as her trusted CIA analyst — and almost daughter-in-law (don’t ask), while “Madam Secretary” pictures Téa Leoni as a Secretary of State miraculously balancing work and family. Women reign in court: Kate Walsh is a “Bad Judge,” tough on the bench by day, wild on the party circuit by night. And women rule at law school: Viola Davis inspires fear in students, teaching them “How to Get Away with Murder.”

Some series hope to gain traction from star power and known quantities. “Red Band Society” on Fox parallels the popular book and film “The Fault in Our Stars,” a worthy weeper for teens.

Expect more daring subject matter outside of the commercial networks, notably Jeffrey Tambor (“Arrested Development”) as a father transitioning male-to-female on Amazon’s “Transparent,” a courageous, sincere dramedy; “The Affair,” a 10-episode drama from Showtime offering male-female perspectives on an extramarital hookup; and the latest from Ken Burns, a 14-hour triple biography of Theodore, Eleanor and Franklin on PBS, “The Roosevelts.”

The Top 10:

1. “Jane the Virgin” CW (Oct. 13)

2. “Black-ish” ABC (Sept. 24)

3. “Transparent” Amazon (Sept. 26)

4. “The Affair” Showtime (Oct. 12)

5. “Red Band Society” Fox (Sept. 17)

6. “The Roosevelts” PBS (Sept. 14)

7. “The Flash” CW (Oct. 7)

8. “Gotham” Fox (Sept. 22)

9. “How to Get Away with Murder” ABC (Sept. 25)

10. “Cristela” ABC (Oct. 10)

Joanne Ostrow: 303-954-1830, jostrow@denverpost.com or twitter.com/ostrowdp

Six nights of newcomers

Monday

“Gotham” Fox Sept. 22 — The very dark Batman-origin story from Bruno Heller (“Rome,” “The Mentalist”), full of hints about future heroes and villains — see how the Penguin became the Penguin, and so on. Ben McKenzie is Detective James Gordon. Jada Pinkett Smith is the standout as a new villain. You don’t have to know the Bruce Wayne backstory, but it helps.

“Scorpion”CBS Sept. 22 — The geek ensemble shall inherit the Earth. Genius misfits are recruited to solve the world’s problems, while Katharine McPhee (“Glee”) serves to help them — and her and her genius son — cope with everyday life. Imagine “MacGyver” meets “Big Bang” as a drama.

“Jane the Virgin”CW Oct. 13 — The best surprise of the season. Gina Rodriguez is a breakout star in this winning dramedy adapted from a telenovela about Hispanic family culture. Accidentally inseminated by her doctor, the devout Jane (Rodriguez) must navigate family, religion and boyfriend. Grandma speaks Spanish (with English subtitles), while her daughter and granddaughter respond to her in English. Edgy and demure at once, it both knocks and embraces the telenovela form.

“State of Affairs” NBC Nov. 17 — Built on too many coincidences and the premise that a woman can’t hold a high-pressure job and be a wife and mom at the same time. In this case, Katherine Heigl (“Grey’s Anatomy”) is a CIA analyst whose fiancé, the president’s son, is deceased from the start. She’s the right hand to the president (Alfre Woodard), her not-quite mother-in-law. Heigl wants very much to be taken seriously, but her effort is distracting.

Tuesday

“Utopia”Fox Sept. 7 — With a Sunday start, then moving to Tuesday, the reality series aims to hook NFL viewers. Fifteen wildly different strangers must form a society from scratch. Libertarian, pansexual, hillbilly, Manhattan snob… it’s all in the casting, of course.

“The Flash” CW Oct. 7 — A promising comic-book adaptation that is more optimistic and full of humanity than most. Grant Gustin (“Glee,” “90210”) plays forensic scientist Barry Allen, who becomes the costumed fastest-man-alive and crimefighter thanks to a freak accident. With Jesse L. Martin (“Law & Order”) and Tom Cavanagh (“Ed”). A worthy spinoff of “The Arrow” from producers Greg Berlanti and Andrew Kreisberg and another positive surprise from CW.

“Selfie” ABC Sept. 30 — Karen Gillan is the draw as Eliza Dooley, a social-media addict who realizes she has no real friends. John Cho as Henry will teach her etiquette. Cute idea for a romcom, but where does it go after the pilot? Also, why won’t ABC let Gillan use her lovely native Scottish accent?

“Manhattan Love Story”ABC Sept. 30 — What he’s thinking versus what she’s thinking. Jeff Lowell (“The Drew Carey Show”) has created a retrograde romcom about the battle of the sexes: He’s obsessed with boobs, she’s obsessed with purses. The gimmick feels old by the end of the first act.

“NCIS: New Orleans” CBS Sept. 23 — Scott Bakula leads the latest spinoff of the long-lived procedural brand. Expect Mark Harmon and company to do crossover episodes to launch the new hour.

“Marry Me”NBC Oct. 14 — Will the real-life romance of Casey Wilson (“Happy Endings”) and Ken Marino (“Party Down”) be enough to sustain this romcom from the creator of “Happy Endings”? There are some very funny moments here, but they might not be enough.

“Forever” ABC Sept. 23 — Think “Quincy M.E.” plus naked Welshman. Ioan Gruffudd is a hunk as a deathless New York medical examiner, solving crimes and living forever. Each time he dies he’s reborn, naked, in a body of water. Only his buddy, played by Judd Hirsch, knows his secret. If only Jack Klugman had been prettier…

Wednesday

“The Mysteries of Laura” NBC Sept. 17 — Another embarrassment for Debra Messing (“Smash”), who plays a detective with twin boys. Cleaning up crime, cleaning up grime. Another “having it all” hour about women trying to hold serious jobs while serving as homemakers, apparently the miracle of the millennium.

“Red Band Society” Fox Sept. 17 — A soulful ensemble drama about teens with long-term illnesses living in a hospital. With Octavia Spencer (“The Help”) as a tough-love nurse, Dave Annabel (“Brothers and Sisters”) as a doctor, and more including Wilson Cruz and Griffin Dunne. It’s not unrelentingly sad: “I had a brother who was in a coma,” creator Margaret Nagle told critics, “and I grew up in pediatric hospitals.” She aims to replicate “the black humor, the fun, the getting to know the kids that you would never know in any other situation” and uplifting spirit. “So yes,” she said, “there are serious things that these kids are going to have to face, but it is not a show that has a body count.”

“Black-ish” ABC Sept. 24 — How to hold on to cultural identity in assimilated America? What to do when your African-American son wants a Bar Mitzvah? Anthony Anderson ponders these questions in this promising comedy about a contemporary American family dealing with race, specifically mixed race. Tracee Ellis Ross (“Girlfriends”) is terrific as his wife. Laurence Fishburne is hilariously cranky as his dad. From executive producer Larry Wilmore and “America’s Next Top Model” co-creator Kenya Barris.

“Stalker”CBS Oct. 1 — Possibly the worst pilot of the season, a senselessly violent peep show from Kevin Williamson, from whom we expect better. Dylan McDermott and Maggie Q play LAPD detectives specializing in stalking cases.

Thursday

“Gracepoint” Fox Oct. 2 — The American adaptation of the terrific Brit hit “Broadchurch.” David Tennant reprises his role (this time with an American accent); Anna Gunn plays his fellow detective. Fox promises different twists than the original.

“Bad Judge” NBC Oct. 2 — Kate Walsh is the tough criminal judge by day, hard-partying girl by night whose life/heart may be changed when a young boy needs a home…. Ridiculously over the top, from Funny or Die’s Adam McKay and Will Ferrell. Can’t imagine watching the second episode.

“The McCarthys”CBS Oct. 30 — Laurie Metcalf and Jack McGee lead a solid cast as a yelling Boston Irish family. Loud and sitcom-y, but funny. The sports-crazed family doesn’t know what to make of gay son Ronny, played by Tyler Ritter (son of John Ritter).

“A to Z” NBC Oct. 2 — Ben Feldman (“Mad Men”) and Cristin Milioti (“How I Met Your Mother”) are appealing as singles Andrew and Zelda in another romcom about the peculiarities of dating in the Internet age. The timeline of the couple’s relationship is narrated by Katey Sagal.

“How to Get Away with Murder” ABC Sept. 25 — Viola Davis plays an intimidating law-school prof who, along with her students, becomes embroiled in a murder case. Shonda Rhimes has created a star vehicle for Davis, but her character is very much a mystery — even confusing. “I hope they wonder about what her real motivations are throughout the whole season,” said producer Peter Nowalk.

Friday

“Cristela” ABC Oct. 10 — Cristela Alonzo grew up on the Texas-Mexico border, raised by a single mom who spoke no English. They were squatters in an abandoned diner. She knows whereof she speaks in this up-by-the-bootstraps comedy based on her life, which addresses issues of immigration and class with smart humor. As the title character, she plays a striver going on her sixth year in law school who works as an unpaid intern at a law firm.

“Constantine” NBC Oct. 24 — An adaptation of DC Comics’ “Hellblazer,” with Matt Ryan (“Criminal Minds”) as demon hunter and master of the occult John Constantine. With Lucy Griffiths. Lots of supernatural action, less character development.

Saturday

Report to your DVR. No new series premiere on Saturdays, so it’s catch-up time.

Sunday

“Madam Secretary”CBS Sept. 21 — Téa Leoni navigates global politics, office politics and her home life as secretary of state after inheriting the office from someone who died. The idea came to exec producer Lori McCreary during the Benghazi hearings. Asked about any similarities to Hillary Clinton, writer Barbara Hall joked that season 4 switches to “Madam President.”

“Mulaney” Fox Oct. 5 — A mishmash of a comedy about a comedian and the world he inhabits. A vehicle for stand-up comic John Mulaney (“Kroll Show”) with Martin Short, Nasim Pedrad (“SNL”), Elliott Gould, Seaton Smith (“Totally Biased”), Zack Pearlman (“The Virginity Hit”) and guests Penny Marshall and Lorraine Bracco. Producer Lorne Michaels recruits everyone who owes him, and it’s still not funny.

“The Affair” Showtime Oct. 12 — A 10-episode drama from the producers of “In Treatment.” A tense, emotional ride with shifting his/her perspectives on an extramarital affair. Dominic West (“The Wire”), Ruth Wilson (“Luther”), Maura Tierney and Joshua Jackson make it sizzle.