Generators can be very important when the power goes out, especially in a winter ice storm, where temperatures can drop below freezing and a home cannot be heated because of no electricity.

KAKE News spoke to an expert about generators and has tips for customers wanting to buy a generator.

Jim Ellington works for Home Depot in Hutchinson, prior to that, he worked as a building code inspector for 20 years.

Ellington says people need to know what they want to use the generator for and how they want to use it.

He says most homes can use as low as a 2,200 watt generator to power most all items. Ellington says high electric needing items, like electric stoves, electric dryers, electric water heaters or electric HVAC systems, cannot usually be used on a generator used for residential settings. People with gas furnaces require much less electricity to make the heater work, the main electrical item is the blower motor for the heater to distribute the air, which is not a high wattage item.

When considering buying a generator, talk to an employee from the store you are considering purchasing a generator from and explain what you need and they can help you figure out the best generator for your needs. They can also help you find the accessories that a generator needs to function in your home, such as electrical splitters and adapters. If you plan on using extension cords to power your items, it is suggested you use 14 gauge wire or larger in the cord.

Ellington says always follow the directions that come with the generator. They will tell you where to place the generator and how to prevent the deadly exhaust gases from building up. Never run a generator in a confined space such as a garage or home.

Some generators and accessories allow you to directly plug your generator into your junction box or breaker box. Ellington says the process is simple to do it, but does suggest that you get an electrician to help install it.

Most generators come with the oil that they need. If not, be sure to purchase the recommended oil. Some manufactures use very specific oil in their machines.

When the power comes back on, be sure to properly store your generator. Gasoline will go bad over time. Ellington says that with the infrequent use a generator gets, it is best to run the generator out of gas or drain the system when you are done using it. Adding fuel stabilizer can help keep the gas from going bad for up to six months if you do not drain the fuel system.

Generators with electric starters need to have the batteries charged up, Ellington suggests getting a battery charger that can constantly charge the battery at very low levels, also known as a trickle charge.

There is a catch to generators. They are a very coveted item for thieves. The problem is, it is dangerous to keep generators in confined spaces where they can accumulate deadly exhaust gases or overheat. You need to find a place to keep the generator that will keep it from being stolen but still be safe to operate.

Generators can be very expensive and it is important to get the correct generator for you needs. The best advice is to talk with a generator dealer and assess your needs to those that a generator can provide.