Pennsylvania Medical Society's Shapiro blasts Highmark cuts in payment to doctors

Email Newsletters Sign up for one of our email newsletters.

Highmark Inc.'s recent Affordable Care Act-related cuts to physician payments damaged trust between the insurer and doctors, the Pennsylvania Medical Society's president wrote in a Wednesday letter to its members.

Highmark reduced payment by 4.5 percent for treatment that doctors provide to patients who bought health plans on the federal marketplace, one of several actions the insurer took to stem $773 million in losses on the marketplace for 2014 and 2015. The insurer also raised the plans' premiums, which had been among the lowest in the nation.

The medical society called the payment reduction unfair, saying that doctors should not be held responsible for Highmark's premium pricing.

Dr. Scott Shapiro, the society's president, said in the letter that he had met with Highmark officials Friday.

“In order to begin the process of building mutual trust, we proposed the need to either immediately reverse the cuts or pursue a new clear and specific initiative that will help physicians recoup the cuts and potentially increase practice revenue within the time that physicians are already spending when seeing patients enrolled in Highmark's individual ACA exchange products,” Shapiro wrote in the letter. He was unavailable for comment.

The society is working with the insurer to expand value-based payments, in which doctors receive higher-than-normal reimbursement when they meet quality standards, he said in the letter. Shapiro said the new payments will be tested in 2016 and launched as early as January 2017.

Highmark has value-based payment programs in place and plans to add more in the near future, Highmark spokesman Aaron Billger said.

“We welcome continued conversations on collaboration with the Pennsylvania Medical Society,” Billger said. “And our focus when it comes to health care is a system that is really, truly physician-led.”

Wes Venteicher is a Tribune-Review staff writer. Reach him at 412-380-5676 or wventeicher@tribweb.com.