Longmont police cadet training •Cadets make the full starting salary of $55,080 a year. •Graduates receive a $600 weapon allowance to buy a handgun from an approved list of weapons. It must be a .45 caliber or a 9 mm. •Department pays about $6,000 for uniforms, Taser, radio, handcuffs, bullet-proof vest, duty belt with accessories — including holster — jackets, helmet, batons, pepper spray and badge. That cost does not include a department-supplied cell phone. Officers pay for their own boots. •It takes about 10 months to fully train an officer. •Background checks can cost anywhere from $500 to $2,500 per cadet, depending on whether they live in Colorado or out of state. After an extensive testing process, 25 percent of people who move on to background checks aren't recommended for hiring. •It costs $5,000 to send a cadet to the academy.

Five Longmont police cadets cruise city streets on a Tuesday morning: two in a Dodge Magnum, three piled into an aging Ford Crown Victoria, each with a long list of addresses and landmarks.

They are learning the ins and outs of Longmont — important knowledge to have for racing to an emergency call, when checking Google Maps on one's iPhone is ill-advised.

They are also getting to know one another.

Advertisement

"I feel we are pretty lucky as a group because we were all hired at the same time and are getting to go to the academy at the same time," cadet Kyle Zulauf said. "We'll be working together on the street, so it's really nice to be together for that training phase."

Zulauf, along with Cooper Arvisais, Chris White, Jocelyn Plascencia and Jina Pollock, all head to the Adams County Sheriff's Academy for 22 weeks of classroom and practical training. When they return to Longmont, they will undergo about three-and-a-half months more instruction at the Longmont Police Department before they are cut loose on city streets. In all, it's about 10 months of training.

Joyce Jackson takes measurements for a uniform for police recruit Cooper Arvisais as classmate Kyle Zulauf, right, looks on Wednesday at Adamson Police Products in Frederick. (Matthew Jonas / Longmont Times-Call)

The latest batch of would-be officers comes from a variety of backgrounds — an evidence technician, an ex-soldier, a records clerk and a former deputy sheriff. Pollock is a long-time dog groomer and would like to work with the canine unit eventually. They all have college degrees in criminal justice.

Plascencia, who worked as a records clerk at the Longmont Police Department for three years, has wanted to be a police officer since she was a child. She said the job isn't all about making arrests but helping people.

"When I lived in (Riverside), Calif., I lived in a very Latin community," she said. "I wanted to be somebody kids can look up to and know you don't always have to go down the wrong path."

White and Arvisais both have backgrounds in law enforcement, as a Denver County deputy sheriff and a Boulder Police Department evidence technician, respectively. White thought about becoming a fighter pilot but canned the idea when he discovered that he "doesn't like spinning."

Arvisais has also worked as a firefighter and emergency medical technician and volunteers for the Boulder Emergency Squad.

"I have a pretty strong background in fire, EMS and technical rescue," Arvisais said. "I was looking for something different but still wanted to be involved in public service and helping the community, so that is what drew me to law enforcement."

Zulauf earned a master's degree in criminal justice at the University of Northern Colorado after serving in the 82nd Airborne. Many of the women in his family are teachers and school administrators. His father and grandfather were both Yuma County sheriffs, and an uncle was Yuma chief of police. He would like to eventually be a school resource officer to combine the two family traditions.

"My whole family is very service-oriented," he said. "In my family, you are either a teacher or you're a police officer."

Adams County Sheriff's Office Cmdr. Rick McNair said 32 cadets from 12 different law enforcement agencies are set to go through the coming academy at the Flatrock Regional Training Center.

They will learn about state laws, arrests, search and seizures, interviews and interrogations, arrest control, firearms and driving from a variety of instructors who include police officers, judges, doctors and attorneys, he said.

"We do a lot of firearms and handguns because you have to be able to make split-second decisions, especially now with everything going on in the news," McNair said. "The more training you do, the better."

McNair said recruits undergo anti-bias instruction to aid with work in a multi-cultural community, training to interact with people with mental and physical disabilities and use-of-force training so officers know how to respond appropriately in a situation when force becomes necessary.

"You're making split-second decisions a lot of the time," he said. "It's always easy to Monday-morning quarterback, so that's why we try to do a lot of scenario-based training."

McNair said cadets also learn about "emotional survival" because police work is stressful as officers see things most people don't and interact with people at their worst. They encourage officers to have interests outside of work and a healthy family and social life.

"It's a difficult, difficult job with different hours and different things you have to go through," he said. "On the other hand, it's a really rewarding job. You get to make a difference."

John Bear: 303-684-5212, bearj@timescall.com or twitter.com/jonbearwithme