DETROIT – Sen. Elizabeth Warren lit up a gathering of liberals with a fiery speech Friday, championing a progressive agenda amid continuing calls for her to reconsider a run for president in 2016.

Warren, D-Mass., held up her campaign to implement the 3-year-old Consumer Financial Protection Bureau as evidence progressive ideas can succeed, even in a political environment still largely overwhelmed by big-moneyed interests and scores of lobbyists. She urged an unrelenting approach in future fights in order to score more victories.

“If we push back hard, we can win. We fight, we win,” she told the Netroots Nation gathering at the Cobo Center in downtown Detroit. “We don’t win every time, but we’re learning to win. We’re learning to win and we will keep winning.”

[READ: Joe Biden Interrupted by Anti-Deportation Protesters]

Warren was welcomed to the Netroots stage by chants of “Run, Liz, Run,” spurred by an unaffiliated draft movement to convince her to wage a White House campaign. Warren has repeatedly said she’s not running for president and when she heard the calls onstage Friday morning, she told the audience, “Sit down, sit down.”

That didn’t stop a newly formed group – Ready for Warren – from handing out signs, stickers and hats promoting a Warren White House bid before and after she spoke.

Warren’s unwavering call to arms could easily be applied toward a galvanizing message in a national campaign. But it’s more likely that Warren’s true goal was to inspire more activists to join a larger movement she’s content leading from the U.S. Senate.

On her pet issue of economic inequality and fairness, she plainly laid out the stakes in a vivid way that captivated the crowd.

“A kid gets caught with a few ounces of pot and goes to jail but a big bank launders drug money and no one gets arrested,” she claimed in one of her most popular lines.

She spent a great deal of time outlining the power of big corporations and the special deals and loopholes they are able to attain because of their outsized influence, but her repeated refrain was a call to political combat.

[ALSO: In Iowa, Chris Christie Finds an Opinion]

“We can whine about it. We can whimper about it or we can fight back. I’m fighting back,” she said to cheers.

While Warren’s speech was devoid of specific policy prescriptions or pieces of legislation, she spent the final few minutes issuing a list of sweeping positions that unite the left, including tougher regulations and oversight of Wall Street and making sure blue-collar families can earn a livable wage and retire with a social safety net.

Afterward, some attendees were visibly inspired by Warren’s address, but also cognizant of the challenges the movement faces.

“It was overwhelming, it was great. On one hand it made me feel so hopeful. On the other hand, I know that it’s going to be a really big fight,” says Celia Young Wenkel, a retired child protection services worker in Michigan who counts poverty as one of her top issues.

“I’m ready to go,” a wide-eyed Wenkel continued. “She’s very inspiring. When she talks, she just nails it.”