Fire sprinkler installer Barry Walter was working in Bend last week, trying to ignore the pain in his elbow that kept him awake for three nights in a row.

He planned to see a doctor for the elbow, which he banged after slipping on a patch of ice, once he was back home in Sandy. Then he spotted Mountain Medical Immediate Care on Third Street.

Walter walked into the waiting room around 11 a.m. on Jan. 6 and was on his way back to work by noon. “It was really fast,” he said. Having used urgent care in the Portland area, he added, “I was surprised.”

Bend’s urgent care capacity has grown substantially in the past five years, but the number of people who want care according to their own schedules has grown even more. So not everyone has a speedy experience like Walter’s. Wait times range from 20 minutes to two hours, depending on the season, day of week, time of day and which provider a person chooses.

Mountain Medical’s owner, Dr. James Stone, said his health care providers strive to move everyone from waiting room to exam room in 20 to 30 minutes and out the door in under an hour. “I’ve had mornings where we’ve opened and there’ll be five people waiting at the door,” Stone said. “There’s no way to plan for that.”

There are patterns that prospective patients can try to work around. Across the board, urgent care clinic operators said they are busy on Monday mornings and slow throughout the week from 1 to 3 p.m.

St. Charles Immediate Care advertises on its website a 30-minute wait, but clinic supervisor Beth Reynolds said that’s not based on real-time data. Rather, it’s a “best average.” The worst-case scenario is 90 minutes in the lobby, plus another 45 minutes in an exam room, waiting for a provider, she said.

Bend has three competing urgent care providers, but the heavyweights, St. Charles Health System and Bend Memorial Clinic, operate on the assumption that most people just want to be seen that day without an appointment.

“Immediate care is a convenience thing for people,” Reynolds said. “They’re going to be seen and out within a reasonable amount of time.”

Bend Memorial Clinic moved its west-side location to the Old Mill District in 2014 and tripled the number of exam rooms in anticipation of demand from people who are newly insured under the Affordable Care Act, Chief Operating Officer Christy McLeod said.

“We quickly grew into that space, literally in a matter of months,” she said. “We see everything in urgent care now, not just acute needs. The full spectrum.”

As a result, McLeod said wait times can be as long as two hours. And that’s not always apparent when a patient walks in and sees an empty lobby. There are 14 exam rooms, and if each one is full, waits will be longer, she said. “We try to manage patient expectations by letting people know,” she said.

People often choose an urgent care clinic based on its location or affiliation with a primary-care provider. One way to make the experience as efficient as possible is to consider each provider’s capabilities.

BMC has digital X-ray and ultrasound machines and labs in its three main locations. The east-side Bend and Redmond clinics also have CT machines. If someone goes to St. Charles Immediate Care on the east side with acute abdominal pain, he or she will be referred to BMC because the evaluation requires imaging and lab work, Reynolds said.

Many young, healthy people are using St. Charles Immediate Care like a primary-care office because their complaints are limited to colds, sore throats and sprains, Reynolds said.

When St. Charles opens a second immediate-care clinic in the fall on the south end of town, it will be staffed by doctors who also have a primary-care practice in the same location. The new building will also house X-ray, ultrasound and CT imaging and a lab.

While local health providers are expanding, Central Oregon has yet to attract any of the national or regional chains that offer quick-access medicine. Walgreen’s and CVS have no clinics in Oregon, and Zoom+, based in Hillsboro, has no presence in Central Oregon.

Local urgent care hours are relatively limited. The earliest that any of the clinics open is 8 a.m., and the latest closing time is 7 p.m.

St. Charles started out in 2010 with weekday hours of 7 a.m. to 7 p.m. but found that most patients arrived just before 8 a.m., Reynolds said. Shrinking the schedule by an hour on each end resulted in a loss of patients at first, but after a while the volume rebounded, she said.

“The town kind of shuts down by 9,” she said.

Another limitation to local urgent care is the lack of a 24-hour pharmacy, Reynolds said. When seeing the last patients at 6 p.m., St. Charles providers push to have them out the door with their prescriptions before the drugstores close, she said. “A 24-hour pharmacy would give us, as a business, options,” she said.

— Reporter: 541-617-7860, kmclaughlin@bendbulletin.com