For more than 40 years, Judy Young and her 75-year-old spouse, Meg Chalmers, shared so much: camping, antiquing, traveling. The retired nurses from Northwood, N.H., planned many more active years together.

“We thought we would have a wonderful retirement, doing many things, enjoying a fantastic quality of life, having our health,” said 68-year-old Young.

But two years ago, Chalmers was diagnosed with early Alzheimer’s, and Young assumed a new role, that of caregiver. After six months of wrestling with what she called daily grief, Young realized she was suffering from depression.

Many such baby boomers will cope with depression later in life, when the illness can present symptoms and challenges specific to that age group.

Seniors who are depressed are more likely than those who are not to die or have serious complications after a major medical event. While s eniors are less likely to be depressed than younger people, the size of the baby boom population will demand new strategies to care for them.

Depression in seniors is often misunderstood.

“The public thinks, ‘Well, if I was losing my ability to walk or losing my vision or hearing or people that I love, that it’s normal to be depressed when you get older,’ and that’s just not true,” said Stephen Bartels, director of the Centers for Health and Aging at Dartmouth College.

The most important misconception about seniors and depression is the assumption that a person who has never had it won’t develop it, said George Alexopoulos, a professor of psychiatry at Weill Cornell Medical College.

When Judy Young, a retired psychiatric nurse and psychotherapist, experienced her bout of depression — it was her first — she was 65.

Depressed older adults can have different symptoms from those of younger people. Rather than seem sad, they might be unable to experience pleasure.

They’re also more likely than younger people with depression to lose weight and to feel worse in the mornings. Delusions can be more frequent. Social withdrawal, irritability and loneliness can be more prominent as well, said James Ellison, director of the geriatric psychiatry program at McLean Hospital in Belmont, Mass.

Whereas some gradual cognitive slowness may be normal with aging, the despair and withdrawal of depression can spark a rapid, functional decline, including problems with concentration. Depressed seniors are more likely to fall, Bartels said. Poor sleep coupled with memory loss can impair reaction times in such tasks as driving and cooking.

If you suspect a decline in function due to depression in yourself or loved one, Ellison recommends that you consult a health-care professional.

Thanks to the support she’s received, Judy Young is feeling better. She takes each day as it comes, enjoying her 23-foot motor home and time in New Hampshire and Florida. She has a busy life coordinating her partner’s enrollment in an Alzheimer’s drug trial with a schedule of concerts, trips and visits with new and old friends.

“You have to be proactive about getting help for yourself,” she said. “That’s something that’s difficult for all of us.”