Solid effort includes two takeaways

The Buffaloes know it was far from perfect, and leaps and bounds of improvement must be made before CU tackles the juggernaut offenses of the Pac-12 Conference.

Yet for the second consecutive week, the Buffs' defense acquitted itself well.

Two early stops set the tone during Colorado's 48-14 dismantling of Massachusetts in its home opener Saturday, and the defense's final ledger also included three sacks, seven total tackles for loss, and two takeaways — including one late in the first half that clearly shifted the momentum in the Buffs' favor.

"It was great, but we've still got much work to do," senior cornerback Ken Crawley said. "We hustled to the ball. It was a devastating loss last week (at Hawaii), so we wanted to come out and execute on the mistakes we had last week and play ahead of the game."

While CU's defense was forced to make its season debut last week backed up in its own end after a blocked punt, the Buffs took full advantage of the chance to record a better start this week. The first two possessions for UMass included four incomplete passes, a total of one yard, and two quick punts.

"We've worked really hard as a defense and we're heading in the right direction," defensive end Derek McCartney said. "Obviously, we're not there yet. We've got a long way to go. But we're going to be great. Our guys won our one-on-one matchups, but we've got to do that every week."

Although UMass netted touchdowns on its next two possessions, the CU defense once again came up big late in the half.

Advertisement

With the Buffs holding a 21-14 lead, a sack by Chidobe Awuzie, one of his three tackles for loss on the day, eventually led to a UMass punt. CU subsequently converted a field goal before UMass once again threatened, using a questionable penalty against safety Afolabi Laguda to gain a first-and-goal at the 10.

Two plays later, though, Rifle native Ryan Moeller recorded his first career interception with a diving snare in the end zone. The Buffs wasted little time turning the pick into six points, and from there the rout was on.

"I'd say we were pretty decent. We still have to work on the little things like tackling and really the mental mistakes," Awuzie said. "Those are going to be important when we go into Pac-12 play. I think we just have to keep working on tackling, and everything else will play out."