What’s scary is that the numbers are so big that the severity of the eventual crash is going to be unimaginable.

Advertisement - story continues below

The Keynesians have found the mythical fountain of youth–or at least they think they have.

They have engineered an economic perpetual motion machine, the definition of which is a machine that can do work forever with no external energy added. In short, they believe they can magically turn economic iron into gold.

Of course, however, these things don’t really exist. They are against the laws of physics, and the current Leftist economic theory is against the laws of physics as well. There is no free economic lunch.

Advertisement – story continues below

I am speaking of the idea that a government can spend as much money as it wants, and print money to cover it–and there will be no long term consequences. The theory is that as long as the Federal Reserve keeps interest rates near zero, the government can borrow as much money as it wants because there are basically no debt service costs.

I recently had dinner with some left-of-center friends of mine. These are intelligent people, well educated and traveled. They looked me in the eye and calmly said that America can borrow as much money as it wants, and there will never be any problems because the Fed has found a way to prevent any consequence of this action.

The debt is not an issue, one man told me, who happens to be a professor of economics at a respected university. This is group think at its finest.

Advertisement – story continues below

America is at record levels of sovereign debt. We have not seen this level of debt-to-GDP ratio since WWII. The problem is there is not end in sight.

We are nearing eighteen trillion dollars in debt that we will have to pay back. The majority of the costs of Obamacare have not even kicked in yet. We cannot afford the interest on this debt if interest rates are allowed to normalize.

The Fed knows this, so they are printing money to buy these bonds themselves. In short, the American financial regulators are spending money that comes out of thin air. They are loaning money to themselves.

The ONLY long term reaction to this irresponsible behavior will be disaster. The American central bank has lost all credibility and even the appearance of professional, rational behavior.

Advertisement – story continues below

Ponzi schemes don’t last. They always crash. Most adults know this.

I can’t predict when or how this house of cards will fall, but it will fall. What’s scary is that the numbers are so big that the severity of the eventual crash is going to be unimaginable.

The views expressed in this opinion article are solely those of their author and are not necessarily either shared or endorsed by the owners of this website.