Topics: Cities, Dream City, Economics, Europe, European Politics, Nationalism, Innovation News, News, Politics News

In last weekend’s elections for the continent’s parliaments, anti-European Union fringe groups surged to majorities in France, the United Kingdom, Denmark and Greece. For the first time, voters endorsed the campaign to reduce or eliminate their countries’ involvement in the European project – to do away with the open borders, economic integration and shared institutions it has wrought over the past six decades.

In France, Le Monde proclaimed the election of the Front National had “devastated the French political landscape.” The United Kingdom Independence Party became the first party besides Labour or Tories to win a national election in over a century. Though turnout was low, and the Euroskeptics have not gained a majority in Strasbourg, European leaders have scheduled an emergency conference to address the results.

Just as states lurch away from Europe, regions are trying to withdraw from states. The first to go may be Scotland, which will hold an independence referendum in September. But Catalonia (Spain) and Flanders (Belgium) each made their wayward desires apparent in the European elections and may not be far behind. If they succeed, others might follow.

The two movements are superficially analogous, as individual members reject involvement in larger groups. But in politics and character, they are diametrically opposed – and represent two extreme possibilities for the European future.

Anti-immigrant, anti-globalization parties in the core states of the European Union owe their popularity to voters in the hinterland and around the cities that globalization has left behind. As the Economist stated this week, “they rarely thrive in large cities. In provincial towns, villages and suburbs around the continent, people whose jobs and livelihoods have been disrupted by immigration, outsourcing and automation no longer fit into the same social democratic ‘big tent’ as urban professionals, ethnic minority voters, students and public-sector workers.”

In France, for example, the Front National reached 40 percent of the vote in regions of the post-industrial north, once a left-wing stronghold, and 35 percent in the reactionary south. But it performed half as well in the well-to-do regions around Bordeaux and Lyon. In Copenhagen, Paris and London, the right wing ran about 10 percentage points behind their national totals.

Separatist movements, by contrast, are typically organized around cities whose fortunes have steadily risen in recent years, like Barcelona and Antwerp. Their supporters claim cultural differences. But they also see national governments as meddlesome middlemen between them and the super-national government in Brussels that manages borders, trade and structural funds.

Regions seeking autonomy that aren’t wealthier than their states — like Scotland or Kosovo — can afford to leave because there is something else to join: Europe. (At least in theory: fearful Spain, with Catalonia on the brain, is the only country in Western Europe to not recognize Kosovo’s independence. European Commission President José Manuel Barroso has warned Scotland it might find gaining EU membership impossible.)

The idea that the European Union structure might diminish the power of the nation-state to the benefit of dynamic cities is not new. In 1991’s “The Global City,” Saskia Sassen proposed that cities would grow powerful enough to detach themselves from national territorial contexts. “It is today widely acknowledged,” wrote Neil Brenner in 1997, “that contemporary cities are embedded in transnational flows of capital, commodities and labor-power… that no state can fully control.”