Topics: Documentaries, Editor's Picks, fracking, North Dakota, Oil and Gas, oil industry, Sundance Film Festival, Sustainability News, Life News, Entertainment News

North Dakota is sitting on gold. The oil-rich Bakken formation, thanks to the advent of hydraulic fracturing, or fracking, produces hundreds of thousands of barrels of oil each day; in one month this year, it produced as much oil as it had in all of 2004. And that means easy money, not just for North Dakotans, but for people all over the country in search of work. Welcome to the 21st-century boomtown.

Change this drastic doesn’t come without its conflicts and complications, as director Jesse Moss found in Williston, a city in the western part of the state. Since 2008, workers have been streaming into the city, overwhelming its capacity to house them and testing the locals’ ability to be welcoming. The stand-out exception to the prevailing “us versus them” attitude is Pastor Jay Reinke, who fills his church — its pews, its hallways, its parking lot — with migrants.

Moss’s resulting documentary centers around Pastor Jay’s efforts to keep his makeshift community running, despite being nearly constantly at odds with the city council, the local newspaper and his neighbors. But it also spends time with the men who seek shelter under his roof, asking important and hard-to-answer questions about the promises that drew them to Williston in the first place, which more often than not seem to stand in stark contrast to how their lives there end up playing out. They come “to find living-wage work, but often just because they’re looking for purpose and meaning in their lives,” Moss told Salon. “They’re looking for redemption and salvation.”

“The Overnighters,” which premiered this year at Sundance, will be making its theatrical debut on Oct. 10. Salon spoke with Moss about life in a city destabilized by the oil industry and the ambiguities of America’s energy explosion. This interview has been lightly edited for length and clarity.

I was hoping you could first tell me a little bit about the origins of the project — how did you find Pastor Jay?

I started the project about three years ago. At that time, Williston had attracted some national attention. The oil boom had been happening and this had become the bright spot in the American economy, the place where people who needed work were migrating. The stories were really relentlessly positive and optimistic and I had a sneaking suspicion that the ground-level reality of people coming there and looking for work was a bit harder. At that time, there were people sleeping in the Walmart parking lot in Williston. And also, this woman from Montana had been murdered by these two guys who had come up there to find work. There was actually quite a bit of fear in the community around the changes that were taking place. I guess I had this feeling there had just been a lot of bigger stories about the energy boom in America. Of course, fracking has been a part of the conversation for quite a while now and there have been good documentaries about that and the environmental consequences of energy production. But what seemed to be missing to me were more long-term stories about people working in the industry and how the industry was impacting their lives and changing these communities — small towns that were suddenly boomtowns.

So here this was playing out in Williston in this fashion of a modern-day Deadwood, and that was a kind of seductive story to me: What does a 21st-century frontier boomtown really look like and feel like? I started reading the Williston Herald online and Pastor Jay used to write a clergy column for the paper. In one, he called on his community to welcome these newcomers. I knew that was an unusual sentiment in Williston, that there was quite a bit of fear in the community about these people. So I called Jay up, I left a message, he called me back. And he was very open on the phone. We had a good conversation. He said, there are people sleeping in my church. They’ve got nowhere else to sleep. They kicked people out of the Walmart parking lot. They’re sleeping here in the pews and in the parking lot. He said, you’ve got to come see what’s happening.

That was the invitation I needed. I went up there by myself, I brought my equipment. I decided to work alone, which is how I like to work as a documentary filmmaker, and I met Jay. I visited the church. I think from the moment I set foot in that place, I knew there was something extraordinary happening there. I didn’t know what the story would be. I didn’t know if Jay would be the center of the story or not. But for one, it was kind of a prism. A very human prism into the oil boom, which is a big story. The analogy would be the Iraq war. My previous documentary was about the war but through the prism of the Iraq war training simulation. I was looking for a way in. I didn’t want to make a macro, big-picture survey kind of socio-political documentary. The films that have moved and inspired me really find the epic in the intimate. So here I found Jay, this one man, and he was in the fulcrum of these tremendous forces — the migration of Americans to North Dakota — and then this local community, this classic, small-town America that was being ripped apart and reborn in a very painful way. And Jay was kind of straddling these two mighty forces and trying to contain them in this little church. I thought here’s a way in, to contain the story for me as a filmmaker, and here’s this complicated, compelling, charismatic pastor who I don’t really understand. I didn’t grow up in his church. I’m not Christian, yet he’s really doing this extraordinary thing of opening his church to this horde of men and a few women. And it struck me, and it was moving. I met some of these men. I met Jay, and I saw his interactions with them, and I felt like there was something happening.

I’d imagine you were staying at the church also, since there really wasn’t anywhere else to go?

That was my reality when I got there as well. I couldn’t find a hotel room and I asked Jay if I could stay in the church and he said of course. And he offered to put me up in the snorers room, which was a really terrible place to sleep. Then I moved out into the hallway on an army cot. Then I ended up sleeping on a couch. The film took 18 months to film, and I slept in the church for the first six months of production. They were not the most restful, comfortable nights of sleep, but in terms of insight and life experience and foundational decision for the film, they were some of the most important months of my life. It was jus an incredible place to be, to get to know the men there, and to film sometimes but sometimes just to shoot the shit and smoke a cigarette and have a cup of coffee. More often I was doing that. I felt alone, too, like so many of those guys who had come alone and left their families behind and felt quite scared. It was a place where people found community and compassion and support, and not in a programmatic way but “Hey, here’s a friendly face. We can talk and share some local knowledge.” And I benefited from that. I was never an overnighter and I wouldn’t describe myself that way, but I really felt close to what was happening there. And I think the intimacy of the film — it gets more and more intimate — really rests on the foundations of those decisions, to really be there and to be alone.

There was a report that came out last year about fracking boomtowns that made it sound like it was real hell living there. It said they had high rates of rape, drug use, STDs. How would you describe the culture you saw?