Getty Images New York City mayor Bill de Blasio attends a press conference outside the United Nations Headquarters along with Lis Smith in September.

By Michael Howard Saul and Derek Kravitz

New York City Mayor Bill de Blasio has decided not to keep Lis Smith, his chief transition spokeswoman who was in the spotlight recently for reportedly dating former Gov. Eliot Spitzer, the mayor’s office confirmed Thursday.

“Lis was contracted to work with our team through the transition. She did exemplary work and we are grateful for the support she provided,” Laura Stantucci, Mr. de Blasio’s chief of staff, said. “Now that the transition is concluding, she is returning to her work as a political consultant.”

The news was first reported by Capital New York.

“I’m so proud to have worked on @Billdeblasio‘s historic campaign and I’m looking forward to seeing what he does as mayor,” Ms. Smith wrote on Twitter Thursday morning. She was not immediately available for any further comment.

Ms. Smith drew headlines last month when the media discovered she is dating Mr. Spitzer, who resigned in 2008 after he was caught patronizing prostitutes. Mr. Spitzer lost his comeback bid for city comptroller in September.

Last month, Mr. Spitzer and his wife, Silda Spitzer, announced that their marriage was over following newspaper reports that Ms. Smith and Mr. Spitzer were dating.

Ms. Smith worked as a press aide to Mr. Spitzer during his campaign for comptroller. After Mr. Spitzer lost the primary to Scott Stringer, who became the city’s comptroller on Wednesday, Ms. Smith joined Mr. de Blasio’s mayoral campaign. In November, after Mr. de Blasio won the general election in a landslide, Ms. Smith became the chief spokeswoman for Mr. de Blasio’s transition team.

Since reports broke about Ms. Smith’s relationship with Mr. Spitzer, she has not been seen at any of Mr. de Blasio’s press events. She did not attend Mr. de Blasio’s inauguration at City Hall on Wednesday.

“I’m just not going to get into individual personal matters,” Mr. de Blasio said last month when asked about Ms. Smith and Mr. Spitzer. Several days ago, Mr. de Blasio said Ms. Smith was on “vacation,” even though the transition team was in high gear preparing for the inaugural ceremony.

Mr. de Blasio was put in a delicate position as he was putting the finishing touches on his first-term administration; in the past, he has been particularly critical of Mr. Spitzer. In an August televised interview, Mr. de Blasio called Mr. Spitzer a “child of the elite” and said he had “invalidated himself by his actions when he was in public office.”

Mr. de Blasio, the city’s 109th mayor, has not yet announced who will serve as his press secretary.