Reporter Jami Murphy graduated from Locust Grove High School in 2000. She received her bachelor’s degree in mass communications in 2006 from Northeastern State University and began working at the Cherokee Phoenix in 2007. She said the Cherokee Phoenix has allowed her the opportunity to share valuable information with the Cherokee people on a daily basis. Jami married Michael Murphy in 2014. They have two sons, Caden and Austin. Together they have four children, including Johnny and Chase. They also have two grandchildren, Bentley and Baylea. She is a Cherokee Nation citizen and said working for the Cherokee Phoenix has meant a great deal to her. “My great-great-great-great grandfather, John Leaf Springston, worked for the paper long ago. It’s like coming full circle. I’ve learned so much about myself, the Cherokee people and I’ve enjoyed every minute of it.” Jami is a member of the Native American Journalists Association, and Investigative Reporters and Editors. You can follow her on Twitter @jamilynnmurphy or on Facebook at www.facebook.com/jamimurphy2014.

BY JAMI MURPHYReporterTAHLEQUAH, Okla. – With warmer weather among us, people tend to spend more time participating in outdoor activities. But it’s important to remember that warmer weather brings ticks and the illnesses they can carry.Although a small percentage of ticks carry disease-causing bacteria, it’s important to take precautions such as using insect repellent, wearing long sleeves and pants while outdoors, avoiding bushy and wooded areas and check thoroughly after spending time outside.One disease that ticks can carry is the Heartland Virus. Earlier this year, a Delaware County man died from the illness, Oklahoma State Department of Health officials confirmed. Officials said it was the first case and death caused by the virus in Oklahoma.According to the OSDH, the virus is found in the Lone Star tick and was first seen in Missouri in 2009.“The Oklahoma case is only the 10th person confirmed with the virus and the second person to die from it. Other cases have occurred in Missouri and Tennessee,” according to the OSDH. “All of the patients diagnosed with Heartland Virus reported spending several hours per day in outside activities or occupations.”As of March, there have been eight cases reported of the disease in Missouri and Tennessee.Symptoms include fever, fatigue, headaches, muscle aches, loss of appetite, nausea, bruising easily and diarrhea. Most patients require hospitalization but fully recover.Other tick-borne diseases include Anaplasmosis, Babesiosis, Borrelia miyamotoi, Colorado tick fever, Lyme disease, Powassan, Rickettsia parkeri rickettsiosis, Rocky Mountain spotted fever, Southern tick-associated rash illness and Tickborne relapsing fever.According to Cherokee Nation Communications, CN infection preventionist Jennifer Belden said from October 2013 to May 2014 CN Health Services reported 34 cases of Ehrlichlosis and six cases of Tularemia to the Oklahoma Department of Health.According to the Centers for Disease Control, Ehrlichlosis symptoms develop one to two weeks after being bitten by an infected tick. Symptoms include fever, headache, chills, malaise, muscle pain, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, confusion, conjunctival injection (red eyes) and rash.Ehrlichlosis can be fatal if not treated correctly, even in previously healthy people. Patients who are treated early may recover quickly on outpatient medication, while those who experience a more severe case may require intravenous antibiotics, prolonged hospitalization or intensive care.Signs and symptoms of Tularemia vary depending on how the bacteria enter the body. Illness ranges from mild to life-threatening. All forms are accompanied by fever, which can be as high as 104 ° F.Two tick-associated forms of the disease are ulceroglandular and glandular.Ulceroglandular is the most common form and usually occurs following a tick or deer fly bite or after handing of an infected animal. A skin ulcer appears at the site where the organism entered the body. The ulcer is accompanied by swelling of regional lymph glands, usually in the armpit or groin.Glandular is similar to ulceroglandular tularemia but without an ulcer. Also generally acquired through the bite of an infected tick or deer fly or from handling sick or dead animals.The CDC states that Tularemia symptoms can be mistaken for other more common illnesses. It is important to share with your health care provider any likely exposures, such as tick and deer fly bites. Blood tests and cultures can help confirm the diagnosis. Antibiotics used to treat Tularemia and treatment usually lasts 10 to 21 days depending on the stage of illness and the medication used. Although symptoms may last for several weeks, most patients completely recover.Visit http://www.cdc.gov/lyme/resources/TickborneDiseases.pdf for more information on infectious diseases cause by tick bites.Use fine-tipped tweezers to grasp the tick as close to the skin's surface as possible.Pull upward with steady, even pressure. Don’t twist or jerk the tick. This can cause the mouth-parts to break off and remain in the skin. If this happens, remove the mouth-parts with tweezers.If you are unable to remove the mouth easily with clean tweezers, leave it alone and let the skin heal.After removing the tick, thoroughly clean the bite area and your hands with rubbing alcohol, an iodine scrub, or soap and water.– Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

Read More Officials take steps to manage contract health budget BY JAMI MURPHY

Senior Reporter – @cp_jmurphy TAHLEQUAH, Okla. – At the May 16 Health Committee meeting, Tribal Councilors questioned Health Services Director Connie Davis and Brett Hayes, who oversees the tribe’s contract health department, about contract health referral reductions for the rest of the fiscal year and the department’s shortfalls. According to an emailed letter from Health Services Executive Medical Director Dr. Roger Montgomery to Davis, who then forwarded it to Tribal Councilors, each year the tribe overspends its contract health budget and he recommends “people cut back on the referrals they write.” “People don’t really cut back all that much and administration makes up the difference with collections from the clinics, etc., so we don’t end up having to push the issue,” Montgomery states. “This year, with the implementation of a new electronic health record leading to reduced clinic schedules, and the addition of approximately 10,000 patient visits this year, there are no additional collections to pad Contract Health’s overruns.” Montgomery states that in the first seven months of FY 2016 the tribe spent $25 million of its $35 million contract health budget. “That leaves $10 million available for the last five months of the fiscal year and no expected increased collections to cover the remainder. If payments for transfers out continue at the same pace of about $200,000 per month, it actually leaves $9 million for everything else,” he writes. At the meeting, Davis said She said the lack of in-house procedures because of referrals has caused contract health spending to get out of control. “So we’ve asked our docs to do a better job managing patients within our own health centers and not sending them out for things like knee injections, shoulder injections or casting,” she said. She added that the health system had grown by about 10 percent annually since she’s led Health Services and that has impacted spending. “We’ve budgeted a flat budget with contract health all these years, and so it’s obvious that there’s at some point that we’re going to have to slow some of the (referrals),” she said. Many referrals are approved now that historically hadn’t always been approved, including pain management and orthopedic procedures, Hayes said. Montgomery states that to solve overspending for the rest of FY 2016 requires referral reductions. “Because of our three chance appeals process, the only real way to ensure not spending money on a referral is to not write the referral at all. In our case, this means reducing the number of referrals written by as much as 50 percent. Contract Health money is and was traditionally earmarked only for urgent and emergent care. It was never intended for elective care,” he states. “It was never intended for routine follow-ups in patients not having further issues. It was never intended for things we could do ourselves, even if it meant waiting a bit for the care. We added money in the past in programs such as Back to Work to help pay for some of the elective procedures. However, when that money was no longer available, we never dropped those new service lines.” <strong>Referrals that could be reduced included in Montgomery’s statement were:</strong> • Dizziness workups that were instigated by a vendor apart from the original reason for the referral, • Prophylactic mastectomy that could be performed at Hastings, • Circumcision revisions for cosmetic purposes, • Dermatology: simple excisions, punch biopsies, actinic and seborrheic keratosis treatments and skin tag removals, • Simple wound care, • Elective gallbladders, hernias, hysterectomies, etc., that could be performed at Hastings, • Cardiac clearance by cardiologists that can be done in-house, • Varicose veins, • Long-term follow-ups for benign or distant conditions, • Elective orthopedics-joint replacements, • Elective repairs, • Injections at outside vendors, • Non-elective orthopedics-simple casting, • PET scans that don’t change treatment, • Cataracts before Medicare kicks in, and • Allergy testing and reduction mammoplasty. Not all non-urgent, non-emergency procedures are included in the list. The list was in reference to one day’s referrals, according to Montgomery’s statement. Montgomery also states that providers would have to “police themselves” when writing referrals. “If your case manager is writing all your referrals for you without any real discussion, you will need to halt this practice…Another option is to advocate to your patients the importance of signing up for available resources, such as insurance from the Affordable Care Act, Medicaid, and Medicare Part B,” Montgomery states. “We can pay for 5 insured referrals for every one uninsured referral. This also brings money into your individual clinics, which allows you to pay for raises, new providers, and creates the cushion that Contract Health used to use when there are overruns. Explain to your patients that signing up for these things are a huge help to Cherokee Nation Health. Ask them if they can afford to and are willing to help.” Montgomery states that if these options were unsuccessful each clinic would be given a budget to work from and be required to review their referrals daily and work within that budget. “If we still aren’t getting under budget, more drastic action would need to be taken,” he states.

Read More Claremore Indian Hospital hosting ‘Kids Summer Safety Fest’ BY STAFF REPORTS

CLAREMORE, Okla. – The Claremore Indian Hospital will host its second annual “Kids Summer Safety Fest” from 9:30 a.m. to noon on June 4. The event will take place outdoors at 101 S. Moore and is geared toward school-aged children and will include games and fun educational learning activities created by local agencies and businesses. Door prize drawings will take place at 11:30 a.m. Safe Kids Coalition Tulsa, with the assistance of the Claremore Fire Department, will conduct a car seat safety checkup event in which nationally certified technicians will show caregivers how to properly install car seats and check those already installed. Also, there will be a limited number of car seats provided to those in need at no cost. Grand River Dam Authority officials will provide education about water safety. City of Claremore Lights and Power officials will have an interactive electrical safety booth. Operations Lifesavers will perform education activities surrounding the importance of railroad safety, while Will Rogers Masonic Lodge No. 53 will provide a free child identification program that consists of height and weight measurements, dental impressions with DNA, scent, fingerprints, photos and recording for child’s voice recognition. This package will be given to the caregiver for utilization if their child is ever missing. Pete Goltra, of the Akdar Shriner Tulsa, will also attend with his popcorn truck providing snacks. American Red Cross will attend with its emergency response vehicle with its water station. Tulsa Life Flight will be on scene with its helicopter for kids to sit inside. Contech Inc. will have heavy machinery on site to teach about the dangers of playing on construction sites. The Claremore Fire Department will have a fire truck available for children to take tours. Pafford EMS will also provide tours of an ambulance. Claremore Indian Health Service will provide various games and education from its dental, dietary, pharmacy, benefit coordinators and emergency department. Tulsa Emergency Infant Services will provide information regarding the services that it provides along with a diaper giveaway. Safenet Emergency Services will have games teaching children how to address bullying. Claremore Auto Parts has provided a wrecked car to stress the importance of using seat belts. Also, Nabatak Outdoors will give away a life jacket and fishing pole, and other agencies attending with booth and activities include Saint Francis Children’s Hospital, Claremore Hillcrest Hospital and Rogers County Sheriff’s Department K9 unit.

Read More CN works to curb prescription drug abuse BY STAFF REPORTS

WAGONER, Okla. – To curb prescription drug abuse, the Cherokee Nation is encouraging the public to drop off any unused prescriptions on Saturday during the Wagoner Family Fun Day in Maple Park. The tribe’s regional prevention coordinators will have an “Rx Take Back” booth at the event from 10 a.m. to 2 p.m. for those who want to safely dispose of prescriptions that are no longer needed. Wagoner County ranks among the highest in the state for prescription overdose deaths related to painkillers, according to state data. “The Cherokee Nation knows the importance of not only physical health, but mental health, and is working to ensure our communities and citizens are healthy and safe,” CN certified prevention specialist Coleman Cox said. “Painkillers such as hydrocodone, oxycodone and codeine, are some of the most abused prescription drugs in our 14-counties. That’s why it’s important to have safe drop off bags and locations to get these no longer used drugs out of medicine cabinets and homes.” The CN is using a grant from the Oklahoma Department of Mental Health and Substance Abuse Services and the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration to raise awareness of the problem and create prevention plans. The CN regional prevention coordinators who work through the tribe’s Behavioral Health department routinely drop bags at pharmacies with information on safe use, safe storage and safe disposal of prescription drugs. In Wagoner County, Owl Drug on Main Street gives the bags out to raise awareness. “We like the prescription take back bags and handing them out with some prescriptions,” pharmacist Matthew Villandry said. “We think it helps and have also seen a decrease in hydrocodone use because we now ask customers to fill another prescription along with it.” Residents can dispose of prescriptions at the booth on Saturday or at any time at the Wagoner County Sheriff’s Office at 307 E. Cherokee St., Wagoner Police Department at 105 S. Casaver Ave. or the Coweta Police Department at 212 N. Broadway, where each has disposal bins. For more information email <a href="mailto: bhs-prevention@cherokee.org">bhs-prevention@cherokee.org</a>.

Read More IHCRC offers summer camp programs BY STAFF REPORTS

TULSA, Okla. – The Indian Health Care Resource Center is offering various camps this summer, including a Wellness Adventures Camp, Culture Camp and Sports & Fitness Camp. The Wellness Adventures Camp is offered to children who have completed grades 2-9. Youths participate in low and high elements of a challenge course and learn problem-solving skills, communication and teamwork, an IHCRC release states. The Culture Camp helps expose Indian youth to Native culture with field trips to Cherokee and Osage nations as well as the Will Rogers and Woolaroc museums. The Sports & Fitness Camp provides opportunities for physical activities, games, experiential learning and enhancing sports skills. For more information, visit <a href="http://www.ihcrc.org/programs/summer-wellness-camps/" target="_blank">http://www.ihcrc.org/programs/summer-wellness-camps/</a>.

Read More Women’s group releases rape handbook for Native females BY JAMI MURPHY

Senior Reporter – @cp_jmurphy LAKE ANDES, S.D. – The Native American Women’s Health Education Resource Center recently released its workbook for Native American females titled “What To Do When You Are Raped, An ABC Handbook For Native Girls.” The book, Cherokee Nation citizen Pam Kingfisher said, is a resource aimed at answering questions women face following a sexual assault. “From thinking through buying emergency contraception, to getting tested for STDS, to who to turn to for support,” she said. Comanche Nation citizen Charon Asetoyer, who is also the Native American Women’s Health Education Resource Center’s CEO, said the book is a woman-to-woman, woman-to-girl, girl-to-girl community response in regards to sexual assault. “Sharing with them, providing support, letting them know they are not alone. That this is not their fault and they shouldn’t blame themselves. The book instructs them on how to report if they choose to,” Asetoyer said. “It talks to them about going in for STD exam and also access to emergency contraceptive Plan B.” Kingfisher and Asetoyer joined Elizabeth Black Bull and Donna Haukaas to co-write the book. [BLOCKQUOTE]Asetoyer said she was asked by a young mother on the Yankton Sioux Reservation in Lake Andes what she should do if her daughter was raped. Asetoyer said that when a mother puts it as when, not if, her daughter is raped, there is a realization that the problem is worse than originally thought. Asetoyer said the book sends a message to women and helps them realize it is not their fault. “There are other women out there. You’re not alone, and turn to them for help,” she said. Kingfisher said the project was personal and that she’s worked with Asetoyer on the book for about four years. “I think it’s so important that we advocate for our health and for our women. As a young girl who was assaulted and didn’t know anything…and later became pregnant and was forced to give up a child for adoption, I didn’t know any of these things. Nobody talked. These conversations didn’t happen at the kitchen table or even around girlfriends,” Kingfisher said. She added that she and Asetoyer, as well as other advocates fighting against sexual assault, want to make this issue real. “For me it’s important that we serve that matriarchal role of being good aunties, being good grandmas, being big sisters and helping,” she said. According to the Rape, Abuse and Incest National Network, one of the nation’s largest anti-sexual assault organizations, during an American Indian or Alaskan woman’s lifetime she is at a 34.1 percent chance of suffering from rape or attempted rape, the most of any other race. And about 3 percent of American men have experienced an attempted or completed rape in their lifetimes. The book is available for download at <a href="http://forwomen.org/resources/an-abc-handbook-for-native-girls/" target="_blank">http://forwomen.org/resources/an-abc-handbook-for-native-girls/</a> Kingfisher said hardcopy bulk orders would be available in the future. <strong>Women</strong> • 1 out of every 6 American women has been the victim of an attempted or completed rape in her lifetime (14.8 percent completed rape; 2.8 percent attempted rape). • 17.7 million American women have been victims of attempted or completed rape. • 9 of every 10 rape victims were female in 2003. <strong>Lifetime rate of rape/attempted rape for women by race:</strong> All: 17.6 percent White: 17.7 percent Black: 18.8 percent Asian Pacific Islander: 6.8 percent American Indian/Alaskan: 34.1 percent Mixed race: 24.4 percent <strong>Men</strong> • About 3 percent of American men have experienced an attempted or completed rape in their lifetime. • From 1995-2010, 9 percent of rape and sexual assault victims were male. • 2.78 million men in the U.S. have been victims of sexual assault or rape. <strong>Children</strong> • 15 percent of sexual assault and rape victims are under age 12. • 29 percent are ages 12-17. • 44 percent are under age 18. • 80 percent are under age 30. • Ages 12-34 are the highest-risk years. • Girls ages 16-19 are 4 times more likely than the general population to be victims of rape, attempted rape, or sexual assault. • 7 percent of girls in grades 5-8 and 12 percent of girls in grades 9-12 said they had been sexually abused. • 3 percent of boys grades 5-8 and 5 percent of boys in grades 9-12 said they had been sexually abused. • 82 percent of all juvenile victims are female. • The year in a male’s life when he is most likely to be the victim of a sexual assault is age 4. A female’s year of greatest risk is age 14. • 1 in 9 girls and 1 in 53 boys under the age of 18 experience sexual abuse or assault at the hands of an adult. • In 1995, local child protection service agencies identified 126,000 children who were victims of either substantiated or indicated sexual abuse. • Of these, 75 percent were girls. • Nearly 30 percent of child victims were between ages 4-7. <strong>Every 8 minutes, Child Protective Service responds to a report of sexual abuse.</strong> • 93 percent of juvenile sexual assault victims know their attacker. • 34.2 percent of attackers were family members. • 58.7 percent were acquaintances. • Only 7 percent of the perpetrators were strangers to the victim. • For 80 percent of juvenile victims, the perpetrator was a parent. 6 percent were other relatives. 4 percent were unmarried partners of a parent. 5 percent were “other” (from siblings to strangers). <strong>American Indians</strong> • On average during 1992-2001, American Indians age 12 or older experienced annually an estimated 5,900 rapes or sexual assaults. • American Indians were twice as likely to experience a rape/sexual assault compared to all races. • Sexual violence makes up 5 percent of all violent crime committed against Indians (about the same as for other races). • Offender/victim relationship: 41 percent stranger; 34 percent acquaintance; 25 percent intimate or family member. <strong>Campus Sexual Violence</strong> • Women 18-24 who are enrolled in college are 3 times more likely than women in general to suffer from sexual violence. Females of the same age who are not enrolled in college are 4 times more likely. • Male college-aged students are 78 percent more likely than nonstudents to be a victim of rape or sexual assault. • Female college-aged students are 20 percent less likely than nonstudents to be a victim of rape or sexual assault. • Only 20 percent of female student survivors age 18-24 report to law enforcement. In comparison, 33 percent of female nonstudent survivors aged 18-24 report to law enforcement. • 72 percent of campus law enforcement agencies have a staff member responsible for survivor response and assistance. • 8 percent of all sexual assaults occur while victim is attending school. <strong>Victims of sexual assault are:</strong> 3 times more likely to suffer from depression. 6 times more likely to suffer from post-traumatic stress disorder. 13 times more likely to abuse alcohol. 26 times more likely to abuse drugs. 4 times more likely to contemplate suicide. The preceding statistics were taken from the Rape, Abuse and Incest National Network. To see these and other information regarding sexual assault, visit <a href="https://www.rainn.org/get-information/statistics/sexual-assault-victims" target="_blank">https://www.rainn.org/get-information/statistics/sexual-assault-victims</a>.