Glenn Beck was fuming on Monday after hearing that President Barack Obama will call for higher taxes during his State of the Union address on Tuesday. According to the New York Times, the president is specifically looking to raise the top capital gains tax rate from 23.8 percent to 28 percent, and eliminate what he calls the “trust-fund loophole,” which protects inherited assets.

Beck said raising the capital gains tax will “kill the economy,” and said the government’s attempt to take the money you have worked your entire life to leave to your children is “wrong, it’s obscene, it’s theft.”

“It’s not the government’s [money]!” Beck said on his radio program. “I’ve already paid you my 50 percent. My children have a right to the money I want to leave them.”

Beck said taxes are already so high that if he wanted to leave his children his property, they would “not be able to afford the taxes.”

Beck’s co-host Pat Gray added that it’s not just the “one percent” who will be affected by the president’s proposals. Aside from the impact on the economy, he noted that “there are a lot of middle class people who want to leave money to their kids.” He also reiterated that it is “not the government’s money” to take.

“It’s a double tax at the very least,” Gray said. “Or triple tax. It’s been taxed.”

“It is so wrong. I can’t take it anymore,” Beck said. “Who do these people think they are?”

Stu Burguiere noted that the Obama administration is often compared to Robin Hood, but said the story was actually one of “the government stealing from the poor, [and Robin Hood] takes it back from the government.”

Beck was also infuriated by the number of Democrats who voted for Obamacare, who now say it should have been done differently.

“These guys just hack me off. And what are the Republicans going to do?” Beck demanded. “Pat immediately [said], ‘Well the Republicans, they’re going to stop this because they’re Republicans. One thing they get right are taxes.’ Is it? That used to be true. Is it true now? What are they doing to stop Obamacare? Did you see the penalties are much higher than they thought they would be? The costs of Obamacare to you personally, much higher. What have the Republicans done? Have they defunded it? They had the opportunity.”

Burguiere responded: “They are saying they will oppose Obama’s [new taxation proposal]. How long that lasts, or what else they give up, or what version of it they decide to come to, who knows.”

Your browser does not support iframes.

The full episode of The Glenn Beck Program, along with many other live-streaming shows and thousands of hours of on-demand content, is available on just about any digital device. Click here to watch every Glenn Beck episode from the past 30 days for just $1!