CLEVELAND, Ohio -- The second open-enrollment period to sign up for health insurance on the federal exchange got off to a slow start today.

Traffic was light this morning but expected to grow at Greater Cleveland locations that had insurance advisers on site.

Danny Leftridge, 59, of Cleveland left Zion Hill Baptist Church on Kinsman Road with information on medical and dental coverage, provided by advisers from the Carmella Rose Health Foundation, a nonprofit that shepherds people through the process of acquiring health-care coverage through the Affordable Care Act.

Ginny Pate, the foundation's executive director, said the organization helped 1,500 Greater Clevelanders get insurance during the first open-enrollment period that ended April 15.

Terri Johnson, a Carmella Rose adviser, said "most of the people I talk to have not been to a doctor in years." The reason is the people have not had insurance.

Pate said "dental (coverage) is so huge in Cleveland. It is so under resourced."

"A lot of these people need work -- not teeth cleaning, but major reconstruction," Pate said.

Dave Nader, a volunteer with Get Covered America who was at Zion Hill, said many people "are afraid of the cost. They don't know that eight in 10 or nine in 10 are eligible for some sort of subsidy."

Pate said the government enrollment website appears to be working well this time, in contrast to when the so-called Obamacare struggled to get off the ground earlier in the year.

A woman who identified herself only as Sandy was shopping for options at the Hough Health Center on Hough Avenue, part of the Northeast Ohio Neighborhood Health Care Services (NEON) network.

"I just wanted to look today," she said. "I need to do a lot more research."

Lisa Harris, one of three outreach-enrollment specialists at the Hough center, said she had only seen two people by noon.

She expected a trickle of walk-ins "because this is the first day and people know they have time."

Inquiries and enrollments will grow exponentially the closer it gets to the February 15 deadline, Harris predicted.

Toward the end of the previous enrollment period, she said on one day "I had 42 messages on my phone."

Harris said the main concern people have is the affordability of the insurance plans.

But Harris said, "Some make a little too much for Medicaid, but they are still categorized as low-income," so eligible for subsidies.

More than 8 million people bought private insurance policies during the first open enrollment period.

The Obama administration has set a goal of getting over 9 million people enrolled this time.