When the Affordable Care Act’s third open enrollment period began in November, the healthcare reform news cycle had zeroed in on record-setting losses among the major insurers, narrowing networks, and increasing premiums.

But once enrollment began, its momentum carried it above all those roadblocks. And by the time the period ended three months later, on January 31, more than 1.3 million Texans had enrolled in an Obamacare plan, about 100,000 more than the previous period. According to data from the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, about one of every three signups was a new registrant. The others were renewals.

But with every passing enrollment period, every new sign up, every renewal, the men and women who are paid to, or volunteer to, help reach the uninsured are becoming more attune to the shifting needs of the population that still lacks coverage. The demand is still high. Last year, Texas’s uninsured rate sank below 20 percent for the first time in more than a decade (18.5 percent), yet still remained the nation’s highest. And so understanding how to get through to these 5 million or so who still lack coverage is realizing that what kept residents away in 2014 may not be the same as what runs them off in 2017.

Case in point: Recent studies show that cost is gradually trumping awareness as one of the largest obstacles. Nearly three-quarters of Texas’ uninsured say that the cost of insurance is too prohibitive for them to purchase, while less than one-tenth say they don’t know how to get coverage. Those findings come from another survey by the Episcopal Health Foundation and Rice University’s Baker Institute, which queried uninsured Texans ages 18 to 64 about their lack of coverage just before the most recent enrollment period began.

Of all, 69.1 percent said the cost of health insurance is too high for them to purchase.

“There are a lot of ways to look at it,” says Elena Marks, the president and CEO of the Houston-based Episcopal Health Foundation. “One thing to consider, when you look at the cost issue, is that people who previously were not insured, or were insured through employers, paying anything seems like a big step up to them.”

In the past, awareness and know-how were the primary obstacles in getting residents to sign up. It didn’t help that Healthcare.gov launched without being fully functional, either. But now, that survey suggests that knowledge of the law is no longer much of a hurdle: Just 6.3 percent of respondents said they didn’t register for insurance because they were unaware of how to find information on what’s available to them.

Price is becoming the topic du jour, from the proponents and the researchers right on down to the buyers. It’s what HHS Secretary Sylvia Burwell beat her drum about during a visit to Dallas: “We know that eight of 10 folks that were enrolled last year can come back into the marketplace and, with the financial assistance, they can find premiums that are $100 or less,” she announced from Parkland Hospital.

But it’s not so cut and dry. Marks says the word “cost” has shifting meanings for each respondent. What is affordable for one person is not for another. And that is the landscape that folks Mimi Garcia and her team must traverse. Garcia is the lead for Enroll America’s Texas chapter, a nonprofit that helps connect insurance purchasers with navigators who can help them find a plan that’s best for them.

They partner with churches and local businesses to reach targeted groups of residents who are likely to be uninsured. And Garcia says, yes, cost is a significant hurdle. However, anyone who makes between 139 percent ($16,242 a year for an individual and $32,252 for a family of four) and 400 percent of the poverty line qualifies for some sort of assistance. When she talks about overcoming the price barrier, Garcia says that the subsidies help assuage much of the concern.

“Once people look at their subsidies and understand what’s available to them, their feeling about cost really changes,” Garcia says. “So on the one hand, it sort of reiterates the understanding that we have of cost as a barrier, yes, but understand that financial assistance is available.”

The survey, meanwhile, points out that as income increases, the assistance decreases. For Americans on a limited budget, devoting a greater chunk of their salary to healthcare that previously went to food or rent or utilities can be prohibitive. According to a study by the Kaiser Family Foundation, non-Medicaid eligible households spent an average of 6 percent on healthcare related expenses in 2014. Families in which all members are insured through private plans spend an average of 8 percent on those same costs.

“One can use an online calculator to estimate the cost of a health insurance plan for a 30 year old single male living in Houston earning $23,540 (200% of the FPL) in 2016. After federal subsidies, this person can purchase a silver plan for $126 per month and bronze plan for $82. In contrast, a 30 year old single male earning $16,243 (138% of the FPL) can purchase a silver plan for $45 per month and a bronze plan for only $1 per month. As income increases, the federal subsidies for purchasing insurance become less generous, which poses a significant financial challenge to lower middle income persons on a limited budget.”

And about the awareness—Garcia says, yeah, sure, most folks know about the Affordable Care Act and know about healthcare.gov. The problem is the health insurance literacy. Enroll America’s army of staffers and volunteers frequently must inform residents about what deductibles and co-pays are, and what it will mean to have, say, a high deductible health plan. The true costs of the plans are still rather opaque, and many of the buyers need help walking them through it.

“While we might have a more informed community, I think that we are a ways from everybody being able to navigate this on their own,” she said. “Unless you’ve been through a situation where you have encountered a major medical event or an accident, you might not have a great understanding of what the actual costs there are.”

And things are surely only going to get more complicated. This enrollment period was the first where there were no preferred provider organization, or PPO, plans. All purchasers were shifted to health maintenance organization plans, or HMOs. It was the result of what insurance companies called unsustainable losses. In HMOs, the plan holder needs a referral by a primary care physician to a specific specialist set forth by the insurance company. Providers outside that are out of network, and the fees will come from the patient’s pocket. And there are still about 1 million Texans that make at or less than 138 percent of the federal poverty line. These folks would qualify for subsidies if the state would agree to expand the Medicaid program under the reform law, or find an alternative that the administration would agree to. Texas is one of the 19 states that have not done so.

But the findings, largely, came to this: “There are people for whom there are subsidies available that are not purchasing insurance and it’s not because they don’t have information,” Marks said. “It’s either they don’t want it or they say it’s unaffordable.”