in: Baby>, Big Kid>, Getting Pregnant>, Pregnant>, Preschooler>, Toddler>, You and Your Family>, Dad Stories>, Development & Behavior>, Dilemmas>, Health & Safety>, Me & My Kids>, News>, Mom Stories

There used be a time when kids were allowed to roam freely. Play dates at the park didn’t necessarily mean a parent had to accompany a child. Now times have changed. If you allow your child to play alone outside, it could land you in jail. That’s exactly what happened to one Florida mom.

Nicole Gainey of Port St. Lucie was locked up for child neglect after letting her son Dominic walk to a playground about 15 minutes away from their home.

According to the NY Daily News, the seven-year-old was passing a public pool when someone asked him where his mom was.

“They asked me a couple questions and I got scared so I ran off to the park and they called the cops,” the boy told WPTV-TV.

Police found the boy at the park a little while later and asked him where he lived. They took him home and later arrested his mom.

This wasn’t the first time Dominic was allowed to walk to the park by himself. Gainey said that he did have a cell phone in case she needed to contact him.

“I’m totally dumbfounded by this whole situation,” Gainey told the station.

“Honestly didn’t think I was doing anything wrong. I was letting him go play,” she said.

Cops informed her that with registered sex offenders in the area, allowing her son to play at the park was not safe.

Some parents may see nothing wrong with what Gainey did. In fact, they may praise her for not being an overprotective parent. A recent study by PLOS One revealed that there is link between overprotective moms and childhood obesity. Gainey may be viewed as a great parent for allowing her son independence. But, others may not be so quick to wave the “mom of the year” flag.

The reality is that we live in a different world. When I was 7, I was allowed to ride my bike alone. I would also walk to the park alone. My Mom would tell me “just make sure you’re home before it gets dark.” Nowadays, you have to think twice before letting your kids roam free. Playgrounds are a breeding ground for pedophiles.

Periodically I check the registered sex offender list in my area. It turns out we have a few in our neighborhood. In fact, one lives right around the corner from us. We pass by his street every weekend when we take the kids out for a walk. My children are only 4 and 1. They’re way too young to play outside by themselves. But, I can tell you they won’t be allowed to go anywhere by themselves at age 7.

Photos: Morgue File

Stacy-Ann Gooden (aka Weather Anchor Mama) can be seen delivering the weather on the news weeknights in New York City. But her most important role is being a wife and mom. She writes about balancing career and motherhood in her blog, Weather Anchor Mama. You can also follow her on twitter, Pinterest, and Instagram.