Listed private equity firms have long complained that public market investors undervalue their stock, but three of the largest players in the field are taking different approaches dealing with low share prices.

KKR & Co., whose shares have dropped 26% against the S&P 500 index’s about 1% rise, is essentially giving up on trying to entice public investors through attractive quarterly distributions, and is ditching its model of sharing 75% of its quarterly cash flow with its public unit holders.

The New York firm announced in its third-quarter financial results Tuesday that it is launching an up to $500 million program to buy back its shares from the open market and switching its distribution policy to a fixed payout of 16 cents a quarter, starting in the fourth quarter. It announced a 35-cent payout for the third quarter.

Speaking during a conference call Tuesday evening, Scott Nuttall, who heads KKR’s global capital and asset management group, said the firm could have saved about $1 billion had it imposed the 16 cent-a-quarter rule since its listing in 2010, and put that sum to work in backing new investment ideas and revenue streams.

“We don’t think currently we are maximizing long term value for our unit holders,” Henry Kravis, KKR’s co-chairman and co-chief executive, said during the call.

While KKR believes it has a better use for its gains than its public investors, not every private equity firm agrees that slashing distributions to public shareholders and buying back shares is the way to go.

Apollo Capital Management and Carlyle Group are taking a different approach.

Speaking during a conference call Wednesday to discuss Apollo’s third-quarter financial results, Senior Managing Director Joshua Harris said, “Our stock is clearly undervalued,” adding that Apollo’s incentive business, in particular, isn’t being adequately appreciated.

As with KKR, Apollo shares dropped nearly 22% since the beginning of the year.

Mr. Harris said his firm has “a number of potential strategic uses” for its cash. He said that given only 30%—a relatively low number—of Apollo’s stock is publicly traded, buying back shares would be “counterproductive” as it will further reduce the number of shares in the public’s hands.

Apollo distributed 35 cents a share for the third quarter, and said it intends to issue to its shareholders “substantially all of its distributable earnings” after taxes and other payables.

David Rubenstein, Carlyle’s co-founder and co-chief executive, seconded Mr. Harris’s view. When asked about the same topic at the company’s earnings conference call on Wednesday, Mr. Rubenstein noted trading in Carlyle’s shares has been “relatively modest”, reflective investors’ less-than-hot view towards the company. He said the best thing his firm can do is “to produce good distributable earnings.”

“We expect people to catch up to where our stock should be,” Mr. Rubenstein said.

Carlyle declared a distribution of 56 cents per common unit for the third quarter, bringing the payout for the first nine months to $1.78 per common unit, or a yield of 13% on the company’s Tuesday 4 p.m. share price of $19.11, Mr. Rubenstein said.

Write to Amy Or at amy.or@wsj.com. Write to Shasha Dai at shasha.dai@wsj.com; follow her on Twitter: @ShashaDai1.