Topics: Facebook, Facebook Private Messages, internet privacy, Social Media, the daily dot, Timeline, Technology News, Life News, News

This article originally appeared on The Daily Dot . It has been corrected since it first published.

“I can’t believe we haven’t made out either. Thanks for the call, you lush.”

I felt my body simultaneously go cold and hot at the horror of seeing this. I wanted to shut my laptop and throw it in a closet, as if hiding the object responsible for delivering this would fix things. “Things” being a private message between myself and a friend I, admittedly, drunk dialed—back in 2006, when I was but a young, stupid, and yes, drunk, college sophomore.

And there it was, for god and every one of my Facebook friends to see. Sitting on my Timeline, as if it were a public note posted to what used to be my Wall. It wasn’t the only one. Not even close.

This isn’t the first time this has happened. Back in September 2012, about a year after Facebook introduced Timeline, users began reporting that responses to private messages were popping up. This means that they didn’t see their own end of the conversations, just the other person’s. Of course, it was sometimes difficult to tell: Facebook used to be a much smaller, more private place, where people would write more personal things on friends’ Walls. The Timeline gave us instant-toggle access to revisiting those times, and while some of the posts could very well have actually been posted to Walls, some of them were absolutely private.

Facebook extensively went on the defensive then, saying that inalmost all cases these were in fact old Wall posts we’d simply forgotten about—we must have been surprised at our earlier candor.But some did turn out to be private messages that had somehow found their way to a place they shouldn’t have been. [Facebook reached out to me to correct this, saying: “Every post we investigated [last year] turned out to be a wall post.”]

And apparently, this bug is back.

It starts like a tick—a small, almost-ignorable twinge beckoning you. You can try and suppress it, and even if you tell yourself you’ve suppressed it, a part of you gives in. And then the inky, oily, unstoppable spread of shame washes over you—not fast, like a wave, but slow. Like molasses being poured.

That’s what recalling an embarrassing memory is like. It’s a very visceral, physical effect—painful, even. We are each an unwilling owner of memories unintendedly stumbled upon while wandering through our subconscious: No! I just wanted to remember who my 7th grade homeroom teacher was, not how I accidentally called her “Mom” in front of the whole class that one time!

We have no choice in it. Anytime I accidentally come across the time I fainted while the Comcast guy was installing my cable or when I had a cast on my leg and got dog poop in it (two weeks before getting it off), I can feel my body trying to retreat into itself, to protect me from my previous horribleness.

Such an unfortunate experience isn’t only spurred by real-life memories. A recent study found that Facebook can cause a significant amount of anguish. “Almost every participant in the study could describe something that happened on Facebook in the past six months that was embarrassing or made them feel awkward or uncomfortable,” Northwestern University’s Jeremy Birnholtz, one of the paper’s authors, explains. “We were interested in the strength of the emotional response to this type of encounter.”

I can now vouch for that.

The investigation started shortly after I read the aforementioned study. I wanted to use my Timeline and that easy-to-access yearly toggle to go back and look at some of my posts from (relatively) long ago, to see if I could read the status updates and comments without embarrassment.

I could not: I’m ashamed of how clever I thought I was to write my status updates in third person (i.e., “[Molly is] surprised by how many bowls of cereal she can consume in a week.”) It’s embarrassing how banal most of my posts were. Why I thought anyone was interested in my daily schedule or how sleepy I was in class is beyond me. And my short-lived enthusiasm for the Twilight saga (which lasted right up until I saw the first movie and then went into a recovery program) is so cringeworthy I want to travel back in time and slap my 22-year-old self.

But all of this pales in comparison to how it felt when I realized I was looking at private messages on my Timeline. A series of posts from my boyfriend at the time seemed oddly inane, and semi-related. As I kept reading them, I realized this was a message he’d sent me—either over Chat or Messages. He talked about some picture of us from a party, his homework plans that night, the tailgate that weekend, what we should make for dinner. Nothing terribly incriminating, yet terribly personal.