This afternoon, President Obama, sensing that his media coverage had waned, gave a speech at a Baltimore mosque, partly to impart a message of goodwill and tolerance and partly to draw out all the crazies and give liberals on Twitter a new strawman to defend.

Most of Obama’s speech was fine, if nonsensical, full of platitudes about patriotism, working together, how peaceful everyone at the mosque was, and why it’s so important for everyone to live in harmony, like that Coke commercial that ended Mad Men. But he also touched on religious freedom, a concept that his administration has been shockingly dense about. According to the President, he is doing everything he can to preserve free exercise in this country, because like it or not, it’s in our Constitution, and darn it if it isn’t important to the foundation of this great nation that everyone be allowed to practice their religion as they see fit, free from the roving eyes of government and public scrutiny.

[[{“type”:”media”,”view_mode”:”media_large”,”fid”:”99263″,”attributes”:{“alt”:””,”class”:”media-image”,”height”:”272″,”style”:”font-size: 13.008px; line-height: 1.538em;”,”typeof”:”foaf:Image”,”width”:”480″}}]]

[[{“type”:”media”,”view_mode”:”media_large”,”fid”:”99264″,”attributes”:{“alt”:””,”class”:”media-image”,”height”:”281″,”typeof”:”foaf:Image”,”width”:”480″}}]]

Maybe I’ve missed something, but the Obama Administration hasn’t exactly been friendly to religions that want to practice their faith in the public square — at least, religions that want to practice a faith that doesn’t mold to President Obama’s vision for how their faith should look.

Obama’s message might play fine in more liberal spheres but you’d be hard-pressed to convince, say, the Little Sisters of the Poor, who the Obama Administration is suing in attempt to force them to violate their religious precepts and provide birth control, free of charge, to their members and employees. Or Hobby Lobby’s top brass. Or the many Catholic and Christian business owners who fought the Health and Human Services mandate that would have required them to pay for their employees’ contraception, including abortefacients, regardless of how they felt about the practice. There, the Obama Administration accused religious business owners of imposing their beliefs on others, and blocking “necessary access” to birth control, though they were simply asking that Administration find it in their heart to allow them to pass on absorbing their employees’ costs. In Obama’s home state, and elsewhere, Obama’s supporters are trying to force doctors and hospitals who refuse to perform abortions to violate their principles. The Obama Administration has said, time and again, it would like abortions to be covered by the Affordable Care Act and Medicaid.

But when it comes to religious freedom in the abstract, well, he’s all for it.