In impassioned speeches announcing a lawsuit against North Carolina's so-called bathroom law, Attorney General Loretta Lynch and Vanita Gupta, the head of the Justice Department's civil rights division, said the law discriminated against transgender people. (Reuters)

There is more than a smidgen of irony in the man who likened Obamacare to slavery taking issue with the historical comparisons offered by, well, just about anyone. Ben Carson, a retired pediatric neurosurgeon, is also the U.S. presidential candidate who declared it impossible for one to be a practicing Muslim and a loyal and diligent president of the United States. He is also the one-time presidential contender who claimed that the Holocaust could have been prevented if German Jews had simply been more heavily armed in Nazi-era Germany. Perhaps Carson is, as the New Yorker magazine suggested, a man of medicine who could have benefited from a few more courses outside the science department.

Yet for reasons conservative news and information outlets need to explain, it is Carson we see and hear everywhere weighing in against Attorney General Loretta Lynch's comparison between conflicts about transgender bathroom laws and the ugly constellation of policies known as Jim Crow. The truth is that there is nothing about Lynch's historical reference to Jim Crow that is not spot-on.

What Lynch, a North Carolina native, said is that states and institutions that have long and not at all auspicious histories of failing to recognize what functional equality means, how it functions, what it looks like and what policies sustain or damage that cause, must recognize that so-called bathroom laws like North Carolina's represent an effort to retrench from social change, to retreat from expanded legal provisions for equality.

What Lynch said was, in fact, rather solicitous in her description of the discomfort some Americans feel with vast social changes that have taken shape in the years since the Supreme Court has repeatedly acknowledged that Americans' constitutional equality extends to matters related to gender and sexuality. What Lynch said was that said discomfort does not and cannot outweigh U.S. law. And state policies that attempt to contravene it cannot be abided.

Here is the indisputable truth: Jim Crow was not, in fact, simply a natural state of affairs or set of traditions that a set of unruly, anti-social, particularly liberal or impatient people suddenly decided must be overturned and brought to an end. Jim Crow was a system of laws, policies and social practices shaped in direct response to -- or more accurately, created and sustained as a means to roll back -- the social and legal changes that occurred in the United States after the emancipation of the country's slaves.

In this period, known as Reconstruction, African Americans registered to vote, were elected to Congress and made economic and educational progress. Jim Crow laws made much of that increasingly impossible and gave continued force and meaning to pervasive notions of white moral and intellectual superiority.

To put that more bluntly, Jim Crow stood in direct contradiction to the U.S. Constitution but was justified by the supposed threat posed to white Americans -- particularly white women and children -- by the unrestrained presence and increasingly equal treatment of black Americans -- particularly black men -- in the years after the Civil War. Jim Crow sought specifically to roll back black Americans' legal gains and strengthen and sustain all that contributed to black social subjugation.

Again, consider the essence of Lynch's speech:

... Last week, our Civil Rights Division notified state officials that House Bill 2 violates federal civil rights laws. We asked that they certify by the end of the day today that they would not comply with or implement House Bill 2’s restriction on restroom access. An extension was requested by North Carolina and was under active consideration. But instead of replying to our offer or providing a certification, this morning, the state of North Carolina and its governor chose to respond by suing the Department of Justice. As a result of their decisions, we are now moving forward. Today, we are filing a federal civil rights lawsuit against the state of North Carolina, Gov. Pat McCrory, the North Carolina Department of Public Safety and the University of North Carolina. We are seeking a court order declaring House Bill 2’s restroom restriction impermissibly discriminatory, as well as a statewide bar on its enforcement. While the lawsuit currently seeks declaratory relief, I want to note that we retain the option of curtailing federal funding to the North Carolina Department of Public Safety and the University of North Carolina as this case proceeds. This action is about a great deal more than just bathrooms. This is about the dignity and respect we accord our fellow citizens and the laws that we, as a people and as a country, have enacted to protect them — indeed, to protect all of us. And it’s about the founding ideals that have led this country — haltingly but inexorably — in the direction of fairness, inclusion and equality for all Americans. This is not the first time that we have seen discriminatory responses to historic moments of progress for our nation. We saw it in the Jim Crow laws that followed the Emancipation Proclamation. We saw it in fierce and widespread resistance to Brown v. Board of Education. And we saw it in the proliferation of state bans on same-sex unions intended to stifle any hope that gay and lesbian Americans might one day be afforded the right to marry. ...

That accurate read of U.S. history makes very clear the damage -- political, social and legal -- that can result from claims that transgender people represent a wholesale threat to the safety of women and children in public facilities (as was claimed in Houston) or useful cover for pedophiles (the North Carolina argument).

People have a right to differ on bathroom laws. But they should always attempt do so with intellectual honesty and an accurate read on not-so-distant U.S. history. And whatever those who support North Carolina's position in this matter do, there's little value in dispatching Ben Carson to defend your cause.