Lou Holtz once said, "Don't tell your problems to people: eighty percent don't care; and the other twenty percent are glad you have them." Unfortunately, Lou Holtz is a man out-of-step with our whiny age.

Today, people will not shut up about their problems. They want to let you know about every issue they have, every “microaggression” and every time they’re offended. It’s a bottomless sea of discontent.

Worse yet, our generation of complainers never seems to blame themselves for their own problems. Instead they’ve picked out a group of designated fall guys that it’s always okay to blame for every problem they have: Christians, conservatives, men or white people.

Every time a Muslim engages in a terrorist attack, we get a lecture on the crusades which ended in 1291. Alternately, we hear how often these diehard Christians have attacked abortion clinics. Setting aside the fact that those killers are universally condemned by Christians, more people were killed in the San Bernardino terrorist attacks than were killed in every abortion clinic attack since Roe v. Wade. We’ve even gotten to the point where liberal gay couples are seeking out Christian florists, photographers and bakers so they can pretend to be hurt when they refuse to cater their weddings.

Then there’s white people. It’s bizarre that in a nation that’s 62% white, Caucasians are considered to be the only race it’s okay to openly discriminate against, mock and smear. White people are obsessively lectured about white privilege, usually by very privileged black professors and television personalities who apparently have no sense of irony. We hear endlessly about the supposed perils of white racism in a nation that just elected the first black president while it’s the official policy of the government to discriminate against white Americans based on their skin color via affirmative action. In a country where more than 90% of black Americans who are murdered are killed by other African-Americans, we focus obsessively on the far less than 1% that are killed by police officers mainly so a racial motive can be implied about the white officers that are involved.

Let me also add, there is no “rape culture” in America. If you want to see a “rape culture,” go to Egypt or the parts of Germany that are overrun with Syrian migrants. There’s also no patriarchy and the idea that women are paid less than men for doing the same work has been so thoroughly disproven that only an idiot would believe it. If women would really do the same work as men for less pay, why not just start a company and hire all women? You could dominate the market with your reduced labor costs. While we’re at it, if you get all upset about a man being polite enough to pull out a chair or open a door for you, there’s something wrong with you as a human being. Try saying thank you once in a while and more people will like you.

Similarly, conservatives are constantly being blamed for problems in black communities even though there isn’t a single majority black community in America where a conservative can get elected. Even though Detroit hasn’t had a Republican mayor since 1962, conservatives were blamed when the city went bankrupt. We constantly hear that conservatives are to blame for income inequality in America; yet 32 out of the 35 districts with the largest amount of income inequality in America are represented by liberal Democrats. Although the only thing I care less about than who wins the Oscars is the health and wellbeing of ISIS members, why is a lack of black Americans winning an award a national crisis when a lack of white players in the NBA is shrugged off? Each seems about as important as the other, which is to say, not very….

There are very few people in America under the age of 40 who can say that racism has had a significant negative impact in their lives, Christianity has been an overwhelmingly positive influence on the country, men are no better or worse than women, just different and the agenda of conservatism is primarily to stick to the Constitution, live within our means and to create a society that gives people the best opportunity to take care of themselves.

Yet, there’s a never ending attack on Christians, conservatives, men and white people in America by those who blame them for their own shortcomings. They can’t accept the fact that they’re miserable, they’re failing, they’re not getting what they want out of life; so they point the finger elsewhere. They’re the sort of people Eric Hoffer described when he said,

The frustrated, oppressed by their shortcomings, blame their failure on existing restraints. Actually their innermost desire is for an end to the “free for all.” They want to eliminate free competition and the ruthless testing to which the individual is continually subjected in a free society.

Life is brutal and there is no way to make it painless, easy and simple. Rather than chalking up failures to the difficulty of life or their own weaknesses, people have always loved to find scapegoats. That ugly impulse hasn’t changed, but the acceptable targets have. Christians, conservatives, white Americans and men are the primary targets of these weak people today.

It’s like the old story about the drunk and his car keys.

Cop: “What are you looking for?”

Drunk: “I’m looking for my house keys,”

Cop: “Are you sure this is where you lost your keys?”

Drunk: “No, I lost them in the alley.”

Cop: “Then why aren’t you looking in the alley?”

Drunk: “Well, this is where the light is."

If people stop blaming all these groups they’ve been told it’s okay to hate and start blaming themselves for their own problems, they might actually improve their lives and as an extra added bonus, the rest of us wouldn’t have to listen to their endless b*tching anymore.