The pucks didn’t go in for Jarome Iginla and the bounces went against his teammates Saturday night.

Near the halfway point at the Pepsi Center, the Calgary Flames had the Avalanche buried in a four-goal hole and perhaps the only element keeping the sellout crowd interested — besides some creative camera work on the big screen — was Iginla’s quest to become the 19th player to reach 600 goals.

“I thought we had good intention (but) I guess we focused more in seeing Iggy scoring that 600th instead of playing our game,” Avalanche coach Patrick Roy said. “We had had a few good chances and we tried to pass the puck to him instead of bringing it to the net. For example, (Alex) Tanguay is all alone in front of the net and he’s trying a little (pass) to Iggy.

“We’re going to have to refocus. It’s not that I don’t want Iggy scoring his 600th but we need to play our game,” Roy said

It didn’t happen in Calgary’s 4-0 triumph, and Iginla remains stuck on 599 after three goalless games. Just a bad night overall for the men in burgundy and blue, who fell to 6-9-3 at home.

We didn’t match the intensity that they brought,” Iginla said. “Every part of our game was not up to where it needs to be. It’s costly. It’s at home. We have to build a run at home. There’s no excuses for that. We were off tonight and got outplayed.”

The Flames — who entered 5-11-2 on the road — led 1-0 after the first period and 4-0 after two. Defenseman Dougie Hamilton opened the scoring with a wrist shot, and two deflections off shots from the point put the visitors in command in the second.

It only got worse. Goalie Semyon Varlamov was pulled after Mikael Backlund scored on his own rebound at 13:07 of the second. Calvin Pickard finished in net for the Avs, who are on a four-game winless skid (0-2-2) in Denver.

In the third period, the Avs had three shots clang off iron beside goalie Karri Ramo, who had a relatively easy night. Most his saves were in his glove or chest.

Colorado’s comeback effort was slowed by four third-period penalties, including a double-minor for high-sticking on Nathan MacKinnon.

“I think penalties killed us. Too many penalties and we only drew two,” Avs forward Matt Duchene said. “It’s tough to play when you’re doing that, tough to get flow. We just didn’t have it tonight, I guess.”

Center John Mitchell took three penalties for the Avs and was banished to the fourth line in the third period.

The Avs return to action Monday against the visiting Los Angeles Kings and continue their homestand Wednesday against the St. Louis Blues.