Sioux Falls, SD

South Dakota State Penitentiary inmate Douglas Ipsen is spending more time on the hill. He'll serve another 20 years for strangling his cellmate last September.

Ipsen admits killing Kent Davidson, who was serving a life sentence for murder.

Ipsen was already serving 75 years for first-degree rape and sexual contact with a child under the age of 16. Today's sentence will run after that sentence. But this might not have been an act of prison violence. In court, his lawyers said that Ipsen and Davidson were both suicidal.

The debate in the courtroom on Monday was whether Douglas Ipsen killed his cellmate or whether it was assisted suicide.

Ipsen became cellmates with Kent Davidson in April 2014. Ipsen's attorney Kenneth Jacobs says Davidson asked Ipsen to take his life, and continually asked him for months.

Jacobs says that his client was also suicidal from a young age. Because Ipsen knew that feeling of wanting to die, he decided to help Davidson by making a rope and strangling him.

There were no claw marks or scratches on either Davidson or Ipsen, which the judge believes signaled that there weren't any signs of struggle between the two. The autopsy reported that Davidson had three days worth of antidepressants in his system when he died. Jacobs speculates that was because he wanted to feel as little pain as possible on the day he planned to die.

State Prosecutor Doug Barnett argued that Ipsen's conduct directly caused Davidson's death. He pointed to a State Supreme Court decision in 2011 that ruled that any person whose actions kill a person can't use an assisted suicide defense because under South Dakota law assisted suicide isn't recognized.



At one point Ipsen spoke to the judge saying, "I am a human being. I have feelings. I feel remorse. Every day I still wish to die. I wish I took my life the day I took his life."

In the end, Judge Susan Sabers says she believes what Ipsen did wasn't aggravated manslaugher, but it was still manslaughter, and it deserves punishment.

Before she sentenced Ipsen, Sabers said she hopes this crime will shine light on the problems of having two suicidal inmates in the same jail cell.

News

General {{Title}} Remove Change News General Courts Web Only Crime Outdoors Events Center Non-Homepage Boredom Busters Pipeline Positively KELOLAND Technology Hunger Affordable Care Act Shops Flooding Remembering 9/11 Drought JazzFest Spring Storm Honor Flight Spencer Anniversary

DoApp Health News Business News Sports

Agriculture Markets Livestock Crops Politics

HealthBeat Cancer Children's Health Heart Health Wellness & Nutrition General Health Beat Women's Health RX Resources What's Going Around OTC Diabetes Recalls Dental Health Men's Health

Politics South Dakota Legislature Budget Congress Taxes General Local Campaign President US Senate New Laws US House Iowa Ballot Issues Local Races Minnesota Gubernatorial

Education Funding College Elementary High School Pre K School Supplies Middle School

Sports Professional College High School Sports Zone Headlines Summit League Tournament Olympics

Business Industry Your Money Matters Development Gas & Energy Legislation Economy/Stocks Employment General Health Care Technology Education Funding Tourism Banking/Finance Housing Transportation Insurance Meetings & Events Retail & Restaurants All Industries On The Move Shops Agriculture

Featured Stories Eye on KELOLAND Inside KELOLAND

Weather Snow Forecast Records Rain Flooding Drought WX Corner General

World News

Investigates GEAR UP

Sponsored Done

© 2016 KELOLAND TV. All Rights Reserved.