EAST FLAT ROCK — The East Henderson cheerleader voices filled the halls of Hillandale Elementary School before anyone could see them on Friday morning.

Waiting beyond the gymnasium doors were hundreds of kids lining all the elementary school's walls anxiously awaiting the Eagle football team.

Within seconds, the cheerleaders emerged from the gym and were met with cheers from the kids. Behind the cheerleaders was a line of football players clad in green jerseys. The long football procession left the gym, went out a side door and then entered back into the school on the first grade hall.

The East football players were smiling as they walked through halls lined with smiling children. The kids held up posters that they'd made to rally the Eagles, urging to victory later that night.

Friday morning was the first of what will be a tradition for East Henderson under new coach John "Mac" McMillan. Tabbed the "Eagle Walk," the East players will visit the elementary schools in their district each Friday morning of home games.

On this Friday as the walk was completed, the Eagle players and cheerleaders filed back into the gym, which was filled with kids. With everyone in the gym, a spontaneous dodge ball game erupted as the kids bombarded the players with balls and followed that up with a contest with the cheerleaders.

Once the dodge ball, high fives and cheers were over, the Eagle players waited patiently on the sidewalk as the cheerleaders handed them pictures and posters the kids had made them.

They hopped back on the buses and made their way back to East.

The day was just beginning.

No. 7

After eating their pregame meal at Rise Fellowship Church, the Eagles settled into the fieldhouse to await the gridiron clash with Polk County. In the weight room, "Facing the Giants" played on a television. In the locker rooms, players sat around. Some talked. Some stretched out on the floor. Some sat silently with ear buds on listening to music.

The coaches were scattered throughout, coming in and out of the locker rooms. The bulk of the assistant coaches settled in around a conference table in the coaches' locker room. Offensive coordinator Sam Perry was busy plotting a fantasy football trade with defensive coordinator Jeff Floyd.

The group of coaches then bounced around different trades, joking about who'd win what games this week, in their coaches' fantasy football league.

As the clock ticked, however, the shift slowly began. Talks of fantasy football faded and the seriousness of real football took hold. The players went out for their stretched and returned to the fieldhouse just a little past 6 p.m.

The first meeting was a reminder session with Perry. Perry walked them through plays and reminded the players of how vital the offensive line's role would be against the Wolverines.

After Perry was finished, Floyd took his turn to talk to the team about defense.

His primary focus was on No. 7. For Polk County, that is quarterback Jamal Wheeler.

The No. 7 theme continued as McMillan addressed the Eagles just before the game began. The player sat in front of their lockers. Many of those lockers had the pictures and scribbling of the Hillandale Elementary kids posted.

"I we can keep the ball away from No. 7, he can't hurt you," McMillan told his team.

As the seconds continued to tick away, assistant coach Rashad Smith talked to the players. Smith just completed his career at North Carolina St. after a stellar high school career in Georgia.

"They coaches," he said, "we got all the faith in ya'll."

He stressed the unity and the camaraderie of a team.

"You won't get it done I you don't believe in the man next to you," Smith said. "One person can move a rock. As a team, we can move the world."

And just moments before the Eagles filed out to the field to bunch up behind the banner and cheerleaders, McMillan addressed his team one more time.

"You are a band of brothers right here," he said. "You've got to fight together."

He reminded them of all their hard work and how he knew that they were tired of the losing streak that they were on.

"It's time to take (all that) out on Polk County," he said.

Dogfight

The Eagles held the Wolverines to just 13 points in the first half. In large part, they kept Wheeler aka No. 7 in check.

East suffered from two fumbles that stalled two drives and cost them seven points on the other side. Just as the first half was ending, however, the Eagles defense stole a little momentum that inspired hope in the locker rooms at the half.

The Eagles lost a fumble with less than a minute to go in the first half. Jamal Wheeler connected on a 26-yard pass to his brother Storm Wheeler that gave the Wolverines a first and goal from the 8-yard-line. The Eagle defense knocked down the pass as the buzzer went off to end the second quarter.

The locker room was much more animated at the half. A calm, cool façade became fire at the half. Perry stood at the front of the room and told the players that the game would come down to pride.

Floyd asked the players if they were ready to win a ball game.

McMillan's emotions flowed into his players at the half. He talked about protecting the football and his voice filled the room.

"They know they're in a dogfight," he told his players. "Take a deep breath. Smile. We can win this football game."

He let those words in. They were met with nods from his players as their energy built.

"We're all together," McMillan continued. "We're one. We're East. Let's go out and that ball game."

Putting it behind

The second half, however, didn't go as the Eagles planned.

The first drive for Polk County as the half got started took 48 seconds and ended with a 56-yard touchdown run by Jamal Wheeler.

The Eagles lost another fumble that resulted in a touchdown and Polk's Jason Chupp picked off a pass and took it 26 yards for a touchdown. When the dust settled, Polk won the game 34-0.

As the East team and fans met at midfield, McMillan once again stared his players in the face.

This time, the words were somber.

"It's eating at me bad," he said. I'm going to watch the film tomorrow and put it behind me."

As he spoke, hope filled his words again. The season isn't over. It really hadn't begun. Next week, East will host Pisgah in the first WNC Athletic Conference game of the season.

"Take every we've done and find as much positive out of it and take it with you to Pisgah," he said.

___

Reach Millwood at Joey.Millwood@blueridgenow.com or 828-694-7883.

___

Follow Joey Millwood on Twitter at https://twitter.com/BRNJoey