I’m hardly surprised that paid “volunteers” for ColoradoCareYes gathered 156,000 signatures on petitions to create a single-payer health care system for Colorado. We have that many and more wishful-thinking liberal utopians in our politically purple state lacking the good sense to recognize an economic disaster-in-waiting.

This proposal, Initiative 20, would be a ballot question in November 2016 under the seductive title of ColoradoCare. It’s worse than impractical. It’s nuts.

This scheme was first offered in 2013 by Sen. Irene Aguilar, a medical doctor and Denver Democrat, and was soundly rejected by the state legislature, failing even to win the support of majority Democrats. Now, it would bypass legislators and go directly to the voters. And it wouldn’t simply be a state statute that could be adjusted by legislators. It would be carved solidly into the Colorado Constitution, making it very difficult to alter or correct.

This is part of a stealthy nationwide campaign to morph the Affordable Care Act into socialized medicine via a state-by-state process. A similar plan was rolled out in Vermont (the home of socialist Sen. Bernie Sanders) and finally dumped by Gov. Peter Shumlin, a Democrat who had initially endorsed it before coming to realize it was unaffordable. That caused The Wall Street Journal to ironically observe that this was “all the more remarkable because the Green Mountain People’s Republic is the ideal socialist laboratory.”

I’ve pored through the proposal’s 5,000 words. It unleashes a devil’s playpen of bureaucracy. Its supporters say it wouldn’t be “government-run.” That’s not exactly true. ColoradoCare would be controlled by a 21-member board elected statewide. Get that: elected, just like politicians. So let’s call it quasi-governmental, with the power to tax, starting with a combined 10 percent increase in the payroll tax on employers and workers; and a tax on non-payroll income from self-employment, interest, dividends, capital gains, Social Security, pensions, and other sources on up to $450,000 of income for couples filing jointly. And you’ll pay this tax even if you have private insurance. With this massive subsidy, ColoradoCare would undercut private health insurers, making them unable to compete (no doubt a goal of the socialists behind this).

The board will set the price of insurance premiums, in effect a tax. And its “executive team” will “establish a central purchasing authority responsible for negotiating favorable prices for prescription drugs, medical equipment and other products and services required by ColoradoCare.” That translates to screwing doctors and other providers with insufficient reimbursements. This will drive up demand for medical care while discouraging supply. That inevitably results in longer waits and reduced access for patients, as experienced by those in other countries with socialized medicine.

The board also will rule on your eligibility for specific medical procedures based on age and health status. Under Britain’s socialized system, that’s controlled by the National Institute for Health Care and Excellence. The indelicate term for this is “death panel.”

ColoradoCare is priced to start at $25 billion a year; our total state budget is just over $30 billion. Its activist proponents claim that will be more than offset by savings in health-care costs. Don’t you believe it. In Medicare’s infancy in 1967, it was estimated that the program would cost $12 billion by 1990. When 1990 arrived, it actually cost $98 billion.

Obamacare is a fraud. Colorado’s largest “non-profit” health co-op has gone broke, sticking taxpayers with $72 million in federal loans. Social Security, Medicare and Medicaid project trillions in unfunded liabilities. But unlike the feds, Colorado’s constitution prohibits budget deficits. ColoradoCare is a formula for state bankruptcy in the name of “social justice,” the left’s all-purpose justification for unsustainable government giveaways.

Let’s hope enough sensible Coloradans don’t fall for this prayer masquerading as public policy.

Freelance columnist Mike Rosen’s radio show airs weekdays from 1 to 3 p.m. on 850-KOA.

To send a letter to the editor about this article, submit online or check out our guidelines for how to submit by e-mail or mail.