An Iowa hospital has agreed to pay $40,000 to the federal government in response to allegations that it engaged in “patient dumping” by failing to provide adequate emergency care for a suicidal patient.

The agreement comes several weeks after one of the hospital’s former surgeons agreed to pay a similar amount for violating the patient-dumping law.

State and federal records indicate that on May 28, 2010, a patient in a wheelchair identified in the records only as “J.D.” came to the emergency room at Trinity Medical Center in Bettendorf for treatment of open wounds on his or her buttocks. While there, the patient repeatedly expressed — in writing and in discussions with the Trinity staff — a desire to commit suicide, telling one nurse, “I took an overdose (of medication) two days ago, but it didn’t work.”

The patient was discharged with no psychological evaluation and no consultation with the mental health unit. A few hours later, the patient was seen in the hospital parking lot, steering his or her wheelchair into traffic in an apparent attempt to be hit by a car. The patient told one staffer of plans to commit suicide later that same night by slitting his or her throat with a scalpel. The patient’s roommate then came to the hospital and told the staff that several days earlier the patient had attempted suicide by overdosing on pain medication, according to records.

Eight weeks ago, the Office of Inspector General at the U.S. Department of Health and Human Service agreed to settle allegations that Trinity’s handling of the case violated the patient-dumping provisions of the federal Emergency Medical Treatment and Labor Act. The law requires hospitals to stabilize patients who have an emergency medical condition before attempting to discharge or transfer them elsewhere.

The settlement agreement with Trinity, obtained through the Freedom of Information Act, requires the hospital to pay $40,000 to the federal government.

Erin Platt, spokeswoman for Trinity Medical Center, said the hospital takes its EMTALA obligations seriously, and in this case chose to pay the $40,000 rather than “draw the case out via a lengthy administrative review process.” She said Trinity has changed its policies to ensure that before behavioral-health patients in the emergency room are discharged, they will either see a physician or have their case reviewed by a physician. Also, chart audits are now being conducted “to ensure that behavioral-health patients are being assessed for suicide risk” and other issues, Platt said.

In April, Dr. Gregory Bohn agreed to pay $35,000 to the federal government to resolve allegations that he personally violated the patient-dumping law on Feb. 12, 2010, while working as the on-call surgeon at Trinity Medical Center of Bettendorf.

The inspector general alleged that Bohn refused to examine or treat a patient who had an emergency medical condition that required surgery.

The Iowa Board of Medicine, which regulates physicians in the state, has not taken any disciplinary action against Bohn.

Bohn could not be reached for comment. The outgoing message on his office telephone indicates he has “closed his practice and left the area.”

Trinity Medical Center of Bettendorf is part of UnityPoint Health, Iowa’s largest integrated health system. UnityPoint affiliates employ 24,000 people and together they log more than 4 million patient visits each year. UnityPoint collects $2.7 billion in annual revenue, and is the nation’s 15th largest nonprofit health system.

Read or Share this story: http://dmreg.co/1omw8wd