Topics: Crafts, Editor's Picks, Feminism, misandry, misandry crafts, Life News

The word “cunt” has been in our lexicon for a while now, reclaimed by a host of feminist activists. I remember the first time I decreed myself a “cunt”—it was on the street following a performance of “The Vagina Monologues.” My friend shushed me, but I called it out loud and proud. “I’m a cunt!” Until that point, I had only heard a man use that word. The experience was freeing.

Maybe, then, it should be no surprise that the word “misandry” has found itself a following in the pop-culture vernacular. (While misogyny is the hatred of women, misandry is the male equivalent. Or as Merriam-Webster bluntly puts it: “The hatred of men.”) Why misandry, and why now? The word is common in men’s rights circles and appears to be the result of a backlash against increasingly public discussions of hate crimes against women and rampant Internet misogyny. This might sound like a sweeping statement—rampant Internet misogyny—but the truth is there is so much hate towards women on the Internet that it’s not about finding examples, it’s about narrowing down examples.

I could tell you about the rape threats against Zerlina Maxwell, or the death and rape threats against Anita Sarkeesian of Feminist Frequency. I could mention the misogynist hurricane of cruelty that vandalized Sarkeesian’s Wikipedia page and manipulated her Google search results to read “Anita Sarkeesian is a feminist video blogger and cunt.”

Go to Reddit or 4chan, or even YouTube. Go to Craigslist, read the comments on the CHVRCHES Facebook page, or look up the name Stella Creasy and you’ll find more of the same kind of verbal abuse, the same attacks, the same kind of threats. Men’s rights activists tend to cry misandry whenever these problems are pointed out–and now women, proudly or in jest, are starting to use the term themselves. Even women who like men (I like my husband, my father, my brother and my son very much, for instance) can see why women might use the word misandry. Because maybe, outside of the Rampant Internet Misogyny, they have, at one point in their life, endured some abuse by a man. Maybe it was a dude, or a bunch of dudes, who treated a woman badly in her 20s. Or maybe, it was just the whole of men—you know, The Patriarchy.

Men understand this. This includes my husband, who, when I told him I was writing this story, said: “Yeah, men suck.” This doesn’t make him a self-hating man, this just makes him a man who understands the problems men can cause.

And because ladies, even the most riotous of ladies—after all, this generation’s interest in crafts started under the Riot Grrrl movement, where girls first embroidered “feminist” on pillows and formed knitting groups called “Stitch ’n Bitch”—like being girlish and tough, the misandry message has evolved in the form of arts and crafts. Check Etsy for the word misandry and you’ll find super-cute pom-pom knit hats with “misandry” emblazoned between rows of hearts. You’ll also find lavender and white heart-shaped misandry hair barrettes, a plastic misandry necklace and a misandry-adorned heart-shaped felt brooch with beads.