Walk into Longs Peak Pub at 600 Longs Peak Ave. in Longmont and you might see Lindsey Beddard wiping down a table, or pouring a brew, grilling a chicken sandwich or taking an order from a crowded table.

That's a typical day for this general manager.

The Longmont resident, who moved to the Front Range from Vail three years ago, has a long history in management and the service industry.

When she started working for Mountain Sun in Boulder she had no intention of getting back into management. But the company had other ideas.

We checked in with the Longs Peak Pub GM recently, between the lunch and dinner crowds.

1. How long has the Longmont location been open, and is it the youngest of the five locations?

The Longmont location is the youngest of the five locations and opened its doors in October of 2014.

2. That's the same month I moved back here. I must have been one of your first customers. So, no plastic. What's with that, only accepting cash and checks. Checks?

The Mountain Sun has never accepted credit cards. This can be somewhat inconvenient, although the benefits go directly back to the people dining with us. Not being bogged down with credit card fees, allows us to offer quality food and beer at a great price.

The coolest thing I can tell people when explaining why we don't take plastic is to let me send you home with a "Karma Envelope." Guests are welcome to take home their bill and a self-addressed, stamped envelope we provide and mail in a check or cash at their convenience. We don't require any information for the guest to do this, we simply trust the goodness in people.

Advertisement

There was a blog written about "Karma Envelopes" recently that literally brought me to tears and made me so proud of the company I represent. My favorite quote from the blog was:

"They believe kindness multiplies. They believe joy rebounds. They believe teamwork is contagious. They believe generosity goes viral."

3. Also the entire staff shares tips and does all the jobs is that correct? Is that a company-wide policy?

Teamwork is the core of the Mountain Sun concept. How many people have ever visited or worked in a restaurant where people just seemed unhappy? From the kitchen fighting with the front of the house to servers fighting for more tables to make money regardless if the service suffers. I know I have...

By removing the hierarchy that exists in the traditional restaurant model we strive to provide a higher level of hospitality. The next time you walk into Longs Peak Pub notice that the staff is full of smiles. This is because we truly love our jobs and genuinely care about each guest's experience. We are a family and support each other because it doesn't matter if you're dish washing, cooking or serving, you are walking out with the same money at the end of the night. A third of the staff and the entire management team are also cross-trained so no matter who needs help we can provide it.

We have always believed our most important resource as a company is the staff. We offer health insurance, dental insurance, profit sharing, educational opportunities, meals, and room for advancement all in an effort to improve the lives of those that join the team.

4. Has the Longmont location made its targets, its goals? Is business good?

We have truly enjoyed our short time in Longmont thus far. I see so many faces that visit the pub daily or weekly. People in the community have been hugely supportive and responsive to what we have been doing.

We have been very lucky to find incredible staff members. Most of the staff has been here since the beginning and those who haven't quickly become important members of the Longs Peak Pub family. The staff here makes you want to come back again and again because not only are they serving you awesome beer and food, they become your friend during the process. Because of these reasons Longs Peak Pub has been very successful in its first year.

5. You have five locations. Are there plans to add more?

We have our largest brewery and pub at Vine Street in Denver, two pubs Mountain Sun and Southern Sun as well as Under The Sun Eatery and Taphouse in Boulder and now Longs Peak Pub in Longmont. We're holding with that for now, but you never know what the future will bring.

Vince Winkel: 303-684-5291, winkelv@times-call.com or twitter.com/vincewinkel