Adrian Piccoli, Education Minister

Discipline is just one area where schools are benefitting from our reforms which put more power and responsibility in the hands of principals - who ultimately know what is best for their schools.

But public schools are still part of a system and we are able to set high expectations for the behaviour of students and the standard of discipline in all schools.

Teachers to gain more powers to discipline unruly students

"We went back to old school tactics to beat truancy"

Principals do have authority to take strong action in relation to unacceptable behaviour. Such challenging behaviour is not tolerated in our schools.

The increase in the number of long suspensions (between 4 and 20 days) 11,216 in 2005 to 18,186 in 2012 shows how seriously public schools respond to unacceptable behaviour.

Teachers, parents and students all know that there has to be discipline in the classroom for learning to occur.

That's why late last year I asked my department to strengthen the Code of Conduct, which includes ways teachers can interact with their students.

Principals do have authority to take strong action in relation to unacceptable behaviour. Such challenging behaviour is not tolerated in our schools.

Georges River Secondary College is an example of a school using the flexibility provided by our reforms to make decisions that address the individual needs of their students and school community. The school has achieved impressive results by engaging a mentor who related well to their students.

Fostering positive student discipline is a priority in public schools.

That is why since coming to Government we have employed 50 Student Support Officers to work with students and promote positive behaviour. We have also trained nearly 5,000 staff in how to respond to problem behaviour and we are working to better prepare new teachers for the challenge of managing student and classroom behaviour.

Jihad Dib, principal Punchbowl Boys High

TURNING around a school happens one student at a time.

The buy-in starts with staff who commit to a future that is not scripted by assumptions about the kind of education that produces great Australians; it carries through to students who believe in the possibility of a brighter future without artificial limits.

It is supported by parents and caregivers who are invested in a school which makes the most of their child's potential and a community that embraces its local school as a source of inspiration. It is encapsulated by believing in the development of the 'whole' child and a 'can do' school culture.

Turning around a school happens one day at a time. A vision is nothing without persistence. At Punchbowl Boys' High School, we refer to this as 'pounding the rock'.

It is the slow and meticlulous art of shaping raw material into something unique, through hard work and unwavering effort.

Turning around a school happens one day at a time. A vision is nothing without persistence.

Our students are resilient because they've learned to be; they know it's not about being the best, but, rather, about giving their best, getting back up when they've been knocked down and about making the most of themselves.

Turning a school around is more than one person standing on a soapbox issuing edicts.

It is the hard work of a team made of staff with the courage to pursue dreams of creating the type of school they wanted as kids.

It is realised through determined students and supportive parents doing all they can to ensure everyone in the team is richer for being part of the incredible journey; the journey that has led to the creation of our very own 'Punchbowl Family'.

Angelika Anderson, senior lecturer, Institute of Human Development Counselling, Monash University

CHALLENGING behaviour in schools is a big problem for everyone concerned.

It is associated with high stress levels for teachers, may result in exclusion of the child concerned and can compromise a safe and productive learning environment for others in the class. Dealing with it effectively is very important.

A large knowledge base exists about how to best deal with problem behaviour in schools and based on this current best practice is Positive Behaviour Support (PBS).

PBS is based on the principles of Applied Behaviour Analysis (ABA). A core assumption underlying PBS is the notion that all behaviour is learned, and that all behaviour serves a purpose for the individual, often communicating something they want (for example, access to activities, items or attention), or something they want to get out of (for example an unpleasant or demanding situation).

The very best way to deal with challenging behaviour is to prevent it from occurring in the first place, the way that well-designed roads and traffic rules prevent accidents.

PBS is a level system designed to create 'behaviour-safe' schools. Schools are high-risk environments, as adult attention tends to be in short supply and there are many demands.

Punitive approaches do not work in the long term. One reason is that common behaviour reduction strategies used by teachers can inadvertently systematically teach kids to misbehave.

Individuals who have a high need for attention, or who struggle with the demands - perhaps because they lack the social, communication, or academic skills - are at elevated risk for developing challenging behaviour. Schools effectively implementing PBS will set children up for success by communicating rules and behavioural expectations clearly, providing extra training for children at risk, and incentivising good behaviour.

Punitive approaches do not work in the long term. One reason is that common behaviour reduction strategies used by teachers can inadvertently systematically teach kids to misbehave. Even if the intention is to punish the child, a teacher's reaction may still function as a reward. For example if a child misbehaves in a reading class that they find difficult, and the teacher then sends the child to 'time out', what is the child learning? Time out, though intended as punishment in this case probably functions as a reward or reinforcement for this child. The child is more likely to misbehave again in reading classes in the future. Another reason why punishment is often unsuccessful is that it does not teach more appropriate alternative ways to have ones needs met, and is therefore likely to result in the emergence of new (and often worse!) problem behaviour.

By the time children get to secondary school problem behaviours may be well-established, and much harder, though not impossible, to eliminate. It will require a functional approach though. There is ample research evidence that interventions informed by Functional Behaviour Assessment (FBA) lead to better outcomes to the extent that in the USA FBAs are mandated by law in schools for some populations. Knowing the purpose of behaviour allows practitioners to select and implement successful positive behaviour change interventions, which often include replacing problem behaviours with functionally equivalent adaptive skills. In that way problem behaviour can be eliminated without the need for aversive procedures.

A problem in the Australian context is that there are few practitioners with the required skills. There is also currently no approved course sequence in all of Australia to train Board Certified Behaviour Analysts (BCBA); professionals most likely to have these skills.

Helen Proctor , Faculty of Education and Social Work, University of Sydney

Ask any historian or read any old school records: classroom discipline has been a hot button issue ever since kids have attended school.

And we wouldn't want to go back to the bad old days, when some kids were so frightened of their teachers that they failed to report the worst kinds of abuse.

Without wanting to underplay the grief experienced by teachers and kids when things really do go badly wrong, most teachers and teens get along ok in today's classrooms. Most kids want to do well at school and most teachers are well-equipped to help them.

But what is to be done when the ratio of shooshing time to learning time gets out of hand? Or when a small group of kids seems to derail the learning of everyone else?

We shouldn't expect more of kids than we would of adults. It's not reasonable to expect kids to be perfectly engaged and obedient all day every day, lesson after lesson.

There are a few things to keep in mind.

We shouldn't expect more of kids than we would of adults. It's not reasonable to expect kids to be perfectly engaged and obedient all day every day, lesson after lesson. And it doesn't hurt to be side-tracked once in a while, or to have a laugh.

Most kids will respond to a well-planned lesson and a teacher who knows their stuff.

The most important strategy of all is one that takes time: the steady building of good working relationships-between kids and teachers, among kids, among teachers.

Finally, what can kids, families and school communities do to help?

Instead of placing so much focus on which teachers are "best" or "worst", what about helping young people to learn how bring the best out in all of their teachers, even on their bad days, even if they're sometimes struggling?

Realistically, kids will have to work with all sorts of people through their lives: learning to manage a variety of teachers is a good start. If it takes a village to raise a child, it takes a community to nurture, develop and hold on to a good teaching force.

Dr Tony Yeigh, lecturer, Educational Psychology/Classroom Management Southern Cross University

If there is a sector of education that requires fundamental rethinking in terms of how it works and how it affects society, it is certainly school discipline.

Indeed, it is important to see things within a context and in this respect current classroom and behaviour management approaches must take into account the impact of technologies and practices that are transforming how the modern adolescent acquires knowledge, forms social bonds, relates to authority and communicates in general.

Teenage brains are designed to develop an individual identity and to obtain social support for this identity, and for the modern teenager this is occurring within an age of transformative learning and social networking, with new "rules" governing the nature of relationships and the basis for mutual respect.

Research suggests that the majority of students come to school each day with a positive attitude toward their teachers, the school and their learning.

Educators must understand that this calls, and will increasingly call into question, the role of principals, teachers and other school personnel in terms of how schools are managed and how students are to be nurtured and "grown" into competent, productive and purposeful adults.

Research suggests that the majority of students come to school each day with a positive attitude toward their teachers, the school and their learning.

However disciplinary approaches that focus on rigid adherence to customary rules, often accompanied by negative "logical consequences" for rule breakers, serve to alienate students and build resentment (Kohn, 1995; Mayer, 2001).

This is because such approaches essentially seek to control student behaviours, and this is counter-intuitive to the massively connected and more collaborative state of affairs that most teenagers experience outside the education system.

Research also suggests that discipline approaches which focus on integrating academic learning with personal interests and which seek to proactively model and teach students how to "operate" in the school environment serve to connect students to one another, to their teachers, and to the school itself (Farmer, 2000; Mayer, 1999).

The underlying basis of this discipline approach is that it values and publically rewards diversity, individualism, and self-direction for the learner.

So, what to do about discipline in schools? Begin with understanding that the purpose of discipline is to build healthy adults.

In this respect the difference between discipline that seeks to control students and discipline that seeks to connect students is that in the modern world, only the latter will build the sorts of relationships that last and result in adolescent confidence and trust.

Dr Eva Dobozy, senior lecturer School of Education, Curtin University

Learning about democratic civic life and political engagement does not primarily occur in formal civics and citizenship education classes where students are invited to think about the relevance of concepts such as democracy and human rights.

No, learning to act in a democratic and civil way happens in everyday life inside and outside of the classroom.

This may be an obvious observation but it is one that needs repeating!

Time and time again we hear about soaring rates of student suspensions from school because of 'inappropriate' conduct, especially related to high school students, but increasingly also related to younger students.

This is a serious civic problem and we all need to take responsibility. Of course, schools have a duty of care and a mandate to offer safe learning environments.

So, it seems that the easiest solution is to suspend the 'trouble makers'. But we all know that child and adolescent civility is not something that can be taught and tested in a way that classroom teachers teach Maths and English.

Suspending students who break school rules may provide some relief to stressed-out teachers, students, parents, and school principals, but it certainly does not make a positive contribution to the suspended child or teenager, his or her family and society at large.

This is a serious civic problem and we all need to take responsibility. Of course, schools have a duty of care and a mandate to offer safe learning environments.

The problem is simply temporarily brushed under the metaphorical carpet to be dealt with at a later stage by someone else.

As an educational researcher and lecturer in educational psychology, and mother of a teenage child, I am particularly sensitive to the issue of incivility.

In some of my research work, I studied the characteristics that democratic schools share. I was able to pinpoint some attributes that are common among these 'out of the ordinary schools'. These schools with a reputation of being democratic were diverse in their philosophical underpinnings and their socio-economic status, but they were all described as open, friendly and generally lively, bustling places.

Most significantly, the school principals at all of these schools perceived their schools to be distinctively different from traditional schooling.

Therefore, they seemed to view themselves as an exceptional educational environment that could not be compared to 'ordinary' schools.

What apparently made these schools different in the eyes of the principals was a particular focus on the rights to dignity of their students and to the possibilities created in their learning environments for students to participate in decision-making and be given a voice.

So, rather than excerpting power over students it is important to provide plenty of verbal and non-verbal messages to them that they are respected as individuals and they have rights and responsibilities.

Their right is to be respected as a human being, to be taken seriously and be given a voice, irrespective of the physical, cognitive or socio-emotional maturity and power difference that exists between adults and teenagers or younger children.

Their responsibility is to act in an ethical and agreeable way and to respect the human rights of others, especially if they are less powerful than them. In other words, they need to learn that civility matters. We adults need to be role models.

This modelling of democratic behaviours starts in our homes, sports clubs, roads, offices and staff rooms.

Let it bother you when a teenager or young child demonstrates disrespectful behaviours. I urge you to do something about it in a democratic fashion.

Maria Montessori, the famous Italian educator who initially trained as a medical doctor, made a point in teaching her classroom teachers that compassion and civility was the key to 'good education'. She explained that a child or adolescent who is misbehaving has an unmet need, much like a patient who develops a fever.

No one expects to be suspended from school for falling ill and no one who visits the local GP because of high fever expects to be punished for an underlying illness that is not yet discovered. Montessori argued that teenagers and young children who misbehave should be assisted to regain their civility and socio-emotional well-being.

Only then can these troubled youth become civic minded, remembering that they will be someone's role model in the future and will, inevitably, become the leaders, sports coaches, teachers, parents and citizens of tomorrow.