Washington (CNN) Joe Biden's 2016 deliberations, a Bill Clinton comment that might not go over so well at home, Scott Walker's plan to replace Obamacare, a new GOP power broker is born, and Jeb Bush's bipartisan ISIS plan -- those stories filled our Sunday trip around the "Inside Politics" table.

1. Biden's road to running

Some of it is political. Much of it is emotional.

And as Vice President Joe Biden mulls joining the 2016 presidential race, close advisers and allies say they are not sure what he will decide, and suggest it is a waste of time to try to read tea leaves from one conversation to the next.

So they are preparing, and answering his questions.

Among the things the vice president has been told, according to several sources familiar with meetings and conversations over the past few weeks:

• That it will be difficult but not impossible to assemble a viable campaign operation. Not impossible, but nowhere near on par with the depth and experience level of the Hillary Clinton campaign.

• That, in the view of several people involved, the best way to think of the possibility is with the framework of a four-state initial strategy: Iowa, New Hampshire, South Carolina and Nevada. The idea here is that, if Biden were to run, the first four contests on the nominating calendar would deliver a clear verdict as to whether he had a real chance to knock Clinton from her front-runner status or whether a third Biden presidential run was destined to end in disappointment like the first two.

• That to mount a reasonable campaign in those states it would be wise to think in the ballpark of $25 million to $30 million, plus $100 million. The smaller figure would be hard money -- smaller contributions to the official campaign organization; the larger would be for a pro-Biden super PAC.

6 photos: Who's running for president? 6 photos: Who's running for president? Ted Cruz, Donald Trump, John Kasich, Hillary Clinton and Bernie Sanders, Hide Caption 1 of 6 6 photos: Who's running for president?



"So, ladies and gentlemen, I am officially running for president of the United States, and we are going to make our country great again," Trump told the crowd at his announcement. Businessman Donald Trump announced June 16 at his Trump Tower in New York City that he is seeking the Republican presidential nomination. This ends more than two decades of flirting with the idea of running for the White House."So, ladies and gentlemen, I am officially running for president of the United States, and we are going to make our country great again," Trump told the crowd at his announcement. Hide Caption 2 of 6 6 photos: Who's running for president?



"These are all of our stories," Cruz told the audience at Liberty University in Virginia. "These are who we are as Americans. And yet for so many Americans, the promise of America seems more and more distant." Sen. Ted Cruz of Texas has made a name for himself in the Senate, solidifying his brand as a conservative firebrand willing to take on the GOP's establishment. He announced he was seeking the Republican presidential nomination in a speech on March 23."These are all of our stories," Cruz told the audience at Liberty University in Virginia. "These are who we are as Americans. And yet for so many Americans, the promise of America seems more and more distant." Hide Caption 3 of 6 6 photos: Who's running for president? Ohio Gov. John Kasich joined the Republican field July 21 as he formally announced his White House bid.



"I am here to ask you for your prayers, for your support ... because I have decided to run for president of the United States," Kasich told his kickoff rally at the Ohio State University. Hide Caption 4 of 6 6 photos: Who's running for president?



"Everyday Americans need a champion, and I want to be that champion -- so you can do more than just get by -- you can get ahead. And stay ahead," she said in her announcement video. "Because when families are strong, America is strong. So I'm hitting the road to earn your vote, because it's your time. And I hope you'll join me on this journey." Hillary Clinton launched her presidential bid on April 12 through a video message on social media. The former first lady, senator and secretary of state is considered the front-runner among possible Democratic candidates."Everyday Americans need a champion, and I want to be that champion -- so you can do more than just get by -- you can get ahead. And stay ahead," she said in her announcement video. "Because when families are strong, America is strong. So I'm hitting the road to earn your vote, because it's your time. And I hope you'll join me on this journey." Hide Caption 5 of 6 6 photos: Who's running for president?



"This great nation and its government belong to all of the people and not to a handful of billionaires, their super PACs and their lobbyists," Sanders said at a rally in Vermont on May 26. Sen. Bernie Sanders , an independent from Vermont who caucuses with Democrats, announced his run in an email to supporters on April 30. He has said the United States needs a "political revolution" of working-class Americans to take back control of the government from billionaires."This great nation and its government belong to all of the people and not to a handful of billionaires, their super PACs and their lobbyists," Sanders said at a rally in Vermont on May 26. Hide Caption 6 of 6

• There are competing thoughts on a timetable, though there is a general consensus that October 1 is as late as the VP could wait to decide.

One joke being kicked around in Biden circles -- assuming he decided to run -- calls for a morning announcement on October 13 and then a dramatic appearance that night at the first Democratic primary debate, in Nevada. Again, that's a joke.

2. Bill Clinton defends his record and puts Hillary in an awkward spot -- again

The Glass-Steagall Act probably doesn't come up much at the dinner table or around the water cooler at work. But the law regulating relationships between banks and securities firms is a big part of the debate about the 2008-2009 financial collapse, and comes up a lot among liberals and populists.

14 photos: Photos: Vice President Joe Biden 14 photos: Photos: Vice President Joe Biden U.S. Vice President Joe Biden began his career in politics in 1972, winning election to the Senate at the age of 29 (he was 30 when he took office). The Delaware Democrat was reelected to the Senate six times, including 2008, before becoming the 47th vice president of the United States. Hide Caption 1 of 14 14 photos: Photos: Vice President Joe Biden Biden is sworn in for his second term as vice president by Supreme Court Justice Sonia Sotomayor, with his wife, Jill, and son, Beau, by his side, on January 21, 2013, in Washington. Hide Caption 2 of 14 14 photos: Photos: Vice President Joe Biden Biden presides over a ceremony in Baghdad to formally mark the end of the U.S. combat mission in Iraq on September 1, 2010. Hide Caption 3 of 14 14 photos: Photos: Vice President Joe Biden Biden and President-elect Barack Obama wave to the crowd at their election night party at Grant Park in Chicago on November 4, 2008. Hide Caption 4 of 14 14 photos: Photos: Vice President Joe Biden Biden speaks after being introduced as Obama's running mate while campaigning together after the Democratic National Convention in 2008. Hide Caption 5 of 14 14 photos: Photos: Vice President Joe Biden From left, former Sen. John Edwards, Biden, Obama and Sen. Hillary Clinton at a debate of Democratic presidential candidates on April 26, 2007, in Orangeburg, South Carolina. Hide Caption 6 of 14 14 photos: Photos: Vice President Joe Biden Biden releases his memoir, "Promises to Keep: On Life and Politics," in 2007. Hide Caption 7 of 14 14 photos: Photos: Vice President Joe Biden As a ranking member of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, Biden is interviewed on NBC's "Meet the Press," concerning the war in Iraq on August 14, 2005. Hide Caption 8 of 14 14 photos: Photos: Vice President Joe Biden While chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, Biden meets Afghan students during a visit to Kabul in 2002. Hide Caption 9 of 14 14 photos: Photos: Vice President Joe Biden Biden is welcomed back after undergoing surgery for an aneurysm in 1988. Hide Caption 10 of 14 14 photos: Photos: Vice President Joe Biden Biden announces his candidacy for the Democratic presidential nomination in 1988. After three months he drops out, following reports of plagiarism and false claims about his academic record. Hide Caption 11 of 14 14 photos: Photos: Vice President Joe Biden While on the Senate Judiciary Committee, Biden meets with Sen. Frank Church, center, and Egyptian President Anwar Sadat after the signing of the Egyptian-Israeli Peace Treaty in 1979. Hide Caption 12 of 14 14 photos: Photos: Vice President Joe Biden President Jimmy Carter and Biden attend a reception for the Delaware Democratic Party in 1978. Biden was the first senator to endorse Carter's presidential candidacy two years earlier. Hide Caption 13 of 14 14 photos: Photos: Vice President Joe Biden At a convention in 1972, Biden and his first wife, Neilia, and his two sons take a photo with Delaware Gov.-elect Sherman W. Tribbitt and his wife Jeanne. Neilia Biden died in a car accident a few months later, after his first election to the Senate, along with their infant daughter, Naomi. Hide Caption 14 of 14

Well, CNN's MJ Lee took note of a remark this past week where former President Bill Clinton defended his stewardship on the issue -- and she notes it could cause candidate Hillary Clinton a bit of a headache.

"Here's something Bill Clinton said this week that actually didn't get a lot of pickup," said Lee. "He said there's not a single piece of evidence to show when he repealed Glass-Steagall, it led to the financial crisis. This is a line that is going to haunt Hillary Clinton when she talks about being tough on Wall Street and wanting to rein in big banks."

"And you watch the crowds that turn up at Martin O'Malley rallies and Bernie Sanders rallies -- they're holding up 'Bring back Glass-Steagall' posters."

3. The next Koch or Adelson? A big Michigan donor makes a policy play

The DeVos family of Michigan long has been a player in state and national GOP affairs, but is looking to ramp up even more this presidential cycle.

JUST WATCHED A new GOP power broker Replay More Videos ... MUST WATCH A new GOP power broker 00:28

Jonathan Martin of The New York Times shared reporting about a forum organized by Betsy DeVos to promote conservative education ideas.

She is holding it in New Hampshire, and drawing an impressive guest list.

"Well, she's not as well known as (Sheldon) Adelson or (Charles and David) Koch, but Betsy DeVos, who's a big Michigan donor, is going to be staging a big education summit Wednesday in New Hampshire, sort of entering the fray of some of these superdonors," said Martin.

"She has a big crowd coming from the candidates: Jeb Bush is coming, you're going to see John Kasich coming, Carly Fiorina coming. A combination of a hot issue on the right, which is education and vouchers, a big donor, and a key state."

4. Walker plans to detail the 'replace' part of his Obamacare repeal plan

"Repeal Obamacare" is a frequent promise from Republican presidential candidates. They also promise to replace many provisions -- but haven't been all too forthcoming with specifics.

Wisconsin Gov. Scott Walker, struggling of late, hopes to distinguish himself from his GOP presidential rivals by adding some meat to the "replace" promise.

Nia-Malika Henderson of CNN told us the plan is coming.

"Scott Walker, who's been slumping in the polls a bit in Iowa as well as New Hampshire, on Tuesday in Minnesota will unveil his alternative to Obamacare," said Henderson.

"He'll unveil a plan that will talk about expanding affordability, expanding choices and eliminating waste in health care. We'll see what kind of traction he gets from this, and it also puts the onus on other candidates who want to repeal Obamacare -- what is their alternative in terms of replacing it?"

5. Bush's ISIS plan has a bipartisan ring to it

Jeb Bush plans to flesh out his plan for combating ISIS this week, and the details are unlikely to draw too much criticism from Democrats.

Ed O'Keefe of The Washington Post shared advance details of the Bush approach and noted that foreign policy experts observe that they overlap with many of the recommendations made recently by leading Democrats.

"They pointed to an op-ed in The Washington Post ... co-written by Michele Flournoy, who of course is considered to be a possible defense secretary under Hillary Clinton, and Richard Fontaine," said O'Keefe.

"They propose helping out the Sunnis and the Kurds more directly, embedding Special Forces with Iraqi security forces going after ISIS, deploying forward air spotters to help pick out some air raid sites, and then a new global campaign against ISIS. Well guess who else is proposing that -- Jeb Bush."

"So they point out that while he's getting a lot of flak for this right now, the eventual Democratic nominee might be proposing the same things, so smart of him to get out in front."