The depth chart read like a Pro Bowl roster, but John Elway hedged his bets.

It was in the middle of the preseason and Elway, after viewing a joint practice with the 49ers, was asked about a Denver defense that had already unveiled its renewed aggression and enviable depth after two games.

The wins were meaningless but the statistics — 11 players contributing to 12 sacks — spoke volumes.

“We feel pretty good,” Elway said. “We feel good about the talent on paper, and I’m always cautious about that until we get out and play because everybody’s got to play together.”

Months earlier, the Broncos had left their fans and Elway, the team’s general manager, dismayed with an early playoff exit. The coaching staff had been overhauled, the list of questions seemed to grow by the day and the expectations set as high as ever.

The fire Elway had long sought and expected from his teams had been doused. A number of key players left in free agency soon after, prompting Elway to revamp and restructure. He went to work making a handful of smaller, less expensive deals that, although unheralded at the time, have become vital in reshaping the Broncos’ defense.

A Hall of Fame quarterback who’s considered the greatest player in Broncos history, Elway led the franchise to five Super Bowl appearances. But since moving to the front office in 2011 he has left, arguably, a greater mark on the defensive side of the ball.

Through the draft and free agency, he has taken flyers on players other NFL teams passed over or discarded. He has spent big on stars but also developed up-and-comers. He has, in four years, built a defense that could end up as the franchise’s finest ever, all while some of his high-round offensive draft selections (namely running back Montee Ball and wide receiver Cody Latimer) have floundered.

GRAPHIC: How the 2015 Broncos defense was built

Through six games, the Denver defense has scored four touchdowns, amassed league highs in takeaways (17) and sacks (26), and allowed only 281.3 yards per game. It has not only prevented defeats but won games, filling in for an offense that has lacked rhythm and consistency — rarities on a Peyton Manning-led team.

“That’s what we want to be,” cornerback Chris Harris said. “I remember watching ‘Monday Night Football Countdown’ and hearing (ESPN’s) Ray Lewis say that we’re just good, we’re not great. That’s something that motivates us on the defense, to be great. We want to go down as one of the top defenses ever.”

Construction of this group didn’t come without criticism and risks. And it wasn’t erected overnight.

Harris a super acquisition

Elway laid the foundation four months into his tenure as executive vice president of football operations when he used the No. 2 overall pick in the 2011 draft on Von Miller, a Butkus Award winner from Texas A&M whose pass-rushing skills and physical gifts would help turn around a defense that ranked as the league’s worst in total yards (6,253) and points allowed per game (29.4) the previous season.

But it was a move after the draft, that July, that ranks among Elway’s finest. He took a chance on Harris, an undrafted cornerback out of Kansas. Harris signed with the Broncos as a free agent, and used Champ Bailey as a mentor before turning into the leader of the secondary. Harris hasn’t allowed a touchdown in coverage since Nov. 24, 2013.

Elway then went to work rounding out the front seven, finding gems low in the draft and developing others with the help of veterans. Defensive end Derek Wolfe came first, selected in the second round of the 2012 draft at No. 36. End Malik Jackson, one of the Broncos’ most efficient defenders, was taken in the fifth round (No. 137). Danny Trevathan, a linebacker out of Kentucky who had drawn comparisons to Wesley Woodyard in college, was selected in the sixth round (No. 188), with a pick Denver received from the Jets as part of the Tim Tebow trade a month earlier.

In 2013 the Broncos welcomed defensive tackles Terrance Knighton (free agency) and Sylvester Williams (draft) — the former helping to turn the latter into the defense’s anchor at nose tackle before leaving in free agency this past March. That year also marked the arrival of Brandon Marshall, a linebacker tossed aside by the Jaguars. Initially signed to the Broncos’ practice squad, Marshall was promoted when Miller went down with a knee injury late that season and has since turned into the quarterback of the defense, calling out plays and leading the defense in tackles last season (110) and this season (48).

But the biggest and most expensive defensive installments were saved for 2014, when, in the span of 24 hours that March, Elway doled out $110 million for cornerback Aqib Talib, safety T.J. Ward and defensive end DeMarcus Ware. Two months later, Elway took another gamble, on Bradley Roby, a cornerback out of Ohio State whose draft stock fell because of an off-field incident but someone who has been a valued contributor as a nickel back.

Smaller moves were also made that would prove beneficial to this defense down the road. A Colorado State linebacker named Shaquil Barrett was among the Broncos’ 15 undrafted free agents signed that May. Barrett has 3½ sacks and a team-high three forced fumbles this season.

“When I first came in, Quinton Carter, my fellow Las Vegas native, he told me, ‘Man, just keep working hard. They’re going to give you opportunities,’ ” Marshall said. “And I saw and they did. This organization gives guys opportunities. Look at Shaq. He got his opportunity and now he’s doing well.”

Welcome back, Wade

The finishing touches for this Denver defense came this past offseason. The line was bolstered by veteran free agents Vance Walker and Antonio Smith. The linebackers got yet another pass rusher in first-round pick Shane Ray, whom Elway traded up to select at No. 23. The secondary found its missing piece in safety Darian Stewart.

But the glue to bind it all was signed off the street: Wade Phillips was brought back as defensive coordinator when the Bengals refused to let Vance Joseph interview. Phillips has turned a good defense into the league’s best after scrapping Jack Del Rio’s 4-3 alignment and installing his version of the 3-4.

Phillips turned loose a blitzing, quarterback-swarming attack.

The Broncos rank third in the NFL in opponent quarterback rating (58.9) when blitzing in passing situations. They are the only team to have kept opponents scoreless in the first quarter of every game. And they rank among the top five in the league in several categories, including total defense (281.3 yards allowed per game, No. 2), scoring (17 points per game, No. 4), third-down percentage (.316, No. 2), sacks (26, No. 1) and interceptions (nine, No. 2).

The defense has taken the spotlight. And it was Elway, a man remembered for The Drive and The Helicopter and his pair of gleaming Super Bowl title rings as a quarterback, who signed off on the group that is turning heads with its depth, pick-sixes, sacks and game-winning plays.

“He’s just being John Elway,” Miller said. “Every year I’ve felt like we’ve had the perfect pieces. This year is no different, but I feel like this is our best team.”

Nicki Jhabvala: njhabvala@denverpost.com or @NickiJhabvala