The dam that protects the public from the rapacious pharmaceutical industry has sprung another leak, and this may prove to be a big one. On March 8, in New York federal court, Amarin Pharma reached a settlement agreement with the U.S. Food and Drug Administration in a First Amendment case involving restrictions placed on off-label promotion.

Seven months prior to the settlement, the Irish drugmaker scored a landmark victory over the FDA regarding limits on truthful statements about unapproved uses of the pharmaceutical company’s drug Vascepa. With the product approved for some patients with triglycerides, the court ruled that Amarin had the right to make broader statements about potential benefits of the drug in patients with persistently high triglycerides.

In the settlement, Amarin agreed to stay current on relevant science and to update its promotional materials accordingly. For its part, the FDA agreed “to be bound by the court’s conclusion that Amarin may engage in truthful and nonmisleading speech promoting the off-label use of Vascepa, i.e., to treat patients with persistently high triglycerides.”

The settlement goes on to stipulate that “Amarin bears the responsibility, going forward, of assuring that its communications to doctors regarding off-label use of Vascepa remain truthful and non-misleading.”

The FDA did win the right, through 2020, to give advance review to either one or two promotional communications annually for off-label uses of Vascepa. But this could be seen as winning back a small portion of what the agency has lost in the way of oversight.

According to the website Law360.com, Amarin’s triumph “has already emboldened other drugmakers. Only one month after the win, Pacira Pharmaceuticals Inc. sued over the FDA restrictions on its promotion, and the agency quickly backed down.”

It appears that the courts are handing the job of industry oversight to the pharmaceutical industry itself. What could possibly go wrong?

Source: law360.com. Amarin, FDA Finalize Free Speech Settlement

Photo source: cnafinance.com

Join the Discussion