A Colorado lawmaker who is no fan of the state’s new peak logo wants voters to decide in November whether to keep it.

“I’ve really run into almost nobody who likes that new logo,” said Rep. Bob Rankin, R-Carbondale.

Rankin’s not sure of his chances of getting the bill through the Democratic-controlled legislature, which convenes Wednesday, but he said he has talked informally with some colleagues across the aisle who share his opinion.

“But that’s a long way from getting their vote on the floor,” he said. “I suspect the people who created the logo will put pressure on people to vote against my bill. I don’t look at this as a partisan issue, but, of course, it may become one.”

Aaron Kennedy, the state’s chief marketing officer, agreed with Rankin that the issue shouldn’t be partisan.

Kennedy, who is part of Democrat Gov. John Hickenlooper’s administration, led a group of prominent business leaders, marketing experts and graphic designers who collaborated to create the logo as part of an effort to brand Colorado.

“I am not a member of the Democratic Party, so this was definitely not a partisan project,” Kennedy said Friday.

State officials in August unveiled the logo and an accompanying slogan: “It’s our nature.” The logo is a green-and-white triangle with a snow-capped peak sitting atop the letters CO. The state said the peak logo would be incorporated into every aspect of state government — signs, letterheads, tourism promotion, vehicle emblems, business cards and dozens of other uses.

The state currently is in the process of transitioning to the new logo, Hickenlooper spokesman Eric Brown said. When departments reorder envelopes, uniforms and such, the materials will come with the logo.

Rankin’s bill calls for the state to immediately halt implementation of the branding effort. It also requires the secretary of state to put the issue on the November ballot so voters have a say.

Kennedy said the branding effort is intended to save time and money. For example, he said, the Colorado Department of Transportation does about 100 big highway projects each year and used to have a brand associated with each one. That meant meetings to come up with a brand and choose one.

“Now that goes away,” he said. “It’s a very easy system.”

In addition, he said 200 Colorado companies have applied to use the “Colorado Company” peak badge on its products to show they are based in the state.

When the peak logo was unveiled, there were plenty of dissenters, including those who thought it looked like a hazardous sign and those who wanted to use a flag-like logo with the capital “C.”

The problem with the flag-style logo, Kennedy said, is that in a nationwide survey where people were shown the flag with no other identifying information, more respondents said it represented Chicago than Colorado.

Lynn Bartels: 303-954-5327, lbartels@denverpost.com or twitter.com/lynn_bartels