It’s hard to muster sympathy for the big insurance companies. They’re easy targets for complaints of rising premiums and high profits.

But in the case of Obamacare — in which Blue Cross and Blue Shield of Texas and other insurers have stepped up to the plate to help millions of Americans get affordable health care — it seems some have truly unfairly gotten the shaft.

Blue Cross, the state’s largest insurer, alone reported losing $400 million in the first year of the program because it paid out more in claims than it got in premiums. And now it’s getting shortchanged by the feds more than $250 million in risk-related payments.

And last month, UnitedHealth — the biggest insurer in the country — said it suffered hundreds of millions in losses on its plans.

That’s just not right and doesn’t make good business sense. If the trend continues, more insurers like UnitedHealth will threaten to pull out of the program or seriously restrict the types and numbers of plans they offer.

And premiums are already going up.

Where will that leave the nearly 10 million Americans — 1 million in Texas — who have gotten coverage through the program? Consider that this state has the highest rate of uninsured in the country.

Obamacare certainly has its detractors in some areas of Texas. This newspaper opposed it in 2010, not so much over the insurance mandate but because lawmakers weren’t clear about how they intended to fund it.

But once the measure passed - just as other measures have when political roles were reversed - we’ve urged lawmakers of both parties to recognize reality and figure out ways to make it work. The GOP’s refrain to “repeal or replace” and the Democrats’ contention that “the law is fine as is” are simply not effective paths to finding solutions.

But how did we get here?

First, Texans flocked to the program, with many needing more expensive organ transplants and knee replacements when pre-existing conditions were allowed.

Then, as DMN business columnist Mitchell Schnurman correctly pointed out last week, after insurers answered the call to offer affordable coverage, “a Republican Congress changed the rules and left insurers holding the bag.” For example, GOP opponents opposed using federal funds for the risk payments that were supposed to cushion the hit for insurers.

Schnurman reports that two-thirds of insurers in the program lost money. It doesn’t take an economics whiz to figure out the companies won’t continue to endure that.

The continued participation of private insurers is critical to making the system work. The health care of thousands of Texans is on the line.

Betraying the very companies that tried to do the right thing isn’t the answer. At some point, Uncle Sam has to make good on its promise to help. It’s past time for our leaders to recognize that.