George Stinson

Twenty-five years ago on Nov. 20, 1989, the United Nations adopted the Convention on the Rights of the Child, (CRC). Since then, the CRC has been signed and ratified by all 197 member nations of the United Nations, except for Somalia, South Sudan and the United States. Article 27 of the CRC recognizes the right of every child to an adequate standard of living “particularly with regard to nutrition, clothing and housing.”

The rising tide of homeless children in our state and nation is having a devastating impact on the success and well-being of our future generations. Children who are homeless are subjected to criminal and social victimization of a magnitude that can only be imagined by the more blessed among us. The recent murder of a young homeless child in Louisville serves as a reminder that children without homes frequently find themselves in situations and among people that may lead to their physical and mental harm, including a violent and tragic death.

In its 2014 Annual Assessment Report to Congress, the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development found that on a single night in January 2014, 578,424 people were homeless throughout the United States, of which 45,205 were deemed to be unaccompanied children and youth. According to the U.S. Department of Education, there were over a million children attending public schools in 2013 who were in various degrees of homeless at some point in time during the school year.

Other non-governmental agencies report significantly higher numbers of child homelessness.

In a recent report issued by the National Center on Family Homelessness entitled “America’s Youngest Outcasts — A Report Card on Child Homelessness,” it was estimated that nearly 2.5 million (1 in 30) American children were homeless at some point in 2013. Closer to home, this report ranked Kentucky worst among the 50 states in child homelessness. The report found that during 2012-2013, there were 66,218 homeless children throughout Kentucky. Regardless of the source or methodology of the research, the numbers of homeless children in our nation and state are staggering—and shameful.

The Kentucky Commission on Human Rights enforces the Kentucky Civil Rights Act which prohibits housing discrimination based on race, color, national origin, religion, sex, familial status and disability. While poverty and homelessness are not specifically enumerated protected classes, such conditions are frequently endured by minorities, women and families who are most vulnerable to unlawful housing discrimination. There is perhaps no greater and fundamental human and civil right than the right of a child to adequate nutrition, health care, clothing and housing.

The commission has a statutory obligation promote human rights and to encourage fair treatment for all persons, including children.

In the spirit of this holiday season, we encourage Congress to join the vast majority of nations by ratifying the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child.

We further encourage our state and local governments to place homelessness at the highest priority in the allocation of our limited public resources.

The National Center on Homeless Families has identified certain public programs designed to prevent and end child homelessness, which the commission fully endorses, including increasing the inventory of safe affordable public housing and homeless shelters; offering public education, job training and employment opportunities to homeless parents; and providing social skills training and mental health screening and treatment for homeless parents and children.

Public investments in bridges, roads and other infrastructure are important, but our children must always come first. We must commit sufficient public and private resources to eradicate the scourge of child homelessness from our nation, states and cities.

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1DuI4DW