Horizon’s new OMNIA tiered insurance plan may be the biggest thing to divide New Jersey’s healthcare industry since the introduction of the Affordable Care Act. Generally, consumers told WNYC they were happy with the plan’s affordable options available at so-called Tier 1 hospitals, while doctors and hospitals in the Tier 2 category said they were nervous about losing patients. The debate rages on, with multiple lawsuits still underway.

Below is a brief timeline of events surrounding the controversial plan.

September 2015

Horizon Blue Cross Blue Shield, the state’s largest insurer, unveils the OMNIA Health Alliance, a partnership of six hospitals and the state’s largest doctors group. Horizon says it intends to roll out a health plan that offers lower deductibles and co-pays for providers in a “Tier 1,” or preferred, provider category.

Critics react to the announcement, focusing on the perceived lack of transparency in how alliance members were chosen.

State Senators State Nia Gill and Joseph Vitale call on Attorney General Robert Lougy to block the controversial tiered insurance plan before it’s planned launch in November.

October 2015

OMNIA criticism heats up. The Senate Commerce and Health Committees dissect the OMNIA plan during a joint hearing. Horizon claims it used six broad categories to identify partners, but says all other criteria is considered proprietary.

November 2015

Commissioner Richard Badolato of the Department of Banking and Insurance denies a request to block the rollout of OMNIA. Horizon says it expects roughly 250,000 members to enroll over the next two months for health insurance beginning Jan. 1, 2016.

Seventeen Tier 2 hospitals take the state to court. They allege that the Department of Banking and Insurance approved the plan before making sure OMNIA met state requirements. The department is responsible for approving new plans and protecting consumers.

December 2015

Seven hospitals sue Horizon, alleging it breached in-network contracts by assigning hospitals lower tier designations without advance notice.

The 2015 enrollment period for purchasing a plan through the Health Insurance Marketplace comes to a close.

March 2016