Complimentary White Paper: Is your regulatory and compliance process reactive or proactive?

Avoid the vicious reactive cycle with these 6 steps Avoid the vicious reactive cycle with these 6 steps

Complimentary Attorney Client Privilege Checklist

Attorney-client communications are not always privileged. A key role of in-house counsel involves training employees to understand these limits. Download the checklist to learn more now. Attorney-client communications are not always privileged. A key role of in-house counsel involves training employees to understand these limits. Download the checklist to learn more now.

Patent Market Tracker: 2016 Annual Patent Trends

This report details trends uncovered through patent reassignment data and summarizes the patent transfer activities of the second half of 2015, providing the cleanest, and most timely US patent assignment data available. This report details trends uncovered through patent reassignment data and summarizes the patent transfer activities of the second half of 2015, providing the cleanest, and most timely US patent assignment data available.

Complimentary Competitive Surveillance Report

This sample Competitive Surveillance report analyzes a single, client-specified competitor and provides insights on competitor patent holdings, number and quality of patents held, filing trends, technology composition, position in select markets, and key inventors. This sample Competitive Surveillance report analyzes a single, client-specified competitor and provides insights on competitor patent holdings, number and quality of patents held, filing trends, technology composition, position in select markets, and key inventors.

It's All in the Approach: Internal Investigations

As corporations go global, the importance of conducting pertinent, effective and defensible investigations also grows. Investigations are no longer limited to employee issues, such as violation of work rules or other misconduct. They now include more critical matters. As corporations go global, the importance of conducting pertinent, effective and defensible investigations also grows. Investigations are no longer limited to employee issues, such as violation of work rules or other misconduct. They now include more critical matters.

Making it Count: Budgeting Success for General Counsel & Legal Department.

As corporations go global, the importance of conducting pertinent, effective and defensible investigations also grows. Investigations are no longer limited to employee issues, such as violation of work rules or other misconduct. They now include more critical matters. As corporations go global, the importance of conducting pertinent, effective and defensible investigations also grows. Investigations are no longer limited to employee issues, such as violation of work rules or other misconduct. They now include more critical matters.

Catching The Wave: Legal Technology Spend At $3 Billion and Growing

To understand the trends impacting the legal technology landscape, the size of the legal technology market, and the growth rates across each segment of that market. To understand the trends impacting the legal technology landscape, the size of the legal technology market, and the growth rates across each segment of that market.

Semantic Search - What you need to know

If you've ever used a search tool, then you're familiar with classic keyword search. Just because it's common doesn't mean it's good. If you've ever used a search tool, then you're familiar with classic keyword search. Just because it's common doesn't mean it's good.

Factoring the Human Element Into Your Data Breach Response

The human element can keep even the best teams from making smart decisions during a breach response. Before you can complete a useful breach response plan, it's critical to understand the factors that affect your team during crisis situations. The human element can keep even the best teams from making smart decisions during a breach response. Before you can complete a useful breach response plan, it's critical to understand the factors that affect your team during crisis situations.