AUSTIN, Texas--(BUSINESS WIRE)--Tango Health is pleased to announce a partnership with global law firm DLA Piper LLP to enhance support for its Affordable Care Act (ACA) compliance services, which are provided mainly to medium- and large-sized companies that are seeking assistance in compliance with the law’s many requirements.

Tango will leverage the legal resources of DLA Piper, to extend the support Tango provides to its clients, including guidance on working with organized labor, IRS audits, exchange notifications, among other challenging situations.

“Coupling Tango’s ACA compliance solutions with top-flight legal support from DLA Piper creates a service line that is greater than the sum of its parts,” said Todd Praisner, CEO of Tango Health. “We know that mid-sized and large companies are struggling to comply with ACA and its reporting requirements and we believe that by offering them a technology-based solution and personalized counsel tailored to their needs, we can enable these firms to stay on track and avoid the penalties that accompany non-compliance.”

Scott Van Horn, Tango’s Vice President of Client Services, will join two DLA Piper partners as speakers at The ACA Town Hall 2016, a special employer workshop during the 12th annual Labor and Employment Law Advanced Practices Symposium (LEAP 2016) on March 16 in Las Vegas. Joining Van Horn on the stage will be Mark Boxer and Anne Pachciarek, partners of DLA Piper in the Employee Benefits and Executive Compensation practice, who specialize in helping companies operate employee benefit plans.

“The LEAP 2016 conference is an excellent opportunity to highlight strategies for ACA compliance, the latest changes to employment law, and other critically important employee benefits matters,” said Boxer. “We are proud to partner with Tango Health in educating employers at this symposium and also, more broadly, in building an array of products and services that employers need at a time of unprecedented change in the health benefit marketplace.”

About Tango Health

Tango Health Benefits Optimization saves organizations money, makes employees happy, and ensures regulatory compliance with the Affordable Care Act (ACA). Comparison tools help employees choose plans based on their needs, and provide savings for both the employee and the employer. Education keeps employees engaged, and Tango experts simplify and manage regulatory compliance to minimize risk.

About DLA Piper (www.dlapiper.com)

DLA Piper is a global law firm located in more than 30 countries throughout Africa, the Americas, Asia Pacific, Europe and the Middle East, positioning it to help companies with their legal needs around the world. In certain jurisdictions, this information may be considered attorney advertising.