'There would be no better New Year’s resolution,' Gene Sperling says. | Politico | Rod Lamkey Jr. for POLITICO Sperling's Hill resolution: Reid plan

The White House on Wednesday urged Congress to pass a fix for Americans whose unemployment benefits ran out this week, supporting a plan to vote on a short-term bill the day Congress returns.

Director of the National Economic Council Gene Sperling used New Year’s Day to make the point in a statement released by the White House.

Story Continued Below

“There would be no better New Year’s resolution for Congress to make today than to commit to making the first new legislation for the new year the restoration of emergency unemployment insurance for those who have this week just been cut off,” Sperling said.

He said the president “strongly supports” a commitment from Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid to bring for a vote a bill from Sens. Dean Heller (R-Nev.) and Jack Reed (D-R.I.) that would extend benefits for three months the day the Senate reconvenes, Jan. 6.

“By temporarily extending emergency unemployment insurance for three months, this bipartisan bill will provide benefits for over 2 million Americans when they need it most, and we urge every member of Congress to support this vitally important bill,” Sperling said.

Sperling argued extending jobless benefits would create jobs and generate economic growth, and he refuted the idea that the people who are losing their benefits are at fault for their unemployment.

“We as Americans can choose to have each other’s backs when we face serious spells of long-term unemployment,” Sperling said. “In more than 50 years, we have never cut off emergency unemployment insurance when the rate of long-term unemployment was even above 50 percent of its current level, even though none of those recessions were nearly as deep as the one we are now recovering from.”

On Dec. 28, jobless benefits for 1.3 million Americans expired. Despite calls for a fix from many on the left before Congress left town, a fix was not included in a bipartisan budget deal reached in December, despite unemployment often being included in comprehensive bills in the past.

Authors: