WHY GOD

Dominique Ansel Bakery's game-changing online ordering system appears to be withering under the pressure of thousands of Cronut fanatics flooding the system. It's just the second week of the new system and it's still in BETA, but this morning the bakery assured us there were "very few glitches" last week and they expected smooth sailing. It seems they have underestimated the power of champagne and chocolate.



LIES

It appears that pastry-seekers were given false hope by the bakery's website, which dangled imaginary Cronuts that, in fact, had already been sold. People, naturally, are pissed:

THE CRONUT PREORDER WEBSITE ISN'T WORKING I JUST WANT A CHOCOLATE CHAMPAGNE AND ORANGE ZEST CRONUT — Weston G (@wonderfulweston) November 25, 2013

SCREW the cronut preorder website--which is less functional than the Obamacare website-- and my friends in SF that I'm doing this for. — Michelle FlorCruz (@mflorcruz) November 25, 2013

WOW CRONUT WEBSITE CAN U WERK NOW — allie marotta (@alliemarotta) November 25, 2013

I've had more luck getting an #ultra early bird ticket than preordering a #cronut #nycproblems — Daniela Schechter (@D_Schec) November 25, 2013

All I want for Christmas is for my cronut order to go through 😔😔😔 @DominiqueAnsel — Ashley (@AshleyDreece) November 25, 2013

Day ruined. Never gunna get a cronut. Currently crying. Bye. — Ashley (@AshleyDreece) November 25, 2013

The online order form for @DominiqueAnsel's #cronut isn't user friendly at all. Says they are available when they aren't.. — Masha D. Murakhovsky (@MashaDaniellePR) November 25, 2013

The cronut preorder site is really terrible. It keeps crashing & says they are available when they really aren't @DominiqueAnsel — Steph B-More (@StephBMore) November 25, 2013

Angry folks have begun a comment thread on Facebook to express their outrage, as well. "Now this is what I call the hunger games," joked one user; "I think there is more chance of getting front row seats to a royal wedding then getting crounuts on pre order," quipped another.

For his part, Ansel urges peace in a time of madness:

Everyone stay calm. It's our second week in beta for http://t.co/1xQm417Yx2. Give it a sec...it'll load (just high traffic that's all). :) — Dominique Ansel (@DominiqueAnsel) November 25, 2013

A rep for the bakery blames the system crashes and false Cronut hopes their current server, which they plan to replace in advance of next week's preorder rush, as well as Paypal. The rep assures us it "will get better! We promise! All technology needs time to test."

Test our patience, that is!