For several smaller local hospitals, the prospect of a large regional medical center in downtown Utica is a welcome idea.

For several smaller local hospitals, the prospect of a large regional medical center in downtown Utica is a welcome idea.

Late last year, $300 million was earmarked in the state budget for the Mohawk Valley Health System project, which might mean one day closing existing hospitals in the area once construction of a larger regional medical center is complete. The system’s first choice is building it in downtown Utica.

“Ultimately, Mohawk Valley Health System must take the steps it feels necessary to assure it can meet the needs of the patients it serves.” said Dr. Vance Brown, Bassett Healthcare Network President and CEO, in a statement. “That is a challenge all hospitals and health systems face in the current and very dynamic environment created by the Affordable Care Act. But in addition and as a result of the ACA, there is also the need for hospitals and health systems to figure out ways to work collaboratively on achieving improved population health in the region’s they serve.”

The Bassett system, of which Little Falls Hospital is part, consists of six hospitals, more than three dozen community-based health centers, 20 school-based health centers, two skilled nursing facilities and other health partners in related fields.

Little Falls Hospital, an institution founded in 1893, has 280 full- and part-time employees and has 25 acute, swing and special care beds.

Darlene Burns, Rome Memorial Hospital’s interim president and chief executive officer, agrees that collaboration is the future of health care.

“Because it could be five years before a new regional medical center opens in Utica and the affiliation landscape is constantly evolving, it is difficult to predict the impact on smaller hospitals,” she said. “The trend in health care is toward more collaboration to improve care coordination and reduce costs, while enhancing access to care.”

Rome Memorial, a 125-year-old institution, treats about 6,000 patients a year and has 129 acute care beds, and 80 residents in a skilled nursing facility.

“Community needs assessments confirm that Rome Memorial Hospital and its affiliated services are essential to the residents of Rome and the surrounding rural communities,” Burns said. “For example, Rome’s central location in Oneida County ensures access to emergency services, and the Emergency Department serves as a critical hub to coordinate safe and timely transfer to tertiary care facilities. When a loved one is hospitalized, families prefer the convenience of having them cared for close to home.”

Kevin Prosser, spokesman for Oneida Healthcare in Oneida, said, “At Oneida Healthcare we welcome the opportunity to collaborate with other organizations in an effort to improve central New York’s population health. The impact of emerging healthcare organizations can only negatively affect Oneida Healthcare if we don’t continue to do our job, that is, to provide exceptional care, always to the patients we serve.”

“If we do what our mission is, we shouldn’t have anything to worry about,” he added.

The medical facility that would one day become Oneida Healthcare began in 1894 when a Presbyterian church provided a treatment room for victims of a railroad accident. Seeing the need for local medical services, the city hospital bounced around town from 1896 until 1967 when it was seated in its current position.

The youngest of small area hospitals, Community Memorial Hospital in Hamilton opened in 1952.

In December, healthgrades.com recognized it as one of the 100 best hospitals in America for joint replacement, and the hospital works collaboratively with Hamilton Orthopaedic Surgery and Sports medicine.

Sean Fadale, CEO of Community Memorial Hospital, declined to comment on the effect a Utica hospital would have on his facility.

NEW HOSPITAL PLAN

The Mohawk Valley Health System hospital proposed for downtown Utica and slated to open in 2021 — if the project proves financially viable – would include:

- The hospital being seated on a 17-acre parcel bordered by Oriskany, Columbia and State streets and Broadway.

- At least two parking garages and a medical office building constructed across the street from the hospital.

- Total projected runs between $500 million and $600 million, with $300 million allocated by the state. The remainder raised through fundraising and loans.

- An alternate site option for the new hospital would be on the health system’s existing St. Luke’s Campus in New Hartford.

- The project ran into a speed bump last month when the region failed to win a $500 million state Upstate Revitalization Competition award, which would have covered the cost of parking garages.

Follow @OD_Cleaver on Twitter or call at 792-4956.