Big fans turn out for Big Thunder Draft Horse Competition

The Colorado team, "The Yoder Family Hay Farm," took fourth place in the North American Classic Six event on Sunday during the Big Thunder Draft Horse Competition at The Ranch. ( Jessica Benes / Loveland Reporter-Herald )

Now that Jane Harrison of Bokoshe, Okla., and her husband are both retired, it is pretty easy to pack up the RV and head off to another state to enjoy the draft horse competitions she loves to attend.

Harrison has a bucket list of horse competitions based on a National Six-Horse Hitch Classic series list.

Harrison attended all three days of the Big Thunder Draft Horse Competition, which was this weekend at The Ranch. She saw a variety of horse teams compete in single cart, tandem hitch, unicorn hitch, or two-, four-, six- and eight-horse hitch teams.

The family-friendly event also started off the show with a kids' stick horse race on Sunday.

Jill and Tom Farmer of Milliken brought their three grandchildren and little 4-year-old Jacqueline Lanzi got second place by running an obstacle course with other children.

"It was fun," her sister, Morgan Lanzi, said shyly.

Sophia Schnitzler, 8, of Johnstown, pulled off the win in her age group and won two free tickets to the World Champion Ice Racing event at The Ranch in April.

She said that as she was running, she kept thinking to herself, "I'm going to win."

Harrison found out about the annual Draft Horse competition held in Loveland on television and was particularly excited that the Yoder brothers would both be competing.

Advertisement

Harrison calls herself a horse fanatic with an f-u-n instead of f-a-n, and also collects Breyer horse models. She and her husband now get to about one horse show a month. They are heading to Denver to the National Western Stock Show and Rodeo next weekend.

"(Draft horses) are a magnificent creature. They are beautiful. They take my heart away thinking about them," Harrison said.

The Yoder Family Hay Farm, driven by Enos Yoder of Westcliffe, Colo., placed fourth in the six-hitch class on Sunday.

Eight-year-old Sophia Schnitzler of Johnstown, in a blue hat, leads the pack at the Big Thunder Draft Horse on Sunday. Schnitzler won the kids stick horse race, where children received pretend horses and ran around an obstacle course to win prizes. (Jessica Benes / Loveland Reporter-Herald)

His brother, Freeman Yoder of Mona, Utah, placed second.

"I saw a program on TV, 'Equestrian Nation,' and it talked about him (Enos Yoder). I was really excited he was going to be here. And Freeman remembered me from Oklahoma City (at another competition)," Harrison said.

Around 10 teams of Belgian, Percheron and Clydesdale horses competed in the six-hitch horse class, which was one of several events on Sunday.

The announcer, Lisa Banga Graham, explained that the judges watch the six-hitch horses as they "work the rails," or run around the arena, and as they line up, to check for consistency and that the three teams of two horses are working together and responding to the driver.

The three teams that make up a six-hitch each differ in size, she said. The team closes to the carriage is the "wheel team" responsible for maneuvering the wagon, stopping and starting and making the turns. The middle team is the swing team that should be even-tempered because they have horses in front and behind them. And the lead team is usually more temperamental and animated.

"All three must work together," Graham said. "Our judge will constantly be looking for consistency."

For results on the competitions, visit www.bigthundershow.com/results.html.

Jessica Benes: 970-669-5050 ext. 530, jbenes@reporter-herald.com, twitter.com/jessicabenes.