'The Four Horsemen of the Apocalypse" by Vicktor Vasnetson, 1887 (Photo: Public Domain)

No, it's not the end of the world.

It's not even – cue the dun dun duuuun music – amnesty.

That's what President Obama's critics call it. But, in elementary school grammar class the nuns would say that's using "hyperbole," which is when we try to make a point by way of wild exaggeration.

We've all done it:

"I am so hungry I could eat a horse."

Or, "You could have knocked me over with a feather."

For politicians, hyperbole isn't everything, it's the only thing. (Yes. Newspaper columnists use it, too.)

In advance of the president's speech, outgoing Minnesota Rep. Michele Bachmann said, "We're here to protect the best interests of natural-born Americans and the president wants to bring a new voting bloc as an insurance policy for the 2016 elections."

Actually, none of the people who would qualify for the president's deferred-deportation program will be able to vote. The best they can hope for is to be able to work without getting arrested.

When I read Bachmann's quote I nearly died laughing. (Yep. That's another one.)

Executive actions by a president can be undone by the next president. Or they can be blocked with a little creative legislation by Congress. Republicans will certainly try that.

Obama is going to protect some of those living illegally in the U.S. by exercising what is called "prosecutorial discretion." Essentially, he's directing federal agencies to go after the really bad guys and leave working folks with families alone, at least for a while. The deferred deportation protection lasts a few years.

It's still a big deal, and there will be a big political fight. There should be a big political fight. But the sky is not falling, the republic is not crumbling and this is not the … Worst. Day. Ever.

If that were true don't you think the major networks would have broadcast the speech instead of choosing not to interrupt -- or even delay -- "the Big Bang Theory," "The Biggest Loser" or "Grey's Anatomy"?

Ronald Reagan and George H.W. Bush deferred deportation to family members who were not covered by the immigration law of 1986. The world did not end.

When Congress was debating health care, Sarah Palin said passage of the Affordable Care Act would mean "freedom dies." A lot of folks agreed with her. Including many now on Medicare, who may remember Ronald Reagan saying in 1961 that Medicare would create a future in which we'd tell "our children and our children's children what it was like in America when men were free."

Apparently, not all politicians wildly exaggerate like that all of the time.

I would not have believed this in a million years (Yes, that's another one.) but when Arizona Sen. Jeff Flake was asked a while back for his definition of immigration "amnesty" he answered without using hyperbole.

Flake said, "It's kind of a fungible definition. Some people say anything short of deportation, and others if they pay back taxes or they pay a fine, or a waiting period, then it's not. My definition of amnesty is an unconditional pardon for a breach of law, and really, nothing that's been proposed by anybody qualifies for that."

Flake's colleagues should follow his example. They should conduct reasoned debates and leave the over-the-top hyperbole to professionals. Like me.

For example, years ago I received a note from an angry reader who said that, among other things, I was responsible for the disintegration of community morals, the state's failing economy, the lack of quality political leadership, the crisis in public education, the influx of illegal aliens, the increase in divorce rates and the community's general distrust and displeasure with public figures, lawyers, land developers and, of course, journalists.

I sent the reader this note:

"Dear Madam: You underestimate me."

Read or Share this story: http://azc.cc/1t90pMD