President Barack Obama speaks the Rose Garden of the White House in Washington on Thursday. Credit: Associated Press

By of the

President Barack Obama essentially underscored Scott Walker's status as a Republican presidential front-runner Tuesday by taking a personal swipe at his credibility on international affairs, suggesting the governor might support the new pact with Iran "after he's taken some time to bone up on foreign policy."

The latest jab in what is becoming an increasingly sharp back-and-forth shows that as Obama tries to build support for the Iran nuclear deal, he has Walker in his sights.

Having said that, Obama's comment on Walker may be welcomed as much by the governor's supporters as his critics. Any time an American president addresses an opponent by name — especially an emerging figure like Walker with a growing body of supporters — it can end up elevating that rival.

For that reason, Jeremi Suri, a historian of presidency at the University of Texas at Austin, said he was surprised by Obama's statement.

"It actually helps Scott Walker by making him seem more important," said Suri, who studies presidents and foreign policy.

For Walker, it also didn't hurt that Obama's remarks were reported on the same morning that U.S. Sen. Rand Paul (R-Ky.) announced his 2016 candidacy as the standard-bearer of the party's libertarian wing.

In response to a question from National Public Radio, Obama scoffed at Walker's recent comments that he would — on Day 1 of his presidency — revoke the pact the United States and allied nations recently negotiated with Iran.

"It would be a foolish approach to take," Obama said in the interview aired Tuesday. "And, you know, perhaps Mr. Walker — after he's taken some time to bone up on foreign policy — will feel the same way."

Walker responded that Americans would be better off if Obama worked with Congress and governors rather than criticizing them.

"President Obama's failed leadership has put him at odds with many across the country, including members of his own party, and key allies around the world," Walker said. "Whether it is cutting a bad deal with Iran, calling ISIS the JV squad, or touting Yemen as a success story, Obama's lack of leadership has hurt America's safety and standing in the world."

Last month, Walker told conservative radio host Hugh Hewitt he would "absolutely" reject the Iran deal on his first day as president because he was worried it would lead to nuclear weapons in Iran and other rival nations in the Middle East such as Saudi Arabia.

Back and forth

This isn't the first time Walker and Obama have clashed.

As Walker's profile rises as a top 2016 hopeful, he has waded deeper into foreign policy issues, adding criticism of the president's policies on immigration and Cuba to the governor's longtime critique of Obama's domestic agenda.

In December, Walker joined a lawsuit seeking to block Obama's executive action sparing as many as 5 million people living illegally in the U.S. from deportation. Obama has said his action was needed to help fix a broken immigration system, while Walker has accused Obama of misusing his executive powers and overreaching his authority.

Walker, in turn, has faced criticism over his shifting positions on immigration.

Last month, Obama also ripped Wisconsin's right-to-work law hours after Walker signed the measure prohibiting private-sector unions and employers from reaching contracts that require workers in a business to pay fees to the union.

Obama said it was part of "a sustained, coordinated assault on unions" that would hurt families and workers. Walker countered that the president "should be looking to states like Wisconsin as an example" of how to create good jobs.

The jousting between the two goes back much further.

On the path to Walker's election as governor in 2010, the then-Milwaukee County executive gave speeches and ran television ads to block an $810 million passenger train between Milwaukee and Madison that would have been largely funded with federal economic stimulus money, saying the state could persuade Congress to put the money into road and bridge work in the state instead.

"When the naysayers say we can't stop this train, we say, 'Yes, we can,'" Walker said in August 2010, using the president's 2008 campaign slogan on a day when Obama was in Wisconsin raising money for Walker's opponent at the time and other Democrats.

As governor-elect Walker stopped the train project — his first success in his current role — but did not succeed in keeping that money for state roads.

On his first day as governor of Wisconsin, Walker authorized a state lawsuit challenging Obama's signature health care law and, in part because of the success of states' legal challenges to the federal Affordable Care Act, later opted not to use federal money under that law to expand state health programs.

Just last week, Walker said he would not help preserve the Affordable Care Act, also known as Obamacare, in Wisconsin by setting up an online state health care market here if a federal market is affected by another lawsuit before the U.S. Supreme Court.

At the height of the 2011 labor protests in Madison, Obama criticized Walker's Act 10 law as "more like an assault on unions." Walker said at the time that his law repealing most union bargaining for most public employees in Wisconsin was needed to balance the state budget.

'Embolden our enemies'

In this week's interview, Obama told NPR he was confident a candidate knowledgeable about foreign policy would be elected in 2016.

"I am confident that any president who gets elected will be knowledgeable enough about foreign policy and knowledgeable enough about the traditions and precedents of presidential power that they won't start calling (into) question the capacity of the executive branch of the United States to enter into agreements with other countries," Obama said. "If that starts being questioned, that's going to be a problem for our friends and that's going to embolden our enemies."

Former Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton, a Democrat, is her party's most likely 2016 presidential contender, though other possibilities include Vice President Joe Biden and former Maryland Gov. Martin O'Malley. The GOP field is expected to include former Florida Gov. Jeb Bush, U.S. Sen. Ted Cruz, Paul, Walker, retired neurosurgeon Ben Carson, former Hewlett-Packard CEO Carly Fiorina and others.

Suri, the UT-Austin historian, said he believed Obama's actions on the Iran deal were in keeping with the negotiations of past GOP presidents such as Richard Nixon and Ronald Reagan with China and Russia. Suri said presidents didn't necessarily submit such agreements to Congress but lawmakers could still check the president's actions in this case by voting to reimpose sanctions on Iran.

"They can pass legislation that contradicts what (Obama) does," Suri said.

Attention, and a target

Peverill Squire, a political science professor at the University of Missouri, said Obama's comments confirm Walker's status in the top tier of presidential candidates.

"The Democrats have taken notice," he said.

Squire said Walker's status as a front-runner also will make him a target. Other candidates, Squire said, will try to highlight the governor's lack of foreign policy experience, his recent shifts on immigration and his comments that if he can take on 100,000 demonstrators during the Act 10 protests, he could take on the Islamic State.

"These sort of faux pas might catch up to him," Squire said.

As for the rivalry between Walker and Obama, White House spokesman Josh Earnest suggested Tuesday that it may not be over.

"I assure you that it's nothing personal," Earnest said of the president's Walker dig. "But there's no doubt, as I'm sure Governor Walker would be happy to tell you, that there are significant policy differences between the two men and there'll be ample opportunity over the course of the next year, year and a half, for us to discuss those differences at some length, I suspect."

More Scott Walker coverage

For more coverage of Gov. Scott Walker and the 2016 presidential race, from news stories to videos and interactive features, go to jsonline.com/scottwalker.