Buy Photo Republican gubernatorial candidate, Matt Bevin, speaks at a Religious Freedom Rally in Frankfort, Ky., on Saturday, August 22, 2015. Photo by Mike Weaver (Photo: Mike Weaver, Mike Weaver/Special to The Courier-Journal)Buy Photo

The Democratic Party of Kentucky on Thursday released a copy of a fundraising letter in which Republican gubernatorial candidate Matt Bevin says he will do away with Gov. Steve Beshear's Medicaid expansion that has put nearly 500,000 working-poor Kentuckians on government health insurance.

Democrats say the Aug. 17 letter is more evidence that Bevin is flip-flopping on the issue, while Bevin's campaign said the Republican has been consistent.

In the fundraising pitch, Bevin calls for “reforming medical malpractice laws, repealing Obamacare’s Medicaid expansion and ending Common Core.”

Jessica Ditto, a spokeswoman for Bevin's campaign, confirmed that the fundraising letter had been sent by the campaign.

Democrat Jack Conway has argued that the state doesn't need to do anything immediately because an actuarial study of the program found that it would pay for itself through at least 2020.

Conway's campaign has argued that Bevin has staked out numerous positions on the Medicaid expansion. In fact, he has said that he would repeal the expansion early in the campaign, denied he said that later, called for seeking a federal waiver to receive Medicaid money in a block grant, and said he would "tweak" the Medicaid expansion.

In February, for example, Bevin said, "No question about it. I would reverse that immediately." But in July, Bevin told journalists, “I said I would address it. I didn’t say I would end it."

And in the Bluegrass Poll Gubernatorial Debate on Tuesday, he said he would seek the federal waiver, which would allow Kentucky to design its own plan to expand the health insurance program.

Ditto said in an email Thursday that Bevin's position hasn't changed.

"Matt has been consistent on the issue of Medicaid expansion from day one. Kentucky simply can't afford to have a quarter or more of our citizens on Medicaid. What he has called for is repeal of Obama's medicaid expansion by applying to (Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services) for 1115 waivers (as other states have successfully done) in order to better customize a solution to address the health care needs of the Commonwealth," she said.

Democrats dismissed that.

Repeating criticisms of Bevin in ads run in 2014 by U.S. Senate Majority leader Mitch McConnell, state Democratic spokesman David Bergstein ripped Bevin for what he said were conflicting statements on Medicaid expansion.

"Republicans called Matt Bevin an 'East Coast Con Man' and a 'Pathological Liar,' but he can't deny what he put in print: Bevin supports a 'repeal' of Medicaid that would kick nearly 500,000 Kentuckians off of their health care," he said.

Beshear expanded Medicaid to people who earn up to 138 percent of the poverty rate as part of Obamacare. Under the law, the federal government is picking up the full cost of the program at first, but ultimately the state will have to pay 10 percent annually.

An actuarial report estimates that the program will pay for itself through 2020 with a net loss in 2021.

Also in the fundraising letter dated Aug. 17, Bevin attacks Conway on a variety of issues and claims that because of Obamacare, more than 280,000 Kentuckians have lost health insurance. In fact, Kentucky has seen a steep decline in the number of people without health insurance since the federal Affordable Health Care passed, much that decrease because of the Medicaid expansion.

In February, Gallup released a poll that found Kentucky had the second sharpest decline in uninsured people in the nation between 2013 and 2014, with the percentage without insurance falling from 20.4 percent to 9.8 percent.

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1KkZfZ3