AURORA — The celebrating mother jolted from her seat, violently punching her two fists into the air, her fluffy black hair looking like she’d been shocked by static electricity.

“I can’t even think right now!” Debbie Loya explained.

Did that just happen?

Bottom of the seventh, two on, two out.

Tie game, winner goes to the Class 4A state softball semifinals.

And the Wheat Ridge batter drilled a pitch into the left-field grass. Just drilled it. And Loya’s daughter had scurried all the way to second base on her bad knee, waiting while her shrieking teammates arrived in a stampede of glee.

A fellow mother came up to Debbie: “That couldn’t have happened to a better girl!”

Gabby Loya, leukemia survivor, was a hero again.

Think back to the summer before your freshman year. The nerves. The energy. The anticipation. Well, it was in July 2013 when Gabby was diagnosed with APML leukemia, a very rare form of leukemia.

As the doctor told her, Gabby asked, heartbreakingly, “Does that mean I can’t play this weekend?”

See, Gabby loves softball. Or as her mother said Friday from the stands at Aurora Sports Park, “She really lives for the game.”

Gabby began chemotherapy three days later, watching her summer softball team on a live feed on an iPad they purchased for their catcher. Intravenous chemotherapy. Her friends were worried about lunch hours; she worried about living.

She’d go to fall softball practice after chemo sessions at Children’s Hospital Colorado. She lettered on Wheat Ridge’s varsity softball team in the fall of 2013. The Farmers won it all, but Gabby couldn’t play much. By December, she had lost all her hair. She’d say to Debbie, “Mom, no girl wants to go to school bald.”

But Gabby persevered, smiling all the time, even if it was forced or fake or a sneaky way to trick the devil.

“She’s got that big humongous smile, even when she’s at her worst — it changes your bad mood into a good mood,” Debbie said, while choking up. “She says, ‘You know, Mom, sometimes when I’m not feeling so good, smiling just makes me feel better.’ “

This smile. I’m telling you.

“Last night we were at Boondocks, as she drove around in the go-karts, she smiles and all you see is teeth,” her coach, Martin Strickett, explained earlier this week. “And she shares that with everyone else around her. You can’t be mad when you’re around Gabby. At practice, she was smiling and giggling, and I said, ‘Can you give everybody else whatever you’re on?’ And she said, ‘What, Coach, chemo?’ That’s just the kind of kid she is.”

Gabby’s leukemia is in remission. But she’s not in the clear just yet. Fear looms like a Texas-Leaguer in shallow center field. She does chemo every day, taking an assortment of pills with side effects of fatigue, nausea, dizziness and sores. Every day. Think about that. Every three months she undergoes a 14-day chemotherapy treatment that’s “aggressive,” her mother described. Sometimes, she’ll have to take as many as 28 pills at once. She does bone-marrow aspirate and spinal taps as regularly as history exams.

We hear these stories a lot — athletes beating adversity — and they kind of run together, it’s sad to admit. But Gabby’s story is infectious because of her pure love for sports and her pure love for life.

This smile. I saw it after the big hit. It sure is wide.

“I just feel like — life is just great right now,” Gabby said after the walk-off hit. “It felt amazing — I love my team. … (After the hit), your adrenaline rushes, and everything in the world just feels great. Everything is happy — I’m happy.”

She headed home. She had to rest up for the biggest game of her life. And take chemotherapy pills.

Benjamin Hochman: bhochman@denverpost.com or twitter.com/hochman