When recently-hired Hope Clinic Director Matt Hudson was in the interview process with the Ypsilanti nonprofit, he was asked about where he'd like to steer the organization if he were hired.

He answered that he envisioned several changes. Chief among those were increasing the spiritual and emotional role the Christian organization plays the lives of those it serves; establishing a Sunday church service; and raising more awareness in the community of the good things Hope Clinic accomplishes.

As it turned out, Hope’s board of directors was already thinking along the same lines, said Hudson. They, too, saw a need for an increased emotional impact, plans were in place for a Sunday service; and they had put out the call for social workers and a financial development coordinator.

Hudson, a former educator and principal at Arbor Preparatory High School who almost didn’t apply for the position, said God was at work in leading him to become the director at Hope.

“It is a perfect match. We’re starting to increase the number of social workers, we now have a church service at 5:30 p.m. every Sunday, we’re conducting interviews for a financial development coordinator and putting the pieces in place and running with it,” Hudson said. “There is a lot of transition but it’s exciting.”

Hope already provides a wide range of services. In 2012, Hope provided approximately 9,000 medical visits, 4,900 dental visits, 196,317 pounds worth of of food, filled $2.7 million worth of prescriptions, a free bag of groceries for 50 families weekly and served 9,200 hot meals.



Its free laundry service is extremely popular and Hudson said the free day care takes a huge burden off working parents. Volunteers contributed 31,000 hours of their time to make the services possible.

Hudson’s unlikely path to the Hope Clinic started with a cerebral stroke in December 2012. Prior to that, he had spent three years as a teacher, seven years as an assistant principal and two as a principal at Arbor Prep.

Hudson finished the year, but while he was on medical leave the assistant principal did a strong job filling in and Hudson felt that he just couldn’t continue leading the school with his health challenges.

In June, he stepped down but, as he recovered, a friend began urging him to apply for the soon-to-be-vacant Hope position. The friend was persistent, though Hudson kept declining, not believing the position was for him. Finally the friend told Hudson that if Hudson would just read some literature on Hope, then there would never be a mention of the job again.

Hudson said he believes the lord was directing him to the position.

“I got the sense that I wasn’t made to sit in a cubicle and work on Excel spreadsheets all day and the lord says I’m supposed to lead,” he said. “I sent in my resume, said ‘This is where I’m supposed to be,’ and the lord provided and it has been an amazing experience.”

In February Hope launched its church service, and though there is a much greater emphasis on the spirituality and the clinic's Christian foundation, Hudson stressed the organization helps Christians and non-Christians.

The medical clinic is at capacity, but the clinic’s basement offers room for expansion, Hudson said, and that space could potentially be utilized for the new social work volunteers the clinic is bringing aboard.

Among their charges will be connecting families to community resources such as Medicaid, food stamps or helping with affordable housing; helping families with baby care; helping to provide medication access through pharmaceutical companies; and providing nutrition education.

Hudson also underscored that while more poor residents are insured through Medicaid and the Affordable Health Care Act, Hope Clinic isn’t turning anyone away who doesn’t have insurance.

“We’re not looking to maintain our client base. We’re very excited that more people are insured … the more people who get more services, the better,” Hudson said. “But we are still packed and we want people to know that we are still accepting those who need services and are uninsured or under-insured.”

Hope is also budgeting for the financial development coordinator, who Hudson said will help tell the world all the good things the clinic is up to.

“We need to be screaming from the mountain tops and spreading the word through volunteers and word of mouth about we’re doing,” Hudson said. “We need to bring Hope to the forefront for the community to gain more understanding of what we do.”

Tom Perkins is a freelance reporter for The Ann Arbor News.