Cameron Diaz has reportedly fallen for another man in Hollywood. This time her beau is Good Charlotte bandmate Benji Madden, according to various reports. The new guy pal is the latest in a long line of relationships that Diaz has found herself in.

Cameron Diaz has found herself with many A-list celebrities including Justin Timberlake, Jared Leto, and Alex Rodriguez. This time, Madden and Cameron Diaz had been spotted at a Los Angeles area gym getting their work out on. Reports indicated that Cameron Diaz and her new beau were introduced to each other by Diaz’s bestie Nicole Richie who also happens to be Benji Madden’s sister-in-law.

Cameron Diaz, the star of many Hollywood blockbusters, has found herself in another movie that is doing as expected at the box office, The Other Woman. However, she has also taken to the talk show trail to promote health and wellness topics important to women. Living a healthy lifestyle is extremely important to Cameron Diaz and it shows in her 41-year-old frame which more closely resembles that of someone in their late-20s to early-30s.

Apparently Cameron Diaz doesn’t have to find men, men come to her. The stunning starlet explains, “I don’t think you find them, I think they find you,” Diaz told US Weekly in March. “My feeling about it is you should just be open to receiving.” The man beacon went up and Benji Madden came calling. While the pair are not calling it serious at the moment, Cameron Diaz typically likes to keep her relationships with loose name tags. However, they have been spotted on more than one occasion in public.

Cameron Diaz believes that everybody will be cheated on in their lifetime and that understanding this can heighten a relationship rather than drag it down. We will see how the new philosophy affects the Diaz/Madden relationship as we all will watch as it either blossoms into something really great, or fizzles into disaster.

In an unrelated story, at least for now if Benji Madden has a say in it, Cameron Diaz had a moment of complete honesty on Bravo’s TV show Watch What Happens Live when she admitted that she has partaken in some lady-on-lady bedroom action. Not revealing details, but fully admitting to having been with a woman.

The always quizzical starlet keeps us on our toes in her personal and public life, but one thing is certain, we always love hearing about Cameron Diaz.