Whatever uptick in approval President Obama got in the immediate aftermath of the recent Supreme Court rulings has faded quickly, a new IBD/TIPP Poll finds.

The poll, taken from June 26 to July 1, found Obama’s favorability rating unchanged from last month at 45%. His overall approval rating is up just one percentage point, from 46% to 47%, while his handling of the economy dropped a point to 38%.

These findings contrast with a CNN poll that was taken last weekend and generated widespread coverage.

It showed Obama’s approval rating jumped to 50% in the wake of the court’s decisions to uphold ObamaCare and make gay marriage a constitutional right, as well as Obama’s winning “fast track” authority to negotiate trade deals.

The IBD/TIPP Poll also shows that the public doesn’t give Obama credit for those recent events. Just 35% say he is good at setting and carrying out an agenda on important issues of the day.

Racism In Our DNA

But the poll also shows the public largely agrees with Obama that racism is inherent to the U.S. In a podcast interview with comedian Marc Maron two weeks ago, Obama said, “The legacy of slavery, Jim Crow, discrimination in almost every institution of our lives . . . casts a long shadow and that’s still part of our DNA that’s passed on.”

Despite having elected Obama to office twice by wide margins, 53% of the public say they agree that racism is in the country’s DNA — with 28% strongly agreeing. Only 43% disagree.

But as is often the case, partisan splits are evident in the data.

By party affiliation, 73% of Democrats side with Obama, compared with 32% of Republicans and 50% of independents. By race, 84% of blacks say they agree with Obama, compared with 49% of whites. Women are also far more likely than men to see the U.S. as inherently racist — 58% to 47%.

Backing The Supreme Court

In other poll findings, the public backs the court in its decision to uphold ObamaCare subsidies in the federal exchange, which also seems to have given the law a boost in popularity. Half now approve of the law, up from 46% last month. Just 39% say they want to repeal ObamaCare, down from 42%.

Those numbers could easily change, however, if ObamaCare enrollees confront double-digit premium hikes when they go to enroll this fall. Insurance companies across the country are asking for increases of up to 50% or more to make up for ObamaCare’s costs.

Most also approve of the Supreme Court’s decision to make gay marriage a constitutional right — 56% did so.

Mixed Bag On The Economy

On the economic front, there are some signs that the public’s views are brightening. Forty-six percent approve of the federal government’s economic policies, up from 41% in June. And 18% say they or someone in their family is looking for a job, down from 23% in June.

But 42% still think the country is in a recession, which is unchanged from last month. And 49% say the economy is not improving, which is up a point from June.

Global Warming A Big Deal?

The July poll also found that 73% of the public view climate change as “a serious threat.” And more than half (51%) agree with the president and Secretary of State John Kerry that it’s “the most defining issue of this century.”

Those numbers, however, are driven largely by Democrats, 80% of whom characterize climate change as a “defining issue.” Just 22% of Republicans and 46% of independents agree with that statement.

If Pope Francis hoped to move the needle much on climate change in the U.S., he largely failed. Only 44% followed the news about his encyclical on combating global warming, and of those, only 30% said it had an impact on their views.