More than 40,000 new drivers have been banned over the past four years, Auto Express has discovered. But in over half of these cases, it’s driving without insurance – and not inexperience or incompetence – that’s to blame.

According to shocking statistics obtained under the Freedom of Information Act, driving without insurance is the most common reason for drivers getting banned in their first two years as licence holders.

• Diesel car pollution is 25 times over legal limit

That blatant rule-flouting earns new drivers six penalty points – enough to automatically revoke their licence in their first two years on the road.

10,000 newly qualified drivers banned every year

In total, around 10,000 newly qualified drivers are banned each year but 21,148 of the 40,481 total since June 2010 had licences revoked due to driving uninsured, according to data from the Driver and Vehicle Licensing Agency (DVLA).

AA President Edmund King says some may have been caught ‘fronting’, where a high-risk motorist avoids costly premiums by appearing as a named driver on someone else’s policy, when they are actually the main driver.

As King warned: “There is still a hardcore of drivers who are uninsured – usually young men who often have a string of offences to their names and may not even have a licence.” Yet the Department For Transport argues these are the “irresponsible minority”, and says the current legislation is keeping the issue in check.





Uninsured driver numbers have fallen since 2005

Continuous Insurance Enforcement means drivers now have to officially declare cars off-road (via SORN) to avoid paying for cover. And ANPR cameras cross-check vehicles to see if they appear on the insurance database.

• Police spend £127million on car maintenance

However, the number of uninsured young drivers has dropped significantly since 2005, says the Motor Insurers’ Bureau (MIB). One in five drivers aged 17-20 was uninsured then, compared to one in 17 now.

Despite this, the Association of British Insurers wants longer learning periods and tighter restrictions for the newly qualified, such as a limit on passenger numbers.





Top 10 reasons for new driver bans

1. Not having insurance cover



Between June 2010 and May 2014, a total of 21,148 newly qualified drivers were caught using a vehicle uninsured against third-party risks.

2. Speeding

7,220 new drivers banned for speeding on a public road.

3. Driver’s identity

Failure to give information as to the identity of the driver accounted for 2,220 bans.

4. Vehicle control

1,766 bans related to breach of requirements as to control of a car – using a mobile etc.

5. Care and attention

Driving without due care and attention brought 1,675 bans.





6. M-way speeding

Another 1,249 were down to exceeding motorway limit.

7. Jumping lights

Failing to comply with traffic light signals brought 1,020.

8. Defective tyres

854 were banned for using a vehicle with defective tyre(s).

9. Insurance offence

Different insurance offences accounted for 699 bans.

10. Failing to stop

665 drivers were banned for not stopping after accidents.

What do you think about the number of new drivers on the road without insurance? Have your say in the comments section below...