Akhil Reed Amar, a professor of law and political science at Yale University, is the author of "America’s Unwritten Constitution: The Precedents and Principles We Live By."

While professors are free to opine on abstract legal questions — as I am doing here — Supreme Court justices are more constrained. Justices rule on cases; and cases arise only after actual facts have materialized. Sometimes these facts have put down deep roots before the justices have a chance to weigh in. In these situations the court rightly hesitates to rip up established practices and properly declines to disrupt vested legal rights.

Millions of people with Obamacare policies have a stronger claim than same-sex couples who would like to get married in the future.

A big constitutional question in the early republic was whether Congress could create a central federal bank. Nationalists like Alexander Hamilton said yes, states’ rightists like Thomas Jefferson said no. The court unanimously sided with the nationalists; but when it did so in McCulloch v. Maryland, the bank was already a fait accompli. McCulloch was decided in 1819 — decades after the Hamilton-Jefferson debate — and Chief Justice John Marshall stressed the fact that investors had already spent gazillions in reliance on the bank’s constitutionality. This “immense property” interest, he declared, “ought not to be lightly disregarded.” In modern parlance: “What would happen to world markets were we judges to declare, at this late date, that all these investments are invalid?”

Now think about Obamacare. When the law first came before the court in 2012, the justices upheld its constitutionality. Had they struck it down then — after its enactment but before its actual implementation — they would not have upended the lives of millions of families. But since 2012, the law has put down deep roots, which “ought not to be lightly disregarded.” Millions have organized their lives around their existing Obamacare health plans.

True, the justices could claim this spring that they are not invalidating Obamacare, just “interpreting” it literally. But this “literal” interpretation is one that no one — no one! — put forth when the bill was pending. Embracing this interpretation ex post facto would violate settled expectations of lawmakers and the general public, above and beyond the life plans of families and the business plans of investors. A “literal” interpretation would also disregard the expertise of the federal agency charged with implementing this complex statute — an agency attentive to the reliance interests that the law has created.

Consideration of same-sex marriage is a bit different though. No matter how the court rules this spring, it is unthinkable that it would “unmarry” those who have already exchanged vows and created vested matrimonial rights and duties. What is at issue is future marriages, not existing ones. Existing marriages are faits accomplis.



But wouldn’t an anti-same sex marriage ruling leave existing same-sex spouses, even if legally secure, in an awkward and exposed position, culturally and socially? Not for long. Thanks to powerful and irreversible political and demographic trends, same-sex marriage is coming soon, almost everywhere, with or without the justices.



Join Opinion on Facebook and follow updates on twitter.com/roomfordebate.