Crain’s asked dozens of experts for innovative ways Mayor-elect Bill de Blasio could make New York City a better place to work and play. The result is our list of more than 40 bright ideas, which can be viewed by category: Land Use, Transportation, Public Safety, Social and Health Services, Government and Labor, Technology, Education, Infrastructure and Environment, and Taxes. If you have a bright idea please leave your suggestion in the comments tab of this article.

New York's commercial life-science sector is only starting to take off, but it represents one of the biggest opportunities for growing a new piece of the economy. The question is how to nurture it to its potential.



New York awards more postgraduate life-sciences degrees annually than any U.S. city. We're No. 2 in National Institutes of Health grant dollars, with $1.3 billion per year. And the research isn't just academic: New York institutions create more biotechnology-related patents than any metro area in the U.S.



But New York's ratio of venture-capital investment in the life sciences to NIH grant dollars, which measures private-sector investment relative to academic research, is woeful. In California, for every NIH dollar raised, there is 65 cents of venture capital invested in the life sciences; in Massachusetts, the number is 38 cents. In New York, it's 4 cents.



In essence, we generate the ideas and train the students and postdoctoral fellows, then ship them to other regions of the country, where the ideas get commercialized. This represents a huge transfer of wealth and good jobs.

Life sciences 260,000—Jobs in the city's educational and health care institutions

2,646—Patents per million inhabitants in the San Francisco and San Jose areas

337—Patents per million inhabitants in New York



The major reason biotech is weak here is historical. In the '70s, "80s and "90s, when the field was being born, the high costs of doing business in the city and the lack of affordable lab space meant that fewer companies started here. Those that did and were successful often left. In places like California and Massachusetts, successful companies gave rise to other successful firms, in the process building the human capital needed for new-company creation—the seasoned middle and senior managers who know how to start and grow companies. New York City currently has a human-capital deficit in this area.



What do we need? First, adequate lab space. We already have the Alexandria Center, built next to NYU Langone Medical Center in response to a city initiative. It provides high-end commercial lab space that has already attracted three major pharmaceutical companies.



But a successful life-science ecosystem also requires vibrant early-stage startups to develop scientific discoveries. Startup companies require much cheaper lab space—the proverbial startup garage, but with lab benches and fume hoods and other dedicated infrastructure. We have valuable but small initiatives in Harlem and Brooklyn, but we must do much, much more. Several sites in the city would be great locations for more biotech hubs, like the Queens waterfront, which is accessible to affordable housing and right across the East River from leading biomedical institutions.



Yet even with affordable lab space, it would still be harder for an investor to start a company in New York than in places like San Francisco or Boston. In those cities, you can poach seasoned managers from other companies; here, you must import them. The only way to get them is with financial incentives to offset our disadvantages.



With such incentives we can overcome the human-capital deficit because there are plenty of biotech executives and managers who'd love to move to New York City—if we create the conditions for the sector to take off.



The city can create such incentives. Its Economic Development Corp. just launched a public-private fund seeded by $10 million from the EDC and $40 million from corporate sponsors Celgene, GE Ventures and Eli Lilly & Co. Another $50 million to be matched through venture-capital partnerships will create a $100 million fund aimed at starting 15 to 20 early-stage research and development ventures by 2020. Other initiatives such as research tax credits would help catalyze even greater private investments.



This is an area where the new administration can make a huge difference. In other regions, there was a point where the talent, companies, capital and ideas reached a critical mass and the commercial life-sciences sector shot into the stratosphere. This didn't happen by chance—wise choices enabled their sectors to take root and grow.



I am confident that, given our existing assets, New York City can reach that same inflection point in five to seven years. We have the opportunity to build a new industry for our city, and thereby help patients with new medicines for poorly treated diseases. The sky is truly the limit.



Marc Tessier-Lavigne is president of the Rockefeller University.

Get Crain's Daily Alert Sign up for our FREE daily email newsletter. A summary of the day's top business and political headlines from the newsroom of Crain's New York Business. More Newsletters ›

Comments