It's fall enrollment time for new and continuing Medicare members. Now through Dec. 7 is when you can sign up for the first time or make changes.

During the enrollment period, you can switch from traditional Medicare to an HMO-style Medivcare Advantage network plan or vice versa, switch Medicare Advantage plan providers, change Part D prescription drug plans, sign up for a special needs plan, or apply for low-income assistance.

Changes made by Dec. 7 will take effect on Jan. 1.

Medicare Advantage and Prescription Drug Plan enrollees who are happy with their current plans can opt to do nothing and will be automatically re-enrolled. But everyone should carefully review the change notification that should have been sent by Oct. 1, said Anne Marie Chansler, program director for the Florida Department of Elder Affairs' SHINE (Serving Health Insurance Needs of Elders) program.

"You should always be checking your benefits every year because the slightest change can have very big impacts," Chansler said.

Here's the lowdown for 2016: Premiums will increase for new Medicare enrollees and some continuing members, as well as for many prescription drug plans, while the number of private Medicare Advantage plans will remain largely stable next year.

Plan stability is good news for participants and for a Medicare Advantage system some feared would contract sharply after the Affordable Care Act was enacted in 2010, triggering a gradual reduction in federal funding for the Medicare plans.

"Many thought plans would exit markets and lead to declines in enrollment," said Gretchen Jacobson, associate director with the Kaiser Family Foundation's Program on Medicare Policy. "Instead, we've seen increases in enrollment while the number of plans have been relatively stable."

And Medicare members today seem to have a better grasp on how to maneuver through the selection process than a decade ago, Chansler said. "What you're seeing is a generation of seniors more tech savvy and more informed about what's out there."

Nationwide, the number of Medicare Advantage enrollees has grown from 11.1 million in 2010 to 16.8 million in 2015. In Florida over the same period, the number swelled from 980,000 to nearly 1.6 million.

Forty percent of Medicare participants in Florida chose a Medicare Advantage plan in 2015, compared to 31 percent nationwide.

Most Advantage members are previous enrollees of traditional Medicare who possibly decided that paying lower deductibles and co-pays is worth living with fewer choices in a provider network, Jacobson said. Traditional Medicare recipients can see any doctor they want without referrals, but they pay higher costs.

Effects of mergers announced in 2015 involving four of the largest Medicare insurance companies likely won't be felt in the Medicare Advantage market for several years — if they are approved by the federal government, Jacobson said. In early July, Aetna announced plans to buy Humana. That was followed a few weeks later by Anthem and Cigna's agreement to merge. Both deals face scrutiny by federal regulators that likely won't be complete until 2016.

The mergers will ultimately affect plans in Florida, where Humana has 37 percent of the Medicare Advantage market, but no one yet knows how.

"There are many different possibilities," Jacobson said. "Premiums and cost-sharing could be reduced if the (merged companies) negotiate lower rates with providers. Or they could increase as a result of reductions in competition. Or (effects of the mergers) could be neutral."

That's down the road. For 2016, about 7.8 million Medicare beneficiaries nationwide were facing increases of about 50 percent to their Medicare Part B premiums when this guide went to press.

A final decision on the exact increase rests with the Social Security Administration secretary, and Congress could later step in to provide relief, said Tricia Neuman of the Kaiser Family Foundation. The increase would affect several groups, including people who are joining Medicare for the first time in 2016, who pay Medicare premiums directly rather than through a deduction from their Social Security checks, and people with higher incomes (more than $85,000 for individuals or more than $172,000 for couples).

About 70 percent of Medicare members won't see a premium increase. This is the majority who pay $104.90 a month with a deduction from their monthly Social Security benefits.

That's because there will be no Social Security cost-of-living benefit increase in 2016. And when that happens, Medicare premiums deducted from Social Security payments remain the same under federal "hold harmless" regulations.

The number of available Medicare Advantage plans remains largely unchanged in 2016.

The Medicare Plan Finder, the federal government's consumer website at medicare.gov, lists all Medicare plans administered by private insurers. According to the plan finder, Broward County residents can select from among 53 Medicare Advantage plans for 2016. Palm Beach County residents can pick from among 42 plans.

Most offer HMO-style benefits. Also among them are what are called "special needs" plans: coverage for low-income people or those with serious medical conditions, including diabetes, chronic heart and lung disease, and HIV-AIDS. Almost all of these plans have some sort of drug coverage. Plan offerings, or even the benefits of plans with the same name, may vary from county to county.

Most Medicare Advantage plans in South Florida charge no premium beyond what is taken monthly for Medicare out of Social Security checks. However, 10 Medicare Advantage plans in Broward and 9 in Palm Beach will charge additional fees, ranging from $14.50 to $188 a month. At the other end of spectrum, several plans will pay part of their enrollees' Part B premiums as an incentive.

Seniors who want tokeep traditional Medicare but add coverage for their medications can pick a stand-alone prescription drug plan, or PDP. A PDP plan's benefits are the same statewide. Floridians will have 19 PDPs to choose from in 2016, with monthly premiums ranging from zero to $146.60

Average premiums for standalone drug plans are projected to increase 13 percent, from $36.88 to $41.46, following several years when the premium was essentially flat. In 2016, almost half of Florida's PDP plans will carry the maximum deductible allowed by Medicare, as compared to about a third in 2015. That deductible will rise from $320 this year to $360 next year.

How to choose what's best for you? Here are some basics and new factors involving 2016 coverage: