Iran Deal Clears Senate Hurdle Tom Williams/CQ Roll Call What Happened:



Senate Democrats handed the Obama administration a major victory, ensuring that Congress would not be able to overrule the president on his Iran nuclear deal.



On Wednesday, retiring Maryland Sen. Barbara Mikulski became the 34th senator to announce her support for the deal, guaranteeing enough votes to sustain President Barack Obama’s veto of the resolution of disapproval that both houses will vote on in the coming weeks. With the Republican majority in near-unanimous opposition to the agreement, the resolution was widely expected to pass, and then be vetoed by the president.



Why It Matters:



If Obama's veto was overruled, he would be prevented from implementing the sanctions relief portion of the deal.



"Thirty-four votes are obviously enough votes for the president's veto to be upheld," Secretary of State John Kerry said after Mikulski’s announcement. "That is not satisfactory for us. We do want to try to go further. We'll continue to persuade."



The White House would prefer to see at least 41 senators on their side, which would could prevent the Senate from passing the resolution in the first place. Since Mikulski announced her support, three more Senate Democrats – Cory Booker of New Jersey, Mark Warner of Virginia and Heidi Heitkamp of North Dakota – have come out in favor of the agreement, and Michael Bennet of Colorado is expected to do so Friday, bringing the total up to 38.

Obama Annoys Republicans With Alaska Visit

Obama Annoys Republicans With Alaska Visit The Associated Press What Happened:



Obama ruffled some feathers ahead of his trip to Alaska this week by officially recognizing North America’s tallest peak's traditional name, Denali, rather than the one it’s been formally called for the past century, Mt. McKinley.



Alaskans were thrilled, but the reaction from Ohioans ranged from disappointed to incensed. That’s because the mountain and its surrounding park had been named for the 25th president, William McKinley, a native of the Buckeye State.



"There is a reason President McKinley's name has served atop the highest peak in North America for more than 100 years, and that is because it is a testament to his great legacy," said a "deeply disappointed" House Speaker John Boehner, R-Ohio.



Why It Matters:



The flap over a mountain’s name intensified attention on Obama’s trip, which was primarily focused on the challenges and efforts to combat climate change.



Obama became the first sitting president to travel north of the Arctic Circle, where he met with foreign ministers of Arctic nations and visited Kotzebue, a city on a narrow peninsula the population of which is among more than 30 communities being forced to relocate as climate change effects like coastal flooding, erosion and permafrost degradation make it impossible for them to stay.



Republicans in Congress have opposed legislative efforts to increase regulations that would help limit the man-made causes of climate change, like reducing pollutants or blocking expanded oil drilling. And for some Ohio lawmakers, Obama’s trip – including the renaming of Mt. McKinley to Denali – was yet another sign of his administration overreaching executive authority.



"President Obama has decided to ignore an act of Congress in unilaterally renaming Mt. McKinley in order to promote his job-killing war on energy," said Republican Rep. Bob Gibbs, who represents the Canton, Ohio, area where McKinley spent much of his life.. "This political stunt is insulting to all Ohioans, and I will be working with the House Committee on Natural Resources to determine what can be done to prevent this action."

Benghazi Committee Remembers Its Purpose

Benghazi Committee Remembers Its Purpose The Associated Press What Happened:



Several members of Hillary Clinton’s inner circle testified this week before the House committee investigating the attacks in Benghazi. Cheryl Mills, Clinton’s chief of staff at the time of the attacks, testified for more than nine hours Thursday.



The interview was behind closed doors, and a transcript is classified pending review, but committee Chairman Trey Gowdy, R-S.C., described the meeting as “professional and productive.”



Jake Sullivan, then Clinton’s deputy chief of staff and now an adviser on her campaign, was slated to testify Friday. The staffer who set up Clinton’s home server, Bryan Pagliano, pleaded the Fifth.



Why It Matters:



After months of focus on Clinton’s emails, the committee’s return to its primary subject still didn’t quiet the criticism from Democrats that the panel was a partisan effort to damage Clinton’s presidential bid.



On Friday, committee member Rep. Adam Schiff, D-Calif., called for the committee to be disbanded in an op-ed in the New York Times.



“Since its formation, the Select Committee on Benghazi has been aimless and slow moving, not knowing what it was looking for or where,” he wrote. “After 16 months and more than $4 million, the committee has gained no additional insight into the attacks in Benghazi. It has nothing new to tell the families of those killed or the American people.”



Others, including ranking member Elijah Cummings, D-Md., bristled that Mills’ request to make her testimony public had been denied.



“I don’t like the idea of putting out a little bit of information so that folks can write headlines, and then trying to find the facts to correct them,” Cummings said.

Clerk's Gay Marriage Stand Ups Calls for Religious Liberty Protections

Clerk's Gay Marriage Stand Ups Calls for Religious Liberty Protections Carter County Detention Center via AP What Happened:



A Kentucky county clerk who refused to issue marriage licenses to same-sex couples was jailed Thursday after defying a court order to carry out her official duties.



Kim Davis was found in contempt of court and taken to jail, and remained there overnight after refusing to consider allowing her deputies to issue licenses in her stead. A federal judge on Thursday approved authority for her deputies, however, and on Friday the James Yates, 41, and William Smith, 33, were able to obtain the marriage license they had been seeking for months.



Why It Matters:



Since courts across the country began striking down bans on gay marriage, and the Supreme Court made gay marriage legal nationwide in June, wedding-related businesses including photographers and bakeries have tested the new laws by refusing to cater to same-sex weddings.



Davis’ stand has sharpened calls from conservatives to enshrine protections of religious liberty, including at least one bill – the First Amendment Defense Act – meant to protect those who cite religious objections in refusing to serve gay people.



But the Rowan County, Kentucky, case is different because Davis is an elected official, and had to take an oath of office swearing to uphold the secular laws of the land; she was jailed for refusing to follow a court order to do so, not for her religious beliefs. But conservatives say Davis’ religious beliefs should be accommodated, including the three Republican senators running for president.



“I think it’s ridiculous to incarcerate someone for their religious beliefs,” said Rand Paul of Kentucky.



Marco Rubio of Florida said that “there should be a way to protect the religious freedom and conscience rights of individuals working in the office,” and Ted Cruz of Texas said the arrest was “judicial tyranny.” New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie, Louisiana Gov. Bobby Jindal, Wisconsin Gov. Scott Walker, former Arkansas Gov. Mike Huckabee and former Pennsylvania Sen. Rick Santorum all came to her defense.



Lindsey Graham of South Carolina was the only sitting GOP senator to say Davis should comply with the law or resign, as did Carly Fiorina. Former Florida Gov. Jeb Bush split the difference, saying Davis should be able to follow her conscience and that gay couples should be able to get licenses in her jurisdiction.





Summer Recess Is Over