TRENTON — With a state commission report due on how to combat the skyrocketing cost of public employee pension and health benefits, Senate President Stephen Sweeney today proposed a plan of his own that would change how health care is administered to thousands of public employees and their families.

Backed by more than a dozen doctors and leaders of public employees' unions, Sweeney (D-Gloucester) today said a lot of money could be saved by simply creating a new "patient-centered" health care system similar to one that exists in Vermont, and that would provide better service to patients and ultimately save money.

He pitched it as an alternative to the idea that saving money on health care should center around requiring workers to pay more or cutting benefits.



"We've heard the cost of health care is too expensive and is out of control," Sweeney (D-Gloucester) said. "What we're looking to do today is to start work on a concept that will actually improve care and reduce costs. I know that's hard to believe, but it is doable - it is very possible to get done."



The three-year pilot program would pay doctors a set base salary and a bonus for good clinical outcomes and patient satisfaction. The idea, Sweeney said, is to do away with a "fee for service" model in which doctors have incentives to as many patients as possible.

It would be implemented in four or five New Jersey locations, for up to 60,000 public employees .Participation would be voluntary.



The program would not require legislation, Sweeney said, but would need to be approved by the two state panels that administer health plans for teachers and other public workers. The panels are split evenly between union and Christie administration officials.



Sweeney said he mentioned his idea briefly to Gov. Chris Christie, but did not know how the governor felt about it.



Christie and Sweeney worked together in 2011 on legislation that required public workers to chip in more to their pensions and health benefits plans. But Christie is expected to back further changes that will likely be proposed by a commission he formed.



And New Jersey could be hit by a big federal tax on expensive "Cadillac plans" held by public workers as part of the Affordable Care Act. Sweeney said his proposal could help rein in their costs to avoid the tax.



Under the plan, doctors would be limited to a client-base of 1,000 patients. They would have to be available 24 hours, seven days a week by cell phone and email. All participating doctor groups would have to keep electronic records, and they would have to set up "high value" referral networks.



Supporters of the idea said it's already finding wide use in the private sector, including by two companies that are interested in participating in the proposed New Jersey program.



"The senator's proposed approach will be very data-driven. Very different from a lot of what's been seen in healthcare," said Dr. John M. Tedeschi , CEO of one of those companies, Continuum Health Alliance.



Dr. James Barr, chief medical officer of Optimus Health Care Partners ACO, which is also interested in participating, said 10 years ago he was dispirited with the health care system and even considered quitting.



But after he moved to a patient-centered model, he said things improved vastly.



"We're not treating diseases. We're not treating members. We're not treating numbers. We're treating people," Barr said. "And these people have concerns, fears, cultures, beliefs, financial and social situations that impact their health. And if we don't learn that, if we don't have a relationship them, we're never going to be able to help them to the degree that we need to."



The New Jersey plan was developed in consultation with "America's Agenda: Health Care for All" - a non-profit whose board is made up mostly of labor union officials and health care company executives.



The group's executive director, Mark Blum, said Vermont's government saw at least 9 percent savings when it implemented a similar plan in 2006.



Blum said that once doctors get to know patients better, they will be better able to manage chronic conditions that account for so much health spending, reducing waste and "introducing prevention in a way that simply doesn't exist in the current system."



Joel Cantor, director of the State Center for Health Policy at Rutgers University, said similar models "have been shown to improve care and save money in a variety of different settings."



Cantor did point to potential problems.



"I see putting doctors on salary as a big potential hurdle, since most doctors own a practice and are partners in a practice. So how do you turn that into a salary model?" he said. "I think there are some problems in the weeds that might have to be worked out, but the concept sounds good."

A spokesman for Christie declined to comment. But Chris Santarelli, a spokesman for the New Jersey Department of Treasury, said in a statement that the state had already taken some of the measures Sweeney outlined.

"Similar to Senator Sweeney's plan, the State Health Benefit Program is already seeing success with similar managed care programs," Santarelli said. "Since 2012, Horizon has expanded the patient-centered model to over 900 locations and 6,000 doctors throughout the State--we expect to see an annual net savings of $20 million. In the State's contract with Horizon and Aetna, set to expire in December 2017, we have locked in rates for the membership population."

Matt Friedman may be reached at mfriedman@njadvancemedia.com. Follow him on Twitter @MattFriedmanSL. Find NJ.com on Facebook.