The U.S. Senate race is in full swing, with most of the swinging done by the TV advertising of the free-spending Super PACS of both parties. Americans for Prosperity pounds away at U.S. Sen. Mary Landrieu, the last Democrat standing in statewide office, while the Senate Majority PAC lambastes Congressman Bill Cassidy, the leading but not only Republican candidate.

After three close but failed attempts to beat Landrieu, Republicans are convinced this has to be their year. Strapped as targets around her neck are her decisive vote for the Affordable Care Act and a 97 percent voting record on bills backed by President Barack Obama. Her Democratic base in New Orleans, while still reliable, is significantly smaller than it was before Hurricane Katrina.

Leading Republicans figured Cassidy to be her perfect foil, as a physician (treating the poor in public hospitals) with only eight years in elected office (experience but not a career in politics). He's not especially charismatic, but he is intelligent and trustworthy. In the recent government shutdown/debt crisis, he voted along with conservatives but, in his rhetoric, he did not get wild-eyed about it.

And that's a problem. Though U.S. Sen. David Vitter has run interference, Cassidy has been unable to close the deal on the right. For Republicans running for Congress these days, it is not enough to be conservative. If you are not ultra-conservative, then you're moderate, which is just a slippery slope away from closet liberal. This nagging distrust about his conservatism has created an opening on the right, into which have stepped two other Republican candidates, Rep. Paul Hollis of Covington and Rob Maness of Madisonville.

Maness, with tea party connections, lumps Cassidy together with Landrieu as compromised establishment politicians. Hollis assured Vitter that he would not criticize Cassidy but keep his aim on Landrieu. Yet in his first TV ads, standing under an oak tree, he distinguishes himself as unspoiled by the partisan politics of Washington. His bid for home boy status -- "lifelong Louisiana," he describes himself -- is a sly dig at both Maness, an Air Force brat, and Cassidy, whose family moved here when he was 6 years old. His underlying message is: I'm one of us, and they are not.

A more direct slap at the GOP anointed one comes from Family Research Council president Tony Perkins, a former Louisiana legislator, who recently told The Hill newspaper that Cassidy can't beat the incumbent because he's not conservative enough.

"He's been pretty weak on the issues," said Perkins, who did not seem overly impressed with the other Republican contenders. "If the Republicans want to win, they actually need to find a stronger candidate."

Perkins does not see himself in that role, not yet. In a later interview, he ruled out opposing Landrieu but expressed interest in running for Vitter's Senate seat if the senator is elected governor in 2015. Perkins tried that before, in 2002, as one of three Republicans to challenge Landrieu. He ran fourth with less than 10 percent of the vote.

The Cassidy campaign is not reacting to talk of dissatisfaction among conservatives, which one supporter earlier dismissed as part of the "silly season" that precedes the real race. But as the campaign year begins, the grumbling on the right is not going away.

The challenge to the main challenger would be more dangerous but for Louisiana's non-partisan, all-comers primary system, which dilutes the voting power of the conservative wing. Partisan Republicans and Democrats alike would like to scrap the current model in favor of closed party primaries, but it is too late for that in this election, and not very likely in the future.

At some point, Cassidy will open his fat checkbook for an ad campaign to introduce himself and tell his story. But before he starts speaking to all voters, including those middle-of-the-roaders who will decide the election, he needs to separate himself from the other Republican candidates as the party's best hope for retiring Landrieu.

Strangely, the group that is making that argument for him now are Democrats. In response to the Americans for Prosperity ads attacking Landrieu, the Senate Majority PAC is going after Cassidy with ads that make him out to be an unbridled, hard-core conservative. While that is meant to hurt him among moderates, the message it sends to unbridled, hard-core conservatives is: Here's your guy.