Donald Trump gestures as he speaks at a rally in Las Vegas in October. (David Becker/Reuters/TPX Images of the day)

Ashe Schow cannot figure out Ben Carson’s appeal:

He has no energy or charisma on stage, aside from the stray humorous remark (in the first debate he talked about his work as a brain surgeon, saying: “I’m the only one to take out half of a brain, although you would think if you went to Washington that someone had beat me to it”). His answers are incoherent and rambling, and they evince a stunning ignorance of policy, especially on economic and foreign affairs. . . . I get the outsider appeal, and the fact that Dr. Carson would be able to argue against Obamacare while opposing the Democratic candidate, but I don’t understand supporting a candidate who performs so poorly in front of a microphone. Carson spoke the least on Tuesday, and it’s clear why: He didn’t have anything to add to the conversation. Economic policy is not his strong suit.

Schow asks, as many Republicans do, “Am I missing something?”

Many are asking the same about Donald Trump. He offers a hodgepodge of outlandish policies. He vacillates between schoolyard insults and boastful self-parody. He has huge gaps in knowledge. How could so many want him to be president?

Let’s consider a few factors.

First, neither Carson nor Trump has anywhere near majority support within the party. It is only in a field of a dozen candidates that someone with a small but devoted following can be considered a “front-runner.”

Second, polling is becoming a mirage. Michael Barone writes:

About 40% of Americans have no landline phones, up from about 2% in 2003, according to the 2014 federal National Health Interview Study, and many landline owners (including me) don’t answer their landlines any more, using them only to place calls. Many who do answer refuse to be interviewed. . . . Polling theory tells us that one out of 20 polls will get results outside the margin of error — and the proliferation of public polls today makes such outliers relatively easy to spot, heightening the sense that the rest are reliable. The most important function of polls, however, is not in telling us who is going to win, but in revealing what is on the voters’ minds. Poll numbers, despite their seeming precision, are not hard data. They are clues to the mysteries that lie in human hearts. Polls tell us that the Affordable Care Act and the Iran nuclear deal are unpopular with most Americans, and polls tell us that the sharp partisan polarization of Americans today is based not so much on ephemeral preferences or ancestral loyalties as it is on deeply held moral and religious (or secular) beliefs. Particular poll numbers are like daubs of pigment on an Impressionist’s canvas, which by themselves don’t convey a sense of reality but which, taken together with many others, can give the aesthetically sensitive viewer a more vivid sense of the underlying reality than the most accurate photograph. Technological change may be making polls less scientifically reliable, but reading polls has never been entirely a science; it has also been an art and seems to be getting more so.

Even with all that, many Republicans don’t understand how millions of people can be so, well, gullible. Let me take a shot at offering an explanation.

People who are agog at Trump and Carson’s success tend to think of politics as transactional. We assess candidates, figure out the ones who want to do what we like and vote for the ones we think can accomplish this. This is how politics worked, in both the Democratic and Republican parties, for decades. Democrats provided goodies for their interest groups (e.g. union protection, programs for urban America) and Republicans promised to deliver on ideological measures (support free markets, respect family values). People who continue to view politics this way not only do not appreciate the charms of Trump and Carson; these transactional voters cannot fathom that their understanding of politics is not the only way to look at politics; it may not even be the predominate one anymore.

Politics is increasingly tribal and identity-based. I do not mean merely that candidates seek support by people of the same gender or race or generation. Instead, people have begun to think of politics like sports; they are members of a team. Democrats self-identify with a long list of beliefs and characteristics. A Democrat would say: I am tolerant. I care about global warming. I drive a Prius. I think Jon Stewart is funny. He therefore looks for pols who think like him and evince the same values and preferences, not because these politicians will do something if elected. Rather, voting is a statement of personal identity. In this universe a Democrat would reason with the utmost sincerity: The president has nothing much to do with abortion, but I could never support someone who would be pro-life. I mean, that is not who I am. Besides, what would my friends think?

Before conservatives snub their noses at this line of thinking they should understand that many Republicans do the exact same thing. A Republican would say: I think people make too many excuses for failure. People need to be responsible for their lives. I’m a patriot. I think our culture has gone to hell in a handbasket. I’m not going to buy one of those itty-bitty cars; I like my gas-guzzler. Faith is the most important part of my life. In other words, they, too, see politics as an act of personal labeling. They just look for a different label.

All of this gets reinforced by the “big sort” — the movement of like-minded people to distinct geographical locales. Liberals go to the coasts and the big cities; conservatives to small towns, the South and rural areas. In a pond of like-minded fish one’s preferences and identification with a set of beliefs and values hardens.

So let’s go back to Carson and Trump. Many of their supporters don’t care about a candidate’s mastery of ideas or even whether their ideas are remotely attainable. These voters hold up the variety of beliefs and values around which they define themselves, find Carson or Trump meet many and then don the jersey of the Trump or the Carson team.

Do all voters act this way? Of course not. But pundits and the media never imagine that many do treat politics this way. That is why the professional media and political operators may be puzzled that some people do seem to notice Carson’s lack of knowledge. In fact, Carson’s supporters simply do not care if he knows China is not sending fighters into Syria; for them, that’s not what politics is about.

We can argue that this tendency to make politics into tribes rather than treat politics as a way of solving problems makes for nasty, divisive, unproductive government. But it is a fact of modern political life. Perhaps voters can be persuaded not to make politics into a form of self-definition and expression, but for many voters (not all, but many) it will remain so. The result will be a proliferation of unqualified, unknowledgeable candidates who offer Americans a way of saying: That’s who I am.

That is why Carson and Trump have devoted followers. And it is why so many pundits, policy wonks and news junkies remain mystified by their appeal.