Photo by: Robin Scholz/The News-Gazette Lisa Robinson of Aging in Place at her office in Champaign on Wednesday, Jan. 13, 2016.

A new business that opened last month in Champaign is geared toward helping senior citizens navigate the brave — and often complicated — new world of health care.

Aging in Place Inc., which is inside the Huey's Home Medical building at 2003 Round Barn Road, provides personalized support and services to help people manage their health care.

The firm provides everything from home assessments to the delivery and setup of medical products used at home; referrals to doctors and facilities; concierge services for patients returning home; and assistance with appeals, denials and benefits navigation.

President Lisa Robinson got the idea for Aging in Place at her other job with the CPAP Store. Customers purchasing or needing services for the CPAP equipment often asked for help dealing with insurance companies, medical facilities and other matters. She realized there was a need for a consulting firm to help seniors get the answers, advice and services they need.

"It was a business opportunity," Robinson said. "We present personal support services to help you manage your health care."

Aging in Place can be a resource for folks who would prefer to stay at home rather than move into a nursing home.

"We base it on a clientele of people who have worked their whole life and want to live in their own home rather than go into a facility," Robinson said. "There are 10,000 people who turn 65 every single day. We are seeing a lot of people who are 65, and their parents are still alive because of advancements in health care and technology. People who want to enjoy their retirement after raising their family now have to take care of their mom and dad."

Aging and Place staff will go into a client's home, spread out all the documents for long-term care and determine the pros and cons of going to a facility vs. staying at home.

"We call it health care navigation," she said.

Aging in Place can also help people following hospital stays.

"You've just been in the hospital, had all this rehab and are faced with a stack of papers you don't understand," she said. "You have this big bill and so much of your claims were denied. We sit down with you and look through it. Sometimes a person will face a $7,000 bill because they didn't list their secondary insurance while the primary insurance doesn't pay for any of that. The person smiles and realized we just saved them $7,000."

Robinson said that health care has changed so much following the passage of the Affordable Care Act.

"We have a highly educated population here in Champaign County with the university people and research people," she said. "But you would seriously have to go back to school for two years to be able to read insurance benefit and denial statements. Some of them are 50 pages long."

Aging in Place also provides recommendations to make staying at home safer and more livable for seniors.

"We can look at your home and say, 'Let's get rid of the carpet and put in some hardwood so your walkers or wheelchairs are safe. Let's work on getting these cords out of the middle of the floor. Let's get this clutter taken out so you are safe in your own home.'"

To reach Aging in Place, call 531-HOME.

Gallagher acquires agency

An insurance agency that has operated in the area since before the Civil War has a new owner.

Brown, Hobbs & McMurray Insurance at 118 S. Race St.,U, was acquired by Itasca-based Arthur J. Gallagher & Co. late last month.

Founded in 1859, Brown, Hobbs & McMurray is a retail insurance broker providing commercial property and casualty, employee benefits, risk management consulting and personal lines insurance services.

Gallagher is one of the world's largest and most well-respected insurance brokerage and risk management firms, according to area vice president Bill Hobbs.

"They will absolutely strengthen our organization by bringing us an enhanced ability to provide additional carrier options, technical capabilities, and value-added services to our clients," Hobbs said.

Hobbs said the entire staff of 14 employees in Urbana — including Thomas Brown, Paul and William Hobbs and Dick and Rich McMurray — will stay in the same location.

However, the firm's office in Hoopeston closed on Jan. 4. Those accounts have been incorporated into the office in Urbana.

"They approached us," Hobbs said. "They were interested in getting into the Champaign-Urbana market, but pretty much everything remains as is."

Customers should expect no changes to their policies, he said.

The local firm formed on Dec. 24, 1859, with an agreement to offer Hartford Insurance. From 1967 to 1989, it was known as Cogdal & Hobbs. In 1989, it merged with another Urbana agency; Brown, Brown & McMurray.

Photo firm to do drone work

Photographer Darrell Hoemann has received an FAA 333 exemption which allows him to do commercial aerial photography and video with a drone.

His exemption covers a wide range of work, including agriculture, inspections and closed movie/video set work.

Darrell Hoemann Photography offers experience in a wide variety of visual communication and works with Web developers, designers and clients with this new tool.

Donating eyeglasses

Bard Optical has announced it is donating eyeglasses to needy public school students in each of the communities the company serves.

Bard Optical has established a "75 Pairs for 75 Years" to mark the company's 75th anniversary in 2016.

The program started Jan. 1 and will end on Dec. 31.

The program provides up to 75 pairs of glasses per community. Public school districts will be provided vouchers for students to use to obtain the free eyeglasses.

Contact Tim Mitchell at 217-351-5366; by email at tmitchel@news-gazette.com; or by regular mail at The News-Gazette, c/o It's Your Business column, P.O. Box 677, Champaign, IL 61824-0677.