Tax manager Patrick Birchfield of Brown Armstrong talks about upcoming changes to the 2016 tax season.

Tax manager Patrick Birchfield of Brown Armstrong talks about upcoming changes to the 2016 tax season.

With the year winding down and tax season around the corner, the stress of choosing a method to file your taxes can be tough.

But the new year also means new rules and regulations, tax manager Patrick Birchfield said during an interview on Tuesday’s “First Look with Scott Cox.” The radio program is part of TBC Media’s daily simulcast with NEWSTALK 1180 KERN. Birchfield came from Certified Public Accounting Firm Brown Armstrong to talk about what Kern County residents can expect while filing taxes this year.

He said the biggest change this year is expected to be the Affordable Care Act.

“People that didn’t have health insurance are going to be subject to a lot more penalties in 2015 and 2016 going forward,” Birchfield said. And while the penalties were minor in 2014, the tax manager explained the fees would double over the next two years.

According to Healthcare.gov, the fee for not having health insurance in 2016 is calculated based on the percentage of a person’s household income, or based on the amount of people living in that household. Those penalized will pay whichever is higher. According to the site, the fine equals out to about $695 per adult or $347.50 per child under 18, for a maximum of $2,085.

The tax manager encouraged listeners to pick up health insurance if they haven’t already. Especially since fines are expected to increase by thousands of dollars, he said.

Those hoping to find someone to file their taxes for them, a common annual trend, can look to local CPA businesses for professional help.

“It takes a lot of the burden off yourself,” said Birchfield. “A lot of times with the fees that we do charge, you’ll save a lot more in taxes,” said Birchfield.

For more information on filing taxes this year pertaining to health insurance penalties, visit: Healthcare.gov or call Brown Armstrong at 324-4971.