Into the Mind: President and CEO of Maricopa Integrated Health System Steve Purves discusses the organization's financial woes.

Maricopa Medical Center as shown in a Feb. 12, 2014, photo. (Photo: Nick Oza /The Republic)

Maricopa Integrated Health System's cash reserves have fallen more than $40 million in the last two years. What happened?

Simply put, $50 million in federal funding to offset our high cost of uncompensated care expired in December 2013.

In addition, the state makes a policy decision each year to divert federal dollars Arizona receives to pay for uncompensated care. This money is intended to support safety net hospitals like ours, but is instead placed in the state's general fund to balance its budget. In 2016 alone, that number is $74 million.

Your critics say you should have seen this coming. Did you?

Yes, but the loss of federal funding was supposed to be offset by Medicaid restoration and the stand up of the Affordable Care Act. Unfortunately, that fell significantly short.

How has the change in your patient mix affected finances?

As Arizona's only public safety net hospital, our level of uncompensated care is higher than any single hospital in the state and one of the highest in the nation.

Ninety percent of our patients have either no payer source or a substantially reduced government payer source. This is not sustainable financially.

Steve Purves (Photo: handout)

What are you doing to right the ship?

We are doing everything we can. We are looking at our health system from top to bottom for ways to cut costs, improve efficiency, increase cash flow and improve services to our patients.

However, we cannot fulfill our historic safety net mission through cuts alone. As long as the state keeps federal funds meant to pay for our patients' care, we will be challenged to continue this critical mission.

Will voters be asked to help out?

No. The tax levy to support our uncompensated care is capped at approximately $65 million annually. However, this covers only a fraction of the uncompensated care we provide. We must find other solutions.

Voters approved a bond issue to rebuild the hospital. What's the status of that?

We're grateful for the overwhelming support for Proposition 480, which provides capital funds for us to build a better safety net system of care and a teaching hospital for the future.

Our board has been studying best practices on how to approach this important work. We will continue to engage the community in this process. The board will only access these funds after we start to see results from our cost cutting efforts.

What would be the alternative if MIHS went under?

None of the alternatives are good. We are the state's only safety net health care system and we serve 500,000 patients a year. The question is: Where would they go and what would be the impact on other health care providers?

Other significant impacts would include:

— Maricopa County would lose the community's largest treatment centers for the seriously mentally ill.

— 400 physicians in training would be left to find other sponsors.

— 2,000 clinical training rotations for nurses, therapists and the military would disappear.

— $834 million per year in economic benefit would be lost to the state.

— The state's budget would lose access to hundreds of millions of dollars in federal funding.

Read or Share this story: http://azc.cc/1yDeVF9