HAMILTON — If hospitals are to survive going forward, they need to change with the times, Robert Wood Johnson University Hospital Hamilton CEO Richard Freeman told business leaders on Tuesday.

Before a meeting of the MidJersey Chamber of Commerce, Freeman — who replaced Anthony "Skip" Cimino earlier this year — said the hospital was "preparing for the future" by studying patient trends and demographics in order to ensure appropriate services are available.

It's a practice Freeman recommended to all business owners, not just those in the healthcare field.

"We have a population that's going to have healthcare needs and a way of living that's different from what they're doing today," Freeman said. "They're going to need transportation, access and specialized services both from healthcare and businesses, like yourselves, to make sure we continue to grow as a township."

The hospital has cited this strategy as the reasoning behind the planned discontinuation of its inpatient obstetric services, including its maternity ward, a process that could come with up to 87 layoffs.

As part of the hospital's application to the state Department of Health, officials referred to statistics showing that the number of women between the ages of 15 and 44, a range the hospital identified as "child-bearing age," was expected to dip below 50,000 by 2019, lower than that population in 2000.

Meanwhile, the number of women over the age of 45 has increased from about 45,000 women in 2000 to more than 55,000 in 2014, expected to increase to about 60,000 by 2019, according to the hospital's research.

Freeman compared the decision to that of the hospital's founders who, in the 1960s, decided to open a new hospital on farmland in Hamilton, following the population migrating out of Trenton.

"Part of what made us successful was the forward-thinking people who moved here," Freeman said. "If we don't want our hospital to languish, we have to be prepared for the future."

With changing demographics and new regulations under the Affordable Care Act, Freeman said more hospitals are willing to tread new ground in order to remain successful.

For example, hospitals that had previously competed are merging as more patients are turning to outpatient centers as a way to avoid a hospital trip for non-emergency situations.

"There's an amazing amount of activity going on, and that's going to continue through the next few years," Freeman said. "There's going to be an increasing importance for providers with exceptional quality service."

While primary care physicians will always be the "gatekeeper" to a medical center's success, by investing in specific practices -- such as orthopedics, wellness and worker's compensation programs -- a hospital can keep up with emerging trends and remain multi-faceted and viable, Freeman said.

"We take care of you when you're healthy, which is the most important time," he said.

Mike Davis may be reached at mdavis@njtimes.com. Follow him on Twitter @byMikeDavis. Find The Times of Trenton on Facebook.