I was watching the news talking about disciplining kids in grade schools. Let's put it this way. If more parents disciplined their children while they're at home, we'd have much less problems on the street, in school and everywhere else. If the mother and father let the kid get away with things, why should they listen to what the teacher says? Kids are not worried about anybody else, the school principal, their teachers, etc., if their mother and father condone their behavior. You're giving too much leeway. If you do something wrong, you should get punishment. The old adage is: If you can't do the time, don't do the crime. That's all. Come on, guys. You let too much stuff slide.

I suspect that presidential candidate Ted Cruz is the antichrist. He has duped people into believing in him, promising religious liberty and prosperity. In reality, he would just love to lead our world into an age of fiery oppression, cruelty and wanton brutality. He'll be feasting on our bones in no time.

Here we go. You are going to walk your dog even though I am fairly sure you have a backyard. You are in a residential neighborhood. I have dogs. I love them. I do not walk them to pee on other people's property though. It is not the poop which you can pick up but rather letting your dog pee on my grass or shrubs. Can you say yellow and dead. I am so tired of this behavior. I work very hard to maintain a beautiful lawn and plant shrubs and flowers to make my property look amazing. I would have to hazard a guess you do not bother to keep your property looking nice. Otherwise, you would not do this to other people's property. Please show some consideration and walk your animal, but have him go on your own lawn.

To El from Hegewisch: I love how you liberals always play the race card when you get caught doing something underhanded. Experience teaches us that when politicians try to sneak some project through without anybody noticing, someone has their fingers in the cookie jar. We have had enough corruption out here. The Southwest suburbs have the best mix of housing anywhere in the Chicago area. If your friends don't like the southwest suburbs, then don't come here or leave. Go live in Lincoln Park, if you can afford it.

Jim, Tinley Park

In response to Don from Orland Park: The answer is simple as to why United Healthcare is exiting Obamacare. They have realized that they cannot make an outrageous profit from it. Obamacare can be improved so it is similar to the plans of the educated, industrialized countries of Europe whereby health care insurers are eliminated. Put it on the board. Yes.

Mike, Oak Lawn

With all the talk about men's and women's bathrooms, lets get serious. What about golf and the ladies tees? As a man, why do I have to be back 20 yards? Can I get free drinks on "ladies night?" What's next?

Orland

Tom talks about science and religion. He is correct in that science has not proven religion, i.e. God. That's because science is based on facts and religion is based on faith. The two are incompatible and mutually exclusive. Science can never prove the existence or non-existence of a god or many gods. As to the creation of the universe, there are may sites that would inform Tom about its beginnings, approximately 13.7 billion years ago. Since it is based on the "Big Bang Theory," it is constantly undergoing reevaluation. That's what science does. The processes involved are constantly being re-examined and updated. Again, that's what science does. Science is not the enemy; it is the salvation. Since religious beliefs are based on faith and faith alone, it is fruitless to argue about religion or religion vs. science.

Paul, Tinley Park

What's Speak Out?

Speak Out allows readers to comment on the issues of the day. Email Speak Out at speakout@southtownstar.com or call 312-222-2427. Please limit comments to 30 seconds or about 120 words and give your first name and your hometown.