MONTGOMERY — Two former Bentley Administration staffers have launched a new tax-exempt group with the goal of helping the governor win public support for his agenda, including his recent $541 million tax increase proposal and future reforms to the state’s healthcare system.

Alabama Council for Excellent Government — which they have nicknamed ACEGov — was recently formed by Cooper Shattuck, the governor’s former top legal adviser. He is joined by another former Bentley staffer, Marquita Davis, who was Alabama State Finance Director during Bentley’s first term. Cooper is now legal counsel for the University of Alabama System and Davis is Executive Director of the Jefferson County Committee for Economic Opportunity (JCCEO) in Birmingham.

The group’s formation documents say it was organized to “promote the common good and general welfare of the people of the State of Alabama” by promoting, among other things, “policies that foster an environment to create more jobs” and make “living in Alabama more affordable for families.” They also plan to “promote legislation to implement such public policies.”

Shattuck told Yellowhammer on Thursday that the group was launched after extensive conversations with the governor, who he says serves as the group’s honorary chairman, although he does not hold an official position.

“In conversations with the governor we realized there was a need to help him get his message and agenda out there in a way where it is most effective and reaches the most people,” he said. “For me, having been in the administration — seeing it, living it, experiencing it — it’s clear that state government really needs some help. Having worked for the governor and gained an appreciation for his genuineness and fresh approach, I welcome the opportunity for other people to hear it, see it and understand it.”

Shattuck said the group will advance the governor’s agenda through a combination of earned media and paid advertising. And although the tax increase proposal is the first issue they’re working on, there will be more to come, including healthcare reform.

In his State of the State address earlier this year, Gov. Bentley said that he would not allow the “flaws” of ObamaCare to keep the state from expanding taxpayer-funded healthcare for the “poorest and most vulnerable.” He also said that some hospitals are “dependent on Medicaid to survive,” further signaling that some form of expansion of the program may be imminent.

“We are not just a one issue group. It’s really about supporting all of the governor’s issues and agenda items,” Cooper said of ACEGov’s plans. “The tax one is one we know and are experiencing, but he has some ideas and goals for healthcare, for example, that we haven’t seen or heard a lot of yet, other than in the State of the State, but they’re coming. There are lots of issues to address. The governor is excited about his second term. The tax issue is the first one up, but there will be more to come.”

Shattuck said his personal involvement in the group was a no-brainer, and hopes their efforts are able to help Alabamians gain a better understanding of the challenges their state government is facing.

“For me, it was an opportunity to help,” he said. “People always say, ‘Well, can’t we just cut this or that?’ I believed that too until I saw it first-hand. There’s nothing left to cut! We have a real crisis on our hands and it’s going to take some bold moves to fix it.”

Like this article? Follow me on Twitter and let me know what you think. — Cliff Sims (@Cliff_Sims) December 3, 2014