The picket line for hundreds of Johns Hopkins Hospital employees has picked up its pace going into the second day of a strike over failed union negotiations regarding a push for higher pay for workers.

Johns Hopkins Hospital employees strike over wages Employees of Johns Hopkins Hospital have hit the picket line in response to failed union negotiations. More

11 News reporter Jennifer Franciotti said several hundred workers were picketing by 6:30 a.m. Thursday on the hospital's east Baltimore campus.

Mobile users tap here for video.

Roughly 2,000 workers, most of whom are service, maintenance and technical employees, began their protest at 6 a.m. Wednesday and vowed to continue nonstop until 6 p.m. Friday.

After recent contract negotiations stalled, organizers of the strike from SEIU 1199 United Healthcare Workers East said Hopkins needs to bring higher wages to the table. The union claims its employees make so little that they must rely on food stamps, Medicaid and other public assistance for basic needs.

"We have a little over 1,200 workers that's actually received food stamps or Medicaid. We had one worker tell me, 'I didn't realize that I was below the poverty level until I saw the numbers,'" said Carietta Hiers, an SEIU representative.

Union officials want to establish a $15-an-hour minimum wage for employees who have been with Hopkins 15 years or more and lift all employees to $14 an hour by the end of a four-year contract.

"We're trying to raise what we call the floor for folks who have been here for 15 years or more," Hiers said Thursday morning (story continues below).





Mobile users, tap here for photos

According to the union, Hopkins wants to have annual raises of less than 2 percent over the life of a five-year agreement and have a minimum wage of $12.25 an hour kick in in 2018.

Hopkins maintained it is negotiating "in good faith" and is "working to reach a settlement that's fair to everyone." It also assured people that patients' medical care would not be compromised during the strike.

"When you look at the settlement and the proposals we've put on the table, we feel we've put a very fair proposal on the table," said Bonnie Windsor, Hopkins' vice president of human resources.

Hopkins officials also pointed out that the workers, who are full-time employees, have several benefits available to them, including free tuition and free preventative care.

However, many workers said Thursday morning that they're angry at a statement released by the hospital Wednesday that said, in part, "These union-represented employees, like all of our employees, are important members of the Johns Hopkins team, but they are not involved in direct patient care."

Maurice Perry, an operating room technician who is on the picket line, said he begs to differ.

"We deal with every patient who comes through the OR, and we do sometimes have to comfort the patients, by talking to them, singing to them or even holding their hands -- anything to make them feel a little bit better," he said. "There are so many people here that are dealing directly with the patients, and we're not recognized. (The hospital) thinks nurses and doctors are the only ones who deal with patients, but they are not."

Union officials said the picket lines around the hospital have been packed and spirited. Less than eight hours into the three-day strike, more than 1,200 of the hospital’s caregivers had already walked the picket line, officials said.

Union employees' benefit package has much to offer

Union employees have a very impressive benefits package, but when asked about that, union officials said that's not the issue at hand.

Armeta Dixon, one of the vice presidents of the union, referred to the extensive benefits package each union employee is offered upon hiring, saying, "It's OK. It's not great, but it's OK."

Dixon said it's more important that the employees start at $14 an hour rather than the $12.25 an hour Hopkins is proposing.

"We feel that we've put a very fair proposal on the table," Windsor said.

Hospital officials said they are really involved in a balancing act between saving jobs and providing valuable benefits. Some of the highlights of the benefits include tuition assistance at a maximum of $10,000 a year for undergrad and $15,000 for an MBA or masters.

For employees who earn less than $35,000 a year, there's tuition advancement with 50 to 100 percent reimbursement depending on schedule.

Other highlights include short- and long-term disability, long-term health care, family and medical leave and a pension.

Health insurance is very affordable, too. A single full-time employee earning less than $30,000 a year pays $24.41 a check, for that employee and a spouse, $91.18, and a family costs $98.50.

"Is there an argument to be made that if some of these employees had taken advantage of the Hopkins educational programs they wouldn't be in that situation?" WBAL-TV 11 News reporter Lowell Melser asked Dixon.

"Let me ask you something, following that theory, everybody goes to school, everybody gets a Ph.D. Who cleans the toilet?" Dixon said.

Union officials seemed to dodge questions on the value of the Hopkins benefits program and why more employees had not taken more advantage.

"So a housekeeper couldn't try and better herself to become a supervisor?" Melser asked Dixon.

"Bettering yourself to become a supervisor is not the answer to the question," Dixon said.

The strike is planned to last until Friday morning.

Stay with WBALTV.com and 11 News for more details as they become available.

WBALTV.com editor Katie Lange and WBAL-TV 11 News reporter Lowell Melser contributed to this article