Phase one of Eddy Street Commons is one step closer to completion now that the plans required to start construction of a full-service Embassy Suites hotel have been filed with the state.

Documents reveal the 151,054-square-foot, six-story full-service hotel will be located on vacant property between McAlister’s Deli and the Fairfield Inn & Suites on Angela Boulevard. Many rooms at the Embassy Suites will have an unobstructed view of Touchdown Jesus and Notre Dame Stadium.

Developer Kite Realty Group has not yet announced the construction timetable and did not return messages late last week seeking additional information about the hotel. Cooper Carry of Alexandria, Va., has been identified as the project architect.

There’s no question that having an Embassy Suites in the market will elevate the image of South Bend as a destination, says Rob DeCleene, executive director of Visit South Bend Mishawaka.

“It will be the only Embassy Suites in the state of Indiana outside of Indianapolis, so that tells you something,” DeCleene says. “Of course, it will be a popular hotel for any Notre Dame function, football or otherwise.”

That’s not to say there won’t be what DeCleene refers to as “growing pains” in the local hotel market with the addition of the Embassy Suites and several other hotel properties that are either under construction or planned in South Bend and Mishawaka.

But he says the central location of campus relative to South Bend, Mishawaka and St. Joseph County will be a year-round advantage for Embassy Suites. “I expect it to be rather successful and an overall boon for our local industry. It’s very exciting,” he says.

Notre Dame’s latest economic impact report, which was issued in June, estimates an $18.5 million annual economic impact from the 370,000 visitors who travel to campus for football weekends, says Notre Dame spokesman Dennis Brown.

In addition to hotels, Brown says, the dollar figure includes visitor spending in restaurants, at grocery stores, and at gas stations, as well as other at various other businesses.

Though area hotels are reporting strong bookings for Notre Dame home games, as many as 500 rooms will be added to the current stock of 4,100 rooms across St. Joseph County in the next few years. That’s a 12 percent increase in the number of rooms compared with the existing supply, DeCleene says.

Outside of the Embassy Suites, only a couple of street-level commercial vacancies remain in Eddy Street phase one. Yats recently opened in the former General Nutrition Center store, Blaze Pizza replaced Hot Box Pizza and TIAA-CREF opened offices in the former Outpost Sports store.

Notre Dame is actively engaged in exclusive discussions with Kite Realty regarding a tentative plan for phase two, says Greg Hakanen, Notre Dame’s director of Northeast Neighborhood Redevelopment.

Like phase one, Hakanen says, the second phase will be developed on off-campus land assembled by the university.

Earlier this year, university officials polled multiple constituent groups — students, faculty and staff — about what they’d like to see in the second phase that extends the mixed-use development south on Eddy Street.

There has been widespread interest in a grocery store and more unique concept restaurants, Hakanen says.

“We shared those preferences with Kite, who is now in the process of drafting a conceptual development plan that identifies uses, quantities and potential building footprints,” he says.

This process will continue until Notre Dame and Kite identify a mutually agreeable plan. When a tentative plan is in hand, Hakanen says, university officials will solicit input from area constituents, including the Northeast Neighborhood Revitalization Organization and neighborhood residents.

“It is impossible at this point to predict how long the process will take, or when construction on phase two might begin,” he says.

Have you heard

Second Time Around consignment shop has reopened at 51160 Bittersweet Road, in Granger. The locally owned store was previously located at Granger Commons strip center. … JJ Fish is planning a new location at 1619 S. Michigan St., in South Bend, according to a state construction report. … Mark your calendars, because the dates for Elkhart Dining Days have been set for Oct. 30 through Nov. 7.

Heidi Prescott’s column runs on Wednesdays and Sundays. Contact her at hprescott@sbtinfo.com or 574-235-6070. You also can talk retail at Facebook.com/thebasket and at Twitter.com/marketbasket. Hear her weekday and Sunday reports at 6:52 a.m. and 8:52 a.m. on The WSBT Morning News with JT at WSBT-AM (960) and WSBT-FM (96.1). The Market Basket Minute airs Thursdays on the WSBT-TV “First News at 4.”