Books

The Four Horsemen of the Apocalypse. Woodcut c.1496 by Albrecht Durer:

I was not long out of school when I saw the movie The Four Horsemen of the Apocalypse. It was ordinary, but several times during the movie there are spectacular, frightening, images of the four horsemen galloping in slow motion across the screen. The Four Horsemen of the Apocalypse are described in the Bible. (Revelations). They represent Plague or Conquest, War, Famine and Death and are usually interpreted as the precursors to the end of the world.

I was curious about these horsemen so, the Bible being no help, I read the book of the same name, by Spaniard Vincente Blasco Ibanez (1867-1928). The story begins in Argentina. A patriarch has established a cattle empire. He has two daughters: one marries a Frenchman, the other marries a German and as World War I approaches the patriarch cannot understand why his family should have any interest or involvement.

Speaking to his French son-in-law he says: "I am Spanish, you French, Karl [the other son-in-law] German, my daughters are Argentinians, the cook Russian, his assistant Greek, the stable boy English, the kitchen servants Chinas [natives], Galicians or Italians ... And yet we all live in peace. In Europe we would have probably been in a grand fight by this time."

The Four Horsemen of the Apocalypse, by Vincente Blasco Ibanez.

When I first read The Four Horseman of the Apocalypse I recall noting that Argentina and Australia were equally remote from Europe and the war. There were even similarities in lifestyle of the two countries in those pre-World War I days. So, why should either country be involved? Of course, Australia was tied to Britain and the Empire.

Advertisement

The patriarch dies and families move to Europe. The German family in Berlin believing: "the more ferocious the war, the more quickly it is concluded. To punish with cruelty is to proceed humanely." The French family, in Paris, hearing: "we are going to make war on War. We are going to fight so that this war will be the last." The cousins are in conflict. Ibanez introduces a character – a Russian socialist - as a means of expounding his views on war and politics.

Paris is excited at the prospect of war. The armies confidently march out of the city. But then they start to return – wounded, defeated. The French father goes to his castle in the country and experiences the battle of the Marne. Soldiers, first French, then German, occupy the nearby village and use the castle as their head-quarters. Each army bombards the other with frightening effect. There is hand-to-hand fighting. Civilians are killed: by cannon fire and executed by the Germans. The descriptions are graphic, unpleasant. The battle rages. The apocalyptic horsemen, Conquest and War, hold sway.

Also during that first reading I realised there was much of World War I that did not involve Australians – or even British. (I was no history student). The Marne battle was the first defeat inflicted on the advancing Germans. (I had no knowledge of it). Recent internet inquiries yielded me the statistics that, in this battle, the French lost 80,000 killed. (The British 1700). In World War I the total number of Australians killed was 60,000.

When the Germans finally leave the village and the castle "the women were removing the earth and trying to dig burial trenches, but their labour was almost useless because it required an immense force to bury so many dead". The countryside is devastated. The horseman Famine.

The final chapters of the book cover the French father's search for his son in the trenches. And in this account Ibanez describes the life in the trenches and the nature of trench warfare. "The foe was such a short distance off, hidden in the ground in a mysterious invisibility which made it all the more terrible."

Ibanez ridicules the value of religion during the War. "They believed only in the priests of their own country. Outside of Germany everything was despicable – even their own religion." Cynically, there is a long, painful description of an army hospital in Lourdes – the city of miracles.

One of the combatants imagines "this terrestrial globe appeared like an enormous ship sailing through infinity. Its crews – poor humanity - had spent century after century in exterminating each other on the deck. To occupy the same surface in the sunlight seemed to be the ruling desire of each group."

And at war's end, with father and daughter searching for son's and brother's grave, Ibanez sees "nature, blind, unfeeling and silent, ignoring individual existence and taking to her bosom with equal indifference, a poor little animal or a million corpses." The horseman Death.

I am now aware that Ibanez is an emotive – even, biased – writer and since my immediate post-school days I have read more rational anti-war novels, more effective anti-war novels but due to my age and innocence at the time I first read it, none have made a greater impression on me than The Four Horsemen of the Apocalypse.