Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share USA TODAY's Susan Page breaks down the numbers from a USA TODAY/Pew Research poll that shows an overwhelming 71% of those surveyed are dissatisfied with the way things are going in the country today. (USA NEWS, USA TODAY)

In this Oct, 24, 2014, photo, the Capitol Dome is nearly obscured by scaffolding at dawn in Washington. (Photo: J. Scott Applewhite, AP)

WASHINGTON — Our long national funk isn't over.

The stock market has been booming and jobs growing, but Americans are facing the new year with the most downcast expectations in nearly a quarter-century — a disconnect that reflects prosperity's limited reach and assessments that Washington's dysfunction isn't going to get better any time soon.

An end-of-the-year USA TODAY/Pew Research Center Poll finds an overwhelming 71% of those surveyed are dissatisfied with the way things are going in the country today. Just 49% predict 2015 will be better — the first time since 1990 that optimism for the year ahead has dipped below 50%.

Those attitudes have fueled developments as disparate as the rise of the Tea Party movement and coast-to-coast protests over the police shooting in Ferguson, Mo., says Matthew Dowd, a strategist for George W. Bush's 2000 presidential campaign. "There's a general sense of anger and frustration that nothing seems to change," he says. "They don't trust that anybody has their back."

Pessimism persists even though voters in last month's elections shook up who's in charge — Republicans will take control of the Senate as well as the House next month — and despite evidence that the economic recovery is on a stronger footing. In the past, those factors might have sparked a more upbeat public mood.

Not this time.

For one thing, the improving economy hasn't boosted everybody. While the jobless rate has declined to 5.8%, many people have given up looking for work and others are underemployed. A record-breaking stock market mostly helps those who own stocks.

For another, dismay over governmental gridlock may be dampening the impact of good news — a case of politics trumping pocketbooks.

In the poll, 81% say the country is more politically divided these days than in the past, the highest percentage in a decade. Seventy-seven percent predict that situation isn't going to get better over the next five years. More than a third expect it to get worse.

The nationwide telephone survey of 1,507 adults, taken Dec. 3-7, has a margin of error of plus or minus 3 percentage points.

The public's dyspeptic mood complicates the political landscape for the 2016 presidential race, which is poised to begin in earnest early next year.

"Voters' lack of confidence in the political system goes beyond their disgust with what they see as mindless partisanship," says Democratic pollster Geoffrey Garin, a strategist for Hillary Rodham Clinton's 2008 presidential campaign. "They also think the system is largely controlled by wealthy special interests that only look out for themselves. This feeling of mistrust extends to the economic system itself, which a large majority believe works for the wealthy rather than for all Americans."

Seventy-six percent of poll respondents predict that President Obama and Republican leaders in Congress won't make significant progress in fixing the problem is that worries them most. (Photo: Susan Walsh, AP)

WHAT'S WRONG?

Ask Americans to name the biggest problem facing the country and the state of the economy tops the list, cited by 14%, while 10% cite unemployment. Concern about immigration was cited by 12%. Unhappiness with government is cited by 10%.

No other issue breaks into double digits. Concern about the deficit and crime has declined from 2012. Just 1% name morality or global warming. As the two-year anniversary of the devastating Sandy Hook Elementary School shooting approaches, the percentage who mention gun control has dropped from 8% in 2012 to less than 1% now.

Whatever their concern, more than three of four respondents predict that Obama and Republican leaders in Congress won't make significant progress during the next year in fixing whatever the problem is that worries them most.

While Republicans scored big gains last month in congressional and gubernatorial elections from Massachusetts to Colorado, views of the GOP haven't improved. Instead, they've soured a bit since before the midterms. Even in victory, the party's favorable-unfavorable rating is now underwater by 20 percentage points, 37%-57%.

Republicans won not because voters were convinced they had the answers but because "patience ran out" for Obama and Democratic policies to work, says David Winston, a pollster who advises the House Republican leadership, among others. That gives the GOP no more than an opportunity to win them over.

"What Republicans need to realize, this wasn't a mandate for any particular policy," Winston says. "People are saying, 'Let's hear your ideas.' This is not a done deal."

Views of the Democratic Party are only a stitch better: 41% favorable-54% unfavorable.

And views of Congress just keep sinking: 22% favorable, 71% unfavorable.

President Obama's overall approval rating seems stuck at a tepid 42% in part because it's problematic for him to take credit for good economic news when so many Americans believe the country fundamentally has gotten off on the wrong track. In the survey, those who "very strongly" approve of the job he's doing hits a new low of 24%; those who "very strongly" disapprove hits a new high of 40%.

On seven of eight specific issues, from handling immigration to terrorism, Obama's disapproval rating is higher than his approval rating. (On energy policy, it's tied, at 41%-41%.)

In his farewell speech this week, Arkansas Democratic Sen. Mark Pryor said, “People all around our nation look at Washington and they shake their heads. … The political environment today grinds the trust and confidence out of our system.” (Photo: J. Scott Applewhite, AP)

NOT-SO-GREAT EXPECTATIONS

Americans are braced for more stalemate over the next two years.

A 54% majority predict Obama won't offer Republican congressional leaders much cooperation. Even more, 70%, say Republican congressional leaders won't cooperate much with the White House.

Those expectations are more negative than they were in 2006, when the midterm elections in the sixth year of president George W. Bush's tenure delivered Senate control to the opposition party.

How much does it matter? Voters who are divided on issues from Obamacare to the battle against the Islamic State agree that the failure of Republicans and Democrats to work together is damaging the nation; 71% say it's hurting "a lot." Most see an impact even in their personal lives.

On these questions, there is almost no partisan divide.

"This is an area where the American people are way ahead of Washington," Arkansas Sen. Mark Pryor, a Democrat who lost his bid for a third term, said this week in a farewell speech on the Senate floor. "People all around our nation look at Washington and they shake their heads. ...The political environment today grinds the trust and confidence out of our system. Let me tell you, that is not good for anybody."

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1Diuun4