Two healthcare giants continue angling for customers in Hazleton even though one of them now runs the city's hospital.

Hazleton General Hospital merged into the $1.7 billion Lehigh Valley Health Network on New Year's Day.

Two days later, another mammoth care provider, Geisinger Health System, opened a Careworks clinic at the Staples Plaza in West Hazleton.

The Geisinger Health Plan also bid to insure new employees of the Hazleton Area School District in contracts that the school board approved Jan. 9.

While the school district didn't accept the bid this time, a consultant thinks Geisinger will submit a more competitive offer in six months or a year.

Dr. Frank Polidora, an orthopedic surgeon who retired from his practice in Hazleton last year, said Geisinger could have taken ownership of Hazleton's hospital if Lehigh Valley hadn't."

"Either one of these systems need to feed their organization with patients appropriately. I wouldn't write Geisinger out of the equation. A lot of people have Geisinger insurance. Geisinger may have the edge on Lehigh Valley. They have the product of medical, and the product of health care," Polidora said.

Lehigh Valley and Geisinger have been bumping shoulders in Hazleton for years.

Some doctors believe their presence in the Hazleton area factored into the merger.

"This was inevitable. I started hearing rumbles of it 20 years ago ... There was a turf battle between Geisinger and Lehigh Valley," said Dr. Victor F. Greco, a retired surgeon and former deputy secretary of health for Pennsylvania who lives outside Hazleton in Drums.

In those days, Hazleton had two hospitals, but some area residents drove to Geisinger in Danville, Montour County, or to Lehigh Valley in Allentown for special care. Helicopters also flew Hazleton patients to the trauma centers of Lehigh Valley and Geisinger.

Geisinger's website mentions that it has been part of the Hazleton community for a decade. In addition to the new clinic, Geisinger Medical Group has a family practice in the Beltway Commons on the Airport Beltway and a cancer center at 1740 E. Broad St.

Lehigh Valley increased its presence in Hazleton through the hospital. After Hazleton General Hospital expanded its Emergency Department in 2006, trauma specialists from Lehigh Valley began working there.

Emergency patients needing specialized care such as heart catheterizations were transferred to Lehigh Valley in Allentown by helicopter or ambulance.

Lehigh Valley doctors began consulting with patients and doctors in Hazleton through audiovisual links for conditions such as burns and infectious disease.

Dr. Robert Childs, a Hazleton pediatrician for 35 years, thinks family doctors might have nudged Hazleton General Hospital toward Lehigh Valley and away from Geisinger. They worried that patients who saw a specialist at Geisinger might then switch to doctors in the Geisinger system for the rest of their care.

"The knock on Geisinger was once you send them there, you might lose them to your practice," said Childs, recalling a viewpoint he heard expressed a decade ago.

Bernard Rudegeair, who resigned as the hospital's chief executive officer a decade ago, noticed a difference between Geisinger and Lehigh Valley then, too.

"Geisinger has doctors here who compete with local doctors. Lehigh Valley didn't," Rudegeair said.

On the Hazleton Area School Board, on which Childs serves, board members hope taxpayers can benefit if Geisinger enters the competition for insuring school employees.

Currently, the school district insures itself but hires Blue Cross of Northeastern Pennsylvania to administer the insurance for workers.

Before approving contracts with teachers and support workers earlier this month and with workers in the International Brotherhood of Teamsters union a few weeks ago, the district offered other companies a chance to insure newly hired employees.

"By making it competitive, it's a microcosm of the Obamacare model," said Childs, referring to the system established by the Affordable Care Act. Americans using a government website can choose between insurance plans offered in their community.

Sara Picard of Millennium Healthcare Group, a consultant who advised the school district, said Blue Cross and Blue Shield traditionally barred competition within a workplace that they ensured.

The school district had a chance to ask for other offers because it is self-insured and because the unions agreed.

Picard said Geisinger submitted a quote that wasn't competitive, but that started a discussion.

"What came out of the discussion is they would entertain it," she said.

In six months to a year, after the district hires new employees and a record of their healthcare usage begins to develop, the district can ask again for proposals.

"We would need to put a proposal on the table, and their school board would need to approve," Geisinger spokeswoman Amy Bowen said.

Geisinger will be able to submit an offer to Hazleton Area, but so might other insurance companies.

Picard said other employers such as TMG Health of Jessup, Lackawanna County, offer plans of more than one health insurance company to workers.

TMG employs 1,600 people, and employers have to be large to attract competing insurers.

The school district, with about 1,000 employees, is regarded as one of the two largest employers in Hazleton, along with the hospital.

Picard expects competition for health insurance within a workplace to become more common as excise taxes and other provisions of the Affordable Care Act take effect.

"Everyone ... is going to be doing what we can to be as creative and manage" costs, she said.

Rudegeair said the act will steer patients to where care can be provided most effectively, which means specialists will be in larger hospitals that treat more patients.

"There will be some flaws, but in general a small community hospital is going to have to be linked to some larger hospital. You can't have a neuro-ophthalmologist in Hazleton," he said.

Polidora said mergers happen in hospitals, just as they do in other businesses.

"What we're seeing is everything in society being taken over by giants," he said. "All gas station prices jump up at the same time. You see prices go up, and you won't have anywhere to go. It puts power in the hands of a few people.

"I think people are going to find more medicine by the cookbooks, and situations where the physician or the physician's assistant or the nurse practitioner will have less time for you."

Likewise, Childs thinks more of Hazleton's healthcare business will go toward Allentown now that Lehigh Valley owns the hospital and patients will continue to be transferred there for special care.

Greco, however, thinks the new hospital Lehigh Valley plans to build in Hazleton by the end of 2019 will offer advanced services such as trauma care, neurosurgery and heart surgery.

"I think in the long run, we'll be offered better care in more of the advanced specialties," Greco said.

kjackson@standardspeaker.com