The Cedar Branch tract in Jackson includes old cranberry bogs that are reverting to natural wetlands. (Photo: Photo courtesy of John Rae, state Department of Environmental Protection) Story Highlights 293-acre Cedar Branch purchase ends 15-year controversy.

Home to Cooper’s hawk, red-shouldered hawk, barred owl, Pine Barrens tree frog, and the northern pine snake.

A $4.5 million deal has saved 293 acres in Jackson to become a township park and wildlife area, plus it benefits water quality in Ocean County — and many miles downstream in Barnegat Bay, state environmental officials said Thursday.

But while applauding the purchase, members of the Sierra Club said it also underscores New Jersey’s faltered open-space funding.

“New Jersey used to purchase up to 20,000 acres a year of open space and we averaged, between 1998 and 2010, $235 million a year in funding. We are now spending less than half of that and we will be out of funding by the end of this year,” said Jeff Tittel of the Sierra Club, an environmental group. “Every year, New Jersey loses somewhere between 12,000 and 18,000 acres of open space to development.”

The Cedar Branch tract along the upper reaches of the Toms River has forest, swamp and old cranberry bogs now reverting to natural wetlands. It had been owned by Hovbilt, one of the Hovnanian group of building companies. While tract lies in the Pine­lands National Reserve, the property is outside the state’s Pinelands zoning master plan that limits development.

For years, neighbors and conservation groups sought to stave off development of the property, which is largely forested and adjacent to the Colliers Mills Wildlife Management Area. Hovbilt had proposed a large-scale mixed development of homes, town houses and commercial space.

Permanent protection now will ensure clean water in the Toms River headwaters of Cedar Branch and Pole Brook, according to the state Department of Environmental Protection. The Toms River carries some 25 percent of the fresh water flowing into Barnegat Bay, but the nutrient pollution picked up from air pollution, lawn fertilizer and other suburban sources is a big part of the bay’s ecological problems, scientists say.

The property will be split into three management areas: 57 acres to be managed as part of Colliers Mills, 203 acres to become a county natural lands area and 32 acres to be owned by Jackson as a public park.

The purchase was a joint project with Jackson’s municipal government providing $2 million; $1.75 million from the Ocean County Natural Lands Trust; $500,000 from the state Green Acres program, and $250,000 in Green Acres grant money used by the nonprofit Trust for Public Land, for many years a partner with the county and DEP for preserving land in the bay’s 660-square-mile watershed.

DEP Commissioner Bob Martin touted the purchase as another step toward protecting Barnegat Bay.

“Land preservation is a critical component of the governor’s comprehensive restoration plan for the bay because it improves water quality by reducing the impacts of stormwater pollution on the bay,” and brings recent preservation efforts to 3,635 acres since Gov. Chris Christie announced his plan in December 2010, Martin said.

But the rather modest Green Acres contribution shows how open-space funding has dried up, according to Tittel.

“This is the kind of project that in the past the state might have bought itself. Now we don’t have money for it,” he said.

Kirk Moore: 609-709-5036; kmoore@app.com

Read or Share this story: http://www.app.com/story/news/local/ocean-county/our-land/2014/05/15/barnegat-bay-ocean-county-environment-jackson/9146983/