Thanks to a huge response following Piers Morgan's exclusive interview with Rick and Kay Warren, tonight CNN is re-airing the raw and heart-wrenching face to face conversation that touches upon everything from life and death, to gun control and mental health.

A well-known American evangelical Christian pastor, Warren and his wife Kay Warren lost their son Matthew to a self-inflicted gunshot wound in April, and in the first interview since their personal tragedy, the Warren's share intimate details of the day they learned of their son's passing:

"We drove over to Matthew's house," describes Matthew's mother. "The lights were on. I could see in his window, the lights were on. And I started ringing the doorbell and banging on the door. Now, typically, he would have said 'go away,' or come to the door and invite me in. He did nothing. That was not his pattern. And so I had a pretty good sense that perhaps something catastrophic had happened."

Knowing of their son's emotional battles, the Warren's soon found themselves facing a daunting decision:

"He had also told us that if we called the police, that he would take his life instantly. So a call to the police was an instant suicide," Kay reveals in Tuesday evening's exclusive interview. "I was living with that horrible, horrible choice of do I call the police and perhaps intervene or do I take that risk if I call that he instantly kills himself? So we just had to wait."

When Kay's text messages to Matthew continued to go unanswered, the Warren's returned to their son's home the following day:

"There was nothing. And so we went back to the house, his house. It looked exactly the same," the grieving mother reveals to the "Piers Morgan Live" host. "The same lights were on. We knew. By that time, we knew."

When the unthinkable became reality, and the death of their son was all but confirmed, Rick Warren recalls feelings of a complete emotional breakdown:

"We were sobbing. We were just sobbing. The day that I had feared might happen one day, since he had been born, and the day that I had prayed would never happen, happened," shares the senior pastor of Saddleback Church. "I remember, as we stood in the driveway just embracing each other and sobbing."

Watch the above clip for more details of the Warren's learning of their son's death, and for the entire interview with the man who leads the eighth-largest church in the United States, tune in to CNN tonight at 9.

-

» Follow "Piers Morgan Live" on Twitter

» Follow "Piers Morgan Live" on Instagram