FLINT, MI -- The Beecher Scholarship Incentive Program will host the Greater Flint Educational Symposium. This year's theme is "Jumping into the Gap: Exploring the role of Race, Place and Class on Educational Achievement." It will explore how various social barriers impede academic success and how these issues can be tackled and overcome through innovative ideas, collaborations and intentional practices.

The event will take place on Thursday, April 10, from 8:30 a.m. to 4 p.m. at the Riverfront Banquet Center in downtown Flint.

This event is free and open to all community members who are concerned with the state of the educational system.

The purpose of the Greater Flint Education Symposium is to link K-12 stakeholders with post-secondary institutions to examine the effectiveness of teaching to ensure student success after high school.





Speakers will include Dr. Sarah Winchell Lenhoff, director of policy and research at the Education Trust Midwest, and Dr. Tyrone Howard, professor at UCLA and author of "Why Race and Culture Matter in Schools: Closing the Achievement Gap in America's Classrooms."

"Many folks are uncomfortable discussing race and class in relation to student achievement, but the impact is real and can't be ignored. We hope this is a first step towards having a transparent and inclusive dialogue about the outcome disparities in the Greater Flint community. Ultimately, this needs to move to effective action so our kids and the city can move forward into the future," said Dawn Demps, executive director of the Beecher Scholarship Incentive Program, in a press release.

The event is supported by the Ruth Mott Foundation, University of Michigan-Flint Diversity Council and the Foundation for Mott Community College.

The Beecher Scholarship Incentive Program has provided academic, social and cultural opportunities for the students of the Beecher Community Schools District for more than 12 years. The program works to empower students to graduate from high school, pursue higher education and embark on the path of becoming contributing citizens of the global community.

To register online, visit http://bsipscholars.org/greater-flint-education-symposium/. For more information, call 810-591-9264 or email dawndemps@bsip.org.