Topics: D.C., economy, Jobs, Retail, Superstore, Video, Walmart, Washington, Business News, News

I like to think I’ve been in more Walmart stores in more places than anyone who doesn’t work for Walmart, or one of its suppliers.

During 10 years of reporting and writing about Walmart, I’ve been to Walmart stores in 30 states, in four countries. I’ve walked the aisles of more than 200 stores, including one in Hawaii. During the last two years, when I lived in Mexico City, our front door was 103 steps from a Walmart, and I confess, I averaged seven visits a week.

But there are still new Walmart experiences to be had, and Wednesday, I had one: I went to a Walmart on grand-opening day.

The Walmart You Don’t Know

Walmart opened its first two stores inside Washington, D.C., on Wednesday, a small one just four blocks from Union Station, and a larger one just east of Rock Creek Park. (A third store is under construction, three more are pushing through the planning process.)

On opening day, #5968 even had a table set up inside where you could sign up for Obamacare, in Spanish: ‘¡Inscríbase hoy!’

Both stores stirred up tumult and opposition in the run-up to Wednesday’s ribbon cuttings. A lot of that had to do with the fact that they’re in urban neighborhoods, as opposed to the cow pastures and outskirts spaces where the big box retailer usually develops.

The D.C. City Council passed a law in July that would have required Walmart and other big-box retailers to pay a $12.50-an-hour minimum wage, 50% more than D.C.’s current $8.25-an-hour minimum. Walmart said it wouldn’t open if it were forced to pay D.C. employees $12.50 an hour. And D.C. Mayor Vincent Gray vetoed the bill. A Walmart spokesman told the Washingtonian it intends to offer starting wages “at least $1 per hour higher than what is offered currently at Safeway and Giant.” The average hourly wage pay for a cashier in D.C. is $11.28 and $13.86 for a retail salesperson, according to the Bureau of Labor Statistics. Gray turned out to cut the ribbon on the bigger Walmart on Wednesday. It’s Walmart #5968, at the corner of Missouri Avenue and Georgia Avenue NW–that was where I went shopping Wednesday morning. It had only been open three hours when I wheeled my shopping cart in.

As always with characters at the center of controversies, it’s revealing to meet the main player–in this case, the store itself–firsthand. Even after you’ve been in hundreds of Walmarts, #5968 proved Walmart, the company, is constantly adapting.

1. The big box doesn’t have to look like a big box.

You can spot the stereotypical Walmart off of the interstate from two miles out, at 70 mph: The battleship gray sides, the band of red ringing the exterior walls, the vast landing-pad of parking, the towering sign.

The amazing thing about #5968 is that I’ve driven by it at least a dozen times in the last two months and I had no idea it was there.

It’s chocolate brown; not a hint of Supercenter-gray. The front is a series of urban-style brick arches, capped by a two-story smoked-glass atrium. The parking is underground. The loading dock is tucked in back. There is no sign-on-a-stick. For the grand opening, a single yellow balloon floated above the store.

I drove into the underground parking garage and entered the store from below. Parking is free (a lot of stores in D.C., including an urban Target two miles south, charge for parking), and there are 344 spaces. Even on opening day, there were spots open.

You rise on escalators into a wide vestibule along the front of the store, a nice, weatherproof place to collect your belongings and purchases before stepping out onto the street. The actual entrance to the store has brick arches that mirror those out front.

But the feature that stopped me in my tracks as I stepped into the store was something I’ve never seen in any Walmart before: Windows.

Standing on the threshold, you can see a row of 30 windows that run the length of the north wall, along the top. You can see outside–the weather, the time of day–from almost anywhere in the store, except where the shelves are so high they block your view.

Like most modern Walmarts, the new D.C. store is sky-lit–the natural light is much more appealing than fluorescent, and it reduces Walmart’s electric bill. Most of the skylights are utilitarian squares in the roof, but #5968 also has a steepled roof over the grocery section, and the sloped sides are also transparent. It’s like standing beneath the roof of a greenhouse.

Just in terms of appearance, the new D.C. store is a reminder that Walmart is capable of appealing design that fits the existing landscape–when it has to or wants to. Just as the skylights have become standard, even outside the U.S., Walmart should never build a Supercenter again without … windows.

2. The big box doesn’t have to be so big.

This new Walmart has a full grocery section, where the prices are good but hardly arresting–California raspberries for $1.98, Colombian bananas for 47 cents a pound. It has electronics, health and beauty, a big toy department, housewares, automotive. On opening day, #5968 even had a table set up inside where you could sign up for Obamacare, in Spanish: “¡Inscríbase hoy!”

In fact, #5968 has the hectic, over-filled air of a full-scale Supercenter, including the classic cognitive dissonance of having the apparel section positioned across the aisle from groceries.

I’m sorry, were we buying panties or pickles?