DMC Surgery Hospital in Madison Heights to convert ER into urgent care center

The DMC Surgery Hospital in Madison Heights plans to convert its existing emergency department into an urgent care center on July 1 because emergency case volume didn't meet expectations, said Conrad Mallett Jr., chief administrative officer with Detroit Medical Center.

DMC opened the surgery hospital — formerly known as Michigan Orthopaedic Specialty Hospital — in 2003 with a full-service emergency department. Administrators believed there would be high patient demand for emergency services in the highly populated southeastern Oakland County market.

"The bottom line is the traffic coming in did not meet the needs of people," Mallett said. "The people continued to use (the ER) of Beaumont Hospital in Royal Oak and Beaumont Hospital in Troy. They did not embrace it."

Mallett said DMC will save substantial expenses by not having to staff the ER with specialized physicians and nurses. The declined to specify the savings amount.

Andrei Soran, CEO of DMC Surgery Hospital, said an urgent care center will better meet patient demands.

“Urgent care services also make more sense with the changes we are seeing in the market place, effects we are seeing from the Affordable Care Act, as well as the shift toward an increase in the use of primary care and preventative medicine,” Soran said in a statement.

Soran said traditional ER services also can be found at other hospitals owned by the Detroit Medical Center.

The closest DMC emergency department to DMC Surgery Hospital, 30671 Stephenson Highway, is located 11 miles away at DMC Sinai Grace Hospital at 6071 W. Outer Drive. Two other DMC hospitals are located 12 miles and 30 miles away at DMC Receiving Hospital in Detroit and DMC Huron Valley-Sinai Hospital in Commerce Township, respectively.

The closest hospital to DMC Surgery with a full-service emergency department is six miles away at Beaumont Hospital in Royal Oak.

DMC is a for-profit hospital owned by Tenet Healthcare Corp. In its original 2012 sale to Vanguard Health Systems, DMC promised not to terminate core services from any of its acute-care hospitals.

However, Mallett said emergency services at DMC Surgery does not meet the definition of "core" services because the hospital is licensed as an ambulatory surgery center under DMC Huron Valley-Sinai.

"There is sufficient traffic (to support) an urgent care center" at DMC Surgery, Mallett said. "It is what the community needs."