Revenue from sales at Chattanooga Goodwill Industries has increased over the last year, but the nonprofit is still struggling and leaders have had to make cuts to close the budgetary shortfall.

"We've had to reduce some staff, but as sales do better and as we get some increased charitable giving, we want to hopefully continue to expand and help more people," Kevin Beirne, director of development for Chattanooga Goodwill Industries, said. "It's just going to take a little bit of time to recover."

Until recently, Chattanooga Goodwill has been able to self-fund the majority of costs for its programs and services, which serve more than 10,000 people in a 23-county area, he also said.

The nonprofit employs more than 500 people throughout its service area.

In addition to employing people with disabilities and other disadvantages, the organization has a variety of programs to help the community. For example, Goodwill does minor repairs on and sanitizes donated medical supplies, then gives them to people who can't afford them.

"We certainly depend on the donations, but then we have personnel costs involved in that," Beirne said.

This year, that program cost about $187,000, he said. And only about $11,000 of that is covered by cash donations, he said. The rest is self-funded. That's just an example of the costs the organization is covering, he said.

Beirne came on in October and said it's only been since then that the organization is making more of an effort to find other funding streams, such as corporate partnerships or requests from area foundations.

The budgetary shortfall is largely because of increased expenses for benefits and business regulations and decreased workforce development funds from the State of Tennessee’s Department of Rehabilitation, he said.

For example, the Affordable Care Act requirement of offering health care to employees not previously insured has been a big budget strain, adding about $300,000 to the organization's costs, he said.

There's also a liability shift involving credit card processing that is impacting Goodwill. The United States is transitioning to a new credit card infrastructure. Many banks are issuing new credit cards with chips in them to help protect from fraud. And that means that retailers have to update their point-of-sales systems to work with the new cards.

It isn't required that retailers update their systems, but if they don't and there is a fraudulent transaction, the retailer must accept the liability.

For Goodwill, this means replacing about 46 point-of-sales stations, which is a large added cost.

Another cost that could be avoided involves taking off trash that people donate. Workers remove more than 100,000 pounds of trash from 35 donation sites each month.

"This requires a huge expense of manpower, transportation and fuel that robs from what we could use to provide our program services," Beirne said.

People should donate items they would want to buy themselves, he said. And donations can help leaders close the budget gap, he said.

In an effort to close the gap, leaders have discontinued the YouthAdvantage career mentorship program, modified the Health Equipment Links Program—which provides medical supplies—and made staff reductions. In 2014, HELP provided 6,126 people with supplies, and leaders hope that they can eventually fully restore and grow that service.

Recent staff reductions have impacted two full-time directors and several other positions in retail and support services divisions.

Officials said in a statement: