The White House says the president doesn’t want to see Sebelius go. Why Sebelius is safe

Kathleen Sebelius may be irreplaceable — in that she cannot be replaced.

Not because President Barack Obama wouldn’t be able to find someone else to do the job, or that anyone’s too pleased with the launch of the Obamacare website. But the White House and Democrats on the Hill know a potential confirmation fight would be so torturous and difficult that they’re better off sticking with the Health and Human Services secretary they’ve got, despite all that’s gone wrong on her watch.

Story Continued Below

Rep. Paul Ryan (R-Wis.) on Tuesday afternoon became the highest-ranking lawmaker to call for Sebelius’s resignation — part of a movement that picked up steam after she declined to appear at a scheduled House hearing Thursday, though she has committed to one next week. But even before the shutdown and debt ceiling standoff ended, the Republican National Committee launched its “Fire Sebelius” campaign, trying to use holding her responsible for the problem-plagued rollout as a way of redirecting the conversation back to doubts about the Affordable Care Act.

( PHOTOS: HealthCare.gov: 10 Sebelius quotes)

Those politics are exactly why Obama likely couldn’t and wouldn’t get rid of Sebelius, even if he wanted to: Democrats know the people opposed to the law would never let another person who backed the law through unscathed and would instead use the confirmation hearings to relitigate the Affordable Care Act — to subpoena reams of information, chase headline-grabbing leads and, overall, do whatever they could to delay or derail it.

Sebelius was originally picked for the job less because she was viewed as a visionary than as a competent manager who would be able to oversee the complex process with minimal hitches. Even so, the White House says the president doesn’t want her to go now, that he continues to have full confidence in her — and that despite the disappointments and the palpable fury in the West Wing, they’re working with her to set things right. In fact, administration officials cite the success she’s had at implementing other parts of the law besides the website as reasons to keep supporting her.

( Understanding Obamacare: POLITICO's guide to the Affordable Care Act)

Asked Tuesday on CNN if she’d talked with Obama about resigning, Sebelius said, “What I talked about is doing the job that I came here to do. … I think my job is to get this fully implemented and to get the website working right. And that’s what I’m focused on.”

The feeling inside the West Wing is that the new focus on Sebelius is transparent, just another angle of attack from the same people who’ve been behind every other effort to resist the law.

“No one that the administration could pick to replace her could ever be confirmed — not even the Lord himself,” said Jim Manley, a former top aide to Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid (D-Nev.). “The animus is such that they would find something to criticize Him over.”

( QUIZ: How well do you know Kathleen Sebelius?)

And not just among Republicans — the thinking in some quarters is that, despite Democratic control of the Senate, vulnerable Democrats might benefit from getting to cast a vote against Obamacare by voting against any nominee. Avoiding that vote, people familiar with the situation say, is part of why there has been eagerness to see her stay in place for a second term, despite whatever problems or desire for change existed.

Rep. John Fleming (R-La.) said the opportunity to reopen the case against Obamacare is indeed one of the main things driving him to call openly for Sebelius’s ouster, an effort he calls part of the same spectrum that led him and other Republicans to shut down the government on Oct. 1.

“I think that would be a healthy thing, for her to resign and we then begin the hearings,” Fleming said.

( WATCH: Sebelius gets the “Daily Show” treatment)

“Sebelius needs to be held responsible, but at the end of the day this is Obama’s health care law,” said RNC chairman Reince Priebus. “Any movement beyond Secretary Sebelius would need to include a full review of Obamacare and the hundreds of millions of taxpayer dollars that have been wasted due to Obama’s ineptitude.”

Republicans have struggled with the logic that has them opposing Obamacare but also blasting someone because they’ve implemented Obamacare badly. But Fleming shrugged off the apparent contradiction, saying he could envision the right kind of successor getting confirmed.

“I think that if somebody came, even though they believed in it, but actually showed a track record of competency — maybe someone who comes from the insurance industry, not just somebody who was a political person who interacted with the insurance” — then that person could be confirmed, Fleming said. “It’s not whether they support Obamacare or not, it’s whether they can competently execute it.”

Fleming is in a safe district. But Democrats eagerly point out that Sen. Pat Roberts (R-Kan.) announced his own call for Sebelius’s resignation the day after his primary challenger announced.

(WATCH: 10 things Obama wants you to know about healthcare law)

And Republican Virginia gubernatorial candidate Ken Cuccinelli kicked off his week by saying that getting rid of Sebelius was the only way Obama could prove he’s “serious about cleaning up the mess he created.” On a Cuccinelli conference call Tuesday evening, Ryan said he agreed with the attorney general.

“If you’re charged with bringing in one of the biggest laws we’ve had in a generation, effectively taking over 18 percent of our economy, you claim that it’s going to be on time, you’re given warnings that it isn’t, but then you do it anyway,” Ryan said. “I think some people should be held responsible.”