Anticoagulation tops the news:

The FDA approved Daiichi Sankyo's NOAC (new oral anticoagulant) entry: Savaysa (edoxaban tablets), and Reuters reports that there is more good news for the injectable cholesterol-lowering drug alirocumab, which demonstrated efficacy even when administered once a month instead of the usual biweekly dosing schedule. That drug had already wowed the crowds at the European Society of Cardiology and American Heart Association.

But the really big story comes from Portola, which says that its NOAC antidote does -- in fact -- reverse the effect of J & J's Xarelto (rivaroxaban).

An outbreak of listeriosis linked to tainted caramel apples continues to increase and has caused at least three deaths and possibly as many as five, according to the Food and Drug Administration. The toll has grown to include 32 people in 11 states, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Thus far, government health investigators have implicated three brands of caramel apples: Happy Apple, Carnival, and Merb's Candies.

The House has passed a bill to require that the Affordable Care Act's employer mandate apply to employees working at least 40 hours a week rather than 30 hours.

The growth of for-profit EMS airlift services, and some fatal accidents, have some concerned about safety, the Bend Bulletin reports. There are few state or federal regulations covering such services.

CDC and state health investigators are still pretty much clueless as to the causes of acute flaccid paralysis in 88 children and adolescents last year, according to a report in MMWR.

Also in MMWR, a summary of occupational HIV infections in healthcare worker since 1985 showed a total of 58 cases in all, but only one since 1999 -- a lab tech with an accidental needlestick in 2008 while working with a live viral culture.

A Connecticut teenager will continue to receive chemotherapy for Hodgkin's lymphoma against her wishes after the state's supreme court ruled that the 17-year-old girl lacks the maturity to make decisions about about her care.

Russia has expanded its intolerance of alternative sexual lifestyles, deeming transgender, transvestite, and people with other "sexual disorders" ineligible to obtain a driver's license.

Morning Break is a daily guide to what's new and interesting on the Web for healthcare professionals, powered by the MedPage Today community. Got a tip? Send it to us: MPT_editorial@everydayhealthinc.com.