WASHINGTON -- Congress got back to work this week, with the House passing a bill dealing with the Affordable Care Act's employer mandate. Also, an FDA advisory committee recommended approval of a biosimilar drug for Neupogen.

House Passes Mandate Bill

By a vote of 252-172, the House passed a measure Thursday largely along party lines that would make the Affordable Care Act's employer mandate apply to employees working at least 40 hours a week, instead of the current 30 hours. Businesses employing 50 or more workers must offer health insurance coverage to all employees affected by the mandate or face financial penalties.

House Speaker John Boehner (R-Ohio) said in a statement that the measure would prevent employers from cutting full-time workers' hours in order to not have them covered by the mandate.

"When middle-class Americans can't work a full, 40-hour work week because of the president's healthcare law, they can't provide for their families, pay their bills, or get ahead in a tight economy," he said. "[This] bill will help the thousands of Americans who either have, or are at risk of having their wages and hours cut by repealing the 30-hour rule in Obamacare -- a rule that hurts low-income workers and women the most."

But Democrats say the measure will mainly serve to increase the deficit and deny health coverage to more people. "Rather than attempting once again to repeal or undermine the Affordable Care Act, which the House has tried to do over 50 times, it is time for the Congress to stop fighting old political battles and join the President in forwarding an agenda focused on providing greater economic opportunity and security for middle class families and all those working to be a part of the middle class," the White House said in a statement.

FDA Advisory Committee Endorses Neupogen Biosimilar

An FDA advisory panel's endorsement of a copycat biologic meant to boost white blood cell counts could clear a path for future biosimilars.

Persuaded by extensive data from sponsors and the FDA's own analysis, the Oncologic Drugs Advisory Committee (ODAC) unanimously recommended approving EP2006, a proposed biosimilar to Neupogen (filgrastim), on Wednesday.

The pioneering EP2006, a recombinant granulocyte colony-stimulating factor currently sold as Neupogen (Amgen), is used to increase white blood cell counts after treatments that lead to neutropenia. It is the first drug to be reviewed under a new pathway established under the Biologics Price Competition and Innovation Act of 2009.

CMS to Lower Pay Rate, Seek 14-Day Hold on Claims

The Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) will ask its claims processors to hold physician payment claims for the first 2 weeks in January while it implements a slight decrease in the Medicare pay rate, agency officials said Wednesday.

"In order to implement technical corrections ... and process claims correctly, CMS is going to ask [Medicare claims processors] to hold claims with dates of service ... from Thursday, Jan. 1, through Wednesday, Jan. 14, at maximum," Louisa Rink, director of CMS' division of practitioner claims processing in the agency's Provider Billing Group, in Baltimore, said during an "Open Door" conference call with providers.

Rink added that the hold "should have minimal impact on providers' cash flow as under current law, clean electronic claims are not paid sooner than 14 calendar days" anyway, and paper claims are not paid sooner than 29 days.

The technical corrections include setting a conversion factor that is "slightly lower" than the one in the final 2015 physician payment rule published in November; the new conversion factor is $35.7547, a decrease of $0.0466, Kathy Bryant, director of the division of practitioner services at CMS' Hospital and Ambulatory Policy Group, in Baltimore, said on the call.

Next Week

Things will be relatively quiet on Capitol Hill next week as Congress continues gearing up for the new session.

On Monday, the FDA's Endocrinologic and Metabolic Drugs Advisory Committee will meet to discuss the safety and efficacy of desmopressin (Nocdurna), for treatment of nocturia due to nocturnal polyuria in adults who awaken two or more times each night to void.

On Thursday and Friday, the Medicare Payment Advisory Commission (MedPAC) will meet to discuss, among other things, per-beneficiary payment for primary care and hospital short-stay payment policies.