Topics: autonomy, Censorship, China, GlobalPost, Hong Kong, Sage Communications, Social News, Media News, Life News, Politics News

This article originally appeared on GlobalPost

BANGKOK, Thailand — On paper at least, Hong Kong is a quasi-independent territory of China where people are free to dish dirt on the Communist Party — a privilege denied to 1.3 billion inhabitants of the mainland.

That vision of Hong Kong, however, is growing dimmer. If allegations are correct, it now appears that those who scrutinize Beijing’s political elite can get snatched off the streets of Hong Kong and dragged into China proper.

That is among Hong Kongers’ worst fears, and they are right to worry. In recent months, five people connected to a single publishing house — known for detailing misdeeds of Communist Party officials — have simply vanished.

The latest to disappear is 65-year-old Lee Bo. He is an editor with Sage Communications, which puts out salacious books, sometimes shakily sourced, that describe Communist Party scandals. His top transgression, it seems, was preparing the release of a book on the — alleged — secret love life of China’s President Xi Jinping.

Lee’s case is remarkable because he was on Hong Kong soil when he disappeared on Dec. 30.

His wife, whom he briefly called after being detained, has told reporters that he said Chinese operatives took him to a non-disclosed location. He called from a number with a mainland Chinese area code.

According to his wife, he told her he was asked to assist an investigation into the dissident publishing house. (Lee’s wife has since withdrawn her missing-person report after claiming to have received written assurances from her husband, a move that Amnesty International said “smacked of intimidation.”)

If true, this is a massive breach of Hong Kong’s autonomy.

Under a cherished set of “one country, two systems” laws, which offer limited independence to Hong Kong, Chinese police aren’t allowed to make arrests within its borders. If covert Chinese forces can freely abduct dissidents in Hong Kong, the territory’s prized free speech ideals are practically meaningless.

Three other Hong Kong residents connected to the publishing operation vanished while visiting the Chinese mainland in October. Another disappeared while on vacation in Thailand — a sign that the Communist Party is willing to pursue its targets even on foreign soil. (Thailand, ruled by a military junta, is increasingly cooperative in deporting traveling Chinese dissidents back into their government’s hands.)

Sage Communications belongs to a clique of independent publishers in Hong Kong that focus on “power struggles behind the scenes, love affairs and political gossip,” says Maya Wang, a researcher with Human Rights Watch.