In between ads for cheap student meal deals and advice from the Japanese embassy on securing a visa, Masaaki Imaeda advertised a handful of rooms online, perfect for students looking for something cheap, easy and peaceful in Sydney.

Photos of simple mattresses and campervan-style kitchens were accompanied with a $160-a-week price tag and promises of convenient locations, shared washing facilities and a quiet environment for those who want to study.

Mr Imaeda, a 64-year-old property mogul and entrepreneur, has since pulled his ads for a Bexley North apartment, a Bexley home and several caravans in Alexandria from cheers.com.au, a Japanese-language online hub for prospective students.

However, with little distinguishing his ads from the other offers of cheap rooms flooding the site, 15 Japanese and Korean nationals moved into his Alexandria shanty town. They were lucky to escape alive on Wednesday when a ferocious blaze broke out during the night, uncovering a shocking illegal housing set-up that student organisations have warned is disturbingly common in Sydney.

Advertisement

Those who lived in the rundown handful of shipping containers, graffiti-riddled buses and decrepit caravans stacked on top of each other were well-dressed students and workers with good English, said Vicki Bonneville, who rented a unit on the same site for her catering business.

They cooked food in an old bus and showered in an office at the front of the site, she said. They shared a single port-a-loo in the car park and a bin beside it over-flowed with food scraps.

One resident said he was cold and uncomfortable but paid $95 a week to live there because it was cheap and close to work. Most had organised the room before arriving in Sydney.

Mr Imaeda had wired electricity to the structures. Fire investigators revealed on Friday that the most likely cause of the blaze was an electrical fault in a storage unit on the site.

Fire crews were shocked to arrive at a routine factory fire at 1.40am to find 11 people crawling out from the smoke. Four more had to be rescued from shipping containers where they were cowering in fear.

The discovery prompted NSW Fire and Rescue Commissioner Greg Mullins to say he was ''outraged that there would be something like this in the heart of Sydney''.

However, Timothy Scriven, president of the Sydney University Postgraduate Representative Association, said that while it was the worst case he had seen, ''it's certainly not unprecedented''.

A study by the NSW Tenants Union this year examined about 220 online classified ads offering cheap accommodation. It found that more than a quarter were ''very likely'' to be illegal boarding houses.

''The fundamental problem is affordability in Sydney,'' Mr Scriven said. ''And the common thread that runs through these cases is a serious lack of education about tenancy rights.

''Universities are going to a lot of effort to attract foreign students but not a lot of effort to protect them from these sorts of things.''

There are reports of students living in cubicles built into a furniture shop on Parramatta Road, garages in western Sydney piled with mattresses and even a toilet at a Thai restaurant.

Despite this, not one local government is actively looking for unlicensed boarding houses, Digby Hughes from Homelessness NSW says.

Thomson Ch'ng, president of the Council of International Students Australia, said foreign students were often too embarrassed or scared to speak up.

''You look for accommodation and the photos seem to be very nice, but when we come to Australia the reality is different,'' he told a NSW inquiry into student accommodation.

''When we are having Skype conferencing with our family and our friends back in our home country, we would not want to show them the background where they have seven of our friends living in the one place. Our places back [home] are much more comfortable than this one and that does not make sense.''

The Alexandria occupants have been left to fend for themselves. Mr Imaeda has been served with a ban on returning to the site. He faces a maximum $1.1 million fine for breaching the Environmental Planning and Assessment Act.

with James Robertson