While Hillary Clinton continues to push her ideas of what healthcare looks like, one analyst thinks Americans ought to ask themselves a few questions.

As reported by NPR and other news outlets, Hillary Clinton has made the Affordable Care Act the center of her health plan. In fact, during a recent debate in Milwaukee, Clinton said that she is a "staunch supporter of President Obama's principal accomplishment, namely the Affordable Care Act."

Hadley Heath Manning of Independent Women's Voice (IWV) agrees that Clinton's plan is similar to ObamaCare.

"It's essentially reliant on price controls and government regulations to try to co-opt various parts of the healthcare system," the analyst explains. "She would extend some regulations into the pharmaceutical industry, for example, in hopes of making care and drugs more affordable for Americans."

Americans should be asking, however, how that approach has worked under ObamaCare and whether they want to continue with that approach, says Manning.

In fact, Manning doubts that is the wisest political path for Clinton to take, since 52 percent of Americans disapprove of the healthcare law.

Manning

In addition to regulations involving the pharmaceutical industry, Clinton wants to create a tax credit for people using more than five percent of their income for out-of-pocket expenses. The former first lady-turned-senator and secretary of state also wants to make it harder for health insurance companies to merge.

OneNewsNow reported this week that ObamaCare is ripe for rampant fraud adding up to billions of dollars, and the program has been hit in recent months with so-called co-ops shutting their doors.

The CEO of health insurer Aetna reported earlier this month the company has "serious concerns" about the sustainability of ObamaCare, in particular the so-called exchanges due to the number of sicker and more costly enrollees. That announcement comes after United Healthcare, the largest health insurer in the United States, announced last November it may drop out due to losses.

On the other hand, Democratic presidential candidate Bernie Sanders is pushing a Medicare for All plan, one that does away with the private-public system that is ObamaCare and replaces it with a program that essentially gives everyone the same insurance and the government picks up the tab.

"Some people argue that single-payer would reduce administrative costs and would provide more equality in terms of what kind of insurance everyone has. But then there are other downsides to single-payer," Manning warns. "For example, with more government payment comes more government control."

"And when we look at single-payer in other countries, we see that the inevitable result is either explicit or implicit rationing of healthcare services, and that would be the inevitable result here as well," the IWV analyst concludes.