William N. “Bill” Haraway, a longtime insurance and financial services professional and active member of agent associations in Maryland, passed away on Jan. 31, 2014.

He was 71 and surrounded by family in his Frederick, Md., home at the time of his death.

Born in Denver, Colo., on Aug. 18, 1942, Haraway was graduated from Georgetown University and began his career with Mutual of New York, later being one of five original partners of Capital Financial Group in 1981. Capital Financial formed a broker-dealer that later became H. Beck. He later co-founded Benicor Associates and Consumer Dental Care. He established Haraway Financial Services in 2004, and was principal of Allied Financial Strategies.

Haraway was an avid supporter of numerous insurance agent associations in Maryland, where he held leadership positions and received some of the organizations’ highest honors.

In addition to the Maryland and Greater Washington chapters of the National Association of Insurance and Financial Advisors (NAIFA), Haraway also participated in programs and events affiliated with state and local chapters of the National Association of Health Underwriters (NAHU).

Major industry awards included The Meyer Award, The Paul Murphy Award, Hall of Fame induction, and the NAIFA-GW Bernard L. Wilner Award.

Haraway was a Chartered Life Underwriter and Chartered Financial Consultant.

His wife, Laura DeLauder Haraway, is owner of DeLauder Insurance Agency in Frederick. A son, Mark Haraway, is vice president of DentaQuest and past president of NAHU’s Maryland chapter. The three were active simultaneously in numerous industry programs.

Haraway is also survived by a son and a daughter who live in North Carolina with their respective families (Kevin Haraway and Debra Haraway), several step-children, a sister and a brother, and several grandchildren.

The family will receive friends at Stauffer Funeral Home, 1621 Opossumtown Pike, Frederick, Md., on Wednesday, Feb 5 from 2-3 p.m. with a service celebrating Haraway’s life at 3 pm.

In lieu of flowers, donations may be made to the William N. Haraway Life Opportunities Fund, P.O. Box 518, Frederick, Md., 21705.

Click for an expanded obituary and link to Stauffer Funeral Home.