Republican apparatchiks fear that, if they manage to deny him the GOP presidential nomination at their convention this summer, Trump will run as a third-party candidate. Little do they realize, he already is.

WASHINGTON, February 27, 2016 – Exit polls in South Carolina and Nevada show that the iconoclast real estate billionaire and Republican candidate for president, Donald J. Trump, appeals to Americans across income groups, no matter their level of education or race – even among Nevada’s Hispanic voters, where he took over 45% of that vote.

In a surprise move on Friday, New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie, who abandoned his presidential bid after a lackluster showing in New Hampshire’s primary, stood by Trump at a press conference in Fort Worth, Texas, describing him as the “best person to beat Hillary Clinton.”

Ben Carson and Donald Trump reflect America’s anger

Long-time Republican political strategist Russ Schriefer wrote in Time Magazine:

“The establishment talking point before Saturday was that Trump was winning only among lower-educated, blue-collar, disaffected voters… What the Internet did to newspapers, what Uber did to taxis… Donald Trump did to American politics… A former president, a sitting governor, a senator, even a former beloved first lady all endorsed candidates with little or no impact on the race.”

But the best analysis of the current state of American politics appeared in the Wall Street Journal’s editorial page (here). Columnist and former Republican presidential speech-writer Peggy Noonan says Trump’s ascendancy represents the “rise of the unprotected,” by which she means Americans “with limited resources and negligible access to power,” who have “suffered from illegal immigration – its impact on labor markets, financial costs, crime, the sense that the rule of law” is collapsing.

But who are the “protected”?

“They are figures in government, politics and media. They live in nice neighborhoods, safe ones. Their families function, their kids go to good schools, they’ve got some money. All of these things tend to isolate them, or provide buffers,” writes Noonan.

These are the people that have been telling us since 2009 that America is out of recession. The same folks that say the financial burden on employers to comply with Obamacare, which has reduced many Americans to part-time status, is a blessing that relieves us from the affliction of “job lock.”

In his final State of the Union Address as president, Obama asked,

“Will we respond to the changes of our time with fear, turning inward as a nation, and turning against each other as a people? Or will we face the future with confidence in who we are, what we stand for and the incredible things we can do together?”

Love him or hate him, Trump is brilliant

Americans aren’t turning against each other or what we as Americans stand for. We are distancing ourselves from the nation’s ruling elite, standing ready to dismantle a sham two-party system whose leaders are more interested in serving each other’s interest than that of their long-suffering constituents.

Republican voters get to stick it to their GOP elites in the primaries, joining Chris Christie in standing by Trump.

Blue-collar Democrats will do the same in the general election this November.

Republican apparatchiks fear that, if they manage to deny him the GOP presidential nomination at their convention this summer, Trump will run as a third-party candidate.

They fail to realize that Donald Trump, while a Republican, is already doing just that.