Lee Stadele and Sam Knight vying for position that pays $5,500 a year

Democratic candidates for county surveyor Lee Stadele, 56, Nederland: flagstaffsurveying.com Sam Knight, 38, Boulder: greenmountainsurveying.com

In the race for Boulder County surveyor, it's all over but the shrugging.

Boulder County Democrats have now received their mail-in ballots for the June 24 primary. They may be struck by the paltry number of contested county races — two.

And, while they perhaps have heard a bit about the race for Boulder County coroner, they'd be forgiven for looking at the two names vying for Boulder County surveyor, Lee Stadele and Sam Knight, and asking: Who are these guys?

Sam Knight is a Democratic candidate for Boulder County surveyor. (Courtesy photo/Sam Knight)

And, while we're at it, what's a county surveyor?

As described on the website of the term-limited incumbent, Jason Emery, the surveyor's duties include land surveying, consulting on boundary disputes, advising county departments and maintaining survey plat records. The two Democratic contenders, Stadele and Knight, are both professionally licensed land surveyors with their own Boulder-based surveying businesses. Both are married fathers of three.

Perhaps surprisingly, given that they are locked in one of the preciously few political battles in the county, they appear to like each other. A lot.

"I don't feel like the race between Lee and I was contentious," said Knight, a 38-year-old Boulder resident. "I don't feel like we tried to undercut each other at all. I was really proud that I got to run against somebody like Lee, who is a really good surveyor. ... He and I both, I think, recognize that each one of us has a lot to offer to this industry."

Stadele, 56, of Nederland, out-polled Knight at the county assembly 225-162 and has been endorsed by Emery. He calls his opponent "a younger version of me."

Lee Stadele is a Democratic candidate for Boulder County surveyor

"There's no way the county can lose, really, because Sam and I, I think either one of us is going to be decent at this. If there is any difference between the two of us, it's just that I have been doing it a lot longer," Stadele said.

Because county Republicans are not fielding a candidate, the winner of the Democratic primary is assured of succeeding Emery.

Both campaigns have spent under $1,000

Stadele points out that the firm he co-owns, founded in 1992, has 450 to 475 filed survey plots to its credit on public record, and that Knight's firm, Green Mountain Surveying, established in 2000, has only "about 45."

However, just when it seemed some real trash-talking could be in the offing, Stadele quickly added, "Statistics don't really tell the whole truth. I think we're both qualified. I think we'd both do a good job. It's a just the personal preference of the voters."

Knight turns the old-guard, new-guard card on its head, somewhat. He used the fact that the incumbent and his predecessor, Bill Stengel, both endorsed his opponent to make the point that his campaign is supported by people who "asked me to come out (and campaign) because they wanted to see a viable option. They didn't want to see it handed to somebody."

And that, really, is about as contentious as it gets. Neither candidate has gone broke in gunning for an office which is considered a part-time job and pays all of $5,500 a year.

Stadele's most recent campaign finance report shows he spent $854.31 through May 29. Knight, who has not filed the financial report that was due June 3, according to the Colorado Secretary of State website, said he is shelling out at about the same level.

"I told myself I would personally commit between one and two thousand dollars, but I'm not even halfway there," Knight said.

The rough and tumble of a political brawl is clearly not either man's cup of tea.

"I am not a politician," Knight said. "I am a surveyor first. That's almost all I think about. Unfortunately, I used to get to hike and climb and ride."

Stadele is happy to have the support of the current and previous county surveyor, and he's proud that they both urged him to run.

"I think that's kind of good," Stadele said. "When you've got other people who are pushing you to do something because they think you'd be good at it, it's not like you're feeding your ego to do it. It's because you've got peers who are wanting you to do it.

"I'm not sure how Sam got interested in it, but I hope that by the end of the campaign, it brings us closer together, as opposed to pulling us apart. Because I think he's one of the good guys, in terms of surveying."

Contact Camera Staff Writer Charlie Brennan at 303-473-1327 or brennanc@dailycamera.com.