Please enable Javascript to watch this video

FAYETTEVILLE (KFSM)- Many stores are opening their doors earlier and staying open later to allow shoppers more time to scratch people off their Christmas lists.

According to the National Retail Federation, a little more than half of consumers (52.9%) wrapped up their Christmas shopping by Dec. 10.

However, hundreds of shoppers were seen doing their last-minute Christmas shopping at the Northwest Arkansas Mall Sunday (Dec. 21). Resident Nathan Cox was one of those people.

"We have not bought any gifts yet so we're starting fresh, on Sunday, four days before Christmas," Cox said.

Cox had his son, daughter and wife with him at the mall. He said they walked through and did some window shopping, then split up to make the purchases.

"I think I got what we need to get, I'm going to send them to the car and dash through these stores and get everything they said they wanted," Cox said.

Betty Cook and her husband Bob, of Siloam Springs, were also shopping at the Northwest Arkansas Mall. Betty said they usually don't wait this long to be done with their Christmas shopping.

"This is the first year because our two daughters and my daughter-in-law did our Christmas shopping for their children because they know their sizes," Betty said. "So we are just buying extra little things that make Christmas fun.”

Some shoppers said there may be an advantage to last minute Christmas shopping. Several stores were seen having 40-50% sales on their entire stores.

College junior Melanie Ward said she took advantage of the sales Sunday. She said she still had a few family members left to buy for.

"I was mostly looking for my siblings and some stocking stuffers for my parents," Ward said.

Listed below are extended hours for several local malls.

Northwest Arkansas Mall Holiday Hours

Sunday Dec. 21: 11 a.m. -9 p.m.

Monday Dec. 22: 9 a.m. -10 p.m.

Tuesday Dec. 23: 9 a.m. -10 p.m.

Wednesday Dec. 24: 8 a.m. -6 p.m

Promenade Mall in Rogers Holiday Hours

Sunday Dec. 21: 11 a.m. -9 p.m.

Monday Dec. 22: 8 a.m. -10 p.m.

Tuesday Dec. 23: 8 a.m. -10 p.m.

Wednesday Dec. 24: 8 a.m. -6 p.m

Central Mall in Fort Smith Holiday Hours

Sunday Dec. 21: 11 a.m. -9 p.m.