HOLYOKE -- The road to establishing "dental homes" begins with 13 chairs.

Holyoke Health Center at 230 Maple St. held a grand opening Sept. 20 of its Pediatric Dental Wing, which features 13 dental chairs for children in the renovated fourth floor.

The goal is to get families patterned into children receiving dental care at an early age by forming "dental homes" of regular visits to the dentist, said Jay A. Breines, Health Center executive director.

Clients from around the region use the center, but Holyoke's low-income population is the target, he said.

"Primarily, we take care of Holyoke," Breines said.

The renovation on the fourth floor was paid for with a federal Affordable Care Act grant of nearly $2 million, he said.

The thinking is that establishing dental care early for a child will save money on health problems later and reduce school absenteeism, he said.

The center's staff of more than 300 includes more than 30 licensed dental-care professionals. The drive to provide dental care to children includes the center working with Boston, Tufts and Harvard universities, whose fourth-year dental students train at the center caring for children's teeth, according to Breines and a center press release.

"So the dentists in the program have come to us right from dental school. In the community, there is an extreme shortage of dentists for children of all ages," Breines said.

The U.S. has a shortage of dentists, according to the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.

"A rapidly aging generation of dentists is not being replaced quickly enough by new graduates to avoid sharp declines in the nation’s oral health workforce over the next five years," the department said on its website.

The shortage of dentists is acute among poor people, with only about 20 percent of the nation’s 179,000 dentists accepting Medicaid, the federal health program for low-income people, the department said on its website. Breines said the Holyoke Health Center accepts Medicaid.

The Holyoke Health Center has a yearly budget of about $32 million, the majority of which comes from fees paid by patients or their insurers, and the rest from grants, he said.

The center began in 1972, moved to its current site in 2001 and is organized with the state as a nonprofit corporation.

The center sees 16,000 patients a year seeking medical and dental care, according to its website.