SIGN UP FOR OUR NEWSLETTER

Nicolle Wallace admitted she was a Republican on her first day on The View Monday. She didn’t need to make that declaration.

A host of media outlets rushed to tell us just that, even if they forgot to label everyone else on the syndicated talk show. The following outlets either directly labeled Wallace as a Republican, neglected to call out any of the fellow View co-hosts for their progressive views or did both.

SIGN UP FOR OUR NEWSLETTER

Variety. The Hollywood Reporter. The LA Times. TheWrap.com.

It’s more of the same when it comes to how the media handles politics–and political labels. Liberals are treated as mainstream, while GOP-friendly folks are identified immediately. Even in the case of The View, Wallace’s Republican bona fides couldn’t be sketchier.

Wallace admitted she didn’t vote for the McCain/Palin ticket in 2008, and her vantage point can be seen clearly in HBO’s Game Change, one of the most cartoonish political hit pieces from the modern era. She also has railed against Tea Party, the grassroots movement doing all it can to roll back ObamaCare and shrink the federal government.

The revamped View debuted Monday, now hosted by liberals Whoopi Goldberg, Rosie Perez and Rosie O’Donnell along with Wallace. O’Donnell, who is a 9/11 truther, is back after her first, tumultuous time on the program where she regularly sparred with conservative Elisabeth Hasselbeck.

The Survivor alum gave as good as she got, which led to the kind of on-air fights that made The View into a three-ring circus. Now, with a Republican on the panel willing to smite Sarah Palin and speak glowingly of Bill Clinton one would think ideological labels wouldn’t be the order of the day.

Think again.

Wallace unwisely kicked things off by “announcing” she was a Republican Monday. Did the rest of the panelists identify their political leanings? How about new show producer Bill Wolff, fresh from his work on The Rachel Maddow Show on MSBNC?

Wallace, like many Republicans eager to curry favor with mainstream press outlets and liberals alike, did her best to ingratiate herself with her new co-hosts. She trashed Palin again to the panel’s delight. Expect more of the same, and more media outlets refusing to affix certain labels where they belong.