Rockies starting pitcher Juan Nicasio could never get a grip on his job this season, eventually getting optioned to Triple-A Colorado Springs. But, on Thursday, Nicasio was recalled by Colorado, this time as a reliever.

“I think just knowing Juan and looking at the situation from my perspective, he strikes you as more of a guy who can sprint with a big arm and go after hitters,” manager Walt Weiss said. “And do that anywhere between an inning and three innings.”

To open up room on the roster for Nicasio, the Rockies optioned right-handed pitcher Brooks Brown to Triple-A.

Nicasio, 27, made his first big-league relief appearance Thursday in the seventh inning, coming in with the Rockies down 4-2 to the Chicago Cubs. He pitched two innings, struck out two and showed off a powerful fastball. He also made a big mistake.

Cubs rookie Javier Baez hit a slider off Nicasio into the right-field bullpen on an 0-1 pitch.

“He gave up the home run but I like the way he was throwing the ball,” Weiss said. “He looked to me like his velocity was up, he looked comfortable sprinting. He threw a slider down and away, it was just a nice piece of hitting by Baez.”

The Rockies have been working for years to make Nicasio a starter. Since debuting in 2011, Nicasio started 69 games and went 20-21 with a 5.12 ERA. He began this season in the Rockies’ rotation, making 14 starts. He went 5-5 with a 5.92 ERA before being demoted June 16. After several spotty performances — he allowed 25 runs over 15 2/3 innings in four games in May and June — the Rockies sent him down and after four rocky starts in Triple-A moved him to the bullpen.

He went 3-2 with a save and a 4.54 ERA in six relief appearances. So far, Nicasio said the transition to the bullpen has been good.

“Yeah, I liked being a starter, but you can’t control that,” he said. “If they think I would be better in the bullpen, I will work hard there.”

Weiss believes Nicasio can find a niche in the bullpen, but knows most pitchers would rather be starters.

“Sometimes it takes a while for a pitcher to get there mentally,” Weiss said. “There’s a lot more glory in starting than pitching out of the bullpen. I mean most of them in a perfect world would be starters, but ultimately it gets down to what’s your best chance of success in the club to win games.”

Alexandria Valdez: 303-954-1297, anvaldez@denverpost.com