The National Rifle Association’s Institute for Legislative Action is using one of President Obama’s recent “clowning around” videos to make a point: Schools should stick to education and stop with the politically-correct gun malarky.

The NRA isn’t talking about real guns, mind you, but rather finger guns, Pop-Tart guns, drawings of guns or guns depicted on T-shirts.

The NRA began by stating just how silly such school rules are:

Attention overbearing public school administrators: you might want to remove any portraits of the 44th U.S. president hanging on your walls. In a recent Affordable Care Act promotional video produced for the website Buzzfeed, President Barack Obama uses his index finger and thumb to form a finger gun and aim it at the viewer. Apparently, the commander-in-chief has not been briefed on the supposedly anti-social, threatening, and disruptive nature of this gesture, so we are here to help.

Then the nation’s oldest and most prominent gun rights organization described the president’s actions.

The video, entitled, “Things Everybody Does But Doesn’t Talk About,” features Obama engaging in various silly activities aimed at portraying him as a regular person, in order to promote his healthcare program. At the beginning of the video, the president is positioned in front of a mirror. After some prolonged mugging, he dons a pair of sunglasses and wields a finger gun at the camera, as if showing off his best secret agent impression.

But, that same innocent act of clowning around has gotten many a grade-schooler in hot water. The NRA lists numerous examples before citing this most egregious case — one where “clowning around” wasn’t even a factor.

Perhaps most appalling, in 2012, the parents of a 3-year-old deaf preschooler named Hunter Spanjer were told by school officials in Grand Island, Neb., that Hunter’s sign language name was inappropriate for school. Hunter signs his name by extending and crossing his index and middle fingers, which produces an appearance akin to that of a finger gun. The school system eventually backed down after media coverage of the incident provoked a public outcry, and the American Civil Liberties Union and the National Association of the Deaf got involved.

The organization went on to describe the inroads they’ve been making with individual state legislatures to stop the enforcement of such “zero tolerance” policies in public schools. The NRA noted success in Florida with it’s “Right To Be A Kid Act,” and remarked that “lawmakers in Oklahoma, Texas, and Nevada have pursued similar legislation.”

After all, the NRA observes, “imaginary gun gestures made in good fun or during imaginative play are perfectly normal and acceptable behavior, even for the leader of the free world.”