OXON HILL, Md. -- It was not a good showing for Louisiana Gov. Bobby Jindal in a straw poll that measured support for potential Republican presidential candidates among 3,000 attendees at the annual Conservative Political Action Conference. Jindal, who says he'll decide in the next few months whether to run for president, finished 12th with 0.9 percent of the ballots.

First in the survey was Sen. Rand Paul of Kentucky with 25.7 percent; followed by Wisconsin Gov. Scott Walker, 21.4 percent; Sen. Ted Cruz of Texas, 11.5 percent; and Ben Carson, a retired neurosurgeon who grew up in the Detroit area, 11.4 percent. Paul won the conservative conference's straw poll for the third consecutive year.

The results were released Saturday (Feb. 28) by organizers of the annual conference, It is sponsored by the American Conservative Union.

Former Florida Gov. Jeb Bush was the choice of 8.3 percent of the straw poll voters, followed by former Sen. Rick Santorum of Pennsylvania, 4.3 percent; Sen. Marco Rubio of Florida, 3.7 percent; businessman Donald Trump of New York, 3.5 percent; former Hewlett Packard chief executive Carly Fiorina of California, 3 percent; New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie, 2.8 percent; and former Texas Gov. Rick Perry, 1.1 percent.

Falling behind Jindal were former Alaska Gov. Sarah Palin, 0.8 percent; former Arkansas Gov. Mike Huckabee and former United Nations Ambassador John Bolton of Maryland, both at 0.3 percent. Jindal received 3 percent of straw poll ballots in 2013 and 2 percent in 2014.

Almost half of the attendees at the three-day conference were younger than 25, many with a libertarian point of view not necessarily consistent with voters in Republican primaries. Many of the potential candidates, including Jindal, spoke during the three-day conference at a large hotel and convention center in Oxon Hill, a Washington suburb.

In his speech, Jindal hit hard not only at his usual target, President Barack Obama, but also at Republican congressional leaders whom he faulted for not doing more to repeal the Affordable Care Act and to block the president's executive order on immigration. Of the Affordable Care Act, Jindal said, "We must repeal every single word of Obamacare.''

On Saturday, Jindal spoke at an event for big conservative donors in Palm Beach, Fla. It was sponsored by the anti-regulation Club for Growth.