The guest editorial, "Obamacare repeal won't be panacea," by the Los Angeles Times on March 8 misunderstands the fundamental flaws of Obamacare.

First, the rate of growth of health-care spending was actually declining from 2000 to 2008 before Obamacare. According to the Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services, the growth of health-care spending was 9.7 percent in 2002 and declined steadily to 3.9 percent in 2009. This decline is attributed to the growth of health savings accounts and the passage of the Medicare Modernization Act of 2003, which created Medicare Advantage plans and the Medicare Part D prescription-drug benefit.

Since 2010, when Obamacare was passed, the rate of growth of health-care spending has increased again. In 2014 health-care spending grew 5.3 percent after the first full year of the implementation of Obamacare. CMS now projects it will continue to grow at an average rate of 5.8 percent from 2014 to 2024. Obamacare has therefore exacerbated our health-care spending problem.

Second, health-care insurance premiums are rising faster since implementation of Obamacare — in some states, much faster. According to the Kaiser Family Foundation, insurance premiums in 2016 rose 38.4 percent in Tennessee, 31.4 percent in Alaska, 32.2 percent in Colorado, and 25.5 percent in North Carolina.

Obamacare is fundamentally flawed because it mandates minimum coverage requirements that don't fit the needs of individuals. It requires community rating instead of real actuarial analysis and allows prices to spread out only over three levels instead of the usual six. Add to this the required coverage of all pre-existing conditions, the ability to enroll after you become sick, and no incentive to maintain continuous coverage, and you have the reasons for rapidly rising premiums. Insurance companies cannot make a profit in this contrived business model, and premiums must rise to compensate for losses.

Robert S. Roberts Robert S. Roberts, a medical doctor, lives in Windermere. Robert S. Roberts, a medical doctor, lives in Windermere.

Even a mandate to purchase coverage or face a penalty has not been sufficient to encourage healthy, young people to enroll for coverage that is expensive and unnecessary for most. The result is a coverage pool that gets older and sicker and therefore more costly.

These fundamental flaws require the repeal of the law and replacement with a system that allows individuals the freedom to choose the coverage that best fits their needs, provides coverage of pre-existing conditions as long as coverage is maintained, incentivizes individuals to make responsible decisions and doesn't penalize the young and healthy for participation.