Contribution

John Linder served in Congress for 18 years from Georgia. He and his wife, Lynne, have retired to a farm in Northeast Mississippi.

What in the world is going on in our country? How did we get to the point where we are treated like ignorant dolts or abject fools?

During the effort in 2010 to pass Obamacare we were promised that our premiums would be reduced by $2,500 per year. Premiums are skyrocketing, but the administration insists that the promise has been kept because if Obamacare had not passed our premiums would be at least $2,500 higher than they are today. We are saving much more than $2,500 and we just don’t appreciate it.

We were told that if we liked our policy we could keep it. Millions of policies that we were entirely happy with have been cancelled. That promise, we are now told, has also been kept. If your insurance company no longer offers your policy because it failed to meet the minimum standards required by the new law, blame your insurance company not the president.

If you were sold one of those “junk” policies that did not provide benefits for HIV/AIDS treatment and maternity coverage, you are one of the fortunate ones. You are going to get much better coverage. Quit complaining and be grateful.

We have been told that Republican efforts to delay the law until the website was working could not be done because it was “settled law.” On Monday the president waived that “settled law” for small businesses. Get over it!

Four Americans died in a terrorist attack in Benghazi just six weeks before the presidential election. The administration created a total fabrication about what happened so they could get through the election without having to talk about terrorism. Two weeks after the attack the president repeated that lie in a speech at the United Nations.

When the lie could no longer survive the facts we were told that the president said it was a terrorist attack from the beginning. Do they think that we are daft? That we don’t pay attention?

When the report of the IRS Inspector General exposed the political abuses by the IRS the president expressed his shock and outrage. There would be a thorough investigation and the problem would be fixed.

It has been about 300 days since that report was released. One month after the investigation began the FBI director admitted to a congressional committee that he did not even know who was in charge of it. On Jan. 13 the FBI said that there would be no indictments.

Last week, two attorneys representing 70 of the Tea Party groups said that none of the victims had been interviewed yet. If you haven’t interviewed the victims, how can you know there would be no indictments?

Catherine Engelbrecht testified last year that after applying for tax-exempt status she had been visited by the FBI, ATF, OSHA, the Labor Department, the EPA and the IRS. She has now received three letters from the senior Democrat on the investigating committee threatening her with a congressional investigation for speaking out.

Two Democrats are demanding an investigation of the Inspector General who reported the abuses.

But you shouldn’t worry your little head about these things. Like the president says, these are just phony scandals anyway. His Justice Department has one of the president’s major campaign contributors on top of it.

Last week the Congressional Budget Office updated its analysis of the impact of Obamacare on jobs. They concluded that the system of subsidies, which decline as income increases, creates an incentive to work less. Over the next 10 years there would be a decline in hours that would equal the loss of 2.3 million jobs.

The White House says this is great news! We should enjoy the shorter work weeks and time off. We’ll spend that time taking our kids to soccer games and ballet lessons. We’re going to have more time for art and poetry.

Do they really think we are that stupid? What has happened to the promise of America; founded on the principle that the will of the people is sovereign? If we are condescended to and lied to routinely how can we even know what our will is? At this point I would consider it a victory if we were just noticed.

John Linder can be contacted at linderje@yahoo.com or on Twitter @linderje.

–

TheBlaze contributor channel supports an open discourse on a range of views. The opinions expressed in this channel are solely those of each individual author.