Leigh Dyer understands that people are busy. Between soccer tournaments, shredding slushy slopes and watching the Rockies slowly implode, the Denver-based professional organizer knows that it’s tough to commit a precious weekend to spring cleaning. But that doesn’t mean it shouldn’t happen.

“Nobody likes to file, and most people’s filing systems are kind of a mess,” she says. “But you really need to try to do an annual or biannual purge of your home. Put it on the calendar, get the family involved, touch everything and remember what you’re using and aren’t using.”

It doesn’t have to be an exact science, but Dyer says that cleaning out basements, binders and filing cabinets — especially right after Tax Day — is a necessary evil. In an attempt to grease those organizational wheels, here are a few tips from Dyer and a couple local financial pros on what needs to stick around and what can finally meet the bottom of the recycling bin this spring. Manila folders not included.

What to toss

Greeting cards: Sure, 1997 may have been a great year, but do you really need to remember how many cards you received on Feb. 14? Probably not, Dyer says. “If the person is giving the sentiment, keep it. If Hallmark is, let it go.”

Children’s artwork: News flash — Johnny isn’t opening an exhibition at the Denver Art Museum anytime soon. But if it’s too painful for parents to let go of their angel’s masterpieces, Dyer recommends having somebody else go through the works and make the decision on their behalf. “It sounds heartless, but most people would want to keep everything, so really it’s more about being pragmatic,” she says.

College term papers: Getting an advanced degree is difficult. People know that, and filling a bookshelf with notes, term papers and charts from the graduating class of ’91 does nothing but confirm what friends, family and co-workers already know: You’re smart. “People think they are going to refer back to it, but they don’t,” Dyer says. “If they really need that information, they’ll consult a more recent book or colleague.”

Receipts that are illegible: Keeping receipts is almost always a good idea — particularly if you’re self-employed or a small business owner. But unless receipts are stored in a climate-controlled space, chances are some of the details are long gone. “Usually within two years those thermal receipts are blank — especially if they’re exposed to some kind of sun or other environmental factors,” says Victor Amaya, one of the founders of ClearPath Accountants in Littleton. “We tell clients to constantly save their stuff electronically.” Amaya recommends the NeatReceipts portable scanner, which runs for about $180.

What to keep

All financial documents, for at least three years: That’s the minimum statute of limitations for most IRS audits, though there are some exceptions that can result in investigations dating back seven years. To err on the side of not inducing a yearlong headache, most money managers suggest holding on to hard copies of your W-2, 1099 and 1040 forms for a period that allows them to combat a worse-case scenario.

“We usually tell clients to keep five-seven years of returns and any deductions they make during that time, too,” Amaya says. Typically a dreaded audit dating back more than five years spawns from filing a claim for a loss on worthless-securities or bad-debt deduction, according to the IRS website, or if you’re not accounting for over 25 percent of your income.

(If you overtly skipped a return for a given year, or filed something blatantly fraudulent, the audit clock is unlimited. Don’t do that.)

For state returns, the Colorado Department of Revenue has up to four years to pursue an audit. And heads up: Colorado was the second-most audited state in the country in 2014, according to a study of 1.4 million returns by TaxAudit.com. Yikes.

Proof of home improvements: Any home renovations that change the value of a property need to be documented in order to properly appraise, and tax, a house upon changing hands. “If you’re taking a deduction for adding a home office, you’ll want to hold on to that,” says Herb White, a financial planner in Denver.

Health insurance cards: Nobody really knows how important this will be , but with about 16.4 million formerly uninsured people now enrolled in Obamacare, everybody agrees that holding on to proof of insurance is a wise move. If you purchased health insurance through the federal marketplace, the letter you receive in the mail with your form 1095-A should be sufficient proof, according to Amaya.

Mileage logs: Amaya recommends keeping logs for as long as you’re in business, and updating miles in a Microsoft Excel document daily.”The people that get the most audits are those with side business like a Schedule C, and they always get asked for their mileage logs,” he says.