People with autism chant slogans during the first annual Disability Pride Parade on July 12, 2015 in New York City. The parade calls attention to the rights of people with disabilities and coincides with the 25th anniversary of the Americans with Disabilities Act. (Photo : (Photo by Stephanie Keith/Getty Images))

A Saudi judge who goes by the name of Abu Said Aljazrawi has promulgated a religious decree authorizing ISIS members to kill innocent babies whose only fault was being born with Down's syndrome and congenital deformities.

According to Mosul Eye, an Iraqi activist group, there were able to confirm 38 cases of infanticide involving children with disabilities within ISIS strongholds in Mosul and Syria. "As if it is not enough for ISIL (another name for ISIS) to kill men, women and the elderly, and now, they kill children," the activist group said in a statement, according to a report from Mirror.co.uk.

Mosul Eye were monitoring the deaths of children with Down's syndrome and other congenital deformities amid harsh condition from the war-desolated region and found out about the oral fatwa, which is the Islamic term for a religious decree, issued by Aljazrawi who is a member of the ISIS Shar'ia Board.

The majority of the children who, for the most part, have yet to reach three months with some of the babies barely a week's old, are those fathered by foreign fighters who joined the terror group and later on married an Iraqi, Syrian or Asian woman. These babies were put away by either lethal injection or suffocation.

"In a move that further solidifies their similarities to the Nazi party, the Islamic State is now calling for the execution of children with Down's syndrome. The Nazis likewise propagated such genocidal policies, when they considered disabled children as 'burdens to the state," the Catholic Online wrote.

During the reign of the Nazis under the dictatorship of Adolf Hitler, there have been about 5,000 people aged under 16 who were also slaughtered, the Daily Mail reported. In some of the Nazi camps, special wards for the children were also established with the sole purpose of putting these young individuals with severe mental and physical handicaps to their deaths.

These acts, referred to as child euthanasia, went on to become a trend at that time with the murder of other children in the concentration camps. Some of the people who have been reminded of these human atrocities during the time of the Nazis responded to the statement released by Mosul Eye condemning these unspeakable act by the terror group.

One commenter asked in disbelief: "What danger do these poor babies impose on ISIL?!" while another one described the ISIS as "worse than the Nazis." "I have just shed tears for these babies. I have two children with special needs, my heart is breaking," the user said.