In an interview with MSNBC's Chris Matthews, President Obama said Sen. Elizabeth Warren and those who oppose the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) are "wrong."



"U.S. Senator Elizabeth Warren is out there saying things like this about the trade agreement,'it's going to help the rich get richer and leave everyone else behind.' She also says it challenges U.S. sovereignty," Matthews said to the president.



"They are throwing the kitchen sink at this trade agreement which will involve 11 nations and ourselves on the Pacific Rim. Why are they saying these things?" Matthews asked Obama.



"Well, I guess they don't want it to happen and I love Elizabeth, we're allies on a whole host of issues but she's wrong on this," Obama said.



"When you hear folks make a lot of suggestions about how bad this trade deal is when you dig into the facts, they are wrong," Obama also said.



The full interview will air at 7pm on MSNBC's Hardball.





CHRIS MATTHEWS, MSNBC: Mr. President obviously a hot question, U.S. Senator Elizabeth Warren is out there saying things like this about the trade agreement -- we're going to talk about today -- 'it's going to help the rich get richer and leave everyone else behind.' She also says it challenges U.S. sovereignty.



They are throwing the kitchen sink at this trade agreement which will involve 11 nations and ourselves on the Pacific Rim. Why are they saying these things?



PRESIDENT OBAMA: Well, I guess they don't want it to happen and I love Elizabeth, we're allies on a whole host of issues but she's wrong on this...



Chris, think about it, I've spent the last six and a half years yanking this economy out of the worst recession since the Great Depression. Every single thing I've done from the Affordable Care Act, to pushing to raise the minimum wage, to making sure young people are able to go to college and get good job training to what we're pushing now in terms of sick pay leave.



Everything I do has been focused on how do we make sure the middle class is getting a fair deal. Now, I would not be doing this trade deal if I did not think it was good for the middle class. And when you hear folks make a lot of suggestions about how bad this trade deal is when you dig into the facts, they are wrong.