A week is long enough for an online image to begin the slow descent from memory down the digital strata. But President Barack Obama’s performance on BuzzFeed last week is worth recalling for what it says about his deconstruction of the presidency.

To encourage millennials to sign up for his signature health care plan, Obama went on BuzzFeed to dramatize “Things Everybody Does But Doesn’t Talk About.” In it, the president mugged in a mirror, winking, sticking out his tongue, taking a “selfie” with a selfie stick, making a bunch of silly faces, trying on sunglasses, firing fingerguns, pretending to be perplexed by a cookie too large for his glass of milk and playing air basketball.

The Obama machine has always been exquisitely attuned to social media, beginning with its farsighted campaign ads in the virtual worlds of video games. Much of the reaction to this comic display was praise for a dead-on hit of the millennial target audience.

A few older persons complained about Obama’s denigration of the dignity of the office. And in the current media environment, such people sound like clueless fuddy-duddies. But like so many things happening today, Obama’s unprecedented actions, as refreshing as they may seem to some, trample long-held traditions that actually have value for us all.



[See: Editorial Cartoons on Barack Obama ]

This can be seen in the character and actions of the president I worked for, George Herbert Walker Bush. Like most chief executives, Bush had a robust sense of humor. (Look at his socks.) But he knew when he should and should not be a “regular guy.”

I saw the president’s private sense of humor on display on a trip to Los Angeles when I ambled into the bar at the hotel where the president and his entourage were staying. I struck up a conversation with a married couple sitting on the stools next to me. They were in their 30s, grinning infectiously and waving their drinks in some kind of celebration.

“Is this your anniversary?” I asked.

“No,” the man said in a British accent, “we’ve just landed here for the first time as American citizens.” His wife explained that after years of applications, interviews and the endless submission of documents, the path to citizenship was opened and they had finally come to their new home as Americans.



[SEE: Political Cartoons on the Democratic Party]

Everyone in the bar congratulated them and a round of drinks was put on our tab.

Fifteen minutes later, two hands came down on the shoulders of the couple. They turned to see President Bush standing behind them. He had been returning from a local event through the hotel kitchen when an aide had alerted him to the new Americans in the bar.

“I just want you to know,” Bush said, smiling broadly, “that it is the practice of this country for the president of the United States to personally welcome everyone who becomes an American citizen.” He shook their hands, made some small talk and walked away, leaving the man speechless and the woman giggling. No doubt, the story lives on as a beloved family tale.

Beyond that private moment, there were public jokes Bush would not entertain as denigrating to the office. When someone persuaded the president to be photographed in the Oval Office sporting Blues Brothers-style sunglasses, he complied – but then had second thoughts. An aide requested the negatives and destroyed them. It is not that the president lacked a sense of humor. It was that Bush regarded the presidency as a trust. He saw himself as the “occupant” of the Oval Office and treated the room itself almost like a curator, never entering it without a jacket and tie. He knew, like his predecessors did, that any president has an ability to use the office for a cheap laugh or celebrity moment.



[READ: We're Not Waging a Holy War]

Until now, presidents have mostly resisted celebrity temptations, knowing the presidency is about faithfully executing the duties of an office handed down in unbroken succession since the Enlightenment. Its traditions are solemn because they envelop an office that has serious duties.

The same face that mugs in the mirror and sticks out a tongue may have to go on television to announce the beginning of a war. The same hand that holds a selfie stick will certainly have to sign condolence letters. For the grieving parents and spouses of fallen veterans, I doubt it was particularly funny to see the man who sent their loved ones to die in battle amusing himself like a child.