Achadjian, who represents San Luis Obispo in the State Assembly, meanwhile, appeared less than enthused. Putting on reading glasses, he simply read from notes several times during the two-hour event. He acknowledged he was a little “wobbly,” as he arrived just an hour before the debate after driving from Sacramento. (Achadjian, who owns several gas stations in the area, has pointed to his busy assembly schedule as the reason he lags in campaign fundraising.)

Still, his home-court advantage was clear. When asked if he wanted to rebut Ostrander’s assertion that health care should be a right — “not a privilege” — he said, “No, I want to give him my applause for pronouncing my name correctly.” The audience laughed.

The crowd booed, however, after Republican Kokkonen said the United States has the best and most sophisticated medical care in the world. Defensively, he said, “I stand by that.” Kokkonen, a San Luis Obispo-based financial adviser who emigrated from Finland in 1945, has run a number of times for federal and state offices.

For the most part, Republican Fareed — a young, ambitious, second-time congressional candidate — stuck to his narrative. “I’m running for congress because career politicians have broken this political system,” he said, “and it doesn’t work for you.” He worked as an aide for Kentucky Congressmember Ed Whitfield from 2012-2013.

Fareed, who works for his family’s Montecito sports medical device business, noted more than once he wanted to “reduce the bloated size of government.” “I’ve seen regulation … that made it difficult for businesses like ours to survive, let alone thrive,” he said. He proposed to “get bureaucrats out of the way” to promote business owners. “When they succeed, we succeed,” he said.

Ostrander swung back: “That is the Republican playbook we’ve heard for the last 34 years, and it has not worked very well, has it?” Fareed and Ostrander also got into a testy back-and-forth over the Affordable Care Act, which Fareed called “the largest federal boondoggle,” adding, “Most people literally passed it without reading it,” he said.

Oshins got the last word, standing up and walking to the front of the table. “Students, I’m doing this for you guys.” He promised to organize meet-ups for parents about loan debt and to keep talking until the issue takes off.

The group is expected to debate again soon; exactly when and where has not been decided.