A cut cuts deep. Why should Broncos quarterback Peyton Manning take a pay cut? At a salary of $19 million, he’s a bargain. Put him on the open market, and some team will offer him $25 million. I don’t think it’s necessary to insult Manning by asking him to take a pay cut. With Manning, the Broncos finish 12-4 at worst in 2015. Without him, it’s 8-8 max. Manning at 75 percent is better than almost any other QB at 100 percent.

Mike, protecting No. 18’s bank account

Kiz: Let’s see. Manning is ready and willing to play football. The Broncos want him back. But there’s a process before a final decision can be made. Isn’t that mysterious? Or maybe it’s not. In pro sports, it’s always about the money. Manning earns in excess of $12 million per year from endorsements. That’s a lot of chicken parm. So let’s say Manning restructures his contract to give the Broncos an extra $5 million in their effort to go from a 12-4 team to Super Bowl champs. Would that be a smart investment?

Give Mr. Big Shot a shot. I couldn’t agree more with you, Kiz, on the Nuggets needing Chauncey Billups in their organization.

Seth, Denver

Kiz: Denver franchises certainly like to bring back Denver icons to rekindle the magic, from Elway to Patrick Roy. Perhaps the formula is a little tired. But if the Nuggets are truly serious about luring NBA free agents to Denver, who better to sell the advantages of living and shooting hoops in the Rocky Mountains than Billups? The team’s front office is big enough for general manager Tim Connelly and Mr. Big Shot.

Slow-pitch. Rockies pitcher LaTroy Hawkins is not concerned about the speed of the game. He said, “Why are we trying to rush this game?” Well, I can tell you why. I have been watching baseball my entire life and love the game. But the reality is baseball has become molasses slow, and it’s getting very boring for fans, especially when a batter insists on backing out of the box after every pitch.

Cathy, leads busy life

Kiz: Given the inability of Rockies pitchers to throw strikes and team ownership’s reluctance to spend money to upgrade the pitching staff, we here at Kickin’ It Headquarters humbly propose a radical idea: Eliminate the position of pitcher at Coors Field. Place a 36-inch-high rubber tee at home plate. Let batters place the ball on the tee. Grip it and rip it. So what if it would require 50 runs to win a game? Nobody in the party deck would notice after the third inning.

What a deal, Dan. And today’s parting shot is a salute to a success story that could happen only in America.

Dan O’Dowd couldn’t effectively draft, develop or evaluate talent for the Rockies, and he lands a job as a baseball analyst on TV. That’s like a mechanic lecturing about brain surgery.

Jim, Parker

Mark Kiszla: mkiszla@denverpost.com or twitter.com/markkiszla