Gloria Allred, attorney to the stars, has been retained by the family of Edwin Mieses, Jr, the biker who was injured in the confrontation in New York last week with an SUV driver.

A video of the incident, which was filmed on the helmet camera of one of the bikers in the group, shows a number of bikers chasing and then surrounding a Range Rover. At least three men can be seen attacking the driver of the SUV in front of his wife and child.

The incident was sparked after Edwin Mieses, Jr was knocked off his bike by the driver of the SUV. A 50 block chase ensued. When the vehicle was forced to stop, the driver’s window was smashed by the some of the bikers and he was beaten.

Gloria Allred told reporters that her client was trying to help the SUV driver when he was run over. She said: “His sole intention was to defuse the situation.”

She alleges that the video footage shows that Mieses, aged 32, had his back to the SUV and was telling other bikers to walk away when he was hit “at top speed.” Referring to the video footage taken of the incident she added: “Watch that huge vehicle, SUV, blast off, and watch it as it is lifted several feet off the ground as it rolls over Edwin Mieses,”

She also spoke about the fact that Mieses and his family are not condoning what happened to the SUV driver: “Edwin Mieses and his family deplore what happened to the driver of the SUV.” “However”, she continued, “let us not lose sight of the fact that Mr. Mieses had done nothing to Mr. Lien,” she added. “We don’t think our client should have been run over and crushed.”

Rosalyn Ng, the wife of the SUV driver said that although she sympathised with what happened to Mr. Mieses her husband did the right thing by fleeing the bikers as he was in a “life-threatening situation.”

She added “Our fear for our lives was confirmed when the incident ended with the ruthless and brutal attack on my husband, me, and, most importantly, our two-year-old child.”

It is not yet known if the family of Mr Mieses will sue the driver of the SUV as police continue to investigate the incident. It also remains to be seen what line attorney Gloria Allred will take in representing her client and his family.