WEST BLOOMFIELD, MI -- They haven't debated, and they may never, but for the first time since the Mackinac Policy Conference in May, Michigan's top two candidates for U.S. Senate were in the same room together Thursday.

U.S. Rep. Gary Peters (D-Bloomfield Twp.) and former Michigan Secretary of State Terri Lynn Land each addressed a crowd gathered by Metro Detroit Chaldean community groups at the Shenandoah Country Club in West Bloomfield

They took the stage separately, never crossing paths, and took questions from an audience made up mostly of immigrant businesspeople with family ties to Iraq.

Peters looked to describe himself to the conservative-leaning crowd as a moderate centrist.

Land sought to highlight her family's immigrant and small business background and repeatedly reminded the audience that she's a mother.

"I'm a mom and I get things done," she said in response to a question about making immigrant visas more readily available for Christians in Iraq facing threats from the terrorist group known as ISIS or ISIL.

"The Department of State, immigration system is broken. If we can make that work better and faster, that, I believe, would take care of the situation."

Peters said Metro Detroit's Middle Eastern community has taken care of refugees and deserves federal resources to keep doing so.

"This is a very hostile situation for Christians in Iraq," said Peters, who serves on a congressional caucus on religious minorities in the Middle East.

"They should be treated as refugees... We should make sure they have visas and opportunities to get out of there."

The candidates are battling over the seat being left behind by retiring U.S. Sen. Carl Levin. They have not been able to agree to terms on holding debate.

In response to a question about whether he's willing to break from the Democratic Party on certain issues, he cited a House vote in which he supported a bill that President Barack Obama vowed to veto.

"I supported making the research and development tax credit a permanent part of tax code," Peters said. "... I take votes that I believe are right for the people of the state of Michigan."

He also said he tries to find a balance between a "regulatory approach to protect taxpayers" and "overly burdensome regulation."

"It is about a pendulum," he said. "... When you try to correct some of that, the pendulum swings too far the other way. What we have to do is try to find that middle ground."

And Peters praised the Affordable Care Act for making health care more widely available, but acknowledged the reform effort had its glitches.

"We have to fix it," he said. "No bill is perfect."

Land, for her part, vowed to see the health care reform legislation "repealed and replaced."

"Obamacare is hurting Michigan businesses," she said, expressing support for lower taxes for small businesses...

"We need to lower taxes, make it simpler, fairer for folks."

She also expressed opposition to minimum wage hikes.

"I've been a waitress, so I've been there," she said. "But the thing that's most important is to get good paying jobs in this state...

"It's a good place to start, minimum wage. The idea is to move up."

Questions on U.S. response to the threat of ISIS dominated the forum.

"I do not support ground forces form the United States," said Peters. "I do not see any reason to do that at this point. But I do understand that it is very important that you have credible presence on the ground. It's got to be Sunni troops that are there... I think now we do have credible forces in Iraq that can move on ISIL... We've got to make sure those forces have what they need."

And Land criticized the president's response to the terrorist group's spread in Iraq and Syria.

"The president has not led on this issue," she said... He needs to talk his military advisers... We need to get our friends together on this. This is a horrible situation and ISIS needs to be destroyed.

"Our friends don't trust us and our enemies don't fear us."