Rongey: Passionate White Sox fans kept things interesting

hello

I don't think I could've stepped into a better situation in 2006.

The White Sox had just crowned an improbable season by nearly running the table in the playoffs and winning the World Series. The city was in a state of thrill and disbelief that one of their hometown baseball teams had earned a title for the first time since the U.S. entered World War I. Even many crosstown fans found joy in it.

Likewise, it was the perfect time for WSCR to acquire broadcast rights. "Home of your 2005 World Series Champion White Sox." I still remember the promos.

I also remember it didn't take more than a few months before reality set in that a flawed-but-good Sox team was going to miss out on back-to-back postseasons despite winning 90 games. I recall the disappointment then, much as we're experiencing disappointment now.

The difference in 2006 was that team gave us some exciting baseball for a large part of the year. "Scary good" at times, as a friend said to me then.

In 2015, the Sox staggered immediately as the bell rung and never fully recovered. In fact, they spent just one day over .500.

The 10-year union between The Score and the White Sox only resulted in one playoff win, and our hope was to top off that relationship by bringing you another postseason run. There isn't a better way to go out.

Sadly, while that won't happen, I think WSCR 670-AM has done an exceptional job bringing White Sox coverage to listeners over the decade, and some wonderful, talented producers have been a part of these broadcasts. I'm lucky for having been able to work with them.

I've been asked about the most common feedback I get from Sox fans, and the answer is, by far, some variation "you have the toughest job. I don't know how you do it."

I usually don't know how to respond to that because it isn't true. I appreciate the sentiment, but taking angry postgame calls after a blown save is infinitely easier than hostage negotiation.

(But, I could probably do that, too.)

The truth is Sox fans are passionate. They care. And whether or not I agree every time, I'd take 100 furious phone calls over apathy, every day. As long as they're interested, we have a job.

Certainly, there will be changes during the offseason, and the White Sox have already begun by opening the door for a new bench coach and assistant hitting coach. But the changes won't stop there. While it's unlikely we will see any other coaches fired, you can guarantee there will be newcomers on the roster for 2016, potentially at third base, middle infield, or in the rotation.

And I'm thankful I'll have a voice during what should be another fascinating winter. Like you, I'll have White Sox thoughts and I look forward to expressing those with you and hearing yours. I'm grateful to The Score and the White Sox for allowing me to be a part of the production for so long.

To everyone who made sure the broadcasts sounded as good as they did all these years, and mostly to everyone who listened, thank you.

• Chris Rongey is the host of the White Sox pregame and postgame shows on WSCR 670-AM The Score. Follow him on Twitter @ChrisRongey and at chrisrongey.com.