More Video...

Marianna, FL---You could look anywhere across the country and you won't find anything quite like Saturday at Chipola College. The Indians baseball team and the local community welcomed back past players at the program's seventh annual Alumni Weekend.

Former players from the program's past returned to Marianna to celebrate the accomplishments of each other and each Chipola team.

Saturday's events were highlighted by the presence of three MLB All-Stars, Jose Bautista, Russell Martin, and Patrick Corbin, the latter serving as the guest of honor. The Arizona Diamondbacks starting pitcher became just the fourth former Indian to have his jersey retired, joining the Tornonto Blue Jays' Bautista and Martin, and Baltimore Orioles manager Buck Showalter.

Also in attendance was a pair of Marianna High School alums, Jeff Mathis and Michael Mader, the former, not a Chipola player, but an adopted member of the program's family.

After signing autographs for the fans in attendance, Bautista, Martin, and Mathis highlighted the participants in the annual alumni Home Run Derby, alongside defending and two-time champ Mat Gamel. Bautista won his first Chipola Derby Championship, finishing the finals with the most long balls.

"It just seems to get bigger and better every year," said Chipola head coach Jeff Johnson, who's spent the last 18 seasons coaching the Indians. "We started off the first year, we had it seven years ago, we had a good turnout."

"I got lucky enough that I was here in Marianna and I'm very grateful," said Bautista. "That's the main reason why I want to come back. I want to show support back to the people that supported me."

"Coming here, I was able to focus on baseball all year round and I think that's when I made a big step into continuing my career and being able to get drafted," said Corbin. "I wouldn't change it for the world."

"It's fun to see that Chipola's doing well, that the program's headed in the right direction," said Martin. "And then seeing the guys you don't really get to see that much and they're growing up, they're starting to have families and stuff like that."

"To have three Major League All-Stars here this weekend, Pat, Russell, and Jose, it says a lot about what they thought of our program when they were here," added Johnson.

As for Corbin, a 2013 All-Star with the D-Backs who's coming off Tommy John surgery, he's not only excited to get back on the mound this season, but to be mentioned around Marianna alongside the previous three players to have their numbers taken out of rotation.

It's a huge honor for me," said Corbin. "I haven't been around as long as those guys, so hopefully I can continue my career and come back from the injury I had last season. I'm looking forward to getting back there and competing with these guys. The names that you mentioned, I mean, these guys are the best in the game. It's just great to see them come from this school and them to come back as well and support this program. That's what we're all here for."