Topics: From the Wires, Entertainment News, News

PARIS (AP) — It was color-meets-menswear at Paris’ celebrity-filled Fashion Week this Saturday, with Solange Knowles chatting to James Bond “Skyfall” star Naomie Harris at Vivienne Westwood before heading on a plane home.

Meanwhile, French actress Emmanuelle Beart confessed she had fallen in love with Lebanese designer Elie Saab.

Here are the highlights of the fall-winter 2015 ready-to-wear shows including show reports from Mugler, Elie Saab and Vivienne Westwood.

___

VIVIENNE WESTWOOD’S GENDER BENDING

If Yves Saint Laurent could liberate women by dressing them in men’s tuxedos, then why shouldn’t fashion do the same, and reverse, for men?

That’s the question Vivienne Westwood explored in her bold and sexually ambiguous fall-winter collection.

A man in a huge billowing gold bustier dress came alongside a female model in a shouldered menswear “zoot” suit — worn in the ’50s as a mark of rebelling against traditions.

If women dressing in menswear is the norm these days, she seemed to say, then why is it that men dressed in womenswear still raises eyebrows?

The thing was the entire collection seemed to raise eyebrows — albeit in a very good way — for its anarchistic and sometimes unfathomable gusto and humor.

Tinsel lined the catwalk, like the debris left after a crazy ’70s disco, mirrored by Hula skirts, as worn by Polynesian men. (Westwood described these as a “bisexual” element.)

Then fast-forward a beautiful Romantic shoulder-less dress printed with a rose, a funky giant Persian printed cloak, a “Braveheart”-style draped tartan, the customary peaked-shoulders tuxedos — and even an Irish Leprechaun hat, then you have a very distinct fashion statement from a woman who has nothing more to prove to the men in her industry.

___

ELIE SAAB’S VARIATIONS

It was a creative and varied show from the popular Lebanese designer.

To rousing military music, the first looks surprised the fashion crowd by how un-Elie Saab they appeared: constructed silhouettes with chic military buttons, lining a long slender coat or a military jacket in black. It was, at first, a welcome darker, more menswear vibe.