After five years and hundreds of thousands of dollars spent on lawyers, the borough has filed a new lawsuit in a case involving Gannett New Jersey

Raritan Borough, the home of World War II hero John Basilone, has been fighting a Gannett New Jersey lawsuit for five years. (Photo: ~File) Story Highlights Gannett NJ sued Raritan Borough in 2009 after denying request for payroll records.

Gannett won case in 2012. Last year, a judge ordered Raritan to pay Gannett's legal fees.

Borough is appealing decisions and now is trying to sue its former payroll company.

A five-year legal battle between this Somerset County town and a media company that owns a local newspaper has taken another turn.

Lawyers for the borough are once again suing the municipality's former payroll-management vendor, arguing that the private company is to blame for an expensive public-records battle against Gannett New Jersey.

Gannett, which owns the Courier News and MyCentralJersey.com (among other newspapers and websites in the state), sued the borough more than five years ago after officials denied a reporter's Open Public Records Act request for employee salary and overtime information in an electronic, non-PDF format such as an Excel file.

Gannett won the lawsuit in Superior Court in 2012 after the judge concluded that borough officials had access to the electronic information and should have provided it as the reporter had request.

But the litigation continues to drag on, at a cost to both the news company and borough taxpayers, as a result of the borough's decision to continue fighting.

The borough is appealing a judge's decision last year to award Gannett $590,000 — just part of all the legal fees the company has incurred since 2009.

OPRA allows plaintiffs who win their cases against public agencies to recover their legal expenses. Open-government advocates say this provision is what gives the law its teeth.

Oral arguments have not been scheduled for the borough's appeal.

In a complaint filed last week in Superior Court in Somerville, the borough wants to hold the former payroll company, Action Data Services in Fairfield, responsible should the borough lose its appeal and be forced to pay what could be the largest-ever OPRA award.

The borough's new lawsuit says the company had told officials that the requested format was not available unless the borough paid a fee of $1,100, which officials tried to charge Gannett. But Gannett balked at paying what it considered such an exorbitant fee.

"To the extent that Raritan relied upon inaccurate information supplied to it by ADS, Raritan has sustained damages in defense of the Gannett (lawsuit) through no fault of its own but instead through the fault of ADS," says the complaint filed by Borough Attorney Richard Wenner.

After the 2012 trial, ADS waived the fee and provided the data to the borough, which turned it over to the Courier News.

This is not the first time that the borough has tried to bring the payroll company into this case. The borough unsuccessfully tried to have the court name Action Data Services as a third-party defendant in 2012.

In response, the company at the time said the borough's strategy was "ill-advised" and that "for the last three years, defendant Borough of Raritan has recklessly gambled with taxpayer dollars."

Read or Share this story: http://mycj.co/1TmKMU2