TED CRUZ: We can nominate a Washington deal maker, profane and vulgar, who has a lifelong pattern of using government power for personal gain. Or we can nominate a proven conservative who has fought consistently for working men and women and to defend the Constitution...



Trump promises to cut deals with Dems, continue Washington crony-ism. Just like he supported the TARP Wall Street bailouts. I'll end corporate welfare, adopt a flat tax, and abolish the IRS. Trump funded the gang of eight. With your help, I led the successful opposition. Trump supports Planned Parenthood. I will direct the Justice Dept. to investigate Planned Parenthood. Trump promises to compromise with Reid and Schumer on SCOTUS nominees. I'll never compromise our religious liberty.



Unlike Trump I'll never compromise our 2nd Amendment rights. Trump pledges to be neutral between Israel and Palestine. As president, I won't be neutral. We'll stand unapologetically with Israel. Trump says he'll keep the Iranian nuclear deal. I'll rip it to shreds on day one. If you're angry with Washington, I understand. But Trump has been part of the Washington corruption for 40 years. He's Harry Reid's and Jimmy Carter's favorite Republican.



Donald Trump refuses to allow the NYT to release the tape where he allegedly said he wouldn't deport illegals, that he wouldn't build a wall. Donald, release the tape. If you're lying to the voters, the voters have the right to know. Enough with the deception. Enough with allowing the rich and powerful to run rampant at the expense of the middle class.



I promised to stop Obamacare, to stop amnesty, to stop debt, to defend religious liberty, the second amendment, and the bill of rights. And I've kept my promise. That's why we were supported by Texas Gov. Greg Abbott. By Lt. Gov. Dan Patrick, our campaign chairman. By former Gov. Rick Perry. By nearly half of the GOP legislators in Texas, and by thousands and thousands of Republican women and grassroots activists. They know my record, they know my heart, they know me personally. I've kept my word to fight for them every day.