Officials with the North Charleston Police Department say a 33-year-old Fort Dorchester High School coach turned himself in after a warrant was issued for his arrest following an allegation that he had an inappropriate relationship with a student.

Ben Laprad turned himself in to the NCPD headquarters Friday morning and appeared before a judge at 2 p.m. where he was issued a $5,000 surety bond. Laprad was also ordered not to have any contact with the victim, victim's family or school.

Dorchester District 2 officials reported Friday afternoon that an arrest warrant had been issued for Laprad for contributing to the delinquency of a minor due to an alleged inappropriate relationship with a student.

According to DD2 officials, Laprad serves as a wrestling coach and a part time at-will adult assistant.

The investigation began on the afternoon of Feb. 21, when police officers met with the principal at Fort Dorchester High School. The principal told police that he had been concerned about a student leaving campus, and possible inappropriate contact between a 17-year-old female student and a member of the school staff, later identified as Laprad.



A police report states, the principal conducted an investigation and determined that the student and Laprad were most likely texting each other, and was concerned that they were meeting off campus.



The victim said she befriended Laprad on Facebook before texting with him.



According to police, the victim provided a written statement describing how she and Laprad flirted back and forth, and "some sexual comments were made."



Authorities say on Feb. 18, the victim went to Laprad's home after he texted her to come to his residence during her free third block. Police say the victim returned to Laprad's home on the 19th and on the 21st.



The victim told police that her clothing remained on and that no sexual intercourse occurred.

School officials say that Laprad has been placed on administrative leave as the North Charleston police investigates the incident

Stay with www.Live5News.com for more information

Copyright 2014 WCSC. All rights reserved.