Another week in the books. We’re in the downhill slide of the session with only two weeks remaining, and possibly less depending on how the budget negotiations develop.

The annual budget consists of numerous bills that will create new revenue or savings. We’ve approved several bills on the floor and in the Senate Joint Committee on Appropriations and Budget. I’d like to mention some of those.

Login required We have used your information to see if you have a subscription with us. So far we have not found one. If you feel you are currently subscribed please click on the button to attempt to find your account. Screen Name or Email Password Forgot? Remember me on this computer Login Screen Name or Email Now I remember! Need an account? Create one now. Back Thank you for reading and relying on TulsaWorld.com for your news and information. You have now viewed your allowance of free articles. Login

You must login to view the full content on this page. Screen Name or Email Password Forgot? Remember me on this computer Login Screen Name or Email Now I remember! Need an account? Create one now.

Last week, the committee approved seven measures that together will put $190 million back into the General Revenue Fund (GRF) to help close the $1.3 billion budget gap. These will reform various tax credits and incentive programs.

SB 1579 instructs the Oklahoma Tax Commission to step up enforcement efforts through the use of technologies to audit sales and use tax reporting. This is expected to generate approximately $35.8 million for the GRF and $2 million for the HB 1017 Fund for education.

SB 1580 modifies the amount of credits allocated annually for investment in affordable housing projects. It’s estimated to generate $900,000.

SB 1581 limits the amount of tax credits for investment in clean-burning motor fuel equipment. The reform is expected to generate $5.773 million.

SB 1582 is estimated to create $14.049 million by limiting tax credits for investment in depreciable property or net increase in employees.

HB 3204 will reduce a tax credit for railroad construction to generate $136,000.

HB 3205 would reduce the time period for filing a sales tax refund claim from three years to one year total generating $8.781 million.

HB 3206 would authorize OMES to certify any funds remaining in the Cash Flow Reserve Fund in December as available for transfer and appropriation. This measure would yield $125 million for the GRF.

On Thursday, we also approved SB 1577, which will save the state $133 million next year. The bill will eliminate a tax rebate for economically at-risk wells for any oil and gas production that took place after 2014. The cost of the tax rebate has increased significantly as oil prices have plunged in the last year.

Sometimes the legislature passes bills that were originally created for a good purpose but then as time goes by and circumstances change unexpectedly that same bill can have negative unforeseen affects. This rebate is a prime example. The rebate was originally created to help smaller producers continue to operate older, unprofitable wells but as the energy sector has tumbled, several newer, more expensive horizontal wells have become unprofitable and eligible for the tax credit. This wasn’t the legislature’s original intent.

The oil and gas industry is a volatile industry with extreme swings and companies need to plan for those difficult lows. It’s not the legislature’s responsibility to bail out companies during hard times especially when, as a state, we’re facing the worst budget shortfall in state history.

Getting rid of this tax credit will provide desperately-needed funds for our education, public safety, transportation and health care among others.

As I’ve said before, the Senate is considering every responsible option to address the revenue shortfall. We’re having to make some tough decisions but we have to do what’s necessary to protect vital state services.

In closing, I was pleased that the Governor signed HB 2616, of which I’m the principal Senate author for, on Monday. The new law went into effect upon her signature. It modifies the Oklahoma Telecommunications Act to reflect advances in technology and modernizes how schools, hospitals, career techs and libraries apply for money for high speed internet services through the Oklahoma Universal Service Fund (OUSF).