A THREE-BEDROOM APARTMENT IN A ST. JOHN’S WOOD TOWNHOUSE

$2.3 MILLION (£1.395 MILLION)

This duplex occupies the third and fourth floors of a Victorian townhouse on Alma Square, a quiet area near the High Street in St. John’s Wood. The house was built around 1850 and converted into apartments in 1985. This one was updated last year; its lower floor includes a living room with a wood-burning stove, and a dining room with a gas fireplace. Both rooms have accent walls with ornate gold-and-cream wallpaper by Zoffany. Next to the dining room, the kitchen has a recycled-glass backsplash made by Fired Earth in dark reds and rust browns. A bathroom with a shower stall is next to the kitchen.

Upstairs, all three bedrooms are tucked under the low, sloping ceilings at the top of the house. Working fireplaces and built-in wardrobes evoke the Victorian period. The rooms share a hall bath, which has a corner bathtub. Although the apartment doesn’t face Alma Square directly, the owners of this apartment have a key to its communal garden. Abbey Road, made famous by the Beatles, is a block away, and Regent’s Park is a 15-minute walk. The High Street has many independent shops and restaurants, and the St. John’s Wood Underground station on the Jubilee line gives easy access to Bond Street, the City of London and Canary Wharf. Heathrow Airport is about a half an hour away via public transit.

MARKET OVERVIEW

The British property market has become very lively over the last year, said Joseph Selby, a director with CBRE Residential in Canary Wharf, explaining that government subsidies had acted as a stimulus, “adding to the whole feel-good factor that is very evident at the moment.” The market in St. John’s Wood has seen robust price gains in recent years, according to Giles Elliott, an agent for Savills St. John’s Wood. “Prices for prime property have risen by about 45 percent since 2008,” he said, adding that his company was anticipating price increases of 6 percent this year. The housing stock in St. John’s Wood varies quite a bit, with Regency-era townhouses, Italianate villas, high-end modern flats and neo-Gothic houses. Three-bedroom flats range in price from £2.5 million to £5 million ($4.125 million to $8.28 million, at £.061 to the dollar), Mr. Elliot said. The apartment profiled here is priced lower because of its smaller size, according to Laura Richardson of Knight Frank St. John’s Wood, the listing agent.

WHO BUYS IN LONDON

“St. John’s Wood is a very cosmopolitan area,” added Ms. Richardson, citing an American school and a French Lycée in the area as attracting expatriate buyers. In addition, she said, “There have been unprecedented numbers of Chinese buyers recently.”

International buyers are “certainly more prevalent in the top end of the market,” Mr. Elliot said.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

BUYING BASICS

Like many London properties, this apartment is being offered as a leasehold transaction, which means it has a renewable long-term lease expiring in 2174. “You’d normally only get a freehold property if it’s a house that hasn’t been split up,” Ms. Richardson said. Transaction costs include a solicitor’s fee, which varies depending on the size and complexity of the transaction; she estimated the fee in this instance at £4,000 or so. The stamp duty also varies depending on purchase price. For properties like this one, priced at £1 million to £2 million, the stamp duty is 5 percent. Most buyers don’t hire their own real estate agent, so the seller’s agent handles negotiations for both sides. But Ms. Richardson said that some foreign buyers hire a relocation agent to find promising properties for them, and they may charge an additional fee. Foreigners can buy without restriction.

WEB SITES

Official London visitor guide: visitlondon.com

Transport for London: tfl.gov.uk

St. John’s Wood Society: stjohnswood.org.uk

LANGUAGES AND CURRENCY

English; pounds sterling (£1 = $1.65)

TAXES AND FEES

Annual service charges of about $5,000 cover building maintenance and access to the garden. Council taxes are $1,140 a year, according to the listing agent, and cover municipal services like street sweeping and trash collection.

CONTACT

Laura Richardson, Knight Frank St. John’s Wood, knightfrank.co.uk, 011-44-20-7586-2777