The late reporter paved the way for Mexican-Americans in the media.

Raul Yzaguirre, president of the National Council of La Raza. (Photo: David Zalubowski, AP)

My friend Ruben Salazar would have been 86 years young.

It is almost impossible for me to imagine this — and not just because I still picture him as the vibrant reporter I knew in the summer of 1970, when he was killed by a tear gas projectile fired by a Los Angeles County Sherriff's deputy.

What I really cannot imagine is how our world would be different if Ruben had been with us for the last 44 years. What would he have written? Where would his blossoming television career have taken him? How would this country's views of Mexican-Americans — or Chicanos, as he would say — be different?

Thanks to a new documentary, a new generation of Americans can consider these questions for themselves as "Ruben Salazar: Man in the Middle," will premiere on PBS on April 29.

The film uses never-before-seen footage, interviews, and excerpts from Salazar's private writings to introduce Ruben, a Mexican-American legend, to American audiences.

The audience will learn that behind the martyred figure that died in mysterious circumstances was a respected journalist who was a trailblazer for the Hispanic journalists who came after him. When Ruben joined the Los Angeles Times in 1959, he was the only Mexican-American on a staff that was largely white.

By the late 1960s — at a time when L.A. had the largest number of Hispanic residents in the country yet none on the City Council — his clear-eyed reporter's instincts and his identity as a successful Mexican-born American prompted him to become increasingly involved in the civil rights movement, especially the Chicano Movement.

Ruben realized that important stories were not being told about the Hispanic experience in America, and that other stories were being told only from a "white" angle. When he left the paper in 1970 to become the news director at a Spanish-only television station called KMEX, many of his colleagues thought he was crazy but Ruben knew it was what he had to do.

"Mexican-Americans, though indigenous to the Southwest, are on the lowest rung scholastically, economically, socially and politically," he wrote. "Chicanos feel cheated. They want to effect change. Now."

Ruben was covering the "Chicano Moratorium," a march protesting the disproportionately high rate of Hispanic deaths in the Vietnam War, when he was killed. The documentary uncovers new details about the shooting, thanks in part to a successful lawsuit that Mexican American Legal Defense and Educational Fund, on the behalf of the filmmaker, brought to obtain the L.A. County Sheriff Department's unredacted records about the incident.

Ruben's trailblazing work as a reporter who strove to fairly depict Latinos in the media has had a lasting impact on a generation of Hispanic journalists. He was one of the first chairs of the National Council of La Raza's task force on the media, and that is why – along with his illustrious legacy as a journalist — we named our annual communications award in his honor.

Every year NCLR is proud to award the Ruben Salazar Award for Communications to a communications professional who has dedicated his or her professional life to portraying issues, concerns, or news relevant to contemporary Hispanic America. The Ruben Salazar Award has recognized to an array of journalists who have continued Ruben's legacy of speaking truth to power, of educating our fellow Americans about this community, and of telling our story. Past recipients include Rocsi Diaz, Juan Gonzalez, Soledad O'Brien, Maria Elena Salinas and Jorge Ramos. NCLR seeks not only to celebrate, but to inspire, those Latinos in the media to follow in Ruben's footsteps and take up the mantle of a career and life tragically cut short.

It is a proud legacy. I wish Ruben were around to see it.

Raul Yzaguirre is the former U.S. Ambassador to the Dominican Republic and former president and CEO of NCLR.

In addition to its own editorials, USA TODAY publishes diverse opinions from outside writers, including our Board of Contributors. To read more columns like this, go to the opinion front page or follow us on twitter @USATopinion or Facebook.

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/PA2nbO