Community Health Centers has opened a 16,000-square-foot facility near Maitland Blvd. to replace its two older and smaller clinics at Eatonville and Rosemont.

The new clinic, which opened its doors at the end of March, was built in response to the growing demand in the area.

It has doubled the number of adult and pediatric dental chairs and brought on new services including optometry and behavioral health.

With a bright and fresh look, it also hope to break away from the stereotype attached to community clinics and attract a wider range of clients from the community,

“Our patients deserve to have a nice place to go to,” said Mark Dickinson, executive vice president and Chief Financial Officer of Community Health Centers.

Community Health Centers is one of Central Florida's federally funded clinics that provide primary care services to insured, uninsured and underinsured adults and children.

CHC Orlando Naseem S. Miller The new Community Health Centers clinic has doubled the number of its dental chairs to 10. The new Community Health Centers clinic has doubled the number of its dental chairs to 10. (Naseem S. Miller) (Naseem S. Miller)

Patients within certain federal poverty levels pay lower fees. The clinic has also been assisting individuals who have Obamacare but can't afford their deductibles.

“We're here for the whole community,” said Dickinson.

Located near Maitland Blvd. at 7900 Forest City Road, the clinic currently offers primary care, pediatrics and dental care for adults and children. The clinic's pharmacy is expected to open in summer.

Mental health care and optometry services, which are expected to open in the next two months, didn't exist in Eatonville and Rosemont and were added in response to patient demand.

Jeffrey Bowman, vice president and Chief Operating Officer of Community Health Centers, said that the increase in demand is due to a population that's growing and aging.

“There's also an overall family provider shortage,” said Bowman.

He said Community Health Center hopes to be the medical home for patients and play a part in reducing ER visits and the rates of readmission to hospitals.

The center's 12 sites in Orange and Lake counties served more than 60,000 patients last year, 40 percent of whom were uninsured and another 40 percent who had Medicaid. It provided dental services to another 50,000 patients.

The center is holding an open house on May 14 at 10 a.m. Its Eatonville and Rosemont centers permanently closed last week.