Despite denials during the launch of Obamacare, the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services is quietly using www.healthcare.gov to build a massive repository of personal information called MIDAS.

A Sept. 16, 2014, Government Accountability Office report criticized HHS for launching MIDAS with "incomplete security plans and privacy documentation." The same report documents that HHS disclosed the data of millions of Americans to Equifax, a corporate credit bureau, without any finalized agreement protecting the privacy rights of the individuals whose data HHS disclosed — a clear violation of the Privacy Act.

HHS periodically responds to questions about the MIDAS database in a document known as a "Privacy Impact Assessment" required by the E-Government Act of 2002. The sloppiness of these assessments makes it clear that HHS still does not take its role of protecting privacy seriously. For instance, in its most recent answer to a question requiring HHS to identify the operator of MIDAS, HHS simply responded "Contractor" instead of identifying CACI, the large corporation that manages data supplied by more than 10 million Americans — although HHS uses the disingenuous number "1 million or more."

MIDAS contains at least the following data elements: name, address, email, phone, date of birth, Social Security number, self-reported income, financial accounts information, ethnicity, citizenship status, military status, employment status, passport number, and taxpayer identification number. There are conflicting accounts as to what extent contractors create and retain records in MIDAS records about their phone conversations with Americans who call www.healthcare.gov.

In addition, HHS is illegally expanding MIDAS by adding data from state-run health care exchanges without the consents required by the Privacy Act.

It is unclear whether HHS, in yet another violation of the Privacy Act, is enforcing a nondisclosure policy of MIDAS data. My own 2014 Privacy Act request generated a prompt phone call from an HHS employee who tried to tell me that the agency did not retain any healthcare.gov data. When I referred to the data collected at MIDAS, she said, "Oh, that database..." and said she would get back to me. Despite my periodic emails, she never did. Senior officials of both CACI and HHS refused to respond to my written questions about the public's right to access MIDAS data.

Twenty-five years ago, the American Civil Liberties Union and other privacy advocates would have immediately sued to block these numerous violations of the Privacy Act at HHS, but today the ACLU's policy agenda trumps its longstanding privacy concerns. Twenty-five years ago, the HHS Inspector General, Richard Kusserow, would have been all over these issues. Today the Bush-appointed Inspector General, Daniel Levinson, consistently places his own job security over the security of the public's private information. Like the character in Catch-22 who schedules but always cancels parades, Levinson keeps announcing his intention to audit MIDAS, but never does. Indeed, when forced by Congress to audit anything relating to the security of Obamacare, Levinson produces little but platitudes.

HHS documents from early in Obamacare implementation suggested that records of Americans would be destroyed shortly after being used to determine eligibility. This laudable goal has been rejected — the start of longitudinal studies by loosely supervised contractors signals that it will be years before HHS even considers destruction of our personal data. Indeed, the sheer number of contract research organizations that now access MIDAS data increases exponentially the security risk of every American with data in the system. It is not an unlikely scenario—a bot randomly wandering the Internet pierced deep into www.healthcare.gov last July without HHS noticing for weeks.

One can hope that HHS Secretary Sylvia Mathews Burwell will proactively become more protective of privacy, but it seems unlikely that she will challenge her own people who have been so cavalier and deceptive about what they are doing. Congress would rather keep debating the merits of Obamacare than oversee its technicalities, but members of Congress should, on a bipartisan basis, pause from those debates to focus on enforcing the Privacy Act rights of people who are—as a practical matter—forced to use www.healthcare.gov.

Michael Astrue was general counsel for the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services from 1989 to 1992 and commissioner of the Social Security Administration from 2007 to 2013. He sits on the board of the Joslin Diabetes Center in Boston.