A Scottish woman has been found guilty of fraud after lying to her ex-partner about her abortion and instead giving the child away to her gay friend.

A Scottish woman has been found guilty of fraud after lying to her ex-partner about her abortion and instead giving the child away to her gay friend. Photo courtesy of Shutterstocl

A 29-year-old Scottish woman lied to her ex-boyfriend about getting an abortion and instead gave the child away to her 35-year-old gay friend. The lie continued for three years before the biological father went to police with his suspicion of the child’s true identity. Now, both the mother and her friend could face up to three years in prison for their intricate act of deception.

As reported by The Telegraph, the child’s biological mother and father, whose true identities cannot be named for legal reasons, had been dating for only three months when the woman became pregnant. The biological father claims to have expressed his desire to keep the child but when his relationship with the child’s mother ended, she told him that she had terminated the pregnancy. It was not until three years later when the biological father was told of a young girl who looked strikingly like him that he questioned the accuracy of the abortion claims.

The father went to the police with his suspicion of the child’s true patronage but was turned away and told it was a civil matter, BBC reported. It was only after he wrote a formal complaint to the police that a full criminal investigation was launched.

After the police became involved in the case, it did not take long for the elaborate lie to unfold. Although the 35-year-old man who had been raising the girl as his own for the past three years claimed that the child had been born via a surrogate mother named “Clare Green,” police soon discovered that Green was nothing more than a false Facebook page created by the pair.

The pair then claimed that they had conceived the child naturally after sleeping together following a birthday celebration, but DNA testing soon proved this to be a lie.

The investigation also revealed that the adoptive father was a registered sex offender and the daughter was promptly taken from his custody. The trial took only six days with the Perth Sheriff Court finding both the mother and her male friend guilty of conducting fraud and denying the biological father the right to know of his daughter’s birth.

Following the court ruling the biological father and his current wife were granted custody of the young child.

"I am over the moon. I have finally got justice for my little girl,” the man explained following the ruling, as reported by The BBC. “I don't think any sentence is high enough to justify what they have done to her."

The ruling judge, Sheriff William Wood, expressed his disdain with the mother and her companion’s “wicked scheme” and praised the biological father for his “determination” in gaining custody of his daughter, The Telegraph reported. "In all respects this was an elaborate and cynical scheme,” he said.

The pair has continued bail and the sentence was deferred until next month.