Got the sniffles and a cough at 7 p.m. on a weekday?

Right now, you might run to the nearest drug store to peruse cough medicines and seek out the softest box of tissues.

But the increased availability of clinics in retail drug stores means there is a growing likelihood you could also stop in for a medical evaluation — and possibly even leave with a prescription medication.

By the end of October, CVS/pharmacy said it will have added eight walk-in clinics to its Louisiana stores, five of them in the New Orleans regional area. The addition of the MinuteClinics brings the total number of retail primary care clinics in the state to 13, with the remainder already in operation in Walgreens stores.

Dr. Andrew Sussman, president of MinuteClinic, said the expansion is part of an effort to open 150 new in-store clinics in CVS stores nationwide before the end of the year — an accelerated construction schedule largely in response to the implementation of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, often called Obamacare.

The retail pharmacy industry does appear to be growing nationally. According to Thomas Charland, who tracks the industry for his company Merchant Medicine, there are roughly 1,500 clinics nationally now compared with about 600 in 2007.

Here are the locations of the retail primary care clinics available in Louisiana: New MinuteClinic locations in CVS/pharmacies: 7777 Bluebonnet Blvd. Ste. 100, Baton Rouge 2915 Highway 190, Mandeville 2103 Gause Blvd. E, Slidell 201 N. Canal Blvd., Thibodaux Healthcare Clinics in Walgreens locations: 821 W Esplanade, Kenner 2880 Hwy. 190, Mandeville 1260 Front St., Slidell 4600 West Bank Expressway, Marrero 4001 Canal St., New Orleans MinuteClinic locations in CVS/pharmacies opening later this month: 820 W. Esplanade Ave., Kenner 2105 Cleary Ave., Metairie 4401 S. Claiborne Ave., New Orleans 17122 Airline Highway, Prairieville



And as millions more people prepare to become insured in accordance with the new federal law, Sussman and others in the retail primary care clinic business say they are promoting their clinics as one way to help meet growing market demand for family health needs.

But others in the medical field believe the clinics could contribute to fragmented medical care and lead patients to miss out on the expert care they might get from a licensed physician.

That’s because, like MinuteClinics, most retail clinics are staffed with nurse practitioners — not doctors — who are empowered to diagnose, treat and write prescriptions for common family illnesses like strep throat, ear infections, sinus infections and bladder infections. They are often open after regular business hours, seven days week.

Dr. Robert Wergin, president-elect of the American Academy of Family Physicians, said that while that after-hours access can be a good thing, the best care comes from a physician who is familiar with the patient and the patient’s history.

But with an existing shortage of primary care doctors that is expected to reach 29,800 by 2015 and 65,800 by 2025, according to the Association of American Medical Colleges, the retail clinic industry touts the model as an affordable way to improve access without compromising care.

“We send a copy of all the notes to the patients’ physicians and we see a lot of patients who don’t have a family physician,” Sussman said. “We actually can be a portal of entry for those patients.”

Patients who walk into the clinics without having a “medical home” are given lists of doctors in the area who are accepting new patients, he said. And about half of the clinics’ patients don’t have a regular physician, he said.

But Dr. Jim Taylor, legislative affairs chairman for the Louisiana Academy of Family Physicians, sees expansion of these clinics as the wrong way to try to meet the demand for physician care.

“This,” Taylor said, “is CVS leveraging its economic power to replace physicians with nurses.”

Nurse practitioners have advanced degrees and often work without direct doctor supervision. But Sussman said that at MinuteClinics the nurse practitioners all have physicians with whom they collaborate — who review patient charts and conduct occasional educational sessions for the nurses.

Additionally, Sussman said, in some markets the clinics have formed affiliations with health systems like the Cleveland Clinic, to strengthen sharing of patient information. That hasn’t happened yet in Louisiana, however.

Karen DeSalvo, health commissioner for the City of New Orleans, said retail clinics can positively increase access to care for people who need to get flu shots, vaccines and physicals. They can eliminate long wait times and work to meet the scheduling demands of patients with jobs, families and other commitments.

“It can be a very nice addition,” DeSalvo said. “It’s best done if it’s linked in with a health care system.”

Even in the New Orleans area, where DeSalvo and her team have worked hard since 2005 to establish a prolific coalition of neighborhood clinics designed to treat people where they live, such clinics often spend much of their time treating chronic illnesses like heart disease, diabetes, emphysema and asthma. DeSalvo said that can sometimes make it hard for a patient with an acute care need like a minor wound or pink eye to get a same-day appointment. A retail clinic can help fill that need, she said.

That’s not to say the retail clinic industry isn’t interested in helping to address those chronic issues as well.

In April, Walgreens announced plans to expand services in 300 of its clinics to include management, assessment and treatment of chronic conditions including hypertension, diabetes, high cholesterol and asthma.

Taylor, a family physician based in Livingston, said he sees such efforts as a disservice to patient care. If retail clinics are interested in offering quality care for these patients, he said, they should hire physicians.

According to Sussman, the affordability of the retail clinics is a draw. The costs for minor illness exams range from $79 to $89, according to the company’s website, and most major insurance is accepted.