CLEVELAND, Ohio – Republican Mark Zetzer knows he will likely lose the election to represent the heavily Democratic 11th Congressional District to U.S. Rep. Marcia Fudge.

Zetzer, of Shaker Heights, appeared solo at The City Club of Cleveland Tuesday for what was supposed to be a debate. Fudge refused to attend.

Fudge, a former mayor of Warrensville Heights, started serving in Congress in 2008. Zetzer, who has a background in marketing and advertising, has lost three elections in two years, including a campaign opposing an income tax increase in Shaker Heights.

"What the Tea Party and myself want to do is to leave markets alone," Zetzer said.

Here are some five observations from the debate:

Zetzer made many digs at Fudge

Zetzer was very vocal about his opponent's decision not to attend the event. He said Fudge is out of touch with her constituents and is a career politician living off of taxpayers' money.

"It takes courage to debate and voters should know that (Fudge) can't face the music," he said. "She has had three elections with almost no competition."

He continued by saying that Fudge hasn't supported any change and that "conservative reactionaries" like himself can fix the market.

All for privatization

Perhaps Zetzer's most surprising statement was when he told the crowd that water and air should be privately owned.

Zetzer opposes the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, as well as other government regulation.

"The EPA fits standards on a one size fits all," he said. "We put our trust and our health in the EPA, and that scares me."

Student debt

Zetzer mentioned the millennial generation's growing student debt. He said that education has gotten more expensive because the government subsidizes student loans.

When he was asked how to fix skyrocketing education costs and piles of student debt, he didn't have a solution.

"There is a bubble in debt that will likely occur in a short time," Zetzer said. "We are sitting on an inflation or deflation time bomb."

Doctors should make house calls

Zetzer made it clear that he was against the Affordable Care Act and if elected said he would work to repeal it. He likened healthcare to veterinary care.

"Animals get treated pretty well," he said. "I don't know why human care is 10 times more expensive than care for animals."

When City Club CEO Dan Mouthrop pushed Zetzer on how ill people without health insurance could get care, Zetzer said hospitals and doctors would still be required to treat sick people, regardless of their ability to pay. He also said the doctors should make house calls to increase their market share.

The Federal Reserve is bad

Fudge voted against a bill that would audit the Federal Reserve, which Zetzer said was a mistake. The value of the dollar has dropped, he said.

"The Fed thinks you have to pump in money and save jobs that might not be useful," he said. "It's manipulation and a rationale for failed policy of central banking."

He supports the Free Competition in Currency Act, a bill languishing in the U.S. House that would allow people to use metals as money.