The FDA and CDC have reported that the human fecal matter-tainted cilantro from the Mexican state of Puebla has led to at least 226 cyclosporiasis cases.

The FDA and CDC have reported that the human fecal matter-tainted cilantro from the Mexican state of Puebla has led to at least 226 cyclosporiasis cases. Brian Slewlorek CC BY-NC-ND 2.0

Last week, the Food and Drug Administration issued a temporary ban on cilantro imported from the Mexican state of Puebla after reports surfaced it was contaminated with human fecal matter. Well, now the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention reports over 384 people in 26 states have been affected by the poop-stained cilantro, starting as far south as Texas and as far north as Wisconsin. Clearly, reports of the parasitic gastrointestinal illness cyclosporiasis didn’t stop people from eating cilantro.

Cyclosporiasis — a parasitic illness that can lead to diarrhea and explosive bowel movements — has hit the U.S. for the fourth year in a row. Last year, the illness affected 304 people. The FDA says the outbreak started around May 1, with at least 226 people falling ill since that time.

Officials reported that preliminary tests in Wisconsin and Texas found those confirmed with cyclosporiasis in fact dined at restaurants that served the tainted cilantro. FDA officials say that the investigations are ongoing and the results are inconclusive.

The FDA investigated 11 different farms in Puebla and found deplorable conditions; some fields lacked toilet paper, running water, soap, and more, while others completely lacked bathrooms. Officials also found human fecal matter and stained toilet paper in some of the fields.

Shipments of fresh cilantro from other Mexican states will be allowed to enter and be released into the U.S. after sufficient evidence has been shown that the cilantro has come from a farm outside of Puebla, according to the FDA.

In case you were still wondering whether or not to eat the cilantro from your favorite chain restaurants like Chiptole and Taco Bell, know that you can eat with a clear conscience. Both food chains get their cilantro from farms in California. If you’re feeling brave and decide to use cilantro in your next meal but are unsure of where the cilantro is from, be sure to wash it, your hands, and anything else that came in contact with the herb before use.

"If you are concerned, go back to the store and ask the retailer where they purchased the cilantro," FDA spokeswoman Lauren Sucher said. "If in doubt, throw it out."

Last year, the Puebla cilantro was put under increased scrutiny by the FDA, while Texas health officials investigated a separate cyclosporiasis outbreak that may have also been linked to the Puebla cilantro. In 2013, another outbreak linked to the Puebla cilantro affected 25 states.