In a century of life, Myer Kripke was a scholar, rabbi and philanthropist.

He led Bible studies and often was approached with questions on Jewish history and religion. He enjoyed explaining his faith to non-Jewish audiences. And he believed that learning was a lifelong calling.

Kripke, who died Friday at age 100, led Omaha's Beth El Synagogue for almost 30 years.

He had served congregations in Wisconsin, New York and Connecticut before coming to Omaha in 1947. He was named rabbi emeritus at Beth El in 1975.

Kripke often hosted educational talks with community members and wrote a weekly column for the Jewish Press for years.

Rabbi Steven Abraham of Beth El said Saturday night that his predecessor was beloved by his congregation and respected around the country.

“He was an incredibly scholarly man, an erudite man,'' Abraham said. He added: “He put the Omaha Jewish community on the map.”

Kripke and his wife, Dorothy, who died in 2000, made numerous charitable contributions over the years. The couple endowed the Center for the Study of Religion and Society at Creighton University, and it was renamed the Kripke Center in 2005.

A key focus of the center is promoting understanding among all faith communities but especially among Judaism, Christianity and Islam.

Rabbi Kripke often spoke in churches, Christian schools and other non-Jewish venues. He said his hope was that misconceptions about Judaism might be “modestly assaulted by my presence.” He taught courses on theology at Creighton and the University of Nebraska at Omaha.

Myer Kripke was born Jan. 21, 1914, in Toledo, Ohio. He was a Phi Beta Kappa graduate of New York University and earned a master's degree in philosophy from Columbia University.

He received master's and doctoral degrees, as well as his rabbinical degree, from the Jewish Theological Seminary in New York City. He was senior class president at the seminary in 1937.

Kripke met Dorothy Karp in a classroom at the seminary. She said it was love at first sight: “I knew a good thing when I saw one.”

The Kripkes' philanthropy was enabled in large part because of their decision to invest with Warren Buffett. The couple had known Buffett since the 1950s, playing bridge together and celebrating Thanksgivings.

Dorothy Kripke urged her husband for several years to approach Buffett about investing their modest savings, but the rabbi resisted, saying the stake was too small to interest Buffett.

“I said 'Look, I'll be silly to go up there,' ” Kripke recalled in 1997. “He doesn't want the kind of money we have.''

In 1966, he finally made the trip to Buffett's office.

“He said 'I'll take whatever you have and I'll make money on you,' ” Kripke recalled. “And he did. And we did.”

The amount grew to millions of dollars over the years, allowing the Kripkes to make charitable contributions, including a $7 million donation to the Jewish Theological Seminary, where he had trained, to restore its 13-story tower for classroom and office space.

Rabbi Kripke used the pulpit as an educational vehicle, said his daughter, Madeline Kripke of New York. He also commissioned artwork for the sanctuary at Beth El.

“The way he practiced his religion from the pulpit was also to be mindful of aesthetics,” she said.

In that same vein, she said, he wanted his sermons to be melodic, understood and translated.

Kripke once told The World-Herald that his strength as a congregational rabbi was his ability to listen. He said he was aided by his devotion to reading, which broadened his perspective.

“One tends to like his own opinion very much,” he said. “I'm guilty of that, too.”

Dorothy Kripke was an accomplished writer and scholar as well. She was the author of 10 books for children, including the popular “Let's Talk” series: “Let's Talk About God” and “Let's Talk About Right and Wrong” among them.

The Kripkes' son, Saul, is an internationally known philosopher who teaches at the Graduate Center of the City College of New York. Madeline Kripke is an editor and well-known expert on dictionaries, with 20,000 volumes in her collection. The Kripkes' other daughter, Netta Stern, who was a social worker, died in 2011.

Myer Kripke also is survived by a grandson, granddaughter and two great-grandsons.

Services will be at 10 a.m. Monday at Beth El Synagogue, 14506 California St., with burial in Beth El Cemetery.

World-Herald staff writer Joseph Brennan contributed to this report.