'I'm still trying to learn everything'

After nearly four months on the job, Longmont Police Officer Rachel Bundy recommends that the next crop of new police officers coming into the department not be afraid to ask for help, even if they really don't want to.

"Right now, I'm still new so I'm still trying to learn everything," Bundy said. "Some calls you're like 'I don't know really what to do' and you're calling for help on the phone."

Take Two The Times-Call's series Take Two revisits people and situations we have written about in the past. Take Two stories run on Mondays.

After undergoing several months of field training with another officer, Bundy is out on her own, but she still is learning the ropes and getting advice from more seasoned officers, who are usually happy to help.

Bundy works the swing shift, also called watch II, which runs from about 1:45 p.m. to 11:45 p.m.. She generally shows up to work a little before 1:30 p.m., four days a week and hits the street after briefing, usually about 2:30 p.m.

"Depending on the day, you can get dispatched right away to a call or you can drive around for a while," she said. "Typically, I handle three to four calls a day before I take my break at 8 or 8:30 p.m. Usually by the time I'm done, graveyard is here and I'll be cover for them. It depends on how busy a day it is."

Bundy said watch II is the most active and likened it to "drinking out of a fire hose" when it gets busy.

"You're just going from call to call to call," she said. "You are trying to adjust to each call."

She said disturbances and suspicious situation calls are common, as are domestics, which can be hard to work because it's often unclear who the guilty party is.

"If I have probable cause to believe something physical has happened, I'm required by state law to arrest somebody," she said. "It's hard when he's saying 'she started it' and she's saying 'he started it.'"

Bundy said that typically, an officer is dispatched a cover unit so he or she doesn't have to go to a domestic call alone but that can change depending on what's happening at the scene.

Rachel Bundy last fall, shortly after joining the Longmont Police Department, where her father Jim Bundy has been serving for 29 years. (Lewis Geyer / Staff photographer)

"If you show up first and hear something really bad going on, sometimes you have to step up and stop it," she said. "If I hear someone yelling 'help' or I hear someone getting hit, I'm going in by myself."

Bundy's father, Sgt. Jim Bundy, also works at the department, but the two aren't on the same shift because it's against department policy, but the two do get each other's court papers by mistake on occasion.

Teachers at the police academy teach new recruits about "emotional survival," because the job is stressful and can wear a person down, especially seeing people on their worst days, day in and day out.

So, Bundy de-stresses with pastimes.

She is an avid reader — "American Sniper" and the Harry Potter series top her list — and loves hanging out with friends.

"I also love just driving up in the mountains, just driving all around," she said.

Bundy watches a variety of movies, too, just not a lot of cop movies.

John Bear: 303-684-5212, bearj@timescall.com or twitter.com/johnbearwithme