Donald Trump. For many in the Republican Party, they either love him for his refreshing political incorrectness or hate him for the image he projects of the GOP that wants to be more demographically embracing.

For Black party members, especially longtime stalwarts in the Philadelphia area, it is an even more awkward situation: disagreeing with the candidate’s race-baiting comments that spawn hooliganism while agreeing he is hitting a chord among discontented voters.

The 2016 campaign, moreover, is casting doubts among the flock locally about the direction of the Grand Old Party and the direction of their vote come November’s general election.

“How can you support the most outrageous figure there is in the Republican Party?” asked Republican political strategist Randy Robinson. “I don’t support him. I’ll never vote for him or [former Secretary of State] Hillary [Clinton]. I’ll probably just do a write in.”

Other Blacks in the party express similar disbelief that Trump is leading the GOP pack, which once counted at least 17 candidates, as it mushes through state primaries and caucuses. In what many saw as a political knock-knock joke has become a stark reality as “The Donald” gains momentum with each ballot victory.

Renee Amoore, a third-generation Republican, has deep concerns about Trump’s campaign and the shadow it is casting.

“This has been very unique from the campaigns, to the violent rallies, and they really concern me,” said the deputy chairman of the Republican Party of Pennsylvania. “To me, it shows how angry people are.

“I never thought it was a joke,” Amoore said of Trump’s nomination bid. “But I never thought it would go this far.

“I always support our candidates,” she added. “But if Donald wins, to be honest, that’s something that I have to think about.”

It has been an arduous struggle to regain the support of Black voters from the days when the GOP was called “the party of Lincoln,” in reference to Republican President Abraham Lincoln’s emancipation of slaves in 1863. That and other acts would endear the African-American bloc to the party for nearly 70 years.

The shift to the Democratic Party occurred in the 1930s, with the implementation of New Deal measures by President Franklin Roosevelt to end the Great Depression. African-American loyalty to the party was further solidified in the 1960s with the enactment by Presidents John F. Kennedy and Lyndon B. Johnson of civil rights laws, covering such areas as voting rights and fair housing.

According to blackdemographics.com, in 2012 when the last presidential election occurred, about 3 percent of African Americans nationally considered themselves Republican compared with 72 percent who were Democrat.

Statistics from the Pennsylvania Division of Voter Registration showed the state had 8.25 million registrants in 2014. Of those, about 3 million signed up as Republicans while 4 million were card-carrying Democrats. The numbers for Republicans in Philadelphia were less favorable, as the party counted 119,267 members vs 806,784 for the Democrats.

Blacks have consistently voted for Democratic presidential candidates for the last 40 years, with President Barack Obama being a notable beneficiary over his two terms in office.

But the Democratic Party doesn’t promote Black independence, Robinson contends.

“I believe in a do-for-self mindset, lesser government and taxations,” he said. “Most African Americans don’t embrace conservative politics because they equate those with being less Black or [being] a traitor to the race.

“Party affiliation is not a litmus test to your race,” Robinson added, noting, “I’m a moderate Christian conservative.”

The 20-year veteran of the Republican Party finds the political affiliation fits with his faith.

“We have a lot African Americans elected as Democrats and they make it about racial pride rather then public policy and that’s the downfall,” Robinson said. “I think Christianity and my faith was more aligned with the Republicans. I’ve seen welfare programs in policy that pretty much dissolved the Black man. It helps children, but not the Black man.”

Ryan Sanders, a Philadelphia native who now lives in Harrisburg and serves as the regional manager of the Republican National Committee, explained his allegiance to the GOP.

“My goals are aligned a little bit closer with the Republican Party in terms of the Second Amendment, business policies … and I believe that some of the policies that were put in place over the past 20 or 30 years have hurt African Americans,” he said. “I had always been conservative in my heart.”

But Republican James Williams, the African-American leader of the city’s 50th Ward, acknowledged that “this is a crazy race and you can’t really predict it. Trump is the outcast candidate and he’s on the fringe. I think he’s taking advantage of the Republican Party.”

The business magnate was considered a long-shot in the field that touted more politically experienced candidates, such as New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie, former Florida Gov. Jeb Bush and U.S. Sen. Marco Rubio, as well as Novice, such as Dr. Ben Carson and Carly Fiorina. The 17 horses that started at the gate have withered down to three going down the stretch.

Only two Republican challengers remain in the party’s primary race: Ohio Gov. John Kasich and U.S. Sen. Ted Cruz of Texas. Combined both have chalked up primary victories and delegate numbers below what their unorthodox campaign opponent has collected since the process began in Iowa on Feb. 1.

Trump, whose political slogan is “Make America Great Again!” has mocked Muslims, immigrants, women and people with physical disabilities. Despite those barbs, he continues to lead in the survey polls and, in many cases, at the ballot boxes. With 34 primaries and caucuses down and 22 still to go, the front-runner has amassed 673 of the 1,237 delegates needed to capture the GOP nomination outright during the party’s convention this summer in Cleveland.

Still, Williams says Trump is “not as well-liked by the Republican Party as people would think. He’s just talking rhetoric. He’s playing into people’s fears. What I can say is the good thing about Trump is that he is hurting the far right wing.”

Calvin Tucker, chairman of the Philadelphia Black Republican Council and leader of the city’s 22nd Ward, insists that a lot of what the candidates are doing is political theater.

“You have to find a lane in the political process, and they’re driving down that lane,” he said. “Donald Trump is appealing to some of the basics regarding immigration and other things like national security.”

Robinson blamed both political parties for the rise of Trump.

“They prepared America for the clown car show by doing nothing and being so adversarial. People hate Congress, and they want someone to get something done. You have folks who are just simply upset about government,” he explained. “The party prepared the stage for this, and the establishment candidates are out of the loop.”

Sanders took another tact in explaining Trump’s political success: “Americans are looking for a strong voice. Along with his experience in the business world, and that matched up with some other things in terms of public safety and the overall welfare of the country.”

So who are area Black Republicans supporting?

“Me, as a voter, if I’m going to pick my candidate for president, John Kasich is clearly the best to lead as POTUS,” Robinson said. “My decision for the GOP brand and what’s best for America would be [Kasich].”

Robinson favors Kasich because he is from a state facing a mixture of industrial, rural and urban issues as well as labor concerns. He also feels the governor is more in tune with poor people, Black people and the LGBT community.

“As for being an African American, I need someone who has familiarity with someone who has lived in an urban-type setting,” the political strategist said. “Kasich has had some experience, and not all positive, but he understands the importance of labor … he understands the position of a thriving metropolis and economy of state.”

Williams, who failed in his bid for an at-large seat on City Council last year, also is betting on Kasich as the best Republican candidate to pit against Democrat Bernie Sanders or Hillary Clinton come the Nov. 8 election.

“He’s the most talented guy in the gym shooting the ball,” he said. “Maybe he’s not dunking enough or he’s not flashy enough, but it’s a shame because he’s not getting any notice.”

Williams gives Cruz a poor rating, calling him “the worst candidate because he’s against things that are good for the average person and for cities like Philadelphia. Most people might not like Obamacare [the Affordable Care Act], but it helps people and it works. Cruz is a person who says he sticks to the Constitution and if we stuck to that then I wouldn’t be free.”

Sanders said he would support whoever is the eventual GOP nominee, even if it’s Trump.

“Me, personally, being from Philadelphia, I know the impact of what the Islamic community has had in our communities and I think as we move forward in the primaries, I think that Donald Trump will have an opportunity to explain his positions and policies,” said Sanders, who is also the co-founder of the Frederick Douglass Inclusion Council.

Tucker, the 22nd Ward leader, notes a lot of Blacks think Trump is articulating the concerns of many people, though being inadequate in his delivery.

“On average, there are a lot of African Americans beginning to say that he may not be saying things the way they should be said but he’s addressing things that need to be said,” he said. “[U.S. Sen.] Bernie Sanders is saying a lot of things millennials want to hear.”

Trump has dominated the survey polls because people are tired of hearing the same empty promises, Tucker said.

“It’s a basic hunger and desire for change,” he added. “People can’t survive on basic income. They see their neighborhood being torn apart. They want change.”

Amoore echoed that voters were eager to shake up the political landscape during the 2016 presidential run.

“[Trump] is not a typical established politician and that’s what people want,” she said, noting his attraction has had undeniably good consequence for the state GOP.

“In Pennsylvania, 46,000 Democrats [have] changed to Republicans,” Amoore said. “A lot of people are saying that’s because of Donald Trump.”

Williams, the 50th Ward leader, hasn’t seen a big dividend from the Trump candidacy translate to a sizable migration in Philadelphia. He said only 1,600 Democrats in Philadelphia had switched to the Republican Party, in a city of 1.03 million registered voters where GOP card carriers were outnumbered nearly 8 to 1 in 2014.

“One out of three Republicans are for Trump,” said Williams, who considers himself a moderate. “Most Republicans view Trump as a Democrat, but it’s just easier for him to win as a Republican. Not a lot of Republicans in the city or the state are really for Trump.”

Tucker acknowledges that voters, especially Blacks, may be politically numbed by their circumstances.

“People have gotten to the point that regardless of who you [gets] into the White House, things have not substantially changed, particularly in the African-American community,” he said. “Poverty is deep and almost entrenched in our community. We don’t know how to get out of economic distress and unemployment.”

With the April 26 primary just weeks away, Black Republicans in Philadelphia and elsewhere across Pennsylvania will likely continue to do more soul searching before they weigh in on who’s their nomination choice.

“The fact of the matter is we’ve got to see a way out of these things we see today,” Tucker said. “I don’t know if our current political landscape can help us move out of that process unless we change that or create a more competitive political environment.”