Photo

To the Editor:

Re “A Fast-Food Symbol of America Falls in Moscow” (news article, Aug. 22):

The Russian government closed four McDonald’s restaurants in Moscow, supposedly for sanitary violations, but the prevailing opinion is that their closing was a symbolic gesture by the government against the United States.

The United States has recently expressed displeasure with Russia’s unlawful and immoral seizure of part of Ukraine, and Russia’s response has been to go after the timeless symbol of American economic imperialism, McDonald’s.

What effect could this possibly have against America? Americans aren’t going to care about the closing of McDonald’s locations in Moscow. All this will do is anger Russia’s own people, who both frequent the restaurants and know the thinly veiled reason behind their closing.

This move is just a petulant attempt by Russia to continue a pointless, stupid feud. Countries this powerful should be above this.

KIERAN McCUDDEN

Los Angeles, Aug. 23, 2014

To the Editor:

In 1991, I was walking to my hotel on a freezing cold, pitch dark December afternoon in Moscow. There was a very long queue to get into the first McDonald’s in that city.

I asked the man at the head of the line if he spoke English. When he said (in a heavy Russian accent) that he did, I asked how long he had been waiting. “Two hours,” he replied.

Yes, Muscovites are upset when a McDonald’s closes. It is not only a “symbol of America.” It is clean food, predictably tasty, in a warm place. And there are clean restrooms.

SUSAN KLEE

Berkeley, Calif., Aug. 22, 2014

To the Editor:

My mother’s family came from Russia. Grandmother made a superb borscht and a great roast chicken.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

You report the closing of McDonald’s in Moscow, due to political retaliation by Russia, related no doubt to American antipathy toward the aggressive policies of President Vladimir V. Putin.

Many Russian immigrants retain a fondness for pickled, highly salted foods, which remain a part of the Russian diet to this day. My grandmother took advantage of the healthy American bounty. Although she did make a wonderful pickled herring from time to time, her menu was a healthy variety of fresh vegetables, meats and fish, wisely cooked.

The closing of McDonald’s in Moscow deprives Muscovites of a source of grilled meat and fried potatoes, and some chicken. It could be seen as an improvement on the awful, salty, consistently pickled diet that the average Russian ingests (with a vodka chaser) until he or she dies.

Big Mac, yes; Putin, no.

MARC REUBEN

Langhorne, Pa., Aug. 22, 2014