<p>ASSOCIATED PRESS The inability of fans to see Adrian Gonzalez and the Los Angeles Dodgers on SportsNet LA was the top area media story of 2014.</p>

The end of the year is a good time to make lists: shopping lists, food lists, resolution lists, along with lists of the biggest news stories of the year.

By far the biggest story in sports media in 2014 was the Los Angeles Dodgers starting their own TV network, SportsNet LA. On the surface, it didn’t seem like all that bad an idea: Why wouldn’t Dodgers fans like having an entire TV network devoted year-round to their favorite team 24 hours a day, seven days a week?

But the problem with SportsNet LA was that very few people could actually see it. Instead of fans having their own Dodgers TV channel, many of them were forced to relive the days when you could only listen to the team on the radio.

After their contracts with Prime Ticket and KCAL (Channel 9) ended in 2013, the Dodgers formed SportsNet LA in a 25-year, $8.35 billion partnership with Time Warner Cable. Time Warner Cable was responsible for negotiating with TV providers to carry the channel, but no other major provider did so because of the fee of around $4 per subscriber per month the Dodgers and TWC were reportedly seeking.

Time Warner Cable reaches a fairly sizable chunk of Southern California, about 30 percent of the audience. But that left 70 percent that couldn’t see the Dodgers except when they were on national TV.

The biggest domino in the chain of providers would have been DirecTV, which also reaches about 30 percent of the market. The others include Dish Network, Charter, Cox, Verizon FiOS and AT&T U-Verse.

It had all gone so well for Time Warner Cable when it started a similar network, TWC SportsNet, for the Lakers in 2012. The primary difference between the Dodgers channel and the Lakers channel is the Dodgers own theirs while Time Warner Cable owns the Lakers channel with the team having editorial control.

TWC SportsNet was formed in a 20-year, $3 billion deal with the Lakers. Distributors initially balked at that fee as well, but they eventually gave in. But SportsNet LA was the straw that broke the camel’s back when it came to high sports rights fees.

Ironically, there were reports this week that Time Warner Cable plans to charge its customers a new fee starting Jan. 1 to compensate for carrying sports channels that come with exorbitant rights fees. Of course, TWC is burning that candle at both ends: charging customers more to carry the glut of sports networks while trying to eliminate the middle man by forming networks of its own and trying to get providers to carry them.

Absolutely nothing has happened in the SportsNet LA negotiations since then and it isn’t likely anything will until around the time spring training starts up again. TV talks seldom happen until a deadline is held over the negotiators’ heads, so it’s unlikely the issue will come up again until around February.

On top of everything else, Comcast is trying to acquire Time Warner Cable and AT&T is trying to acquire DirecTV. That may grind everything about SportsNet LA to a halt until those acquisitions are finalized.

Jim Carlisle covers TV-Radio sports for The Star. Email address: jcarlisle@vcstar.com. Follow on Twitter: @VCSJimCarlisle.