White House officials confirm President Obama plans to travel to Omaha following his seventh and final State of the Union Address.

A White House statement reads: "From Florida to Wisconsin to Idaho and many more states in between, the President has made a point of following each of his State of the Union addresses by visiting communities throughout the country -- and this year is no exception."

Along with a stop in Omaha on Wednesday, Jan. 13th, the president will also travel to Baton Rouge, Louisiana on Thursday, Jan. 14. He plans to highlight the progress "we have made across the country and discuss how he can continue taking action in the next year to help hardworking Americans get ahead," the statement reads.

The statement released to KETV NewsWatch 7 goes further to say that President Obama "is focused on not just the remarkable progress we have made, but also what can be done in the year ahead -- and in the years to come. With each day of his presidency, the president plans to keep his foot on the gas pedal and engage Americans in discussions about how we can continue to move the country forward."

Obama's first stop in Omaha is will show that "since the president took office, the unemployment rate in Nebraska has fallen to 2.9 percent, down from 4.8 percent at the peak of the recession. This means more than 70,000 jobs, including more than 40,000 in the Omaha area, have been created since 2010. The Affordable Care Act has benefited hundreds of thousands of Nebraskans, including more than 767,000 people with preexisting conditions who are no longer at risk for coverage denials, reduced benefits, or higher premiums -- and if the state expands Medicaid, an additional 42,000 uninsured people would gain coverage. Additionally, the president’s historic investment in college affordability has resulted in a 95 percent increase in Pell Grant funding in Nebraska and the number of grant recipients increased by 11,000," the statement reads.

This will be Obama's second visit to Nebraska since he was elected and the statement reads that he is looking forward to discussing his priorities and opportunities for progress in the next year.

Further details regarding Obama's travel to Nebraska have not been made available.

We'll update you as we learn more.