Related Coverage Health New England Chairman discusses cost increases due to the A.C.A.

SPRINGFIELD, Mass. (WWLP) – Health New England’s chairman says the Affordable Care Act or Obamacare is penalizing smaller insurance companies and could ultimately increase how much some of us pay in insurance premiums. The 22News I-Team found out this could impact who Health New England insures.

Baystate Health President and CEO Dr. Mark Keroack who is also Health New England’s Chairman says we shouldn’t disrupt a system that’s already working. He told the I-Team a provision in the Affordable Care Act is threatening how affordable our healthcare system is.

A provision in the Affordable Care Act, called risk adjustment is forcing Health New England to rethink who it insures. The 22News I-Team spoke with Baystate Health President Dr. Mark Keroack.

“What risk adjustment is attempting to do is estimate which insurance company has the sicker patients,” said Dr. Keroack.

The health insurance companies that have sicker patients would be paid an adjustment directly from other insurance companies.

(How much money are we talking about Health New England potentially losing?)

“The estimates we’ve gotten from the state would have been about $14 million owed for calendar year 2014 and about $30 million for 2015,” said Dr. Keroack.

(Would this force you to rethink how Health New England is run or if it is run at all?)

“I personally think that Massachusetts should be given a waiver from the federal government because we’ve been in health reform for so long, we’ve been ahead of the crowd here and we shouldn’t be penalized for it,” said Dr. Keroack.

Without a waiver Baystate’s President told the I-Team they’d be forced to pay Blue Cross Blue Shield big money that they’d rather spend here.

“Which would really be upsetting to me having to write a check to a well off company in Boston instead of using those monies to benefit our community right here in western Mass. would really be a problem,” said Dr. Keroack.

Baystate’s President isn’t saying they’re considering leaving the Health Exchange anytime soon. He is hoping the state requests and the federal government grants a waiver to reduce or remove these payments.

(How might individual be impacted if they are insured by Health New England?

“If they are insured by Health New England they could see their rates go up. Ultimately if the rule continued in effect we probably couldn’t continue to provide insurance to that segment of the market,” said Dr. Keroack.

This wouldn’t affect all Health New England subscribers, only the individuals buying insurance off the health care connector as well as employees of small companies. Keroack said any decision they ultimately make likely won’t impact their 300 employees.

To read the entire transcript of the interview with Dr. Keroack you can click here.

Fallon Health sent 22News a statement in which it said it is not leaving and does not plan to leave the Health Connector.

Health Connector Spokesman Jason Lefferts sent 22News a statement which read, “We are still gathering accurate data from carriers, and need

to see what the data says, and then work with the Division of Insurance and others if there is an imbalance in the system. As data quality has improved we are feeling more comfortable about general market stability. Throughout the entire risk adjustment process, including creating a formula and gathering data from the market, we have worked closely with carriers, and we will continue to do until the process is complete.”

22News also spoke to Sharon Torgerson, the Director of Communications for Blue Cross Blue Shield of Massachusetts. She told 22News risk adjustment is an important component and key requirement of the federal health reform. They have worked with the members of the Health Connector board and have already taken risk adjustment into account for their premiums. Although, she reminds us that the Health Connector has yet to compile its final numbers for risk adjustment.

The next step for us is to speak with the Health Connector board to see how they are crunching those numbers if they or Governor Baker plan to ask for a federal waiver and if one is actually feasible.