By Deena Winter | Nebraska Watchdog

LINCOLN, Neb. — A new study estimates Nebraska would forgo hundreds of millions of dollars — $738 million in the year 2022 — by not expanding Medicaid because the state’s residents will still have to pay federal taxes to support the massive expansion of the government program for the poor.

Expanding Medicaid to more low-income people is a key provision of the Affordable Care Act, or Obamacare, but last year the U.S. Supreme Court ruled states don’t have to participate. Nebraska is among 20 states that have so far opted out.

But Nebraska lawmakers — including some Republicans — haven’t given up, and plan to push the issue for the second legislative session in a row.

Because the feds say they’ll pick up most of the cost of the program, taxpayers in states that don’t participate will bear a significant share of the overall costs through federal tax payments, but won’t enjoy any of the benefits, the Commonwealth Fund study said. The feds pay all the costs of expansion for the first three years, and then support begins dropping to 90 percent by 2020.

Gov. Dave Heineman has strongly resisted, saying an expansion is too expensive and he doubts the feds will live up to promises to fund most of the costs. He said it would cost Nebraska hundreds of millions of dollars to expand Medicaid, reducing funding for education and likely requiring a tax increase. He points to broken promises to fund 40 percent of special education decades ago, which is now funded at less than half that.

“I don’t trust them and I also don’t want to take away resources from education funding in this state, because that’s what you’re going to have to do or raise taxes. I don’t think that’s a good idea,” Heineman said in an interview Thursday. “The bottom line is this Medicaid expansion is too expensive; it’s unaffordable long term.”

Education and jobs should be the state’s priorities, he said.

But the Commonwealth report said no state that rejects the expansion will save money, and research has shown the cost to expand Medicaid will average less than 1 percent of state budgets. The Commonwealth Fund supports independent health care research, and its aim is to promote “a high performance” health care system.

The report said Medicaid expansion would cost most states less than a sixth the amount of money they pay to attract businesses annually. The Medicaid expansion program will become a large source of revenue to states — averaging 2.35 times as much federal highway money states will get in 2022, the report said. The report estimates Nebraska would spend about $55 million on the expansion by 2022, compared to $1.7 billion in incentives for businesses.

Robert Graboyes, senior research fellow at the Mercatus Center at George Mason University, said while it’s true states that decline to join the program will be turning down money, there’s no guarantee the feds will be able to afford to keep their promise to take on most of the costs.

“No one really knows if they will,” he said in an interview. “If I were a betting man, I don’t think they’ll fulfill that. If you expand you’re going to be paying a big chunk of the bill.”

Expanding Medicaid would open up the program to adults under the age of 65 who earn up to 138 percent of the federal poverty level (nearly $16,000 for individuals or about $32,500 for a family of four). Graboyes said those people would be dropping private plans or no plans to enter an expensive, broken program. He said people are better off being uninsured than being on Medicaid.

“Governments are notorious in underestimating what are going to be the costs,” he said. “This is going to be a very expensive thing to undertake.”

During the last legislative session, a bill expanding Medicaid was filibustered and not voted on because supporters couldn’t round up enough votes to end debate. Omaha Sen. Jeremy Nordquist has vowed to bring the bill to a vote in the next session, which begins in January. Heineman has challenged Nordquist to bring the bill up for a cloture vote on the first day of the session to see who has the votes.

Nordquist has said expanding Medicaid would have helped keep Nebraska’s insurance rates down as Obamacare is implemented. He cites a study by the independent, nonprofit RAND Corp. that said premiums for people who buy their own insurance would increase 8 to 10 percent in states that don’t expand Medicaid.

An interim hearing on expanding Medicaid will be held at 1:30 p.m. Wednesday at the Capitol.

Contact Deena Winter at deena@nebraskawatchdog.org. Follow Deena on Twitter at @DeenaNEWatchdog

Editor’s note: to subscribe to News Updates from Nebraska Watchdog at no cost, click here.