NEW YORK--(BUSINESS WIRE)--NYU Langone Medical Center, and its affiliated physicians, has agreed to a new multi-year agreement with Empire BlueCross BlueShield to join Empire’s Pathway and Pathway Enhanced Networks. These networks serve Empire members who purchase individual insurance plans on the New York State Department of Health Affordable Care Act marketplace, and for Empire small groups and individual members who purchase health insurance plans off of the marketplace.

Empire’s Pathway Network comprises nearly 49,000 physicians and 83 hospitals that are considered “in-network” for Exchange or Affordable Care Act compliant individual plans. The Pathway networks are designed to focus on primary care physicians who are committed to transforming their practices to a patient-centered model of care to help members achieve a higher-level of care in an efficient and cost-effective way.

As part of the new agreement, Empire Exchange beneficiaries can now access NYU Langone hospital-based and ambulatory services and physicians that were previously considered to be out-of-network. With over 100 ambulatory sites, clinics and medical practices located throughout Manhattan, Brooklyn, Queens, Staten Island, Long Island and the Hudson Valley, NYU Langone’s ambulatory sites and faculty group practice (FGP) network brings services directly to where patients live and work. Additionally, they provide access to the wide range of NYU Langone’s subspecialists at its flagship location in Manhattan. Patients also benefit from the seamless integration of their electronic medical record throughout the NYU Langone network.

NYU Langone was awarded the Blue Cross Blue Shield Blue Distinction program for liver transplants, bariatric surgery and complex/rare cancers, and participated in Empire’s Quality-In-Sights hospital quality program, which rewards hospitals for patient safety, patient satisfaction and health outcomes.

NYU Langone is Magnet designated for quality patient care, nursing excellence, and innovations in professional nursing practice, an honor that fewer than seven percent of the hospitals nationally have achieved. Ranked No. 15 nationally in U.S. News and World Report’s 2014-2015 Honor Roll, NYU Langone is the only hospital in New York to receive top 10 rankings for all three musculoskeletal specialty areas of orthopedics, rheumatology, and rehabilitation.

“We are pleased to be able to partner with NYU Langone and its affiliated physicians. Having NYU Langone be a part of our Pathway networks further solidifies Empire BlueCross BlueShield as a leading health insurance provider in the state and demonstrates our commitment to the New York Marketplace, and the Individual and Small Group markets,” said Empire’s President and CEO, Brian Griffin. “We’ve served New Yorkers for more than 80 years and look forward to continuing the peace of mind that comes with carrying the cross and shield.”

To enroll in, or to find out more about Empire’s robust and cost-effective plans on-and-off the New York State of Health Marketplace or Exchange, please log onto www.empireblue.com or call 877-315-5503 on or after Nov. 15, 2014, when open enrollment begins.

About Empire BlueCross BlueShield

Serving New Yorkers for over 75 years, Empire BlueCross BlueShield is the largest health insurer in New York supporting nearly six million members and more than 38,000 business, union and small employers in New York. Empire BlueCross BlueShield (Empire) is the trade name of Empire HealthChoice Assurance, Inc., and Empire Blue Cross Blue Shield HMO is the trade name of Empire HealthChoice HMO, Inc., independent licensees of the Blue Cross Blue Shield Association, serving residents and businesses in the 28 eastern and southeastern counties of New York State. Additional information about Empire is available at www.empireblue.com. Also, follow us on Twitter at www.twitter.com/healthjoinin, on Facebook at www.facebook.com/HealthJoinInEmpire, or visit our YouTube channel at www.youtube.com/healthjoinin.

About NYU Langone Medical Center:

NYU Langone Medical Center, a world-class, patient-centered, integrated academic medical center, is one of the nation’s premier centers for excellence in clinical care, biomedical research, and medical education. Located in the heart of Manhattan, NYU Langone is composed of four hospitals—Tisch Hospital, its flagship acute care facility; Rusk Rehabilitation; the Hospital for Joint Diseases, the Medical Center’s dedicated inpatient orthopaedic hospital; and Hassenfeld Children’s Hospital, a comprehensive pediatric hospital supporting a full array of children’s health services across the Medical Center—plus the NYU School of Medicine, which since 1841 has trained thousands of physicians and scientists who have helped to shape the course of medical history. The Medical Center’s tri-fold mission to serve, teach, and discover is achieved 365 days a year through the seamless integration of a culture devoted to excellence in patient care, education, and research. For more information, go to www.NYULMC.org, and interact with us on Facebook, Twitter, and YouTube.