Topics: biblical literalism, Editor's Picks, Evangelical Christianity, Film, god's not dead 2, inherit the wind, Movies, Entertainment News

In a pivotal scene from the famous 1960 film “Inherit the Wind,” a biblical scholar, prosecuting a defendant on trial for teaching evolution in a town whose laws forbid it, is called to the stand as an expert witness. Slowly but surely, he begins to unravel on the stand. The defense attorney, Henry Drummond (rendered vividly by Spencer Tracy), pulls apart his literal reading of the Bible. If Joshua had really made the Sun stand still, wouldn’t the Earth have been destroyed? Where did Cain’s wife come from if “in the beginning” there were only Cain, Abel, Adam and Eve? How can we be sure the Earth was created in 4004 B.C. if the Sun, the metric by which we measure time, was not created until the fourth day?

“God’s Not Dead 2,” the sequel to the commercially successful movie of the same name, is an inversion of this theme. In the film, Grace, a history teacher played by Melissa Joan Hart, is asked whether the nonviolent philosophy preached by Mohandas Gandhi and Martin Luther King, Jr. has parallels to that preached by Jesus in the Bible. In response, she quotes scripture, and endorses the analogy. A scoffing student ridicules her by sneering, I kid you not, that Jesus could not have been great because he died. Grace responds that Jesus, like King, died out of dedication to causes larger than himself, and that this does not detract from the greatness of either man. Teachers, administrators, and the ACLU alike are outraged by this lesson, and Grace winds up in court, where her lawyer finds himself proving, as one of the satanic ACLU attorneys puts it, “the existence of Jesus Christ.”

It’s impossible to stress how deeply unrealistic the film’s premise is, and important to stress that this case was not “based on a true story,” itself a loose specification. Nor was it a dramatized version of real events as “Inherit the Wind,” based on the 1925 Scopes Monkey Trial, was. This shouldn’t be surprising to anyone who saw the film with a vaguely critical eye, but should be surprising to anyone who took its message to heart. The movie suggests the persecution of Christians in our society is readily apparent in the real world, and not just as artistic license. (“Join the movement,” the closing credits implore). Then why on earth would its writers and producers have to invent such a case out of thin air, rather than portraying one of the multitudes of victimless crimes for which Christians throughout the country are presumably being prosecuted? Perhaps because employees demanding contraceptive coverage or gay couples service might be more sympathetic than fiendish ACLU lawyers?

Or perhaps because no such case exists? In my personal experience at a diverse public school in the notoriously blue state of New Jersey, my teachers frequently discussed Christianity from a historical and political perspective as well as a literary one. (In a heavily South Asian school district, Hinduism was discussed only during a middle school unit on world religions, during which, for the first time in my 13 years as a practicing Hindu, I had to memorize the names and descriptions of the various castes.) The only complaint I ever heard came from a Catholic student who disapproved of our English teacher’s reference to Christian “mythology.”

But my dominant education in various religious traditions occurred outside the classroom. I enjoyed hiding the afikomen during a friend’s Passover seder, much as I enjoyed breaking fast with Muslim friends during Ramadan. My friends, similarly, have relished our discussions about the finer points of Dawkins, visits to Hindu temples, or thumbing through the Ramayana. “God’s Not Dead 2″ offers no similar model for plurality. The subtler points of the movie, few and far between, were well taken. It is clear, though never articulated, that the Christian teacher and her Christian grandfather are of more modest means than the parents who lead the charge against her. The very fact that religion is often used as a proxy for class, race, or nationality is what distinguishes it from people’s ideas and beliefs in other areas of life. It’s what makes religious prejudice uniquely problematic.

But the movie isn’t a denunciation of that prejudice. We’re instead led to believe that people are either Christian or unabashedly hateful atheists who boast their ignorance of both history and the scripture they denounce. When Grace’s student Brooke approaches her at a local café, she is struggling with the death of her brother. Grace suggests she might find solace in Jesus, which inspires her to raise his teachings in class. Conveniently, though Grace has no way of knowing this, Brooke’s brother was also a faithful Christian who hid his beliefs from his family for fear of judgment. Even more conveniently, though Grace also has no way of knowing this, she finds her parents’ atheism deeply unfulfilling, and her brother’s old Bible far more so. But what if Brooke’s brother hadn’t died at all? What if she were struggling with whether to come out to her parents or how to cope with her out-of-wedlock pregnancy or how to leave a church rather than join one?