Update at 2 p.m.: Lauren Trimble, Jenkins chief of staff, said the man has been located and is now being monitored.

Original post: Dallas County law enforcement officers are looking for a man who reportedly rode in the Dallas Fire-Rescue ambulance that had carried a man stricken with Ebola to Texas Health Presbyterian hospital.

County Judge Clay Jenkins said Dallas police and county sheriff’s deputies are trying to find the man, who reports have suggested is homeless.

Authorities have not released the man’s name.

“We are working to locate the individual and get him to a comfortable, compassionate place where we can monitor him and care for his every need for the full incubation period,” Jenkins said in an emailed statement. “I want to emphasize that he is a low risk individual and we are doing this out of precautionary measures.”

At a national press briefing Sunday, officials appealed to the unidentified man to come forward, perhaps to contact a police officer so that he could be picked up and tested for Ebola symptoms. The man was tested Saturday and showed no signs of the disease.

“If he’s listening right now, we want to be sure to address his needs,” said Dr. David Lakey, commissioner of the state health department. “We want to be careful and compassionate.”

Jenkins stressed that the missing man has not committed a crime and is not in trouble. The county judge said the man, when found, will be placed in an unspecified location that will allow for easier testing.

“We’d like to find a great place to monitor you as well,” Jenkins said, as though the man might be listening to the conference.

The ambulance was effectively quarantined last week after Thomas Eric Duncan was diagnosed with Ebola. The emergency medical services crew who transported him has been asked to stay home for 21 days or so. All of them have tested negative for Ebola so far.

Dallas Fire-Rescue officials have said little about the incident. Officials with other EMS agencies noted that it’s standard practice to decontaminate ambulances after they transport a patient.

Centers for Disease Control officials have repeatedly emphasized that Ebola only spreads through direct contact with the bodily fluids of a person who has symptoms of the virus.

Staff writer Sherry Jacobson contributed to this report.