HOUSTON--(BUSINESS WIRE)--Insperity, Inc. (NYSE: NSP), a leading provider of human resources and business performance solutions for America’s best businesses, today announced the release of Insperity® TimeStar™ 8.0, a premier employee time and attendance tracking software solution.

TimeStar 8.0 helps companies comply with the Affordable Care Act (ACA) by allowing them to proactively collect, analyze and take control of employee attendance and labor data – all online and in real time. Under the ACA, employers will need accurate, timely data on the number of employees and hours worked by each employee in order to comply with enrollment and reporting requirements.

“Insperity makes it a priority to consistently deliver advanced solutions in technology that help business owners meet the demands of today’s evolving marketplace and remain competitive and compliant,” said Jim Wacek, Insperity® Time and Attendance division president. “Insperity TimeStar 8.0 offers the most extensive variety of time tracking data collection options available, including a comprehensive secondary rates feature which automates pay scale variations by employee and task.”

Labor and personnel costs are often a company’s largest expense, but organizations that implement TimeStar typically save three to five percent of payroll costs because the system automates time tracking processes and increases payroll accuracy. Enhanced capabilities of Insperity TimeStar 8.0 include:

Automatic advanced tracking for job costing, labor distribution and regular rate of pay for employees who perform multiple duties at varying pay scales via the secondary rates feature. The secondary rates feature also integrates with Insperity TimeStar’s portfolio of payroll partners, including Sage.

Enhanced views of the organization’s key performance indicators, including hours and wages, employee counts and scheduled/working status.

Streamlined access to a timesheet view allowing one-page data entry and approval for punches, hours, dollars, units and mileage.

Insperity TimeStar 8.0 boasts easier navigability and increased application speed due to a sleeker, simpler and more intuitive user interface over its predecessor. TimeStar 8.0 supports Safari 5.0.6+, Firefox 17+, Google Chrome 16+ and Internet Explorer 9+ and automatically scales its view when accessed via smartphone or tablet device. Organizations can implement the system through a license on company premises, as a hosted subscription model based on the monthly number of employees or licensed with a managed hosting service.

About Insperity Time and Attendance

Insperity® Time and Attendance, with more than 25 years of labor resource management experience, provides Software-as-a-Service (SaaS)-based time and attendance, advanced scheduling, human resources, payroll and human capital management software solutions. Insperity Time and Attendance and its premier offering, Insperity® TimeStar™ , help organizations collect, analyze and take control of employee attendance and labor data with increased accuracy and efficiency.

About Insperity

Insperity, a trusted advisor to America’s best businesses for more than 27 years, provides an array of human resources and business solutions designed to help improve business performance. Insperity® Business Performance Advisors offer the most comprehensive suite of products and services available in the marketplace. Insperity delivers administrative relief, better benefits, reduced liabilities and a systematic way to improve productivity through its premier Workforce Optimization™ solution. Additional company offerings include Human Capital Management, Payroll Services, Time and Attendance, Performance Management, Organizational Planning, Recruiting Services, Employment Screening, Financial Services, Expense Management, Retirement Services and Insurance Services. Insperity business performance solutions support more than 100,000 businesses with over 2 million employees. With 2012 revenues of $2.2 billion, Insperity operates in 57 offices throughout the United States. For more information, visit http://www.insperity.com.