Supporting and Promoting Ethics for the Animal Kingdom Tucson, an animal rights group, was at the Tucson Rodeo grounds protesting the event on Sunday, Feb. 28. (Source: Tucson News Now)

The last day at the rodeo brought more than just the competition.

Supporting and Promoting Ethics for the Animal Kingdom Tucson, an animal rights group, was at the Tucson Rodeo grounds protesting the event on Sunday, Feb. 28.

"These animals are not crazy out of their minds bucking wild. They are traumatized in the chutes," said Gary Vella, SPEAK Tucson chapter coordinator. "They pull the strap really tight at the last second just before that chute door opens, and they get shocked in the butt at the same time, and of course they are bucking like crazy."

People can’t turn a blind eye animal abuse anymore, Vella said.

SPEAK Tucson has been out protesting the rodeo since the 1990s, and each year he is able to educate more people about what happens behind closed doors, he said.

Vella doesn't believe the rodeo can happen without animal abuse and said he would like to see the event shut down.

"People have to boycott and say, 'I know it has been going on for a while but we have to take a good look at it,'" he said. "This is an animal abusive event and we just can't put our money behind it anymore."

Tucson Rodeo General Manager Gary Williams shared the following statement via email:

"We take the care and handling of all of the animals involved in our rodeo very seriously. We participate in seminars regarding livestock care and take a proactive approach in their handling. We hire personnel that put the needs of the animals ahead of their own and have great respect for all of the athletes involved in rodeo, but especially the four-legged ones."

The email went on to say the Tucson Rodeo has a long-standing tradition of promoting the Western lifestyle; is consistently among the top rodeos in the Professional Rodeo Cowboys Association and has more than 60 rules relative to livestock care, with a veterinarian on site during all of the competition.

Copyright 2016 Tucson News Now. All rights reserved.