AARP Foundation offers free tax assistance and preparation, beginning this week.

This year, AARP Foundation is again providing free tax assistance and preparation for taxpayers with low to moderate income through the AARP Foundation Tax-Aide program.

In its 48th year, the program is the nation’s largest free tax assistance and preparation service, giving special attention the older population.

You do not need to be a member of AARP or a retiree to use this service.

“Tax code is incredibly complex, and many Texans struggle to navigate it and get the refunds they’re due,” said Ron Craig, the volunteer leader oversees all AARP Foundation Tax-Aide volunteers in Texas. “We’re here to help. We see many folks coming back year after year to get help they trust from volunteers in their own neighborhood. We’re always taking new clients as well.”

Last year, AARP Foundation Tax-Aide’s 36,000 volunteers nationwide provided 2.6 million people with free tax help. Of these, more than 2,000 AARP volunteers and more than 162,000 taxpayers were Texans. The program is offered at approximately 284 sites in Texas including senior centers, libraries and other convenient locations.

AARP Foundation Tax-Aide volunteers are trained and IRS-certified each year to ensure their knowledge of revisions to the U.S. tax code. In Texas alone, taxpayers who used AARP Foundation Tax-Aide received more than $106 million in income tax refunds and more than $22.8 million in earned income tax credits.

Preparation of tax returns under the Affordable Care Act rules will require additional documentation from taxpayers this year. The good news is that taxpayers on Medicare or Medicare Advantage don’t need any further information. For everyone else, health insurance coverage information, including information about Marketplace purchases and health care exemptions.

For more information or to locate an AARP Foundation Tax-Aide site, visit www.aarp.org/findtaxhelp or call (1-888) 227-7669. AARP Foundation Tax-Aide is offered in conjunction with the IRS.