Economists rely on dozens of indicators to track the nation’s economy, but when it comes to checking the economic pulse of a city, there’s only one yardstick that really matters: jobs.

That’s an area in which the Augusta-Aiken market should excel next year, according to leading regional economists, who forecast some of the most robust employment growth in Georgia will be in the seven-county metro area.

An influx of cybersecurity-related tech jobs, an increase in leisure and hospitality activity, and an overall improvement in consumer confidence should help the Augusta metro area enjoy vigorous employment growth in 2016.

“We expect hiring to continue to ramp up in coming months as local area businesses expand,” Wells Fargo Senior Economist Mark Vitner said in his most recent regional report. “After decades of just moderate economic gains, Augusta’s economy appears primed for stronger economic growth.”

Georgia State University’s Economic Forecasting Center has predicted the Augusta metro area will see a 2.5 percent increase in nonfarm jobs, compared with 1.8 percent for the state as a whole. The University of Georgia’s Selig Center for Economic Growth has forecast a 2.4 percent gain, compared with 2.3 percent statewide.

Simon Medcalfe, a professor of finance in Augusta University’s Hull College of Business, said he is optimistic that 2016 will be better than this year – and possibly as good as the previous year.

“This year in terms of economic growth was a littler slower than 2014, so hopefully we can get back into a little faster growth rate,” he said. “In 2014, Augusta was the second-fastest growing area in the state. Now it’s running around fourth.”

The latest job figures from the Georgia Department of Labor, released Thursday, showed that Augusta’s labor market grew by 3,100 jobs, or 1.4 percent, in November, compared with the same month the previous year. That was the fourth-biggest gain in jobs, behind Savannah, Columbus and Gainesville.

Employment growth is crucial to a region because it offers the unemployed and under-employed the opportunity to increase their income, which boosts consumer spending – something that economists say is roughly two-thirds of the overall economy. New jobs also bring new workers to the area, helping fuel the home construction and real estate development industries.

There are plenty of reasons for people to relocate to the area in the coming year, including ongoing construction of new nuclear reactors at Plant Vogtle, expansion of existing industries – such as the planned 60,000-square-foot addition at ADP – and, above all, the continued buildup of high-tech personnel at Fort Gordon, where the military is relocating the Army Cyber Command headquarters and associated cybersecurity operations.

Vitner wrote that the increase in military spending “leaves Augusta vulnerable to whims of the federal budget process” and that “cyber warfare and cyber security are two high priority programs that likely have plenty of runway ahead of them.”

The Selig Center’s Jeff Humphreys writes in his 2016 economic outlook that the Army post buildup “will make Augusta a place where military contractors will congregate.” Indeed, federal contractors such as Northrop Grumman, Unisys, Booz Al­len Hamilton and Chiron have established operations in the area to be close to the military’s cyber operations.

Unisys’ recently opened service center in downtown Augusta, for example, is expected to hire 400 workers during the next few years on top of the 300 already housed in the riverfront office. Dale Dye, the site’s executive director, said it’s likely the facility – which already is considered the company’s flagship sup­port center – will likely grow beyond 700 employees.

“We already have the volume to fill this place up,” Dye said of the 74,000-

square-foot space formerly occupied by the National Science Center’s Fort Discovery. “Augusta offers such a rich talent pool that we can do that.”

Such service-sector jobs are expected to fuel most of the metro area’s employment growth in 2016, as it has during the past few decades. The broad category, which includes retail, education, health care, financial services and transportation, will ameliorate the effects of weaker growth in goods-producing sectors, such as manufacturing and mining.

Economists have cited brisk growth in Augusta’s leisure and hospitality sector, which grew a whopping 11 percent during the past year.

“That’s a good indicator people have disposable income to spend,” Medcalfe said.

One of the biggest industries in Augusta – health care – has seen more modest gains.

“There’s no real change there, where normally we’ve seen consistent growth,” Medcalfe said. “I’d like to say it’s because were getting healthier as a nation, but basic observation seems to suggest that’s not the case.”

Though certain health care positions, primarily in the nursing field, are in perennial demand, the overall weakness in health-care sector growth might be related to apprehension over the Affordable Care Act, Medcalfe said. Georgia is one of several states that have not expanded their Medicaid program under the act, which affects the bottom line of hospitals that provide service to the poor and previously uninsured patients.

“There may be some uncertainties over how (Obamacare) will be implemented and how people will take up insurance and services,” he said. “There may be some holding back, a wait-and-see attitude.”

All in all, the state and local economy is ending the year with strong momentum that is expected to continue in 2016. Last week’s interest rate increase by the Federal Reserve – its first in nine years – is an indicator that faith in the economy is returning to pre-recession levels.

“The take-home message is that the Fed is confident in the growth of our economy, which is a good thing,” Medcalfe said. “Most investment decisions are a confidence issue.”