Buy Photo Voter registration forms (Photo: File/USA TODAY NETWORK-Wisconsin)Buy Photo

Some Wisconsin legislators are fast-tracking an effort to eliminate the Special Registration Deputy program as part of a voter reform proposal.

Currently, Wisconsin law allows help for voters who have moved, changed names or are new to voting by authorizing special registration deputies (SRDs). While voters may register on Election Day or at their clerk’s office, SRDs provide convenience to the voter via community voter registration drives. SRDs are trained by a municipal clerk to assist voters and to submit their registration forms for inclusion in the state’s voter database.

Some SRDs function independently, some volunteer through organizations such as the League of Women Voters or political parties, but all are dedicated to helping citizens exercise their constitutional right to vote.

In recent years, voter rights have become more restricted by the Wisconsin Legislature. Consider the end of weekend voting, increased restrictions for SRDs requiring certification from each municipality (there are 24 in Brown County) to submit applications from all county voters, and required photo IDs.

Whatever the intent, the result is the same: hardships for many current and would-be voters as well as volunteers. While the proposed bill would make online registration possible for those already in the state Department of Motor Vehicle database, that gain would be more than offset by eliminating SRDs.

Why not keep both?

Last fall, Independent Special Registration Deputies of Brown County (ISRD) began as a grass-roots voter advocacy group dedicated to easing the voter registration process for all citizens. ISRD is unique; it is non-partisan and independent of any special interest group.

Although ISRD has been in existence only a few months, its growth is due to the collaboration of more than 50 volunteers and 24 municipal clerks. ISRD provides SRDs to all nine Brown County public libraries on the third Tuesday of every month, except February when voter registration is closed. This month ISRD is registering students in all Green Bay public high schools.

We have not even had time to advertise our non-partisan voter registration services, yet area schools have contacted us for voter registration drives. Municipal clerks have recommended our service. Bottom line? SRDs, and ISRD in particular, provide a valuable community service.

Why eliminate a service that:

» Is free (there is no taxpayer money involved)?

» Is convenient for voters who don’t have a computer, who work days or who don’t have time to wait in line to register at the polls?

» Increases citizen participation in their government?

» Creates a sense of unity in voting as a right of all citizens?

» Provides non-partisan websites for additional voter information?

The only reason we can guess is that some legislators want to eliminate SRDs to further erode our constitutional right to vote.

Next week state senators will vote on eliminating SRDs as part of Senate Bill 295. Please write your state senator (http://legis.wisconsin.gov) and urge a “no” vote on SB 295 unless the SRD program is preserved to assist Wisconsin voters.

Sally Sieber of Hobart and C J Peters of Green Bay are co-leaders of Independent Special Registration Deputies of Brown County.

Read or Share this story: http://gbpg.net/1XaYiZ2