Insurers balk over hole-in-1 payout

Posted: 6 am ET

If you follow professional golf, you'll see a few aces -- the tour's shorthand for a hole-in-1 -- over the course of any given season.

Just last weekend, pro golfer Scott Brown kicked off his final round at the Wyndham Championship in Greensboro, North Carolina, by holing-in-1 the 174-yard, par-3 third hole -- which, as it happened, kicked off a pretty disappointing day for his playing partner, Tiger Woods.

But apparently the underwriters of a hole-in-1 charitable promotion did not share the thrill when tour pros George McNeill and Justin Thomas both hit aces, hours apart, on the 137-yard, par-3 18th hole at the PGA Greenbrier Classic in White Sulphur Springs, West Virginia, on July 2.

Holes-in-1 yield big payday

Under the Greenbrier's tournament-sponsored rules, each fan seated in the grandstands overlooking the 18th hole at The Greenbrier resort's Old White TPC (Tournament Players Club) course shall receive a crisp, new $100 bill for the first ace in the tournament, $500 for the second and $1,000 for the third.

True to his word, tournament chairman and Greenbrier resort owner Jim Justice papered the grandstands, twice, for a total ace payout of $192,000. McNeill and Thomas also received $25,000 and $50,000, respectively, for the charities of their choice.

But just a dang moment, said the promotion's London-based underwriters, Talbot 2002 Underwriting Capital, White Mountains Re Sirius Capital and Markel Capital Limited. The money guys on the hook for those crowd-pleasers filed suit last week in U.S. District Court in Beckley, West Virginia, claiming that the aces weren't long enough.

The plaintiffs claim they should be let off the hook because the policy, issued to Old White Charities, the Greenbrier's nonprofit financial arm, clearly stipulates a minimum distance of 170 yards on the 18th hole for an ace to warrant a blizzard of "Benjamins." The suit further claims that Old White Charities never paid its premium of $106,470 by its July 1 deadline.

Old White Charities was not immediately available for comment.

The long odds of a hole-in-1

Granted, both players hit their aces with pitching wedges. The technology of golf equipment and the strength-training of tour pros have evolved to turn the modern game into something of a 3-club affair of driver, wedge and putter.

That said, an ace from 137 yards is hardly a chip-in. Or, more colloquially, an ace is an ace is an ace.

According to the National Hole In One Association (I know; who knew?), the odds of us duffers holing an ace are approximately 12,500-1. A low-handicap golfer cuts that to 5,000-1, and a pro golfer halves that again to 2,500-1.

Tiger Woods hit his first ace at age 6; LPGA pro Michelle Wie holed her first at age 12.

Waddaya say? Is it a gimmie? Or will Old White Charities be stuck with an enormous 19th-hole bar tab?

Here's how insurers protect celebrity jewelry.

Follow me on Twitter: @omnisaurus.

Veteran contributing editor Jay MacDonald is co-author of "Future Millionaires' Guidebook."