By MATT MURPHY

BOSTON — Gov. Charlie Baker, who was highly critical during his campaign last year of the Affordable Care Act's impact on the state, has requested that the federal government delay changes in the state's small business health insurance market until the state can formally file for a waiver.

Massachusetts has twice been denied waivers from provisions of President Barack Obama's signature health care law, including former Gov. Deval Patrick's requests that the state be allowed to retain the nine factors used to calculate risks and insurance premiums for individuals and small businesses.

Baker last week quietly requested from the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services a reprieve from the rating factor changes, which he says have led to "significant premium swings that have disproportionately impacted small businesses."

The Republican governor also asked that Massachusetts be allowed to continue to limit the size of businesses that qualify for small group insurance to 50 employees rather than expand the definition to up to 100 employees, as required under the ACA starting Jan. 1, 2016.

Massachusetts currently operates a merged market for small groups and individuals purchasing health insurance as part of the universal access law signed by Gov. Mitt Romney in 2006.

"As you are likely aware, the merger of these markets has provided affordable coverage and premium stability to the individual market since 2007," Baker wrote to HHS Secretary Sylvia Matthews Burwell.

"We are committed to continued preservation of affordability for individuals in Massachusetts, but expanding the small group definition to 100 would increase risk to that market, requiring us to reconsider retaining a merged market."

The federal government will begin accepting formal requests for waivers from the small business group regulations in 2017, and Baker said he's looking to maintain the size of the current small group market until a formal waiver can be filed.

Baker wrote the letter to Burwell on April 27, a day before Burwell visited Boston Medical Center to discuss opioid addiction. A spokesman for Baker said he did not believe the governor spoke with Burwell about the waiver during her visit.

The Patrick administration requested, both verbally and in writing at the direction of the Legislature, a waiver from the ACA regulations that would reduce the number of factors used to calculate insurance premiums from nine to four: age, family size, geographic area, and tobacco use.

Both times the Obama administration said no, but Massachusetts was the only state in the country granted a transitional waiver that gave the state until 2017 to phase in the changes. Massachusetts carriers have been allowed to consider five additional factors - industry, group size, participation rate, use of intermediary and membership in a group purchasing cooperative.

Baker requested an "indefinite extension" of the transition period that would freeze at 2015 benefit levels the percentage of premiums calculated using the full-range of factors. "The eventual elimination of the ratings factors, as well as the restriction limiting insurers to file their rates on an annual basis, will lead to further disruption and instability in the marketplace," Baker wrote.

Jon Hurst, president of the Retailers Association of Massachusetts, said small businesses belonging to his organization in April reported, for the second straight year, average annual premium increases of 11 percent, far exceeding increases at the Group Insurance Commission, state Connector Authority subsidized plans or those for large employers.

"There's a general feeling that the ACA allows for broader waivers and exemptions in 2017 and I would hope that's something we can pursue. It's not by accident our members saw two years in a row of identical increases of 11 percent. That's all about the rating factors," Hurst said.

Hurst also said the inclusion of mid-sized employers in the small group and individual merged market will lead to either "huge, huge premium increases" for businesses with between 51 and 100 employees, or force more business owners to become self-insured.

The Center for Health Information and Analysis recently reported that 58 percent of the market is self-insured, allowing those businesses to get around many insurance mandates approved over the last eight years and removing "good risk" from the market that Hurst said in turn drives up costs for smaller employers.

"We hope the Obama administration will give us this latitude because we were in large measure the model, but we are also seven years ahead and we've learned some things and we're different with that merged marketplace," Hurst said.