Neighbors in South Boulder work to get a mail truck unstuck on Stony Hill the day after the Dec. 15 snowstorm. ( / Special to the Daily Camera )

We live on lower Stony Hill Road, just below Bear Mountain Drive, in South Boulder. Our street has an incline. A forest of trees on the southeast corner prevents the sun from reaching snow on the pavement. The result has been an impassable street, with a sheet of ice on it, after even small snowfalls. The solution is to plow it — and do so right at the end of the snowfall, before traffic creates ice.

I asked the city to plow, as I described above, on Dec. 16. This was their response:

"Dear Robert,

Your request # 29349 has been closed for the following reason:

Dear community member,

Thank you for contacting the City of Boulder's Transportation Maintenance with your snow removal request.

If we are on snow shift, your request will be routed to a plow driver. While we typically do not plow most residential streets, we do take special plowing requests while we are on duty for snow shift. If snow shift has been called off because the storm has dissipated and the priority routes have all been cleared, then your request will be routed to a street maintenance crew during regular work hours (7-3:30, M-F).

We have completed your request. Please note that depending on conditions and the amount of snow present, we can often re-route a plow to other streets during snow shift once the assigned priority routes have been plowed and are in good condition.

Advertisement

Please feel free to call me directly if you would like further information on our current operations.

Thank you again and have a nice day.

Carey Sager 303-413-7115."

Well, that is really clear, is it not? The end result, whatever the city did, was captured in the photo accompanying this guest opinion. Our regular mail delivery person, Bill Tran, got stuck, trying to get up Stony Hill toward Bear Mountain Drive. My daughter, Caroline, who works as an account executive for AMR, happened to visit and noticed the predicament. She, Mr. Tran, another person who lives nearby and myself, took about 20 minutes to help turn the truck around. It was then driven down the hill, and after turning, around, got enough momentum to get through the slick area.

We cannot have this type of situation occur in our supposedly civilized city on a long-term basis. Our street's pathetically icy status has been the case for decades. The solution is extremely simple: plowing at the correct moment. I shovel our main entrance to our home right after the snowfall is over, to avoid ice buildup from people walking over it. The City Council and city management need to wake up to the concerns and problems of their constituency that really make a difference in their lives.

Robert C. Dullien is an executive coach in Boulder.