Good afternoon, everyone. I’m honored to be here this chilly afternoon with so many advocates for life. Although I have to tell you, it’s warmer than Iowa or New Hampshire.

In less than a year, there will be a new president in the White House. The next president will pick up to four Supreme Court justices who will decide issues of life and religious liberty. She will decide whether we force taxpayers to fund the political arm of the abortion industry. Whether we as a nation believe—as the Democrat platform says—that a life isn’t a life until it leaves the hospital. Whether a baby only a month from being born is only as good as the organs you can sell from it.

Make no mistake—this election will be a fight for the character of our nation.

The establishment media and political class don’t want us to talk about what the abortion industry is doing. You saw what happened when I talked about the horrific truth of the planned parenthood videos during a Republican debate. Unlike the media, you’ve watched the videos. You’ve seen an aborted baby, it’s legs kicking, it’s heart beating while the technician describes how they would keep these babies alive to harvest their organs. The left called me a liar. They said there were no such videos. There are no aborted babies born alive. Nobody is selling baby parts.

But look what happened next. Planned Parenthood came out and said they would no longer take compensation for baby organs. Sounds like an admission to me!

Hillary Clinton is giving a pro-abortion speech today in New Hampshire. She is saying that we as conservative women don’t count. But here’s the truth: they have perverted feminism into a left-leaning political ideology where women are pitted against men and used as a political weapon to win elections.

Being empowered means having a voice. But ideological feminism shuts down conversation?—?on college campuses and in the media. If you are a pro-life man?—?or a conservative woman?—?who doesn’t believe the litanies of the left, then you are “waging a war on women” or you are a “threat to women’s health” or you are variously described as “window dressing”?—?Joni Ernst?—?or offensive as a candidate?—?Carly Fiorina.

Ours is a fight for the character of our nation. For the value of life itself. It is a fight we must win to take our country back.

I have visited pregnancy centers around the country. They are doing God’s work and they do not receive a dime of federal funding. The pro-abortion Left can’t stand it when we talk about defunding Planned Parenthood. They scream at the top of their lungs about taking away women’s health. Unless you bring up these pregnancy centers. Then they go dead silent.

Because this was never about women’s health for them. It was about the litanies of the left. It was about funding their political agenda. This is a fight we must win.

You know, Planned Parenthood actually shows up at my events. So let me say this to the Planned Parenthood supporters: You can scream and throw condoms at me all day long. You won’t silence me. You don’t scare me. I have battled breast cancer. I have buried a child. I have read the bible. I know the value of life.

34 years ago, I met my husband, Frank. When we were married, I learned that his mother had been told by her doctors to abort him. She was a woman of great faith and courage and chose instead to bring her son into the world. She spent almost a year in the hospital after his birth. But he was the joy of her life and he has been the rock of mine. I have thought often about how different my life would be if she had made a different choice.

I know that what each of you know. Every person has God-given gifts. All of us actually have far more potential than we realize. Science is on our side. Public opinion is on our side.

We are winning this fight, ladies and gentlemen. We are winning this fight—but it is a fight. And so we need a fearless fighter in the White House. Not just to win this election but to restore the character of our nation.

You can bet I’ll win this fight against Hillary Clinton. And you can count on what I’ll do as President. I will defund Planned Parenthood. I will support the pregnancy centers around the country that are actually serving the families in their communities. Together, we will restore the character of this nation.

Citizens, join with me. Fight with me. Vote for me. It’s time to take our country back.

Thank you.