Ian Crane, a 24-year-old cyclist for American team Jamis-Hagens Berman, crashed through the rear window of another team’s vehicle Sunday while making his way through the caravan around the 19-mile mark of Stage 7 of the USA Pro Challenge.

He was in stable condition with non-life-threatening injuries but remained sedated at St. Anthony Hospital’s trauma unit in Lakewood after being airlifted from the course, the team said.

“It was a pretty violent crash,” said Ed Beamon, sport director for Jamis-Hagens Berman. “He had a lot of facial lacerations and probably some broken bones. Obviously, there was quite a bit of blood loss, mainly from the facial lacerations.

“Everything we’ve gotten from the doctors has been positive.”

Crane, a native of Seattle who is in his first year as a professional cyclist, had been scrambling through the caravan to rejoin the main group of riders after a small crash that required him to change bicycles. Shortly after, several vehicles came to an abrupt stop, and Crane crashed through the back windshield of a Team Cannondale car, a Cannondale spokeswoman said.

Beamon didn’t assign blame to either Crane or the drivers.

“He had been in the caravan a bit longer than normal,” Beamon said. “We were hitting a pretty windy section, and as he was coming back in the caravan, there was a stoppage. Either he didn’t react to it quick enough or … I don’t exactly know how it happened.”

PHOTOS: 2014 USA Pro Challenge, Final Stage

WATCH: Alex Howes won the final stage of the USA Pro Challenge

Race officials initially received an erroneous report of a fatality and considered canceling the race out of respect for Crane and the other riders, Shawn Hunter, the race’s CEO, told The Denver Post.

“The initial report that got to us was devastating,” Hunter said. “When something like that happens, our first thoughts and actions go toward the athlete, his family and his team.”

Heavy crosswinds had been blowing along Colorado 93, where the race had proceeded after leaving Boulder. The Colorado State Patrol closed the highway to investigate the incident.

“Ian’s one of our most promising riders,” said teammate Ben Jacques-Mayne, who won the King of the Mountain (top climber) jersey at the Pro Challenge. “He’s proven his caliber and quality as a rider. We were planning to ride for him today, and to hear that he’s gone out, it’s heartbreaking.”

Cyclists almost always need to ride through the caravan of team cars — which hold sports directors, food, water and race mechanics — after stopping, usually for a mechanical failure such as a flat tire. Drivers of team cars, many of whom are former cyclists with extensive experience, frequently honk their horns to alert cars ahead of them that riders are moving through the caravan.

“It is a crazy environment back there,” Beamon said. “Each driver has two eyes, not 20 like he needs. Each rider is always motivated to get back to the bunch and dealing with a lot of conditions. It’s always a treacherous environment, but it’s remarkable how few crashes there are.”

Denver Post staff writer John Meyer contributed to this report.

Daniel Petty: 303-954-1081, dpetty@denverpost.com or twitter.com/danielpetty