Patrick and Emily McLarty can relate to families faced with mounting medical bills.

“We’ve experienced what that’s like, and the uncertainty and the fear,” Emily McLarty said.

She said she and her husband know all too well what it’s like to have the rug pulled from underneath.

In 2009, Patrick McLarty went in for a routine medical procedure to remove a kernel of corn from his esophagus. He suffered a rare stroke, paralyzing the left side of his body and leaving him in a coma for several days. The Ponder Junior High School assistant principal spent two years recovering.

“We know what that felt like and how scary it was, but more importantly, we know what it felt like to get help and to have our family, friends and our church family and our small community just rally around us … so we didn’t have to spend a huge amount of energy and thought on how we were going to pay our bills and whether or not we were going to lose our home,” said Emily McLarty, who is principal at Denton ISD’s Adkins Elementary School.

The generosity shown to them is why the McLartys are now looking to pay it forward. In recent weeks, the couple launched a gaming application, Dunking Monkey, on Google Play and in Apple’s iTunes App Store. The app is being sold for $1.99, and the McLartys say they’ll use three-fourths of the revenue collected to assist cancer patients and their families with medical bills.

“The game is just kind of a vehicle to an idea, the bigger picture, I guess,” Patrick McLarty said. “We’re not asking people to give money, donate anything because … they’re buying the app.”

“We’re just asking them to buy an app and kind of be a part of something different, a different way of thinking, and understand that we’re normal people just trying to help other normal people,” he said.

The idea to pay it forward came one night while the couple was playing a game of “What If.” One question that came up: What would you do with a $1 million lottery prize?

“Pat said … without hesitation, ‘I’d want to help people. I’d want to help people with their medical bills,’” Emily McLarty recalled.

Also spurring the idea was Patrick McLarty’s experience seeing a hard-working person with insurance struggle with medical debt.

When Patrick was in his 20s, his mother was diagnosed with ovarian cancer. She died in 1997. He watched as his father, who had worked hard to avoid incurring debt, was blindsided with his mother’s medical bills. He saw the worry his father experienced.

“It just killed him, this illness that came out of nowhere and caused all this debt that he didn’t want,” Patrick McLarty said.

He said he’s had the idea for an app for a while. He researched what was needed to develop one and reached out to software companies to share the idea he had for Dunking Monkey. Eventually, he found a Chicago-based company interested in creating his app idea.

Development for the game began in July and was funded with savings the McLartys had after selling their first house in Sanger. For several months, they worked remotely with a handful of developers in India, poring over sketch designs, development samples and communicating the vision they had for the game. Patrick McLarty said some of his students in Ponder tested the game during development and offered feedback. He said it’s surreal to walk into a gymnasium and see students playing a game he created.

The game’s objective is simple: Succeed at knocking a cartoon monkey into a dunk tank. Players must hit a target, and depending where their strike lands on that target, they earn multiple points. The game has three levels with a special feature for players who advance to Level 3.

The game debuted on Google Play on Oct. 31 and in the iTunes App Store on Nov. 6. So far, the game has accumulated about 100 downloads.

The couple launched the website www.dunkingmonkey.com this week for people to learn more about the game’s purpose. The website will also be used as a portal for families to apply for medical bill assistance. The McLartys say that through the website, they intend to be transparent about who’s being supported by the funds raised.

Given their family’s own medical ordeal, Emily McLarty said they have an appreciation for what it means to experience the goodness in humanity.

“That feeling of being the recipient of such generosity is humbling, and it changes you,” she said. “Our community came together and took care of us, and over and over again. There were little examples of that and it’s so affirming of the world.

“I think when given the opportunity, people will choose to be kind and they will choose to be generous. We need opportunities to do that.”

BRITNEY TABOR can be reached at 940-566-6876 and via Twitter at @BritneyTabor.