Talks finances, new doctors, possible plant renovation

Rotary Club members heard an update on Sterling Regional MedCenter from CEO Jeff Shelton during a meeting at the hospital Wednesday.

He spoke about Banner Health, which has facilities in seven different states and 49,000 employees. Shelton noted a boost in employees occurred last year with the acquisition of University Health Systems, which has changed the focus of Banner, because now they have a healthcare division and an academia division.

"We're changing our model and a lot of that has to do with the Affordable Care Act, moving to accountable care organizations," he said. "We're staging ourselves for the future."

"Healthcare and hospitals have done sick care forever. We're now forced to change our way of thinking into wellness care, that we keep you well so that you don't get sick and if you get sick, how are we going to manage your care effectively to get you well faster?"

Shelton shared a new document the hospital has put together with information about all the doctors at SRM that are employed by Banner.

He also presented information that was shared with employees at the SRM's quarterly town hall meeting in March, including financials. In January, the hospital had a budget shortfall of 5.2 percent, "but we had some good things happening," Shelton said. Hospital deductions, which are the contractual discounts they have with Medicare, Medicaid, third party insurers, etc., were 0.6 percent under budget and expenses were 4.4 percent under budget.

Advertisement

"That means we were monitoring our supplies, we were monitoring our labor force very wisely, we were monitoring turning off the lights when you exit the room, making sure you do all those different things, and as a team we were succeeding in pushing that down," he said.

However, in January, SRM lost $300,000. "That shows that healthcare is a very fragile business," Shelton told Rotary members, noting the hospital made up for that loss in February.

He said the money the hospital lost was because most people's insurance plans started over Jan. 1 and, "you're not going to use healthcare resources unless you know you're going to meet your deductible, so you're going to hold off on anything and everything you can until you absolutely have to go to the doctor." As a result, SRM's registrations were down over 30 percent.

Shelton also pointed to another "scary gorilla in the room:" people shopping around and going to freestanding facilities instead of the hospital for an MRI, for example, because it's cheaper. He pointed out the reason a freestanding facility is cheaper is because they only have to offer their services as needed. They're not open all hours and they don't have to have staff there 24 hours a day, seven days a week, 365 days a year.

"Hospital overhead is outrageous, while freestanding institutions are lower. That can't stay that way, so we're looking at our community delivery model, because we have to remain competitive," Shelton said.

He spoke about SRM's efforts to reduce worker's compensation costs by focusing on a safety team to reduce risk for injury. Shelton believes they can save $100,000 if this is done right.

The hospital is also addressing the issue by implementing a phone call so employees can report any type of risk and installing a $400,000 nurse call system, to make sure they can communicate with patients effectively.

Plus, the hospital is looking at reducing the cost is pays for short break or no break lunches. In Colorado, if you work more than five hours you're mandated to be given a 30-minute lunch break, but it's supposed to be uninterrupted. Short break or no break lunches caused by interruptions cost SRM $212,000 last year. Shelton said the goal is to reduce that by a bare minimum of 30 percent, resulting in a $63,000 savings.

Additionally, he mentioned some hires they've had for nursing positions: Lisa Hughes and Nicholas Moore. The hospital also just recruited Dr. Jeffrey Freeman, a radiologist who started March 1, and Dr. Amanda Nichols, an orthopedic doctor, who will start later this year. Plus, Shelton said they've got an internal medicine doctor "that we feel really good that we're recruiting," Dr. Nathan Evans, and two general surgeons that they're working with, Dr. Weir and Dr. Hovoka. "We feel confident we're going to get those individuals to sign with us."

Shelton said SRMC is also excited to offer a new rural track in Sterling for North Colorado Family Medicine's Residency Training Program. Two medical students, Pete Buchanan, MD, from Virginia, and Natalie Krier, MD, from North Dakota, will join SRM in spring 2017 and spend two years doing a rural rotation. Approximately 20 applicants for interviewed for the two spots.

He talked about some of the areas SRM needs to improve in: woman and infant services; wound care, which "is a serious challenge for us here in rural America, especially diabetes and other issues associated with that;" urology; gastroenterology; and rehab services.

Shelton also spoke about SRM's phyiscal plant, which is very old. They've hired Craig Allen, who has 35 years experience with plant operations, as ops manager, and are evaluating right now to see if it can be renovated, meaning replace some of the structure, or just replace the entire structure.

"Very serious discussion that's going to happen in June, probably through the whole last part of this coming year and it's going to involve our community's input about it, our doctors' input about it, our nursing personnel, everyone, clinical, to find out if it's the right thing to do for our institution," he said.

Callie Jones: 970-526-9286, cjones@journal-advocate.com