Wagyu beef cattle stand at Sekiguchi Farm in Kamisato, Saitama Prefecture, Japan. Bloomberg News

Japan’s powerful Agricultural Co-operatives are flexing their muscles ahead of a week of intense negotiations for free trade deals with Australia and the U.S.

Some 700 co-operative leaders from across the country staged a rally in Tokyo on Thursday, declaring that they will keep vigilant eyes on any signs of softness on the part of Japan during expected talks with Australian trade minister Andrew Robb on Saturday and with Prime Minister Tony Abbott on Monday.

Supporters of Prime Minister Shinzo Abe’s free trade policy stress that Japanese farmers are too pampered by subsidies and tariffs and price support and that they need to make more efforts to compete, but the co-operatives say such change is not possible.

Australia, the largest beef exporter to Japan, is demanding that Japan halve its 38.5% tariff on Australian beef.

Farmers insist that Mr. Abe is accountable for his own party’s pledge that sensitive farm items such as beef and wheat should be excluded from tariff talks.

The rally was attended by more than a dozen lawmakers of the ruling Liberal Democratic Party, who renewed their pledge to fight on behalf of the farmers.

“If the tariffs can’t be defended against Australia, how can they be defended against the U.S.?” said Toshiaki Tobita, head of farm co-operatives in Hokkaido, Japan’s largest dairy producing region.

The U.S. is much more demanding than Australia in terms of opening the Japanese market, demanding a full elimination of all tariffs. Japan is hoping that an agreement with Australia on moderate tariff reductions might help make the U.S. moderate its demands.

“If the tariffs are fully eliminated, it would cause irrecoverable damage to the domestic cattle industry,” warned Gen Nakatani, head of the LDP’s farm industry task force. “The negotiations with Australia are a precursor to those with the U.S. We cannot accept another defeat to Australia, having suffered a loss over whaling already,” he said, referring to a ruling Monday by a U.N. court against Japanese whaling in the Antarctic.

Negotiations between Japan and the U.S. are expected to pick up pace next week, as a visit by U.S. President Barack Obama to Tokyo looms at the end of the month.

“The TPP will come up on the agenda in the Japan-U.S. summit later this month,” said Koya Nishikawa, head of the LDP’s TPP task force. “Unless Japan teams up with other TPP countries, it will be very difficult to push back against U.S. demands.”

The U.S. had a 46% share in imported beef in Japan, against Australia’s 49%, before an outbreak of mad cow disease in 2003 wiped U.S. beef out of the Japanese market. The U.S. has been regaining its share after import restrictions were lifted. A tariff reduction for Australian beef would be a blow to exporters of U.S. beef.

In 2012, Australia had a 62% share in the imported beef market, against 27% for the U.S.

The Japanese farming cooperatives insist that a drastic tariff cut would inflict devastating damage on domestic cattle farmers, who supply about half the beef sold in Japan.