TEMECULA VALLEY HOSPITAL BY THE NUMBERS 375 employees hired 100 physicians on medical staff 50,000 products stocked by all departments 5,000 hours of employee training 146,524 square feet of new medical office/office space in area surrounding the hospital $2.79, cost per square foot of office space near hospital, up from $1.61 last year Sources: Temecula Valley Hospital, Costar Analytics

Fiore “Sam” DiLullo, a Temecula resident of 17 years, remembers well the dark years.

For the vast majority of the city’s 25-year history, Temecula didn’t have a hospital to call its own. As the city’s population doubled and then doubled again, residents were forced to visit sometimes overwhelmed hospitals in Wildomar or Murrieta or drive to Riverside or San Diego County for treatment. Stories of people dying because they were unable to get to a far-flung hospital in time were common.

In city elections, one of the first questions asked of a prospective council candidate was what he or she planned to do about the lack of a Temecula hospital.

That inglorious era – which was pockmarked by lawsuits, broken promises and a frustrated population of 100,000 – came to an end when Universal Health Services opened the 140-bed Temecula Valley Hospital on Temecula Parkway, a facility that this month celebrated one year of service.

“This is a blessing,” said DiLullo, a 75-year-old who was recently treated for heart blockages at the hospital, one of two in the Southwest County region that is authorized to treat severe strokes and heart attacks. “I went in for an out-of-breath experience and ended up getting a triple bypass. They diagnosed it and attended to it immediately.”

Darlene Wetton, the hospital’s CEO, said there are hundreds of other area residents who share DiLullo’s appreciation for the facility, which became the fourth hospital in the region when it opened Oct. 14, 2013.

“I’ve got letters and letters and emails saying how wonderful it is to have a local hospital,” she said during a recent phone interview. “The community has embraced us.”

When the hospital was initially proposed in the mid-2000s, area politicians were bemoaning a hospital bed shortage. Southwest Healthcare System, operator of Wildomar’s Inland Valley Medical Center and Murrieta’s Rancho Springs Medical Center, responded by bankrolling expansions of both facilities.

In 2011, Loma Linda University Medical Center opened a 106-bed hospital in northeastern Murrieta.

With the addition of Temecula Valley Hospital in 2013, there are now plenty of hospital beds for area residents, and Wetton said the supply should be adequate in coming years, which likely will find outpatient medical centers or clinics serving a growing number of people who traditionally have visited a hospital.

“Is every hospital bed full?” she asked rhetorically. “If they’re not, there are enough beds.”

According to Temecula Valley officials, the hospital is running at 35 percent capacity on average. The long-term plans for the facility include the possibility of expansion – another 140-bed tower could be added – but Wetton said that won’t be considered until there is a need.

Southwest spokesman Brian Connors said in a statement the new Temecula hospital has helped meet the growing demands of the surrounding communities.

“Our region combined – Temecula Valley, Rancho Springs and Inland Valley – has seen a marked increase in our emergency department visits,” he said.

Wetton said the implementation of the Affordable Care Act, or Obamacare, has also boosted the number of people who are visiting ERs.

Looking forward, Wetton said she expects the hospital will start to see an increase in the number of patients who have been referred to the facility by friends or family members because of positive patient survey data.

“It’s all about trust and reputation. As soon as you develop a high-quality reputation, that word spreads very quickly,” she said. “It’s very different than a lot of industries ... when it comes to your health and safety, the quality of your service has got to be paramount.”

DiLullo said the staffers he interacted with were all friendly and they helped put his mind at ease during a rough time for his body.

“The personnel there all have a sense of humor and professionalism. ... I really didn’t have any fear.”

Contact the writer: aclaverie@pe.com, 951-368-9698, @PE_Claverie