McCOOK, Neb. -- A member of the Airport Advisory Commission was advised to direct individuals with interest in renaming McCook Ben Nelson Regional Airport to the McCook City Council after raising the topic during a meeting earlier this year.

Commissioner Doug Vap reported "a concerned party approached him regarding renaming the McCook Ben Nelson Regional Airport," according to minutes from a May meeting approved last week. Vap's comment prompted Public Works Director Kyle Potthoff to suggest the party discuss their concerns with City Council and added, "We are an advisory group and do not have the authority to make those kinds of decisions."

Today's path for those looking to rename the airport appears to differ from when the airport was originally renamed in honor of the McCook native and former U.S. Senator.

Consideration to rename the airport was scheduled by city staff for an Airport Advisory Commission recommendation in January of 2009. Commission members subsequently postponed action on the request after it failed to garner enough support to advance to a vote.

During the meeting, one commission member proposed renaming the airport in honor of Sen. Ben Nelson but the action died when no one was willing to second the motion.

A representative for a committee of approximately 10 advocates for renaming the airport said the group collected 42 letters in support of the change, according to a review of Gazette coverage from the 2009 meeting. Commission members discussed the issue and offered various alternatives for honoring Sen. Nelson before unanimously voting to table any action and bring it back at a later date.

The item was subsequently scheduled for a second round of debate during a commission meeting a month later, however, the advocate group for the project withdrew its request just prior to the meeting and rerouted the discussion straight to City Council.

Four months after the commission meeting the McCook City Council took up the issue in June of 2009. Council members ultimately approved renaming the airport on a split vote.

Former City Councilman Aaron Kircher represented the lone vote against the name change at the time, while former Mayor Dennis Berry and former City Councilors Colleen Grant and Lonnie Anderson voted in favor. Former City Councilman Jack Rogers was absent from the meeting.

City Council approved renaming the airport from McCook Regional Airport to McCook Ben Nelson Regional Airport, pending Federal Aviation Administration approval.

The role of the Airport Advisory Commission seemed in question at the time as well. Kircher questioned why City Council was taking up the issue when there was no recommendation from the Airport Advisory Commission. Berry replied that renaming the airport had become a community issue and as such the council needed to address it.

Several community members spoke against the proposal but the majority of the approximately 50 people attending the 2009 meeting favored the name change. Three members of the Airport Advisory Commission spoke out against the name change including one that inquired as to the point of having an advisory board if it wasn't taken into consideration in matters relating to the airport.

City Manager Nate Schneider said Friday he wasn't involved in the 2009 discussions and didn't know why City Council decided to bring the renaming initiative forward. He also said only the Board of Zoning Adjustment and Health Board have decision making ability, the Airport Advisory Commission and other boards provide recommendations to City Council.

"Every other board has the ability to make recommendations to the council, with the council having the decision making authority," said Schneider.

Schneider didn't respond to questions asking why a 2015 airport renaming effort would follow a different protocol than the 2009 effort or why the protocol differed yet from a recent effort in support of constructing a McCook skatepark. In 2013 then-Mayor Berry required local supporters for construction of a skatepark present their proposal to the Parks Advisory Board before City Council would consider the item.

Sen. Nelson was a popular McCook native with a successful political career until he provided the final vote need to advance the Affordable Care Act. He was born and raised in McCook and first elected to the U.S. Senate in 2000 and re-elected in 2006. He served as Nebraska's governor from 1991 to 1999.

In late 2009 Sen. Nelson provided the final cloture vote needed to end a Republican filibuster of the Affordable Care Act and his popularity among Nebraskans subsequently fell. A December 2009 Rasmussen poll indicated he would lose convincingly in a hypothetical runoff to then-Governor Dave Heineman. The poll indicated Heineman would receive 61 percent of Nebraska votes compared to Nelson's 30 percent, according to a recap Wikipedia.

City Council members indicated last week they had not been contacted by anyone interested in undoing the name change. Mayor Mike Gonzales said he was approached on the topic when he first got on City Council, adding "I have not heard anything lately."

Councilors Gene Weedin, Janet Hepp and Jerry Calvin said they had not been contacted on the subject. Councilman Bruce McDowell had not responded to the inquiry as of Monday morning.