Decline a result of stricter guidelines, increased outreach efforts

Since implementing tougher guidelines for non-resident students to receive in-state tuition rates based on emancipation, the University of Colorado has seen a marked drop in the number of students petitioning for the lower rate.

Between the fall of 2013 and fall of 2014, the university saw a 66 percent drop in petitions for in-state tuition from non-resident students claiming independence from their parents or guardians. The campus saw a 60 percent drop in petitions between the spring of 2014 and spring of 2015, according to data provided by tuition officials.

The approval rate for all types of petitions, including through emancipation, also declined. It went from 91 percent in the fall of 2012 to 79 percent in the fall of 2014 for undergraduate students.

CU officials say the declines are significant because out-of-state tuition makes up a large portion of CU's revenue and helps keep tuition low for Colorado students.

The stricter guidelines were put in place Oct. 1, 2013, for the spring 2014 petition cycle to more closely follow the spirit of Colorado's tuition laws.

They now focus "more broadly on the actual financial independence of the student and look more closely at any outside support provided to the student, including support from parents, grandparents, friends, etc.," according to an email sent to students in the fall of 2013.

Advertisement

So far, the beefing-up of requirements to prove financial independence has been effective. But campus tuition officials say they're also trying to be clearer with students and parents, starting as early as the admissions process, about their chances of qualifying for in-state tuition.

"We are trying to do a better job of educating students up front so they know what's realistic," said Kristi Wold-McCormick, campus registrar. "It takes a lot of documents and time and energy to file a petition. We don't want to waste their time and energy if they're not likely candidates."

Stricter guidelines

When a student is accepted at CU, a tuition officer makes what's called an initial classification — either in-state or out-of-state — to determine which tuition rate the student pays.

Colorado undergraduates in the College of Arts and Sciences will pay $9,312 in tuition next year, compared to $32,346 for out-of-state students. That price difference leads some out-of-state students to petition for resident status through emancipation.

From 2010 to 2012, the number of students petitioning for emancipation jumped 35 percent, and the number of successful petitions increased 40 percent.

CU saw so many students successfully petition for in-state tuition that it lost roughly $4 million in projected tuition revenue in 2012-2013. That prompted the Board of Regents to ask CU's legal team to look for ways the campuses could follow and enforce tuition laws more closely.

Jake Wells, a 2007 CU graduate who founded the company In-State Angels to help students around the country get in-state tuition, said the stricter guidelines essentially changed the definition of financial independence.

He works with students all over the country, including some at CU, and has become very familiar with the university's new interpretation of the state's tuition laws.

"It used to mean that you have a trust fund from a great-grandparent who's now dead and it's your money — that used to be fine, you could use that," he said. "Similarly, if you had a grandparent or an aunt or uncle or a family benefactor who wanted to help you with school, that used to be fine as well. And that's no longer the case."

'Realistic expectations'

Students under the age of 22 petitioning for resident status through emancipation must reside in Colorado for at least a year and prove by clear and convincing evidence that they were financially and residentially independent for that year. The burden of proof rests with the student.

If they're successful, they need to stay financially independent during their time at CU, and the campus conducts random audits to be sure.

It's not an easy feat for young adults, some who are fresh out of high school, to prove they can support themselves without help from parents or family members.

But that difficulty is intentional, Wold-McCormick said. The state allocates public money for higher education to primarily benefit Colorado students, she said, so lawmakers want to ensure that only eligible students receive in-state rates.

"Emancipation isn't supposed to be a real easy thing to establish," she said.

That can be frustrating for some students and parents. To ease some of that tension, the campus has tried to increase transparency and outreach by talking with families during the admissions process so they can make informed financial decisions about college.

Wold-McCormick said she doesn't want anyone to come to CU under the impression that the out-of-state sticker price is negotiable.

"It's really setting up realistic expectations," she said. "Admissions has been working with prospective students so people don't come here thinking, 'I can stay here a year and get the resident rate just because I'm in the state.'

"When you talk finances, that's personal, and it's very emotional, too. We just want to make sure people don't have any false expectations, that we're as transparent as possible. That when they choose to attend CU, they are realistic about the expected tuition, that it's within their means or priorities."

The campus also instituted mandatory, hour-long "Tuition 101" sessions this spring for students interested in emancipation. Before that, "everybody" was filling out a petition, Wold-McCormick said, even if there was little chance they'd be approved.

So far, the class has helped answer questions before students are deep into the complex petition process, she said.

Not impossible

Wells, the In-State Angels founder, said CU's new guidelines have made it harder for some students to petition successfully, though it's not impossible.

Travis Peccorini worked with the company to successfully petition for in-state status last fall. He came to CU from California on an ROTC scholarship but said he quickly realized that program wasn't a good fit for him.

After his first semester on campus, he dropped out, got a full-time job as a cook in a local deli, rented an apartment and began the one-year residency period.

He ignored a trust fund from his grandma and made sure to keep detailed bank records. With careful budgeting, he was — and still is — able to support himself entirely.

Now 20, Peccorini technically just finished his freshman year after attending classes in the spring.

He believes he's more focused in school now because he's paying for tuition, books, food, rent and all of his own expenses.

"It taught me to look out for myself," said Peccorini, who's studying aerospace engineering. "It's my money that I'm spending for school, so I might as well put my full effort into it."

Sarah Kuta: 303-473-1106, kutas@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/sarahkuta