In Magic Hat Brewing's beer, the ginger is stronger than the malt.

G-Thing beer from Magic Hat Brewing Co., of South Burlington, Vt. is 5.7 percent ABV. (Photo: Magic Hat Brewing Co.) Story Highlights Prominence of malt flavor is apparent, though not strong

Carbonation, mouthfeel are OK in 5.7% ABV dark-malted beer

In Heart of Darkness Stout, its rich chocolate flavor is enlightened by dark roast coffee

Beer Man is a weekly profile of beers from across the country and around the world.

This week: G-Thing

Magic Hat Brewing Co., South Burlington, Vt.

www.magichat.net

G-Thing is the first dark-malted beer I've had with ginger in it and was surprised by the prominence of malt flavor — not strong, but still apparent. Most ginger beers I've tasted were made with light malts and the ginger flavor easily overshadowed any of the malt.

The ginger in G-Thing is still stronger than the malt, but doesn't cancel it out. However, whether you want a chocolate malt grain flavor with your ginger is another matter. I don't see chocolate ginger candies on the shelves, or hot chocolate with ginger, or, starting from the opposite end, Chinese stir fry with chocolate. You get the drift.

The ginger flavor is fresh and provides a dry finish. It also has a bite to it, but not so much that it becomes bitter or hot. Other areas of the beer were OK, including carbonation, head, body, mouthfeel and lacing, but the overall flavor for me relegated the 5.7% ABV G-Thing to the "that's interesting" category. If you're into ginger, you may find some novelty in the different malts used with G-Thing.

I just don't see ginger as a spice that screams "winter" or "Christmas." Maybe as one ingredient among many, such as clove, nutmeg, allspice, etc., which have been used in a number of Christmas seasonal beers.

Heart of Darkness Stout from Magic Hat is a different matter. Also featuring a 5.7% ABV, its rich chocolate flavor is not marred by spices, but enlightened by excellent dark roast coffee and roasted barley notes. There are hints of raisin and plum that are more typically found in stronger imperial stouts.

The body is creamy with low-to-medium carbonation and while it might be easy to write it off as "imperial stout light," it is refreshing to have the taste of an imperial in an ale that isn't heavy on the palate or overly alcoholic.

Both G-Thing and Heart of Darkness are in Magic Hat's current Winterland variety 12-pack, which also features No. 9 Not Quite Pale Ale and Encore India Pale Ale. Heart of Darkness is also sold separately. Magic Hat's online Beer Finder link is here.

Many beers are available only regionally. Check the brewer's website, which often contains information on product availability. Contact Todd Haefer at beerman@postcrescent.com. To read previous Beer Man columns Click here.

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/JuKLeQ