Li Na posed with the Australian Open trophy after her encore to a 7-6 (3), 6-0 win over Dominika Cibulkova in the final match Saturday. Paul Crock/AFP/Getty Images …

Li Na, who turns 32 next month, became the oldest women's champion here in the Open era. Paul Crock/AFP/Getty Images …

No. 20-seeded Cibulkova played a shot to Li Na Saturday, Jan. 25, 2014. Aaron Favila/Associated Press …

No. 4-ranked Li shad lost two heart-wrenching finals in Australia. She said it didn't matter how she got there, only that she'd finally broken through to win the title at her favorite major. Eugene Hoshiko/Associated Press …

Roger Federer plays a forehand in his semifinal match against Rafael Nadal at the Rod Laver Arena. Michael Dodge/Getty Images …

Roger Federer plays a backhand. Scott Barbour/Getty Images …

Rafael Nadal serves to Roger Federer. Reuters …

A trainer (background-in blue) helps Rafael Nadal as he deals with a blister on his hand, during an injury time out. Paul Crock/Agence France-Presse/Getty Images …

Fans watch the men's semifinal match in Melbourne. Joe Castro/European Pressphoto Agency …

India's Sania Mirza (top) plays a shot during her mixed doubles semi-final match with partner Romania's Horia Tecau against Australia's Jarmila Gajdosova and Mathew Ebden (bottom). William West/Agence France-Presse/Getty Images …

Dominika Cibulkova of Slovakia celebrated winning her semifinal match 6-1, 6-2 against Agnieszka Radwanska of Poland Thursday. Scott Barbour/Getty Images …

Agnieszka Radwanska hit a return. Narendra Shrestha/European Pressphoto Agency …

Dominika Cibulkova in action during the match. She is the first Slovak to get through to a Grand Slam singles final. Mark Dadswell/European Pressphoto Agency …

Stanislas Wawrinka of Switzerland played a backhand in his semifinal match against Tomas Berdych of the Czech Republic Thursday. Warinka won the game with three tie-breaks: 6-3, 6-7(1-7), 7-6(7-3), 7-6(7-4). Mark Kolbe/Getty Images …

Stanislas Wawrinka in action during the match. It is his first time to reach a major final. Narendra Shrestha/European Pressphoto Agency …

China's Li Na celebrated after defeating Eugenie Bouchard of Canada 6-2, 6-4 in the women's singles semifinal Thursday. Narendra Shrestha/European Pressphoto Agency …

Eugenie Bouchard in action during the match. This was the 19-year-old's first Australian Open. Clive Brunskill/Getty Images …

Li Na hit a return during the semifinal. The Chinese No. 1 has reached the Australian Open final twice before, in 2011 and 2013, but she lost on both occasions. Mal Fairclough/Agence France-Presse/Getty Images …

Poland's Agnieszka Radwanska serves to Victoria Azarenka of Belarus during their quarterfinal. Radwanska won 6-1, 5-7, 6-0, ending a winning run for Azarenka that saw her take the Australian Open title in 2012 and 2013. David Gray/Reuters …

Dominika Cibulkova of Slovakia celebrated after defeating Simona Halep of Romania 6-3, 6-0. Cibulkova will face Radwanska in the semifinal. Rick Rycroft/Associatede Press …

Rafael Nadal of Spain served in his quarterfinal match against Grigor Dimitrov of Bulgaria. Clive Brunskill/Getty Images …

Stanislas Wawrinka of Switzerland returned the ball to Novak Djokovic of Serbia during their quarterfinal at the Australian Open on Tuesday. Wawrinka defeated reigning champion Djokovic in a five-set thriller, 2-6, 6-4, 6-2, 3-6, 9-7. Made Nagi/European Pressphoto Agency …

Djokovic during the match against Wawrinka. William West/Agecen France-Presse/Getty Images …

China's Li Na during her quarterfinal against Flavia Pennetta of Italy on Tuesday. Li won 6-2, 6-2 and will face Canadian teenager Eugenie Bouchard in the semifinals Thursday. Petar Kujundzic/Reuters …

Tomas Berdych of the Czech Republic celebrated defeating David Ferrer of Spain 6-1, 6-4, 2-6, 6-4. Bobby Yip/Reuters …

Switzerland's Roger Federer, left, beat France's Jo-Wilfried Tsonga on day eight of the Australian Open. Paul Crock/Agecen Fracne-Presse/Getty Images …

Dominika Cibulkova of Slovakia, left, is congratulated by Maria Sharapova of Russia at the net after winning their fourth round match at the Australian Open tennis championship in Melbourne, Australia, Monday. Aaron Favila/Associated Press …

Cibulkova plays a forehand in her fourth round match against Sharapova. Matt King/Getty Images …

Serbia's Ana Ivanovic celebrates after victory in her women's singles match against Serena Williams on Sunday. Mal Fairclough/AFP/Getty Images …

Williams rests on her racket during her fourth round loss to Ivanovic. Aaron Favila/Associated Press …

Italy's Flavia Pennetta bites the net after losing a point during her match against Germany's Angelique Kerber. William West/AFP/Getty Images …

Serbia's Novak Djokovic in action against Italian Fabio Fognini. Djokovic went on to win in three sets. Jason O'Brien/Action Images/Zuma Press …

Garbine Muguruza (Spain) came seemingly out of nowhere to defeat tenth-ranked Caroline Wozniacki (DEN) 4-6, 7-5, 6-3 in the third round Saturday. Ken Hawkins/Zuma Press …

Andy Murray signs autographs after playing against Feliciano Lopez. Murray won the match to move on to the fourth round. Ken Hawkins/Zuma Press …

Rafael Nadal's neon shoes. Jason O'Brien/Zuma Press …

Great Britain's Andy Murray, bottom, in action with Spain's Feliciano Lopez during their third round match Saturday. Jason O'Brien/Zuma Press …

Third-seed David Ferrer of Spain acted like it was a close-run thing after rolling over France's Jeremy Chardy, the 29th seed, 6-2, 7-6, 6-2. Aaron Favila/Associated Press …

Top seed Serena Williams of the U.S. continued her march through the field, though her opponent, 31st seed Daniela Hantuchova of Slovakia, did become the first to win more than three games in a match against her, taking six in all as she fell, 6-3, 6-3. Ryan Pierse/Getty Images …

Sunscreen may save spectators—here watching unseeded Florian Mayer of Germany beat 20th seed Jerzy Janowicz of Poland—from getting burnt, but it provided no relief from temperatures that reached 44 degrees Celsius (111 degrees Fahrenheit) Friday. William West/Agence France-Presse/Getty Images …

Fourth seed Li Na of China was slow in getting started against No. 26 Lucie Safarova of the Czech Republic, losing the first set, 6-1, and having to survive a match point to win the second, 7-6, but she went on to win the third, 6-3, and live to fight another day—against Russia's Ekaterina Makarova in round 4. David Gray/Reutrs …

Make sure to reapply sunscreen after futile attempts at cooling off. Made Nagi/European Pressphoto Agency …

Fourth seed Andy Murray of Great Britain showed his happy face after winning a point in his 6-2, 6-2, 7-5 second-round victory over unseeded Vincent Millot of France Thursday. Mark Kolbe/Getty Images …

After those Russian winters, Maria Sharapova enjoyed the heat so much she spent three hours and 28 minutes in defeating Italy's Karin Knapp, 6-3, 4-6, 10-8, in a second-round match Thursday. William West/Agence France-Presse/Getty Images …

The end of the line for fifth seed Juan Martin Del Potro of Argentina, leaving the court after falling to unseeded Roberto Bautista Agut of Spain, 4-6, 6-3, 5-7, 6-4, 7-5. Jason Reed/Reuters …

Two-time defending women's champion Victoria Azarenka of Belarus defeated Sweden's Johanna Larsson 7-6, 6-2, in a round-one match. Jason O'Brian/Action Images/Zuma Press …

Top-seeded Rafael Nadal of Spain, left, commiserated with Bernard Tomic after the 21-year-old unseeded Australian was forced to pull out of the match with an injury after losing the first set, 6-4. William West/Agence France-Press/Getty Images …

Another unseeded Australian, 31-year-old Lleyton Hewitt, also failed to get out of the first round, falling to No. 24 seed Andreas Seppi of Italy—though after dropping the first two sets he did manage to stretch it to five, 7-6, 6-3, 5-7, 5-7, 7-5. Petar Kujundzic/Reuters …

Dominika Cibulkova of Slovakia, the 20th seed, hit a blind backhand on her way to a first-round win against Francesca Schiavone of Italy, 6-3, 6-4. Michael Dodge/Getty Images …

Switzerland's Roger Federer, the sixth seed, dispatched yet another unseeded Australian, James Duckworth, taking him down in straight sets, 6-4, 6-4, 6-2. Ken Hawkins/Zuma Press …

Bested by temperatures topping 43 degrees Celsius (109 Fahrenheit), unseeded Frank Dancevic of Canada collapsed during his first-round match, and got up to lose in straight sets to France's Benoît Paire, the 27th seed, 7-6, 6-3, 6-4. Aijaz Rahi/Associated Press …

China's Li Na served in her first round match against Ana Konjuh of Croatia at Melbourne Park. Li won the match 6-2, 6-0. Michael Dodge/Getty Images …

Serbia's Novak Djokovic hit a return to Lukas Lacko of Slovakia on the first day of the Australian Open. Brandon Malone/Reuters …

Venus Williams of the U.S. reacted after a point against Russia's Ekaterina Makarova. Williams lost the match 2-6, 6-4, 6-4. Mal Fairclough/Agence France-Presse/Getty Images …

France's Julien Benneteau cooled off during his men's singles match against Spain's Pablo Carreno Busta on the first day of the Australian Open. Benneteau won the match in five sets. William West/Agence France-Presse/Getty Images …

Luksika Kumkhum of Thailand celebrated winning her first-round match against sixth seed Petra Kvitova of the Czech Republic. Mark Kolbe/Getty Images …

Serbia's Ana Ivanovic dug in for a forehand in her first-round match against Kiki Bertens of the Netherlands. Ivanovic defeated Bertens 6-4, 6-4. Ryan Pierse/Getty Images …

Vasek Pospisil of Canada signed autographs after defeating Australia's Samuel Groth 6-4, 6-3, 6-4. Bobby Yip/Reuters …

Spain's David Ferrer leapt for a shot during his singles match against Colombia's Alejandro Gonzalez. Ferrer won the match 6-3, 6-4, 6-4. Greg Wood/Agence France/Getty Images …

A ball boy cooled off on the first day of the 2014 Australian Open in Melbourne. Temperatures climbed to higher than 35 degrees Celsius. Franck Robichon/European Pressphoto Agency …

Seventh seed Sara Errani of Italy left the court after losing to Germany's Julia Goerges 3-6, 2-6. Jason Reed …