Photo

I made my way upstairs, drawn by a strange sound emanating from our bedroom. It was rhythmic, like the sound of an old dot matrix printer. As I opened the door, I was confronted with the image of my wife holding two plastic funnels over her breasts with a big frown across her face. I immediately thought of Madonna’s cone-shaped bra from the 1980s and let out a gasp.

Courtney: John wasn’t laughing at me, he swore up and down. He was laughing at the ridiculousness of the contraption: a standard mechanical breast pump. New motherhood already felt like a battle to stay standing on ground in perpetual tectonic shifts. Now I realized that I was effectively dependent on a badly designed, embarrassingly loud device for any chance to leave the house. Let’s just say, I didn’t feel like Madonna. I felt like a cow at an industrial farm, awaiting a humanizing visit from Temple Grandin. It turns out, even Wikipedia describes the breast pump as “analogous to a milking machine used in commercial dairy production.”

Since our first encounters with the breast pump, we wondered how women had been duped into settling for such bad design. The pump is a symbol of the modern work-life conundrum. In theory, women have the freedom to honor the wisdom that “breast is best,” while still pursuing their own careers. And yet, to do so, they’re forced to attach themselves, multiple times a day, to a loud, sometimes painful machine that makes one feel anything but powerful.

No doubt inspired by the ubiquitous public service announcements about how healthy breastfeeding is for mother and baby, 77 percent of new mothers do it, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention’s 2013 Breastfeeding Report Card. In fact, a crucial provision of the Affordable Care Act requires insurance companies to cover lactation services, with the pump being the most obvious purchase. The average electric pump costs approximately $250. According to market research firm Global Industry Analysts, the breast pump market will reach 5.63 million units by 2015.

Photo

And yet, despite the lucrative market possibilities as well as the health benefits, the modern pump remains largely unchanged since it was first invented. Edward Lasker, an engineer, produced the first mechanical breast pump and secured the patent in the 1920s. In 1956, Einar Egnell created the Egnell SMB breast pump, a more efficient answer to Lasker’s original design. Nearly 60 years later, little has changed about the fundamental design of the mechanical pump. Suffice to say that neither man, despite building their legacies on lactation, had ever breastfed a baby.

Once we were confronted with the appallingly outdated design of the breast pump, we started asking other parent friends about their experiences. One friend, an executive in Washington, described pumping in an airport bathroom in San Juan, P.R., holding the plastic funnels to her breast as women touched up their makeup and gave her dirty looks. The only electrical outlet was next to the sinks.

Another friend needed to pump during a conference call; she crossed her fingers that the client on the other line wouldn’t ask about the incessant and curious sound in the background. The noise isn’t the suction, as one might expect, but the motor. Our half-ton hybrid car is quieter.

Another friend commented on the transparent plastic funnels: What product designer actually thought I would want to see my nipples getting sucked into small tubes over and over again?

We believe that all mothers deserve a better, more dignifying breast pump. It’s a critical, daily tool for the working mother and a no brainer investment for early childhood health (thus, the federal government subsidizing its use at such a significant level).

And beyond the health benefits of a better breast pump, there is a lot of money to be made by the company that attempts to really understand what would make the lives of working mothers easier and more pleasant. One pregnant friend put it in stark relief, “There were approximately one zillion different kinds of baby carriers to choose from when I was registering, but breast pumps? About three, and none of them looked significantly different from one another.”

We are reminded of Gloria Steinem’s “If Men Could Menstruate,” an article published in Ms. Magazine in 1978, in which she used satire to point out how different the world would be if gender roles were reversed: “Men would brag about how long and how much.” If men could breastfeed, surely the breast pump would be as elegant as an iPhone and quiet as a Prius by now.

It’s high time someone redesigned the breast pump. There’s dignity to be regained and a whole lot of money to be made.

Courtney Martin is the author of multiple books, including “Do It Anyway: The New Generation of Activists.” John Cary is the author of “The Power of Pro Bono.” They are partners in life and in work.