Photo

A new survey of young Americans’ political views has some saying millennials are “incoherent” or “confused.” One company, however, knows exactly what they want and is committed to giving it to them.

Here’s what the recently released Reason-Rupe 2014 Millennial Survey concluded about Americans between the ages of 18 and 29:

“They trust neither political party, are social liberals and fiscal centrists, and are supportive of both business and government. They favor free markets, but aren’t sure whether markets or government best drive income mobility. In all, millennials are neither a Democratic nor a Republican generation; they remain politically unclaimed.”

Some have taken the results to mean that when it comes to politics, millennials are kind of mixed-up. In a Vox piece titled “This poll proves that millennials have totally incoherent political views,” Dylan Matthews pulls out some possible contradictions:

“• 65 percent of Millennials think it would help the economy to cut spending…

• …but 62 percent and 58 percent think it’d help the economy to boost spending on job training and infrastructure, respectively.

• 58 percent think that it’d help the economy to cut taxes…

• …but 66 percent think it’d help the economy to raise taxes on the wealthy.”

Of these and other findings, Derek Thompson of The Atlantic writes:

“Some of these positions suggest, rather than prove, utter incoherence. For example, you can technically support (a) reducing the overall tax burden and (b) raising taxes on the wealthy by raising the investment tax and absolving the bottom 50 percent of Social Security taxes. Somehow, I think what’s happening is simpler than young people doing the long math of effective tax rates. I think they’re just confused.”

Are millennials uncertain about their desires, unable to articulate what they truly want in life? Not so, says Pizza Hut.

See Bruce Horovitz’s USA Today story on the “pizza cookie,” which is a cookie, shaped like a pizza. Mr. Horovitz quotes Carrie Walsh, Pizza Hut’s chief marketing officer: “Millennials tell us it’s what they want. They like to cap off a great pizza with a great dessert.”

The pizza cookie is apparently especially millennial because it is social media in dessert form. Mr. Horovitz reports:

“The key for the chains is to make the desserts as shareable as the pizzas, says one pizza guru. It’s oddly similar to the reason that hookah sales have jumped among Millennials — because they like to feel a part of social gatherings, says Steve Green, publisher of PMQ Pizza Magazine, a trade publication. ‘You never get a pizza for yourself. Now, you take a chocolate chip cookie and make it communal — and you’ve got a party.’”

Will pizza cookies be able to overcome the carb hatred that has doomed cereal? At Today.com, Ben Popken betrays some skepticism: “Amid an obesity crisis and increasingly health-conscious nation, it doesn’t seem like America would have the appetite for such a dish.” However, he writes, “the desire among a certain high-metabolism group to feel a part of communal gatherings is even stronger than their need to watch their waistline.”

The pizza cookie looks pretty tasty (the Today.com staff verdict: “it tastes like a cookie”). But the notion that millennials are especially interested in eating with one another, something that humans have been doing for thousands of years (and that’s also popular among, just for instance, sharks), recalls a point many made about the Reason survey.

Mr. Thompson put it this way:

“Overall, Millennials offer the murky impression of a generation that doesn’t really understand basic economics. To be fair, neither do most Americans. Or many economists, perhaps. Or most journalists. Economics is hard.”

Mr. Matthews wrote:

“It’s worth questioning the value of trying to force these answers into a coherent political framework rather than accept that Millennials, like most people, have much, much better things to do with their time than form highly nuanced and non-contradictory political opinions. Political nerds tend to really overestimate how much most people care about public policy, and how much they feel it connects to their daily lives.”

But Matt Buchanan of The Awl articulated the point perhaps most forcefully of all:

“Millennials are no more or less incoherent about their political beliefs than any other relatively arbitrary generational grouping of Americans clustered together largely for marketing purposes. The fundamental American political right is not to vote, but to be willfully contradictory in your core belief systems, often in the same breath. At worst, this shows that Millennials, if they weren’t a myth, will grow up to be the thing that they, and every other young generation, supposedly fears most — their parents.”

Short version: Millennials are a lot like other people. They hold some contradictory political opinions, they may not have a perfect grasp of economics, and they like eating stuff with their friends. Pizza cookies for all!