The Koch Brothers, to me, sound like very good neighbors and job producers, the types that are good for our country and not looking to get handouts and giveaways of taxpayers assets and tax dollars. Yet our Senate Majority Leader, who has reached millionaire status and is government employed (as in “elected”) and hasn’t produced any jobs on his own merits and not through political clout, but harasses two people who do actually produce many thousands of jobs that contribute to more thousand of jobs for our country.

Also according to Wikipedia, Koch owns many other varied industries as well as other ventures and investments. The firm employs 50,000 people in the United States and another 20,000 in 59 other countries.

However, such was not the case and the U. S. Senator from Nevada, Harry Reid, was all alone in his condemnation of the Koch Brothers, the multi-billionaire duo who privately own Koch Industries, Inc., which, as Wikipedia states, is an American multinational corporation based in Wichita, Kansas, United States, with subsidiaries involved in manufacturing, trading and investments.

Will wonders never cease? The biggest liar in America was strangely silent about the fact that his second-in-command of recently producing falsehoods actually one-upped him with the latest ‘Big Whopper’ not produced at the local Burger King factory. And you would have thought that when the subject was so relative to his personal name he would have at least announced his vocal approval.

Reid harasses the Koch Brothers simply because they “have huge amounts of money,” are contributors to the Republican Party who also recognize production and promotion in a political party that is positive for its citizens. Contrary to that scenario is multi-millionaire George Soros, who contributes “huge amounts of money” to the socialistic liberal politicians of the non-job producing Democrat Party as a downside.

Just because the Koch Brothers appropriately run ads opposing ObamaCare, and it is their and everybody’s right to point out the tragedies of that monstrosity of a law, Reid has no right to pillage the Koch’s. He admits, “I can’t say that every one of the Koch brother’s ads are a lie.” but then does not elaborate and tell the country what the lies, that he tells us are lies, have in them to make them lies.

If the ads consist of real lies, why doesn’t Reid just point them out to Americans and not just blast two good jobs producing citizens of America. I will admit the Liar Harry is probably exceptionally well qualified to recognize a lie due to his preference and frequent usage of prevarication, but IDENTIFY them, Harry, and get your feet out of the swamp.

The February 27, 2014 printed version owner of Liar Harry’s Senate floor outburst against two very good and honorable Americans, is a news organ that should also recognize lies due to its praises in their masthead which reads, “REAL LIBERAL POLITICS” with questionable pride which authored the also questionable headline of the article about Reid slamming the Koch Brothers for lying about ObamaCare. One has to wonder how many lies that den of socialistic-communistic drivel produced in concocting its contents for Liar Harry’s Senate speech.

The author of the printed online version, Justin Baragona, is also in character, praising Reid saying he, “did not pull any punches while on the floor.” Though I can’t figure that statement out when no where in Reid’s speech did he throw any punches where he could repeat the lies Reid accuses the Koch Brothers of saying in the ads. If as Baragona states that ‘Reid did not pull any punches’ I wonder where they went.

Maybe Reid and Baragona are planning another article next week or one day soon, headlining all of Reid’s punches that they forgot to mention in the February 27, 2014 article. And incidentally, I also would like to see some explanation of all the calumny, as defined as “A false statement maliciously made to injure another’s reputation”, which is contained in Reid’s floor statement to wit:

“I can’t say that every one of the Koch brother’s ads are a lie..but a vast, vast majority of them are. What is going on with these two brothers who made billions of dollars last year in an attempt to buy our democracy is dishonest, deceptive, false and unfair. Just because you have huge amounts of money, you should not be able to run these false, misleading ads by the hundreds of millions of dollars.”

Even a United States Senator, and Majority Leader of the socialist liberal Democrat Party, should clarify a publicly printed charge of “an attempt to buy our democracy is dishonest, deceptive, false and unfair.” And Reid says that the Koch Brothers lie! By comparison, he makes them look like angels.

Harry Reid is quick to slam anyone who disagrees with any of his words or actions. I call him the Number 2 Liar behind the present and worst Liar possibly ever known to American politics, our current illegal president Barack Hussein Obama. Reid has been on the public dole and “sleaze” list for most of his political life which has been over 50 years, and like Obama, he began his political career with very meager personal finances due to his schooling and never having been gainfully employed prior to his entry into politics.

Today, as you read this some fifty-plus years later, earning nothing but government salaries or the more likely plums from investments born from ventures gained from political “pay-offs” “tips” and friendly advice, along with favored person investments and favorable legislations passed. In the military we called that kind of income “kumsha”. I don’t know the derivatives of that word but the Merriam-Webster dictionary entry for cumshaw shows it to be, presents, gratuities; also: bribes, payoffs.

Of course, our Harry was never in the military, though his age would have allowed Vietnam; but you can’t make any “big” money there. So it isn’t expected that he would have culled his “extra” income from not overly large political salaries anything more than “good fortune from good friends.” Believe me fellow loyal Americans, this man is a good example of why we NEED TERM LIMITS for government service. And those limits should be short enough not to be able to acquire or even get near the “gravy train” of government tax dollars. They’re robbing us taxpayers blind. It MUST STOP!

Too many politicians, notably Clinton and Obama have taken office without any substantial means only to become millionaires within a very few short years. Good people are waiting and willing to serve a short term for a reasonable, expenses-covered compensation. Get them while they’re young and eager to serve their country. If our forces are reduced to pre-world war II, they won’t have that avenue in which to serve.