Cecile Richards, center, national head of Planned Parenthood, and others wore pink for their "National Day of Solidarity." Richards spoke during rally in Englewood, Colo., on Dec. 5, 2015. (Photo: By David Zalubowski, AP)

The national head of Planned Parenthood called for an end to violence against women, doctors and clinicians who seek or offer reproductive healthcare, saying "enough is enough" during an appearance in Denver Saturday marking a day of unity for the organization.

Cecile Richards said that the Rocky Mountain branch, which operated a clinic that was seen of shooting Nov. 27, was an inspiration among supporters and workers for reopening its doors a day after the tragedy, reports the Associated Press.

"National Day of Solidarity" rallies were held around the country, according to Planned Parenthood. Supporters responded on social media by using the hashtag #StandWithPP and adding pink filters to their profile pictures.

The organization said the events are being held to honor the three victims of the Nov. 27 shooting at the clinic in Colorado Springs, Colo., and 14 killed in San Bernardino, Calif. Wednesday.

Planned Parenthood is calling for an end to the rhetoric that, they say, has fueled violence against abortion clinics and marginalized groups, such as the black, immigrant and transgender communities.

“Our thoughts and prayers are with the victims of these terrible tragedies, and we are resolved to stop this from happening again,” said Dawn Laguens, executive vice president of Planned Parenthood Federation of America. “It’s not enough to denounce the tragedy without also denouncing the poisonous rhetoric that fueled it. Instead, some politicians are continuing to stoke it, which is unconscionable — going so far as to try and pass legislation further blocking access to health care just days after the tragedy in Colorado Springs.”

Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share A campus police officer killed in the Planned Parenthood shooting was honored Friday for volunteering to rush to the clinic as shots rang out, an act those who knew him say was driven by his sense of purpose and faith. (Dec. 4). AP

Planned Parenthood, which is the nation’s largest abortion provider, has been in the national spotlight since the July release of undercover videos that allegedly showed employees discussing the illegal sale of tissue and organs from aborted fetuses for profit. The organization vehemently denied these accusations, saying they had consent from the patient to donate the fetal tissue in question to medical researchers for stem-cell research.

In an attempt to move past the controversy, the organization revised its policies in October and no longer receives reimbursement for supplying tissue to researchers.

But with the release of the video came a spike in concern for violence against abortion providers. In September, the FBI warned of "likely criminal or suspicious incidents" against reproductive health care providers, their staff and facilities and said they were tracking nine criminal or suspicious incidents nationwide.

While politicians spanning the spectrum decried the Nov. 27 attack, conservative lawmakers have continued to prioritize changing abortion legislature.

The Senate voted Thursday to strip federal funding from Planned Parenthood for one year as well as repeal key provisions of Obamacare. The legislation has not yet been by the House, which passed a different version in October, but President Obama will veto the bill if it reaches his desk, the White House said Wednesday.

Contributing: Gregg Zoroya, USA TODAY

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1XR3L5U