Completed projects provide hope amid ongoing recovery

For more info: Habitat for Humanity Visit: www.stvrainhfh.org Long-Term Flood Recovery Group Contact: 303-442-2178 or visit bocofloodrecovery.org

More than 16 months after the 2013 flood destroyed their trailer in Longmont's Royal Mobile Home Park, the Soto family is going home.

After floodwaters ravaged their trailer, the family of six spent about four months crashing with nearby friends and family before moving into an apartment at the Inn-Between — a Longmont-based nonprofit that provides temporary housing for low-income and homeless residents.

The apartment was a lifesaver after the family drained about 75 percent of their savings replacing personal belongings lost in the flood, including their family vehicle, Florina Soto said through a translator. But it wasn't home.

The Sotos will never be able to return to the trailer they once called home, but St. Vrain Habitat for Humanity helped the family find their new normal: homeownership.

This weekend, the family is moving into their three bedroom, 1,250-square-foot home in Longmont's Poplar Grove neighborhood.

"We waited a long time for this moment to come," Soto said. "We've always dreamed about owning our own home, and it has been worth the wait."

Volunteers broke ground on the home in March, and the family received the keys during a dedication ceremony Jan. 17.

During construction, the Sotos contributed about 500 hours of work to other Habitat for Humanity projects. The nonprofit's rules require families to contribute when possible.

Progress boosting morale

The Soto family is the second family to move into a Habitat for Humanity home under the nonprofit's flood-recovery program, following Crystal Cordova, whose Habitat home was underway before the flood wiped out her parents' home where she was living with her two children. Cordova lives next door to the Sotos.

The nonprofit launched Rebuild the St. Vrain Valley in December 2013 to support area residents affected by the flood. The program offers relief to residents with minor repairs, costing less than $5,000; major repairs, costing more than $5,000; and new construction for families whose homes are beyond repair.

The Habitat for Humanity chapter has completed 19 repair projects in Longmont, Lyons and Frederick under the Rebuild program, said director of development John Lovell. There are three major repair projects underway in Lyons, he said, one which is expected to be complete next month.

The Long-Term Flood Recovery Group of Boulder County is also making headway in helping clients navigate the paperwork and bureaucracy associated with recovery.

Since launching in November 2013, the group has closed about 45 percent of its 1,031 cases, said manager Stephanie Walton.

Clients have received about $4.6 million in support from federal, state and local agencies with the help of case managers, Walton said.

There are an estimated $8 million in unmet needs across Boulder County, Walton said. And families with homes that cannot be repaired, like the Sotos', are recovering at a slower pace because of the additional costs associated with recovery, she said.

Total-damage cases are tedious for families and support staff members, but completed projects are boosting morale as recovery efforts forge ahead.

Micaela Chacon, the Sotos' Long-Term Flood Recovery Group case manager, was almost as excited as the family when they received their keys to the new home.

This is Chacon's second client to get a new home since the flood, she said. Another of her clients moved into a mobile home about three weeks ago.

"It's a big victory for us and for them," Chacon said. It's a long journey to see them through all of the challenges, but when it finally happens, it gives me the confidence to go forward."

Hope in a new home

Joselyn Soto, 6, bounced up the stairs Tuesday, her pigtails swinging side to side before she whipped around and threw her arms out, proudly presenting her new bedroom.

"It's really big," Joselyn shouted, ending a tour of her new home with the "best room in the house."

Joselyn will share the room with her sister, Nicole, 13, while her other sisters, Denise, 15, and Allyson, 3, share the room across the hall.

Unpacking is like Christmas for the girls who haven't had access to some of the boxes of toys and clothes that sat in storage for the past year, maximizing space in the temporary apartment.

While her younger sisters discover forgotten treasures, Denise is contemplating paint colors and decor that she hopes will bring a touch of her former home to the new space.

"My room was really colorful in the mobile home," Denise said. "I'd like to get some of that back here."

Sentimental items like photographs are gone forever. As the family rebuilds their savings, Jose Soto is slowly replacing his tool collection, which he uses in his construction job and at home, that was depleted during the flood. Florina Soto looks forward to the day when the family can purchase a larger vehicle that will better fit her growing family.

But a space of their own, where Florina will bake cookies with her daughters and Jose will customize the home's details to their taste, gives the family hope and reminds them what is important.

"We are fine the way we are, but we have not recovered everything," Jose Soto said. "The important thing is that we are all together. That's the main thing, and now we have a home to be together in, so we are thankful."

Whitney Bryen: 303-684-5274, wbryen@times-call.com or twitter.com/soonerreporter