HATTIESBURG, Miss. - The Southern Miss football team, who have accomplished a 9-4 season with a Conference USA West Division championship, accepted an invitation to participate in the sixth annual Zaxby's Heart of Dallas Bowl Sunday afternoon.

The Golden Eagles will play Washington out of the Pac-12, who finished the regular season with a 6-6 overall record and 4-5 in the North Division of its conference. This will be the first time a Conference USA team has faced a Pac-12 squad in a bowl game.

The game will be played at the historic Cotton Bowl Stadium, Saturday, Dec. 26, 2015, and will kick off at 1:20 p.m. (CST). ESPN will televise the game with RedVoice LLC handling the national radio broadcast in both English and Spanish via the Zaxby's Heart of Dallas Bowl radio network.

"I'm very excited for our players, coaches and the entire university community," said Southern Miss Director of Athletics Bill McGillis. "The Heart of Dallas Bowl is a tremendous reward for our team and an outstanding opportunity to advance our football program on a big stage. The University of Washington is an excellent opponent with a rich tradition of championship football. Opportunities to play against High Resource Five conference opponents -- especially those in the Pac-12 are rare -- and we're very fortunate to have this one against the Huskies. I'm very pleased for our fans that we will play in a bowl game within the region and that it is within reasonable driving distance of most of our alumni and students. Dallas is a terrific city and the Cotton Bowl is one of the most historic stadiums in America. We need to get ready for one heck of a holiday party!"

The Golden Eagles make their first bowl appearance since the 2011 and their fourth in the state of Texas, having played in the Sun Bowl in El Paso at the conclusion on the 1952 and 1953 seasons. Southern Miss also appeared in the 2002 Houston Bowl. It is the 23rd overall appearance for the Golden Eagles in a bowl contest.

The game marks the first time Southern Miss will play in the historic Cotton Bowl and their team's first time to play in the city of Dallas since the 2012 season against former C-USA member SMU.

"I'm excited for our players, our coaches and our fans," said third-year Southern Miss coach Todd Monken. "It's been a lot of hard work in the making, getting to this point, and it is a credit to them. We put ourselves in a position to win Conference USA and come up a little bit short, but the future is bright. We couldn't be any happier representing Conference USA in the Zaxby's Heart of Dallas Bowl."

This season the Golden Eagles have broken single-season school records for completions (312), passing yards (4,263), total offensive yards (6,758) and touchdowns (67), and points (528). While the offense ranks second in total offense at 519.8 yards per contest, the defense ranks first, allowing just 364.1 yards per contest.

The priority deadline to order your bowl tickets and have them fulfilled is 5 p.m. on Wednesday, Dec. 9. After that date, please note that any orders placed after the priority deadline will be filled on a first come, first serve basis.

Tickets along the sideline will be $75, while tickets in the corners of the end zone will be $50. Student tickets are $25 and fans may make donations for tickets to be used by local members of the military, local charities, and under privileged youth groups for $25.

Fans are encouraged to purchase their tickets through the Southern Miss Ticket Office as each ticket purchase directly benefits Southern Miss Athletics and guarantees fans that they will sit with other Golden Eagle fans.

After Dec. 9, the ticket office will begin to fulfill orders made before the priority deadline in the following order:

* Season Ticket Holders & Eagle Club Members priority based upon Eagle Club Giving Level.

* Season Ticket Holders who are non-Eagle Club Members.

* Eagle Club members who are non-Season Ticket Holders.

* General Public

If you are a season ticket holder or Eagle Club member, be sure to log in to your account at SouthernMissTickets.com when ordering to ensure you receive your priority. If you do not remember your login information and need assistance, fans can call the ticket office at 1-800-844-TICK (8425).