Nearly every front lawn along Briggs Place, in Superior's Rock Creek neighborhood, features a roofer's sign, including this, from Pachner Exteriors. The neighborhood was battered by a hailstorm July 7. ( Joe Rubino / Daily Camera )

Take a quick drive around Superior's Rock Creek neighborhood and it is impossible not to notice the abundance of roofing company signs planted in front yards.

After being battered by a damaging thunderstorm on the evening of July 7 — a system that dumped hailstones between an inch and an inch and a half in diameter on towns from Louisville to Arvada, according to the National Weather Service — nearly every single home on the neighborhood's Briggs Place has one of the eye-catching signs in its yard.

Briggs Place resident Chuck Marrero said that while he wasn't there to experience the storm himself, his home suffered in the storm, with insurance adjusters assessing about $22,000 in damage to his roof, paint, screens and other parts of his property.

He said a representative from Pachner Exteriors knocked on his door within days of the storm, and he is glad they did, helping him move along the claims process.

"I had my insurance — Farmers — come down and they totally agreed with Pachner's assessment," Marrero said, adding that his roof repair will cost about $11,000 alone. "The Pachner guy was very knowledgeable. He walked through with my claims adjuster and gave him details I wouldn't have been able to provide."

Superior might not been the only town where roofing signs become a common sight this summer.

Conditions right this summer for more hail

Mike Baker, a forecaster with the National Weather Service in Boulder, said that the recently-released long-range outlook from the Climate Prediction Center in Washington D.C. indicates that Colorado could see below average temperatures and above average precipitation the rest of the summer. If conditions work out right, Baker said, that could obviously mean more hail.

With that in mind, insurance industry experts are recommending homeowners be proactive this year.

"First and foremost, if you believe you have damage get in touch with your insurance company immediately and get the claims process started," Carole Walker, executive director of the Rocky Mountain Insurance Information Association, said on Friday.

She also cautioned about rushing into a contract with a roofer, saying that it is important to research a company and make sure they are bonded and reputable.

"There are some you need to be cautious of whether they are scam artists or using high-pressured sales techniques. What they may say is 'Your whole roof needs to be replaced,' and then your insurance company comes out and says 'This can be repaired,'" she said. "You want to make sure you're not paying out of pocket or paying up front with anyone."

Walker said that after reaching out to their insurance company, the next thing homeowners ought to do is take pictures and document damage done by a storm. In some cases some temporary repairs may be wise to prevent further damage, but homeowners should be sure to keep receipts for any such work so they can reimbursed.

Over the last decade hailstorms have caused more than $3 billion in insurance-covered damage in Colorado, according to statistics kept on the Rocky Mountain Insurance Information Association website. Walker said that while most of the damage in a typical summer is done by a few large-scale events, this year has seen more frequent, smaller storms, including a series of storms between May 20 and 22 that caused and estimated $109 million in losses across the state.

Angela Thorpe, a spokeswoman for the biggest insurance provider in the state, State Farm, noted that Colorado dropped out of the company's top 10 states for wind and hail damage insurance claims last year after long holding a place on the list. Still, being in an area where severe thunderstorms are frequent, Thorpe said the company offers clients discounts as deep as 28 percent on their homeowners insurance if they invest in impact-resistant roofing.

The importance of being proactive

Isiah Pachner, managing partner of Pachner Exteriors, said it has been a busy year for his company, doing work in Superior, Boulder, Louisville, Broomfield and across the Front Range from Colorado Springs to Fort Collins.

Noting that he takes pride in working as an insurance specialist that provides sound advice for homeowners, he echoed the value of impact-resistant roofing in Colorado. He said the most important thing for homeowners, though, is being proactive.

"Not matter how big or how small (a storm is) it's never a bad idea to have someone come and give you an assessment," he said. "The last thing you want to do is sleep on something like this and then six months or a year later find out you have damage and find out you don't have coverage."

He emphasized the importance of homeowners checking local references for any company they may work with, and only signing a contract if they are totally comfortable with that company.

Parker-area contractor CJ Restoration is also a firm that has planted its signs in a few yards in Superior and elsewhere in Boulder County this summer. Brian Graybeal, the company's in-house claims adjuster, said that with the more frequent, but lower impact hailstorms the state seems to be experiencing this year, homeowners should be wary of damage that is less visibly noticeable.

"If we get some big hail, you'll notice marks. With the light hail you may not see stuff like that, but at the same time that impact may have lifted a nail out of the roof, and now the shingles are shifting and moving whenever the wind comes along," he said.

With that in mind, Graybeal advised homeowners to be vigilant and keep an eye out for internal indications of exterior damage such as discolored ceilings or walls.

"It is very important for homeowners to be hands-on this season," he said.

Contact Camera Staff Writer Joe Rubino at 303-473-1328 or rubinoj@dailycamera.com