Let's begin today with a stipulation. It's hard -- well, virtually impossible -- to hate Mike Honda. The affable Democratic congressman from San Jose, who is facing a formidable challenge from Ro Khanna next year, proved that point Tuesday night.

With a cadre of health care officials, Honda held a town hall meeting at the Fremont Senior Center to discuss Obamacare. At the end, I wasn't sure whether it was a snoozathon or sensitivity training. The congressman's amiability disarmed even the tea party standard-bearers.

Honda had done something that I was certain was a political mistake: He had asked people to RSVP for the event. It was a transparent way of controlling the audience. The real verbal assailants are often reluctant to emerge from the cloak of anonymity.

Portrait of alumni Congressman Mike Honda, class of 1959, at San Jose High, in San Jose on Monday, May 13, 2013. (Josie Lepe/Bay Area News Group) ( Josie Lepe )

To top it off, Honda evaded most of the fire. He introduced the panel and then sat in the audience, as if he had as much to learn from the explanation of Obamacare as anyone else. The moderator was Dr. Zettie Page, a smooth administrator for the Tri-City Health Center in Fremont.

For the first hour, as the officials outlined the law, you could feel the onset of sleeping sickness: Where do I look for a health exchange? (coveredca.com) Will my union's health care benefits change? (No). Will some docs get less from Medicare or Medi-Cal? (yes).

This wasn't a town hall, exactly. It was Health Care 101, and unless you were deeply enmeshed in it, your attention wandered to something more compelling, like the effectiveness of Khloe Kardashian's ultimatum to Lamar Odom.

Advertisement

Finally, past the midpoint of the meeting, they threw it open for questions. As a reporter, this was the moment I had waited for all night, the time when the congressman would be fed to the lions, with his last moments saved for YouTube.

Moment of laughter

Instead, the first questioner, fumbling with the mike, mentioned that he had acted in a community playhouse. That prompted a panelist, Herb Schultz, a federal health official, to crack that he had played comedic leads himself. Suddenly, the audience was laughing, the worst possible development for a reporter yearning for confrontation.

A little while later, a true tea party aficionado got up and demanded to know what federal service was done as efficiently as its private counterpart. A rehearsed question, but at least the lion had snarled. And the panelists threw him a bit of red meat, answering "Medicare.''

When he objected, Honda interceded. "To be fair, we should give you the data on that,'' he said. Things were getting worse and worse. Instead of accepting his role of victim, the congressman was playing peacemaker.

Finally, a Syrian-American man rose to ask what it would take to persuade Honda to join the effort to strike the Assad regime after the use of chemical weapons near Damascus.

Honda is no warmonger: He signed a congressional letter asking that the president let Congress debate a strike. But he answered the man's question only indirectly, talking about a visit to a refugee camp and saying he wanted to get information on all chemical attacks and identify culprits.

Then I understood: Mike Honda is the guy who knows how to pacify lions with a story and a smile. He had carefully chosen the audience, yes. But in the end, even the most fearsome beasts laid down and issued a sound much like a purr.

Contact Scott Herhold at 408-275-0917 or sherhold@mercurynews.com. Follow him at Twitter.com/scottherhold.