Thursday my daughter was in an auto/bus accident in Homer Glen. If my tax dollars pay for this type of emergency response by the school, police and fire departments, they should be ashamed. First, no one from Schilling ever notified anyone their children were involved. Students were all held on the bus for a long time without contact, finally being left off only to someone who happened to show up on the scene. Medical attention was poor and by choice. We pay more to schools, police and fire departments for what — to find out your child is in an accident on Facebook? Where are the tax dollars working here? The only compliments go to the school bus driver, who did a great job not having anyone seriously injured, and a female Homer Glen trustee who showed up to assist. The rest of you need to learn how to handle emergencies properly.

Political figures often fret about the Social Security Trust Fund running out of money in 10 to 20 years. How come no one seems to worry about the Medicaid Trust Fund, the Food Stamp Trust Fund or the Section 8 Trust Fund ever running out of money?

Don, Palos

I read that Delusional Donald said he would make a great president because it is much easier to be president of the United States than running successful businesses. Seriously? As a CEO, you look out for the profits for yourself or your shareholders/investors. As president of the United States you are responsible for the lives of those in this country, even those you do not like, and make decisions accordingly. As leader of the strongest county on this planet, you also need to think how your decisions will affect everyone on Earth. You can't file for bankruptcy and start over if a decision made in haste, without understanding all the facts, turns out to be a big blunder. Wars get started that way. But if Delusional Donald said it, it must be true.

El, Hegewisch

Headline says: Trump's "America First" speech alarms U.S. allies. Yeah, I would worry too if someone who pays the majority of my bills says "no more."

Oak Forest

I am not a Rod Blogavich fan, but come on our judicial system. Jesse Jackson Jr. gets 30 months for using political funds illegally, Dennis Hestert gets 15 months for using funds illegally and child molestation and Rod gets 14 years for having a big mouth. JJJ should still be in jail, Hestert should have gotten life and Rod should be released.

Chicago

So United Healthcare is pulling out of Obamacare because it lost money from its exchange coverage. Other health care company acquisitions and mergers mean fewer options for enrollees. Companies can't compete and can't profit. Consumers can't choose. You mean capitalism doesn't work with socialism?

This is why people distrust government and our judicial system. Both are broken. "Who ya' know" are bywords in our court system. Does anyone, including our media, actually still think "Blago" deserves 16 years in prison for what he did compared to once-powerful political leader and "serial child molester" Dennis Hastert? Only 15 months in prison for multiple child abuses ? C'mon, give us a break. The systems are broke.

I watched Megyn Kelly trying to interview Ted Cruz. The exasperated Kelly tried to get politician Cruz to answer her questions. He just ranted on in "poli-talk" without ever responding. This was a perfect example why the people are revolting and suspicious of electing another politician as president. This is why Trump is running away with their primaries and could become the next president.

Bob, Oak Forest

What's Speak Out?

Speak Out allows readers to comment on the issues of the day. Email Speak Out at speakout@southtownstar.com or call 312-222-2427. Please limit comments to 30 seconds or about 120 words and give your first name and your hometown.