In many ways, 2014 was a pivotal year for PPACA, as most major reforms came online in the past 11 months. Among the facets implemented were the Health Insurance Tax, subsidies, state and federal exchanges, minimum standards, health care co-ops, Medicaid expansion and new rules for wellness programs, minimum waiting periods and several market reforms. There were lots of problems, and the government tacked on plenty of last-minute changes and extensions in an effort to smooth the implementation. It all resulted in a flood of negative press for PPACA. Public perception has fallen so far that polls now consistently show that around 60 percent of Americans don't favor the law. Complete your profile to continue reading and get FREE access to BenefitsPRO.com, part of your ALM digital membership. Benefits:

Your access to unlimited BenefitsPRO.com content isn’t changing. Once you are an ALM digital member, you’ll receive: Critical BenefitsPRO.com information including cutting-edge post-reform success strategies, comprehensive service provider listings, educational webcasts and videos, resources from industry leaders, and informative eNewsletters.

Exclusive discounts on ALM, BenefitsPRO Magazine and BenefitsPRO.com events.

Access to other award-winning ALM publications including LifeHealthPro.com, ThinkAdvisor.com and Law.com. Register Now Already have an account? Sign In X Sign in with your ALM Account Remember Me Or... Sign In With LinkedIn

“Most of the requirements were effective for 2014, but because of the way the administration allowed states and carriers to continue with noncompliant plans for another year, there's variability across the country,” Waltman says. “So you have some employers who are compliant and other employers working on becoming compliant. They have to document. It's not just ‘I don't have to do it this year’; it's ‘I have to fill out and document it.’ A lot of employers were already offering coverage, but the new systems in place are a compliance burden that may be as much work as offering coverage in the first place.” But compliance hasn't been easy, some industry insiders say, as employers have been fearful over the law's penalties and continuing changes. Aaron Davis, president of NextLogical Benefit Strategies in Westminster, Maryland, says brokers have been busy working to educate clients — as well as ease their concerns.