Single-income families can face a variety of problems at tax time. These problems can lead to smaller refunds or bigger tax bills. It can be especially complicated for divorced parents who have to deal with the issues surrounding claiming dependents. However, even married couples with just one working parent can lose out on tax breaks because of their single-income status. Here are 15 problems that single-income families might face, and what they can possibly do to avoid the problem or lessen the impact.

1. Not Being Able to Claim the Child Care Credit The IRS offers working parents a tax break if they’re paying for child care. The child and dependent care credit allows taxpayers to claim up to $3,000 in expenses for one child and $6,000 in expenses for two or more children. However, a family with a stay-at-home parent can’t take advantage of this credit. “This credit requires that both spouses either work or are full-time students, meaning that single-earner two-parent families will most of the time not qualify for this, despite having spent many thousands on daycare,” said Crystal Stranger, an enrolled agent and president of online tax preparation service 1st Tax. If you’re shut out of the child care credit because one parent doesn’t work or attend school, you still can get a tax break for child-care expenses. If your employer offers a flexible spending account for dependent care, you can contribute up to $5,000 a year in pre-tax dollars. Read: 3 Tips to Doing Your Taxes Like Warren Buffett

2. Not Being Able to Benefit From a Dependent Care FSA Divorced parents run into another set of problems when it comes to getting tax breaks for child-care costs. If your employer offers a dependent care flexible spending account, you can make pre-tax contributions — which lower your taxable income — and use the money to pay for care for "eligible" dependents. However, if you’re not the custodial parent, you can’t take advantage of this tax break, said David Du Val, vice president of customer advocacy at TaxAudit.com, a tax audit defense firm. An eligible dependent is a child younger than 13 for whom you provide more than 50 percent support, who lives with you more than half the year and isn’t claimed by another as a dependent. Even if you pay for some dependent care, you can’t benefit from an FSA if you don’t meet these requirements.

3. Thinking a Stay-at-Home Parent Can’t Save for Retirement Typically, you have to have earned income to contribute to a traditional IRA or Roth IRA. So many single-income families assume that the breadwinner is the only spouse who can contribute to one of these retirement accounts because the non-working spouse doesn’t have any earned income, said Thomas Walsh, a certified financial planner and portfolio manager with Palisades Hudson Financial Group. However, the IRS makes an exception in this case. “In order to promote retirement savings from both spouses in the home, the IRS created the spousal-IRA,” Walsh said. A working spouse can contribute up to $5,500 a year ($6,500 if 50 or older) for a non-working spouse. You have until the April tax deadline to make a contribution for the previous year and deduct the contribution on your federal tax return if you meet certain requirements.

4. Missing Out on the IRA Contribution Deduction The benefit of contributing to a traditional IRA versus a Roth is that you can deduct your contribution to lower your taxable income. However, if the employed spouse is covered by a retirement plan at work, but his or her income is too high, he or she might not be able to deduct an IRA contribution for the non-working spouse. The amount of contribution that can be deducted is phased out if modified adjusted gross income is between $183,000 and $193,000. You also can’t claim any deduction if the working spouse’s modified AGI is $193,000 or more. Unfortunately, if you earn that much, you also get shut out of a Roth IRA — which doesn’t offer an upfront deduction for contributions, but withdrawals are tax-free in retirement, said Walsh.

5. Filing as Single Instead of Head of Household Single parents can hurt themselves at tax time if they file as a single taxpayer rather than head of household, said Lloyd M. Grissinger, tax practice leader of the Memphis office of CBIZ MHM, an accounting and tax service. To qualify as head of household, you must be not married, pay more than half the cost of housing for a year and have your dependent live with you more than half the year. There are several tax benefits for filing as head of household. Here’s just one: If you file as head of household this spring for the 2015 tax-filing season, you can claim a standard deduction of $9,250 on your federal tax return. However, single taxpayers only get a standard deduction of $6,300.

6. Using Married Filing Separately Status Filing separately while you’re still married can create problems at tax time. If you use the married filing separately status, you’ll miss out on valuable tax breaks such as the earned income credit for low-income taxpayers, education credits for college expenses and the student-loan interest deduction, Du Val said. “Ninety-five percent of the time, you will get a bigger refund or owe less if you file jointly,” Du Val said. So if you’re separated and living apart, you still might want to file a joint return to get the tax benefits. Or you might qualify for head of household if your spouse didn’t live with you for the last six months of the year, you paid more than half the cost of keeping your home and your dependents lived with you most of the year.

7. Getting Alimony Instead of Child Support If you’re divorced and get financial support from your ex-spouse, you need to be careful about the type of support you receive because it will make a difference at tax time. Alimony is treated as taxable income, but child support is not, Grissinger said. “That’s why it’s important to have proper representation on the legal side,” he said. Make sure during the divorce settlement that you agree to have money come to you as child support — or get a large enough alimony payment to cover the tax bill that will come with it, Grissinger said. On the flip side, the person who pays alimony gets to deduct that payment on his or her tax return. However, they can’t deduct child support payments.

8. You Can’t Claim Your Child Because Your Ex Earned More Claiming dependents can be tricky if you’re divorced. Typically, you can treat a child as a qualifying dependent if that child lives with you more than half the year. You’re entitled to claim exemptions — which reduce your taxable income — for dependents. Plus, you qualify for other tax deductions and credits as the custodial parent. However, if your child lived the same number of days with you and your ex-spouse, you can’t both claim the child as a dependent. If your spouse earned more than you, then he or she would be treated as the custodial parent and allowed to claim the child as a dependent, according to the IRS.

9. Overlooking the Earned Income Tax Credit The earned income tax credit can help lower the tax burden on low-income families. “It’s a really good benefit for single working parents,” Grissinger said. It also can help married couples who only earn one income. However, it’s often an overlooked credit, according to tax preparation software company TurboTax. To qualify, you must earn below a certain amount — which varies depending on your filing status and the number of dependents you have. The maximum income limit for the 2015 filing year is $53,267 for a married couple filing jointly with three or more dependents, and the maximum credit is $6,242. You can take advantage of IRS Free File software to help you calculate and claim the credit.

10. Not Qualifying for the EITC Due to Certain Income To qualify for the earned income tax credit, you must actually have earned income. So if alimony or child support was your only income, you can’t qualify for the credit. Social Security and unemployment benefits also don’t count as earned income. You also can be disqualified for the credit if you receive investment income that exceeds a certain amount. For 2015 returns, the amount is $3,400.

11. Failing to Take Advantage of Qualifying Widow Status If you become a widow or widower, you need to make sure you don’t file using the wrong tax status. Otherwise, you could miss out on some tax breaks. If your spouse dies during the year and you’re a single-income household at tax time, you can still use the married filing jointly status for the year in which your spouse died to take advantage of the higher standard deduction for married couples and joint return tax rates. Then the following two years you might be able to file as widow(er) with dependent child if you have kids. You can claim a higher standard deduction with this filing status than as head of household, Du Val said.

12. Divorced Couples Might Lose Out on Student-Loan Interest Deduction Some of the tax benefits you got as a single-income household while you were married might disappear when you get divorced. For example, you can deduct up to $2,500 in student-loan interest as long as your modified adjusted income is less than $160,000 if you're married filing jointly. However, you lose the right to that deduction if your MAGI tops $80,000 as a single or head of household filer. So if your MAGI is $100,000, you could’ve claimed the deduction while you were married, but you’ll lose it after a divorce because you can no longer benefit from the higher income cut-off.

13. Divorced Couples Might Lose Out on the Saver’s Credit Low- to moderate-income taxpayers can take advantage of a tax credit for contributing to a retirement account, such as a 401k or IRA. The credit is worth up to $2,000 for married couples filing jointly. To qualify, married couples filing jointly have to have an adjusted gross income of less than $61,000 for 2015 returns. For single taxpayers, the income limit is just $30,500. Being married doubles the maximum income you can have to qualify. If you were the sole income earner while married and pushing the income limit for claiming the saver’s credit, you’ll likely exceed the limit if you get divorced — and lose out on this tax break.

14. Getting Hit With the Affordable Care Act Penalty A single-income family with a stay-at-home parent could hit a snag at tax time if the working spouse didn’t pay for health coverage for all members of his or her family. The Affordable Care Act (or Obamacare) requires everyone in a household to have minimum essential coverage, or pay a penalty when filing a tax return, said Du Val. If you thought you were saving money by not including your spouse on your policy, you’ll pay for it at tax time. Du Val said he’s seen taxpayers pay penalties of more than $1,000.