Dr. Joe Ross, medical director of pediatric cardiology at Dayton Children’s Hospital, examines Tyler Pemberton, 17, Monday during the first day of the new Ohio Pediatric Care Center in Springfield. Dayton and Nationwide Children’s Hospitals opened the joint specialty care center to reduce duplication of services and make it more efficient. Bill Lackey/Staff

By Matt Sanctis

Staff Writer

Two local children’s hospitals began combined operations at a North Limestone Street facility Monday, a trend experts believe will continue as the Affordable Care Act influences health care delivery in Ohio.

Dayton Children’s Hospital and Nationwide Children’s Hospital of Columbus opened Monday the joint outpatient specialty care center at 1644 N. Limestone St. The entities will remain separate, but will work together as the Ohio Pediatric Care Alliance to provide a variety of pediatric services to area patients.

The effort won’t create additional jobs initially, but officials from both organizations said the long-term goal is to grow and add services that aren’t available now. It will also allow both entities to eliminate duplication of services and become more efficient, said Vicki Giambrone, vice president of strategic partnerships at Dayton Children’s Hospital.

“Rather than duplicate efforts, we decided to find a way to partner together,” Giambrone said.

The expansion of Medicaid and insurance exchanges under the ACA receive most of the attention, said Bryan Bucklew, president of the Greater Dayton Area Hospital Association. But one of the law’s goals is also to provide incentives to pay for better quality health care, as opposed to paying for the number of procedures provided, he said.

“These innovative partnerships are probably a precursor to what’s coming with the Affordable Care Act as everybody looks at how you provide the most efficient, effective care and trying to make sure people have access to the system,” Bucklew said.

Both entities had been operating in Springfield separately. Nationwide was already using the North Limestone Street facility, but Dayton Children’s had been leasing space at the MercyCrest Medical Arts building on McCreight Avenue.

Overall, the Dayton Children’s Hospital provides care to as many as 290,000 children annually across the region. Nationwide didn’t have patient totals immediately available.

Under the agreement, Dayton Children’s will provide outpatient care in cardiology, endocrinology, gastroenterology, hematology and oncology, nephrology, and pulmonary and urology care. Nationwide Children’s will provide Ear, Nose and Throat clinic services. The Nationwide Children’s Child Lab, which provides laboratory services, will also continue to operate at the facility.

Services such as X-rays and ultrasounds will also be added in Springfield as part of the agreement. The entities will continue to work with the community to determine what other services might be beneficial, Giambrone said.

Both organizations have a strategic plan to develop partnerships that can improve care for patients, said Valerie Ruddock, vice president of operations for Nationwide Children’s.

“We’ve pooled our resources and built on each other’s strengths,” she said.

Similar partnerships are likely to become more common statewide as health care providers navigate changes in the ACA, Bucklew said.

“There’s still a lot of uncertainty associated with (the Affordable Care Act) and you have all the different providers looking at ways they can be more efficient and effective,” he said. “So you’re going to see these kinds of partnerships continue to move forward throughout Ohio.”