Photo

GREENVILLE, S.C. — Gov. Scott Walker, eager to jump-start a flagging campaign, expressed support for a government shutdown over Planned Parenthood funding and likened his fights with lawmakers in Wisconsin to the movie “Braveheart.”

Jeb Bush reveled in the weeds of his tax plan and federal discretionary spending, appearing grateful for the chance to address a policy forum — until a discussion of his long-held support for Common Core education standards inspired hearty boos. “Hang on a second,” he pleaded. “You’re going to like the ending of this story.”

And Ben Carson, the retired neurosurgeon ascending in recent weeks toward the top of the polls, brandished the understated charm that has powered his rise: He entered to a standing ovation, thanked his hosts for inviting him on the day he was turning 64, and was promptly serenaded by the crowd with a full rendition of “Happy Birthday.”

“People think doctors only know medicine,” he said later, defending his qualifications as far-reaching. “They’re nuts.”

Two days after their second televised debate scrambled the race anew — perhaps most notably elevating the profile of Carly Fiorina — nearly all the Republican contenders for president descended on South Carolina on Friday for a conference organized by the conservative group Heritage Action for America. (The group is the political arm of the Heritage Foundation, founded in 1973 and transformed in recent years from a staid policy incubator to an organizing engine fueled by the Tea Party movement.)

Photo

The most striking exception was Donald J. Trump, who had been scheduled to appear. His campaign said that a pending business transaction had forced him to cancel, a development that Heritage Action called “unfortunate.” (Mr. Carson joked that the news of Mr. Trump’s dropping out was the “best birthday present.”)

In his absence, Mrs. Fiorina, propelled on Wednesday by a memorably steely exchange with Mr. Trump over his disparaging comments about her looks, moved to build her case as a top-tier candidate. (One of Heritage Action’s moderators, Gov. Nikki R. Haley of South Carolina, quipped of Mrs. Fiorina, “This is what a smart, intelligent face looks like.”)

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

In her own comments, Mrs. Fiorina cited her history as an executive, including her history interacting with China, in a forceful call to action that earned several sustained ovations.

“Pressure applied by citizens on their representatives will move the system,” she said. “President Fiorina will call on you as citizens of this great nation to take our government back.”

Mr. Bush, who was generally received warmly, cast himself as “a disrupter in Tallahassee” during his time as governor, suggesting his peers had comparatively thin résumés.