With an expected 19 percent jump in demand over the next eight years, the largest job increase of any occupation in the United States will be in nursing, according to the U.S. Department of Labor.

Using data from the Bureau of Labor Statistics, Carolyn Mosley, dean of the College of Health Sciences at the University of Arkansas at Fort Smith, points out the increase in demand is not just from the improved access allowed by the Affordable Care Act, but also because of retirement of a generation of nurses.

“Everybody’s excited about the deal with the facility at Fort Chaffee (a planned osteopathic medical school), and I think that’s great. It’s going to increase physicians. But I keep telling people ‘No one’s talking about how we’re going to handle the need for more nurses,’” Mosley said. “Doctors are in your room five or 10 minutes, but it’s the nurses that are in that hospital providing the care 24 hours a day.”

The Fort Smith Regional Healthcare Foundation unveiled plans in February to build a medical college on 200 acres of donated land at Chaffee Crossing, with an opening date of fall 2017. Since then, the college hired Dr. Kenneth A. Heiles, D.O., as dean.

In 2012 there were 2.75 million registered nurses in the United States, according to the BLS data. The projected employment for registered nurses in 2022 is more than 3.23 million. The BLS projects a 11 percent increase in all occupations in the U.S. economy by that time.

“UAFS has focused its attention on the bachelor of science in nursing program, and has eliminated the associate degree and increased class sizes, to do everything we cannot only to increase the number of qualified nurses in the area but increase the training of qualified nurses as well,” UAFS Chancellor Paul Beran stated.

The UAFS College of Health Sciences has always been the largest part of the university, even when it was Westark Community College. Within the next two years, Mosley said a “role of scope change” is in order to begin offering a master’s degree in nursing education and in turn further increase the number of slots in the bachelor’s nursing program.

With only 60 spots available each semester, a bachelor’s in nursing track seat at UAFS is a highly prized one. For the past six semesters, UAFS has seen between 551 and 707 students pick nursing as a major. Of the latest pack of nursing majors, 180 students were qualified to apply for one of those 60 spots. They had an average grade point average of 3.5, Mosley said. The minimum GPA required is 2.5.

The base salary in Arkansas for a registered nurse is about $54,000, with differential pay given to those who work nights and weekends, the dean adds.

“We started out initially with the BSN program just doing 20 a year,” Mosley said. “We soon found out that was not going to do the job.”

Just within the past academic year has UAFS been able to accept 60 students in the program, thanks to endowments that allow for three additional professorships.

“There is a need out there. Our nursing majors outnumber some of the other total numbers in some of the other colleges,” Mosley said. “We have the interest that is there.”

Graduates of the nursing program at UAFS have reported acceptance of a job several months before actually graduating, she said. Demand is both local and national. Mosley said she gets messages regularly from recruiters looking for nurses to apply to a “traveling nurse” program.

Recruitment of physicians, nurses and nursing instructors to Fort Smith has been a challenge because of the high demand nationally. Having a master’s degree in nursing education program at UAFS would help grow the program on a grassroots level, Mosley said, by hiring professors who already have a strong network in the Fort Smith area.

Demand for health care services will increase because of the aging population, the Bureau of Labor statistics states. Nurses will be needed to educate and to care for patients with various chronic conditions, such as arthritis, dementia, diabetes and obesity.

“The financial pressure on hospitals to discharge patients as soon as possible may result in more people admitted to long-term care facilities, outpatient care centers, and greater need for home health care,” the BLS report states.

Job growth is expected in facilities that provide long-term rehabilitation for stroke and head injury patients, as well as facilities that treat people with Alzheimer’s disease. And since many older people prefer to be treated at home or in residential care facilities, registered nurses will be in demand in those settings, as well the report adds.

Growth is also expected to be faster than average in outpatient care centers, such as those that provide same-day chemotherapy, rehabilitation, and surgery. An increased number of procedures, as well as more sophisticated procedures previously done only in hospitals, are performed in ambulatory care settings and physicians’ offices.