The two big achievements of the Obama administration are health reform and financial reform. (Maybe carbon regulation will be added to the list; stay tuned.) For the most part, however, neither has gotten much respect. I think this may finally be changing on health reform, as the evidence piles up for a dramatic improvement in coverage in states that didn’t obstruct the law. But financial reform is still unloved, attacked by the right as anti-business and by the left as too weak to work.

There is, however, an important new GAO report suggesting that reform is mattering a lot on one key hot-button issue: too big to fail. I’m not, however, seeing much clear writing about this; the always excellent Mike Konczal is on the case, but I suspect that most readers won’t know enough about the background to appreciate what’s going on.

So here’s an explanation. If you go back to what happened in 2008, you had a situation in which the impending collapse of some key financial institutions threatened to bring down the whole world economy. So they were bailed out — with many people complaining that the bailouts rewarded bad behavior. Indeed, some people — including me — argued for taking troubled banks into receivership, so that none of the bailout would go to stockholders. But key officials at Treasury argued that they didn’t have the legal authority.

This episode created a concern: now that everyone knew that big financial institutions would be bailed out if they went bad, wouldn’t this (a) give such too-big-to-fail institutions a continuing advantage, because their government guaranteed safety would make them able to borrow cheaply, and (b) encourage irresponsible behavior? And there was a fair bit of evidence for (a): large financial institutions did indeed seem to have a funding advantage.

To deal with this, Dodd-Frank created Ordinary Liquidation Authority, otherwise known as resolution authority — giving the government the legal authority to seize institutions the way it arguably should have in 2008-2009.

But Republican leaders fiercely opposed financial reform — and claimed that resolution authority actually made too-big-to-fail worse, because it institutionalized bailouts. This always seemed implausible; bailouts will happen in crises, one way or another. And if financial reform was a giveaway to the banks, why did Wall Street, which used to look relatively favorably on Democrats, turn overwhelmingly Republican after reform passed?

Still, you’d like some evidence. And GAO has the goods. There was indeed a large-bank funding advantage during and for some time after the crisis, but it has now been diminished or gone away — maybe even slightly reversed. That is, financial markets are now acting as if they believe that future bailouts won’t be as favorable to fat cats as the bailouts of 2008.

This news is part of broader evidence that Dodd-Frank has actually done considerable good, on fronts from consumer protection to bank capitalization. Of course it should have been stronger; and I don’t expect it ever to look as good as Obamacare increasingly does. But claims that it was counterproductive now look like claims that black is white. Are you surprised?