File (Photo: Getty Images/iStockphoto)

A few years ago, a friend told me her family could not afford a summer vacation or maintenance on their home. I felt sorry for her until she itemized her list of sports-related expenses: a $10,000 yearly country club membership, $65-an-hour private tennis lessons, a $6,500 club sports fee, $1,000 in uniforms and four weekend trips with plane tickets, gas, hotels and food. These expenses only covered one kid's sports and she had two other kids to "manage."

Another friend enrolled her daughter in baton twirling lessons. She told me since the sport was so obscure, she was certain her kid had a chance to get a scholarship to a European university. A former neighbor boasted about her son's swimming talent; a free ride to college was inevitable!

Last year, an acquaintance built a batting cage in the basement of his house and started college visits. His son was 13. And a family I knew drove their son to Chicago twice a week after school for club hockey. His sister slept in the back of their van for the 300-mile round trip. Since then, they moved to Minnesota to get closer to the hockey scene and college recruiters.

I don't know how families do it. I am dumbfounded by this youth sports culture, the parents who control it and the games they play to win.

The days of a pick-up game at the park and learning a sport in high school are over. Now, it's videotaping fifth-grade basketball games to review and spray tans for 12-year-old cheerleaders. If you haven't been in club soccer since you were 3, you don't stand a chance making the team. School has become secondary to sports and homework gets in the way of practice. Even missing school for sports is no big deal.

Nobody really lives in their home anymore; they live in their car. And a kid's family is replaced by their coach and team. Someone even told me not to let my girls be friends with "sporty" girls because they only hang out with their teammates. On nice weekends, neighborhoods are empty. Weekends are for club sports and travel teams. Sundays used to be for church. On holiday weekends, forget it. There's a tournament in Madison. Nothing is sacred anymore. Many teenagers don't have jobs because sports are their year-round job. Sports have become work, not fun. And the list goes on.

When I was in high school, I played sports, but I also took piano lessons, had a diverse group of friends and worked part-time. I had a life! I did not need a sport to teach me time-management, competition and teamwork. Individual accomplishments mattered. Back then, colleges recruited well-rounded students with real-life experiences that showed they were independent and able to handle the challenges of being away from home. If my parents had followed my soccer team around I would have been mortified. I did not want or need anyone micromanaging my life and my parents understood that.

Today, parents have become managers, coaches, cheerleaders, banks and reality TV stereotypes ("Dance Moms" anyone?). Instead of setting money aside for savings, a 529 plan or a family vacation, money is poured into the dream that one day their kid will get a sports scholarship. Many families spend a semester's worth of college tuition on a year of youth sports with no guarantee it will even matter.

The saddest part of all of this is that many parents fool themselves into thinking their kids are gifted athletes. The reality is many parents are trying to live vicariously through their child. This dream becomes the parent's and not the child's.

In the game of youth sports, it's play to win. Unfortunately, in the end, kids have a lot to lose.

Read or Share this story: http://post.cr/1zDglzS