Writer Anne Jolis, left, and Bookalokal.com founder Evelyne White prepare to confuse Europeans’ palates with marshmallow-topped yams at Thanksgiving 2010. Frances Robinson

Thanksgiving is a great holiday that Brits shouldn’t pass up when given the chance. It gets the party season seriously under way, it’s a great excuse to drink Californian wine (not easy to find in Belgium), and unlike July 4, it’s thankfully not a celebration about throwing off the yoke of British oppression. (Oh, hilarious, a box of tea bags! Thanks, guys.)

While it’s a family holiday in the U.S., American expats on their own here use it as an excuse to invite their friends over and confuse Europeans with a vast array of sweet vegetables. Not to be old-fashioned, but in Europe, main courses are generally savory, while dessert is sweet. This notion was destroyed for me when Evelyne, an American friend, introduced me to Thanksgiving four years ago. Cranberry sauce (supersweet), creamed corn (sweetish), and sweet potatoes with marshmallow on top (really America?).

Evelyne–who proved so good at cooking elaborate dinners for 20 in a cramped Ikea kitchen that she set up an Internet startup to link up likeminded chefs and diners—introduced me to the tasty world of turkey, pumpkin pie and baked camembert (it’s always nice to have a local twist).

READ MORE: WHERE TO FIND YOUR (LAST-MINUTE) TURKEY IN LONDON

READ MORE: HOW TO MAKE THE PERFECT THANKSGIVING TURKEY

Since then I’ve become a huge fan, and got to experience a gourmet version at the U.S. embassy in Brussels. It was a distinctly diplomatic affair, with festive tunes played by a jazz quintet from the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (yes, there is such a thing). Marines made small talk, diplomats discovered Napa Valley sparkling wines, and homesick Americans discussed regional variations on the classic Thanksgiving dishes–oyster stuffing anyone?

Still, I thought, I’d never really had that family Thanksgiving experience. While some of my ancestors emigrated to interesting places, none had ever settled in the U.S. So when I went to stay with my mum’s cousins in Red Deer, Alberta, in October, I was delighted to be invited for a maple-syrup-infused feast of turkey, mashed potatoes and every kind of pie. Who knew? The more-modest inhabitant of North America totally does Thanksgiving too.

Canada’s has already passed (it was on Oct. 13), but this brings me to the final thing that I still don’t understand about the festival: Why do Americans insist on eating Turkey less than a month before another annual Turkey-eating occasion: Christmas? I know the pilgrims were desperately hungry and the turkey was all that was available, but times have changed! Still, it’s not my place to judge. I’m just off to make a cup of tea.

Email us at expat@wsj.com. Follow us @WSJexpat. Join our Facebook group.