WATCH DPTV: Park Hill Elementary students tell us what they are thankful for

WATCH DPTV: Clayton Early Learning preschoolers on thankfulness

Time was, at least in popular memory, when Thanksgiving was a day of family and feasting.

Then it became a day of family, feasting and football.

Now it is a dawn-to-dark blitz of family, feasting, football and retail frenzy, as retailers get a jump-start on Black Friday — the storm-the-stores sales event of recent years — by opening stores when turkey carcasses are barely cold on the platter.

“We are watching a new trend being born,” said Marshal Cohen, chief retail analyst at NPD Group, which tracks consumer behavior. “For many people, Thanksgiving Day itself has become as much about shopping as food. Not everyone goes shopping, but a lot do.

“We have literally watched the typical time for Thanksgiving dinner go from about 5 p.m. to 3 p.m. so people can catch the sales that are starting that evening.”

So much for lining up at the doors at dawn the day after Thanksgiving.

Folks who wait until Black Friday for deals at big-box retail outlets such as electronics stores can find themselves aced out of products they seek.

How did it come to this?

A bit of history

The notion of the Friday after Thanksgiving being a big retail day goes back 75 years.

While President Abraham Lincoln in 1863 had declared the last Thursday in November a day for national thanksgiving, it was President Franklin D. Roosevelt who moved to elongate the holiday shopping period in 1939, when the last Thursday in November fell on Nov. 30, leaving shoppers — and retailers — only 24 shopping days until Christmas.

After two years of wrangling, it was decided that Thanksgiving would be held on the fourth Thursday of November.

The retail term “Black Friday” would not emerge until the 1960s. One version of the term’s origins holds that Philadelphia police coined it to describe the chaos at downtown stores on that day.

“Retail has gotten more sophisticated,” Cohen said. “Sales are starting earlier, and consumers are being wooed earlier.”

Black Friday has eroded the notion that the day after Thanksgiving is a time to revel with leftovers and relatives, where cousins get to know one another and folks can compare how everyone has grown in height or waistline from the previous year.

Impulse and profit

The day is no longer a breather but, rather, part of a weeks-long mono-holiday. It is the revving of an economic engine that rumbles from Thanksgiving through Christmas to New Year’s Day.

“It seems we’ve commercialized a national holiday in every month of the year,” Cohen said.

Much of this is a twofold result of the 2008 economic crash and the rise of online shopping, a direct threat to the profits of traditional retailers.

But Cohen notes that statistically, the percentage of impulse purchases is nearly twice as high at stores than it is online. So opening earlier is just good strategy for brick-and-mortar outlets.

The National Retail Federation predicts sales in November-December of 2014 (excluding autos, gas and restaurant sales) will jump 4.1 percent over 2013 to $616.9 billion.

It would be the first time since 2011 that holiday sales in that period increased more than 4 percent over the previous year.

Barbara Bickart, associate professor of marketing at Boston University’s School of Management, said the expanded Thanksgiving sales season has dual drivers.

“There’s the lure of great deals for customers, and retailers are feeling the pressure,” Bickart said. “They want the customers to come to their stores first and stay away from the competition.

“And consumers seem drawn to it. For them it’s almost as a game.”

The media — print and broadcast alike — contribute to this.

It’s not just the stories about the madness at the doors and interviews with customers salivating for deals, but the advice from “experts” on how to score big in the sales aisles. Smartphone apps help shoppers navigate retail parking lots for open spaces.

Of course, this is a two-edged proposition.

Yes, retailers open early on Black Friday and fan the flames. But would they do this if we, the people, weren’t lining up hundreds-deep in front of those stores when the morning sun was still several time zones away?

Kate Raymond of Denver hopes to beat Black Friday: She plans to hit Best Buy after a midday Thanksgiving dinner.

The store near her opens at 5 p.m. on Thanksgiving Day and stays open until 1 a.m.

On Monday afternoon, she had just emerged from a Best Buy on East Mexico Avenue.

“We’re in the market for a new high-def television,” she said.

“I was in there scouting for flat-screens and trying to get a jump on Thursday evening, when we’ll be shopping.”

Black Thursday?

But could there be a backlash to the notion of shopping on Thanksgiving? Two years ago, a Boycott Black Thursday page went up on Facebook.com. To date, it has more than 115,000 “Likes.”

A Wednesday post by Lori Jo Anderson reads: I’m not shopping this Thursday, neither is my family. I don’t want to give money to any company that is turning Thanksgiving into Thanks-grabbing.

Not all businesses combine cranberry sauce and consumerism. National chains such as Costco, Sam’s Club, Nordstrom, T.J. Maxx and Marshalls are shuttered on Thanksgiving Day.

Denver’s Tavern Hospitality Group also has decided to stay dark for the sake of its staff members.

“This year we reached out to our employees, crunched all the numbers, and decided that the morale benefit outweighs any revenue loss,” said owner and CEO Frank Schultz.

For a company with 11 locations, many with a major sports-bar emphasis, it was a big decision. Traditionally, their doors have opened on Thanksgiving around 6 p.m., letting people in to watch ballgames or just get away from a packed living room.

“The whole frenzy of people shopping and going out just isn’t fair to people working in those industries,” Schultz said.

William Porter: 303-954-1877, wporter@denverpost.com or twitter.com/williamporterdp