U.S. Sen. John McCain, R-Ariz., is frequently characterized by his critics as a “RINO” — Republican in name only — but such criticism hit especially close to home on Saturday.

The Maricopa County Republican Party, McCain’s home county, voted overwhelmingly to censure the 2008 Republican nominee for president for his “betrayal” of party values, according to the local CBS affiliate.

McCain was admonished for pushing liberal legislation, backing liberal nominees and for “assaults on the Constitution and 2nd amendment,” the resolution said.

Arkansas mom destroys Common Core in four powerful minutes

The vote wasn’t even close, with 1,169 voting for censure, compared to just 358 voting against it.

The censure concluded that “until he consistently champions our Party’s Platform and values, we, the Republican leadership in Arizona will no longer support, campaign for or endorse John McCain as our U.S. Senator.”

Ouch.

Here is the resolution as drafted by precinct committeeman Tim Schwartz, according to CBS5 Phoenix:

As leaders in the Republican Party, we are obligated to fully support our party, platform and its candidates. Only in times of great crisis or betrayal is it necessary to publicly censure our leaders. Today we are faced with both. For too long we have waited, hoping Sen. McCain would return to our party’s values on his own. That has not happened. So with sadness and humility we rise and declare: Whereas Sen. McCain has amassed a long and terrible record of drafting, co-sponsoring and voting for legislation best associated with liberal Democrats, such as amnesty, funding for Obamacare, the debt ceiling, assaults on the constitution and second amendment, and has continued to support liberal nominees; Whereas this record has been disastrous and harmful to Arizona and the United States; and, Whereas Sen. McCain has campaigned as a conservative and made promises during his re-election campaigns, such as the needed and welcomed promise to secure our borders and finish the border fence, only to quickly flip-flop on those promises; and whereas McCain has abandoned our core values and has been eerily silent against liberals, yet publicly reprimands conservatives in his own party, therefore BE IT HEREBY RESOLVED that the Maricopa County Republican leadership censures Sen. McCain for his continued disservice to our state and nation, and BE IT FURTHER RESOLVED that until he consistently champions our party’s platform and values, we, the Republican leadership in Arizona will no longer support, campaign for or endorse John McCain as our U.S. senator.