Kenn Tacchino is a professor of taxation and financial planning at Widener University in Chester, Pa. Kenn is the editor of the Journal of Financial Service Professionals. The Journal reaches over 16,000 practitioners, academics, and policy makers in the financial services industry. Professor Tacchino is also a frequent speaker at professional meetings for financial planners. He can be reached at kbtacchino@widener.edu .

Shutterstock Now is not the time to take your eyes off of the road.

Last week, I focused on some poor decisions people make during their working years as they plan for retirement. Today let's focus on some obstacles to a successful retirement that occur close to the time a person is about to retire and what we can do to overcome them.

Retire too soon

The average retirement age for men is 64 and the average retirement age for women is 62. When choosing a retirement age the idea of a selection based on anchor points (e.g., eligibility for Social Security at 62, or Medicare at 65, the age at which friends and relatives retired, or full retirement age under the employer plan), or even just picking a retirement age at random, can be extremely popular ways to look at the issue.

The problem is, however, anchor points and unadvised decision making isn't the best way to decide a retirement age because they don't factor in the improvements in longevity that we have experienced in the last half century, nor do they consider whether you are financially prepared for retirement. The choice of a retirement age needs to be a rational decision that accounts for a variety of considerations. If you can't afford to retire and you're able to keep working, you need to hang on until your financial picture gives you a green light.

You should be prepared to address the following before you pick a retirement date:



Checklist of Retirement-Date Considerations 1 Calculate available retirement income to determine if you have adequate resources. In other words, consider your life expectancy and the future expenditures needed each year to maintain your standard of living. 2 Assess how you might address a variety of retirement risks. For example, longevity risk, investment risk, sequence of returns risk, inflation risk, etc. 3 Assess whether you have sufficient health insurance coverage. 4 Examine the financial resources you are giving up if you retire compared with remaining employed. Don't forget to factor in lost matching contributions and any early retirement incentives. 5 Assess the availability of phased retirement or part-time work in retirement. Retirement doesn't have to be an either/or decision. Many people choose some work in retirement. 6 Evaluate your ability to adapt to retirement. For example, assess the identity, fellowship, and status that you receive from working. 7 Examine the potential for retiring at the same time as your spouse. 8 Examine the impact of various Social Security claiming age options. Remember, however, that retirement age choice and Social Security claiming decision don't have to occur simultaneously.

Carry debt into retirement

According to the EBRI 58% of workers and 44% of retirees are having a problem with their level of debt. AARP reports that 40.5% of households ages 65-74 carry a mortgage. The median loan values were $70,000. That's not so bad. However, that is just the tip of the iceberg when it comes to long term debt. Many have accumulated debts on everything from paying a child's education costs to running up the credit cards on holiday gift giving extravaganzas.

Living beyond your means now complicates and sometimes eliminates your ability to retire. Using, and living within, a structured budget should help to mitigate debt which is acquired without putting thought and planning behind the purchase. Some debt can't be so easily eliminated, however. If the retirement budget can account for this debt, great; if not, then putting off retirement until the piper has been paid may be one of the few solutions you have.

Also see: 5 debts that can ruin your retirement

Read: The surprisingly high cost of debt

Claim Social Security too soon

Statistics vary from year to year but according to the Social Security website, depending on the year data is gathered, between 40% and 50% of people claim their benefit at age 62. And 70% of recipients sign up for Social Security between 62 and full retirement age. It seems the idea of claiming early is predicated on not passing up free money. However, there are two sides to the "free money" issue. Many focus on lost years with no payments while they wait month after month to collect. However, they ignore the larger payments (another type of free money) that results from delayed claiming. An example may help to illustrate this:

Assuming you are entitled to $2,000a month at age 66 you will receive $1,500 a month (plus COLAs) at 62 and $2,640 (plus COLAs) at 70. Some look at the sacrifice of waiting eight years and foregoing monthly checks. Others see benefit to waiting for the extra $1,140 month ($2,640 minus $1,500). The "free money" you waited for may prevent you from running out of gas at the end of retirement. The "free money" you acquired by starting payouts at 62, however, may only serve to artificially inflate your standard of living in the early years of retirement. Shouldn't the focus for many people be to protect against poverty in old age?

Another way to look at the issue is so-called "break-even" thinking. Conventional wisdom says if you will live to age 80 or beyond you should wait to claim; otherwise claim early. However, conventional wisdom ignores the "insurance value" of waiting. Conventional wisdom often ignores the increased survivor benefits associated with waiting (husbands who wait to claim typically are taking better care of their wives than those who don't wait), and conventional wisdom ignores the fact that a deferral decision is like purchasing a larger (and cost of living adjusted) deferred annuity for each month of delay with no fees that is backed by the full faith and credit of the federal government. I can't help but believe that for most middle-class Americans trying to avoid outliving their money, waiting to claim may be a great option.

Also see: The case for claiming Social Security later

Read: Another, maybe better, reason to push off retirement