When a team of health-care and social service workers in Allentown went looking for frequent visitors to emergency departments and hospitals, they quickly learned that many were dialysis patients.

Ask those patients what's most important for maintaining their lives, and they'll, of course, say the dialysis treatment, when a machine cleans the bloodstream the way healthy kidneys would.

Next on the list? For many, it's transportation.

For a significant number of the patients served in the Allentown Super-Utilizer Partnership, the issue of simply getting to treatment is critical and sometimes more problematic than getting the treatment itself. It's a situation when life-and-death care can run into a jumble of federal and state rules. The picture is complicated often by the disabilities and haphazard lives of super-utilizer patients, who have complex health issues and are in and out of the hospital.

Locally, this collision created any number of frustrated customers, especially after last winter's storms. Even when the weather cooperates, however, patients say traveling to and from dialysis can take as much time as the three- to four-hour treatment.

Meet some of the super-utilizers we talked with for this special report, as well as the people in the medical field working to solve the problem. (THE MORNING CALL)

Transportation problems are a "universal issue" for low-income, sick people, said Dr. Jeffrey Brenner, the leading promoter of super-utilizer programs like the one in Allentown. Indeed, it's a challenge for many low-income patients, not just super-utilizers.

"If you're very disabled, very sick, try catching three buses to get to the doctor," he said.

With a grant funded through the federal Affordable Care Act, a small partnership of health-care workers, case managers, social workers, community volunteers and clergy in Allentown seek to surround these patients — many of whom have multiple chronic health problems, mental illness and poor social settings — with services and attention to help them gain more control over their health and lives. With that, Brenner and his supporters say, patients' health will improve and health-care expenditures will decrease. And figuring out the easiest, least costly way of getting patients to and from their life-sustaining appointments is a key part of those services.

GRAPHIC BOX: The Partnership

Through the efforts of the partnership and regional transit provider LANTA, improvements in the pickup and drop-off of patients seeking life-sustaining treatment have taken hold in recent months. But it will always be much more than a simple matter of pickup and drop-off for many patients.

Take the story of Sandra Lewis.

A mother of seven daughters, the 60-year-old Allentown woman cleaned rooms at the Allentown YMCA and lived modestly in subsidized housing in Cumberland Gardens and then in private apartments for most of her life. She took pride in her cooking, citing her Spanish rice, lasagna and chicken pot pie. "The real chicken pot pie," she added.

She eventually developed diabetes, but things seemed under control until about five years ago, Lewis said, when she was bumped in a store and fell, breaking a leg. A cascade of health issues followed, including kidney failure and congestive heart failure. Along with them came the social costs. She could no longer work and lost her apartment.

Diabetes also can wreak havoc on the circulatory system, threatening the feet and limbs of patients. For Lewis, foot infections became common, leading to multiple hospitalizations.

Lewis says these conditions landed her in five nearby hospitals — the Lehigh Valley Health Network hospitals in Salisbury Township and Bethlehem, the St. Luke's University Health Network facilities in Allentown and Fountain Hill and Sacred Heart Hospital in Allentown. By this time, Lewis' care was being paid for by Medicaid, the shared federal-state program for some low-income people and the disabled. Her admissions were so common, hospital staff would recognize her when she was wheeled in.

"They'd say, 'Oh, you were here before,'" Lewis said.

Another broken foot kept her in a double room in ManorCare in Bethlehem, which by this summer had become her home for two years.

On Aug. 4, Lewis says, she had a scheduled trip with LANTA's paratransit van service to see her podiatrist but she never got on the van. Whether it was a miscommunication or a missed trip is unclear; LANTA has no record of a complaint for that date from a ManorCare resident.

It is clear that Lewis did not get to her appointment and ManorCare staffers handled her foot care until her next appointment. Soon, though, her foot began to ache. Drainage seeped from the wound. An infection set in and Lewis was admitted to Sacred Heart.

This time, it was extremely serious. Doctors debated whether she needed the foot amputated. In the end, they grafted skin onto her wounded left foot, hoping to save it.

A ManorCare spokeswoman said federal privacy law prevented her from discussing Lewis' care directly, only saying that caregivers followed Lewis' doctor's orders.

No one can say for sure if Lewis' hospitalization could have been avoided if she had seen the doctor on Aug. 4. But her case shows how critical transportation is to patients' health and how a kink in the system can send health-care spending soaring.

Lewis' case is just a single anecdote in the story of how Medicaid has ballooned in Pennsylvania from $13.9 billion in 2000 to around $29 billion now. And it's super-utilizer patients driving that spending. Nationally, the top 5 percent of beneficiaries consume more than 50 percent of Medicaid spending.

Meantime, Lewis' travel woes continued. In mid-September, she needed an ambulance to transport her to the dialysis clinic after another mix-up. LANTA officials say records indicate Lewis was late for the van. A few days later, the van arrived late for her wound care appointment, which LANTA acknowledged.

"These are appointments that she cannot miss at all," said her daughter Christina.

After the September travel problem, Lewis was unhappy, but remained philosophical.

"Waiting for the buses to take you here and there is very bad," she said, adding, "God is good. I keep my trust in him."

Barriers to getting there

Like field generals who have to plot a new strategy every day, laying out the daily plan for the fleet of vans that carry diabetics, cancer patients and other ailing people — as well as qualified elderly people who are healthy — is a daunting logistical challenge.