Topics: Batman, Miley Cyrus, Natural Disasters, Summer, The Internet, The Tyee, Social News, Media News, Entertainment News

This piece originally appeared on The Tyee



The Internet has much to answer for, but even its loudest critics have to admit that no one has ever done Silly Season better than the web.

That’s the term newspapers have long used for the stretch of summer when the steady, reliable sources of content — government, prime time TV, professional protesters — go on holiday and suddenly the factory newsroom has trouble filling white space.

I’ve always thought reporters earned some of their reputation as ghouls due to the summer doldrums, when word of a major forest fire breaking out can cause cheers in a newsroom. (Fires at night make for great TV images. Ditto flash floods.) As news goes, few things beat a good natural disaster, in which there are no villains, just plucky citizens fighting the good fight. And just think of the warm and fuzzy stories about everyday heroes and pet rescues!

Alas, Mother Nature won’t always cooperate, and Silly Season earned its nickname because desperate reporters in the dog days of summer often resorted to the ridiculous.

Frying eggs on sidewalks to illustrate the heat was a favourite. Sharp-eyed press agents (who were often just moonlighting reporters) spotted this pattern and turned summer into the season of publicity stunts. Which is why on the last weekend of August, local and national news outlets alike picked up on the titillating tale of the UFO cult promoting itself via a parade of topless women on Vancouver’s Robson Street.

But I was disappointed by the dull-witted coverage from some Vancouver scribe who managed to write a plodding account summed up as “men ogle boobies on Robson; cause traffic snarl.” Like that’s news.

Newspapers have always delivered fluff, the crime of the current rags is that they deliver dull fluff. Meanwhile the Internet, powered by the people, gives us much of the wit, insight, and entertainment that were once a major part of newspaper appeal.

For those of you who’ve been at your wifi-free cabin, here’s the recap of this August’s unusually thought-provoking range of stories made better by the chatter of the mob.

Snakemania!

A monster movie came to life in New Brunswick after a pair of brothers aged 4 and 6 died in a freak accident with a killer snake. Preliminary reports say they were asphyxiated by an escaped African rock python that was about four metres long and 45 kilos. Piecing together the various confusing reports (damn those unpaid summer interns!) it seems the python got out of its cage in a pet store and climbed via the ventilation system to the residential apartment above. The 100-pound reptile then fell through the ceiling where it landed near the sleeping boys. What happened next is anyone’s guess and everyone is speculating.

The story is heartbreaking, but it was probably the horror of the incident that led to a rash of news stories about illegal pythons turning up in a Rubbermaid bin near you.

Police discovered 40 ball pythons in plastic chests in a motel room in Brantford Ontario and their owners were later charged with animal cruelty. In Mission B.C., more than 50 reticulated pythons were found in a rented house, and news reports suggested these were watch-snakes. There, presumably, to scare-off the sort of interloper who might be indifferent to pit bulls.

Then the web began turning up tales of escaped pythons killing children and cases of some turning on their adult owners. All sorts of snake owners weighed-in about the dangerous nature of pythons. That’s the breed making a nuisance of itself in Florida, where former pets have escaped into the Everglades. Then the Prime Minister’s office announced Stephen Harper would be looking into rules around keeping exotic pets.

Courtesy of the interwebs I’m now having nightmares. But as they say, it’s always better to know.