The General Assembly passed a pair of bills during its recent session meant to make life a little more manageable for families dealing with autism.

One will expand mandated insurance coverage for autism services come 2016, taking the required age from six years old to 10. Another will let families earn tax-free investment income from new ABLE investment plans, which will work similar to existing 529 plans used to save for college.

These new "Achieving a Better Life Experience" accounts won't be limited to families with autistic children. A range of disabilities will allow families to qualify, and anyone can put money into an account for a child.

The money also won't be counted against a family in Medicaid and Social Security eligibility calculations, as it would in a normal savings account.

Gov. Terry McAuliffe highlighted the ABLE program Thursday, dubbed World Autism Awareness Day, in a brief event at the Faison School for Autism, a private non-profit in Richmond. McAuliffe said more than 16,000 public school students in Virginia have been diagnosed with autism, a poorly understood condition that comes with a range of cognitive and social troubles.

"It is essential that we lighten the load on these families," McAuliffe said.

He was joined by school officials, students, parents, teachers and grandparents, as well as retiring state Sen. Walter Stosch, R-Glen Allen, who sponsored the ABLE measure in the state Senate.

The bill is based on a 2014 congressional authorization that allowed states to create these accounts, but Virginia is the first to do so, McAuliffe said. Some 30 other states are following suit, he said.

The program will be run by the same people who oversee Virginia's 529 College Savings Plan. They're putting the details together now, Stosch said, and the program should be up and running in early 2016.

Other legislation, House Bill 1940, will require insurance companies in Virginia to offer policies that cover autism services up to age 10, instead of the current requirement up to age six.

Autism therapy often looks a lot like intensely-hands-on education, with a focus on teaching students who can't always communicate how to get by in the modern world. These services can be expensive.

For several years state leaders declined to require the insurance industry to cover these services, but in 2011 legislation passed requiring coverage between from age two to six. There was a trade off this year, as the requirement was nudged up to age 10, tied to the federal Affordable Care Act.

Virginia has exempted policies sold to businesses with 50 or fewer employees from the autism coverage requirement. Come 2016, that will increase to 100 employees as the state's exemption is dovetailed with the federal government's definition of the small group insurance market.

John Maloney, who has a son at the Faison School, and who helped pass the 2011 bill that first mandated coverage, said House Bill 1940 will still make a difference for families.

More people, he said, will get coverage. The real victory, he said, is that coverage "is available in this market."

"Five years ago it was not," he said. "That's when the first bill passed. And that took 3 years to get through the legislature."

Fain can be reached by phone at 757-525-1759.