South Australia’s struggling economy is at risk of falling behind Tasmania’s to become the country’s worst, a new report has found.

The SA economy has been ranked second-last in CommSec’s State of the States report, ahead of only the island state.

But CommSec’s chief economist Craig James said South Australia was suffering from a downturn in manufacturing, including the planned closure of the state’s auto industry, while a weaker Australian dollar had made business tough for exporters such as winemakers.



In Tasmania, employment and housing construction rates are on the rise and the state could move past South Australia if trends continue.

Related: Tony Abbott's South Australia problem: on the front line of the Coalition's war to win back votes

“In Tasmania the unemployment rate is moving in the right direction, housing is moving in the right direction,” James told ABC radio on Monday.

“That creates the risk that Tasmania could move its way up the leaderboard, especially when South Australia has unemployment at 15-year highs.”

South Australia’s 8% jobless rate stands at a 15-year high while Tasmania’s 6.2% is approaching a four-year low.

“Most states get their momentum from somewhere,” he said.

“Western Australia (is getting it) in the mining sector, NSW and Victoria at the moment are getting it from the housing sector.

“But South Australia’s really finding it hard to find that x-factor to drive the economy.”

James said Tasmania’s economy had been stimulated through state and federal government assistance in recent times and South Australia was in need of similar support.

“It may need some of these courageous decisions like a payroll tax freeze – to try to get that momentum kick-started,” he said.

South Australia has shaped up as a key battleground in federal politics.

The abandonment of an election promise to develop Australia’s next generation of submarines in Adelaide, the withdrawal of support for Holden and a lack of support for the state’s extensive wind energy sector have all contributed to the Coalition’s unpopularity in the state.

The shelving of BHP’s $20bn Olympic Dam mining project and the loss of 380 jobs has also not helped secure business confidence in the state.

Before the change in leadership, Tony Abbott had sought improve the government’s standing in the state by bringing forward defence projects worth tens of billions of dollars and safeguarding up to 2,500 shipbuilding jobs.

The state’s Liberal opposition leader, Steven Marshall, said CommSec’s report confirms South Australia’s need for an immediate jobs stimulus.



“Our state needs jobs creation now, not in a few years,” he said. “To create jobs in South Australia we need to lower taxes and reduce red tape to encourage business investment and economic growth.”

Comment was being sought by AAP from premier Jay Weatherill.

New South Wales was ranked the best-performing economy for a fifth consecutive quarter because of its booming housing market, good retail trade figures and population growth.