Watch delusional House Republicans literally laugh at President Obama’s promise to veto their 44th attempt to get rid of the ACA.

When confronted with the prospect of a presidential veto of their pointless legislation during the meeting of the House Rules Committee, Rep. Hal Rogers joked about Obama setting a red line.

Here is the video from C-SPAN:

In the video clip, Rep. Jim McGovern tries to warn the Republicans on the House Rules Committee that the votes aren’t there, the Senate isn’t going to take this up, and if it got to President Obama he would veto it. Rep. Hal Rogers (R-KY) asked, “He has threatened to veto?” Rep. McGovern (D-MA) replied, “He hasn’t threatened. He absolutely will veto.” Rogers replied, “He’s drawn a red line.” This brought about much laughter from the Republican side.

House Republicans would be wise to understand the lesson of the red line. Obama drew that red line on Syria, and then got exactly what he wanted.

Republicans are so delusional that they are laughing off the threat of a presidential veto. They really believe that they can bully Obama into killing his signature healthcare reform law. They don’t believe that the president will stand firm. The laughter and jokes from Republicans suggest that they are celebrating shutting the government down. House Republicans are trying to spin what they are doing as an effort to keep the government open, but it is the exact opposite.

House Republicans are giddily trying to shut the government down. Forty seven million Americans will no longer receive a paycheck if the government shuts down. Veterans will be hurt by limited or no access to veterans’ services. House Republicans don’t care that they are about to injure tens of millions of people. They are laughing while inflicting pain on millions of Americans.

House Republicans may not believe it, but President Obama would veto their bill so fast that their heads would spin. They think they hold all of the cards, when they hold none. House Republicans are committing an act of economic hostage taking with a joke and smile. They appear to cluelessly believe that this time their failed tactics will work. House Republicans are counting on their 44th try to be the one that finally gets rid of Obamacare.

You can’t fix stupid, and House Republicans are showing just how dumb they really are.