Topics: Bernie Sanders, Donald Trump, Editor's Picks, Jim Newell, Sarah Palin, Stephen Colbert, Ted Cruz, Elections News, Media News, News, Politics News

Stephen Colbert debuted this week as David Letterman’s “Late Show” successor, and despite a nearly disastrous technological snafu, his first few shows have gone pretty well. Yet as much as I enjoy Colbert — and especially this joke about Sen. Bernie Sanders — I gotta say, the funniest thing I saw this week had nothing to do with him. And it didn’t take place amidst the skyscrapers and bright lights of Manhattan, either.

No, this spectacle had a much drabber locale. And unlike Colbert, none of its stars could be accurately described as a triple-threat. True, its musical accompaniment was solid (aesthetically, if not necessarily legally). But to a certain degree it was the event’s amateurishness — its haphazard, ramshackle, chaotic energy — that made it so great. If more traditional, professional folks had run it, I doubt it’d have been even half as fun.

You’ve probably guessed this already, but I’m talking about the “Stop the Iran Deal Rally,” the carnival thrown Wednesday in D.C. by a group that calls itself the Tea Party Patriots. The one that was held after the White House had enough votes to protect the deal from Republicans. The one that featured Sarah Palin, Sen. Ted Cruz, and Donald Trump. The one that took a jackhammer to the border dividing reality from “Veep.”

If you haven’t already seen any footage — and if you have a good sense of humor concerning the ignominious death of representative democracy — I can’t recommend it enough. (This CNN clip is an okay introduction; the woman who says she opposes the deal because she has “a couple daughters in New York City” and “sure wouldn’t want to see them nuked” is my favorite.) But you can get a good sense from written reports, too.

My onetime colleague Jim Newell’s piece in Slate, for example, does a great job of establishing the kitsch-ceiling for the event. (Spoiler: It’s high.) But as good as the quotes from a guy Newell describes as wearing “a Hillary Clinton rubber mask” are, the piece does something more important: it provides a snapshot of the people going to Donald Trump rallies. And it suggests that they, too, would rather be somewhere else.

I don’t mean that literally. All the reports I’ve read suggest that most attendees had fun. What I mean to say is that many Trumpites — more so than devotees of Palin or Cruz — don’t sound very political. They don’t sound like the kind of people who spend their leisure time reading about electoral politics or watching “Meet the Press.” Instead, they sound like they showed up because they felt they had no other choice.

Take Pete Webb, for example, a gentleman who told Newell he’d come all the way from Miami and who believes Congress is “lame” and has “got to be stopped.” What’s got Webb so angry, presumably, is that Congressional Republicans won’t thwart the Iran deal. Not due to choice, but because foreign policy is usually the executive branch’s purview. And because the Constitution is big on that “separation of powers” stuff.