Courtesy Gabriel Burt This is most of the original ad-hoc team in the very early days, Nov 5, outside the CGI office in Herndon, Va., says Mikey Dickerson, formerly of Cromwell (center).

CROMWELL >> Sometimes the biggest solutions come from the smallest places.

Mikey Dickerson, one of 100 students in Cromwell High School’s Class of 1997, led a team of five last winter in fixing the Affordable Care Act’s website, HealthCare.gov, earning him a spot on the March 10 cover of Time magazine.

According to his mom, Debora Dickerson, he has always worked hard for the things he’s passionate about.

“He went to Washington assuming he was going to be donating his time, but discovered that was not allowed,” she said. “This was a project he felt deeply about, so he was willing to give it his all even if it meant giving up a paycheck for several months.”

Advertisement

Dickerson, who said he wants to continue to help improve the government’s deficient technological assets in the future, expressed appreciation for his hometown.

“I was lucky to have grown up in a town with good public schools, with many great teachers — Barbara O’Rourke and Sherry Petrosky among them, guidance counselors, and music and art programs that look like impossible luxuries in a lot of districts today,” he said.

But, Petrosky remembered, Dickerson, among other things, was a class president, a peer advocate and a member of both student council and the National Honor Society.

“His whole being was giving back,” Petrosky said. “That kind of mentality obviously has traveled with him through his career.”

Unsurprisingly, Dickerson’s knack for programming began at a young age. In fourth or fifth grade, when he wasn’t delivering copies of The Middletown Press to neighbors, Dickerson was writing programs in BASIC on an IBM PC his dad had brought home from work.

One of his projects, much to Debora’s surprise, was programming a computer to play “Happy Birthday” for her.

“I had no idea computers could even make noise,” she said. “He seemed to just instinctively understand how computers worked.”

Dickerson continued learning new programming languages. According to Cromwell High School mathematics teachers O’Rourke and Petrosky, programs Dickerson wrote for their graphing calculators — which were new to them at the time — are still being used today.

“It’s a high that you can’t explain when the student becomes the teacher, especially at that age,” Petrosky said. “It reminds you of the potential of every student.”

Debora noted that other teachers noticed his abilities, too.

“His (physics) teacher told me at parent-teacher conference that, when she gave a test, she always graded Michael’s paper first,” she said. “If his answer didn’t agree with hers, she would check her answer before grading the rest of the papers.”

Dickerson attended Pomona College in California, graduating with a degree in math in 2001 and returning to the school a year later as a systems administrator.

In 2005, Google reached out to him.

“It seemed very unlikely that I’d get an offer from them, so it was pretty exciting,” Dickerson said. “It’s basically what it probably feels like to get called up to Major Leagues if you’ve been playing farm baseball for a long time.”

Partly as a result of connections between Google and Obama For America, Dickerson volunteered to help with Barack Obama’s 2008 and 2012 campaigns. Then, in mid-October last year, the government asked Dickerson, along with four others, to determine if the dysfunctional HealthCare.gov site was salvageable.

“It was a national crisis and the President wanted just five people, so to be one of the five was pretty exciting,” he said.

Although Dickerson was summoned merely to do an assessment, he and the others were asked to stay at least until the end of November once it was determined the website could be saved.

“I only had a carry-on bag and, like, two changes of clothes, because we thought it was a two-day kind of thing,” Dickerson said. “But, that obviously turned into a six-month kind of thing.”

As a site reliability engineer with management experience, rather than the more common software engineer, Dickerson became the group’s natural leader, overseeing operations during the early morning, when traffic was high, and the late night, when fixes were implemented. During that period, he worked an average of 16 hours a day, seven days a week.

Debora admitted she was annoyed when Dickerson didn’t come home for Thanksgiving. But, she said, he hadn’t told her the extent of his role.

“It really wasn’t until Todd Park (U.S. Chief Technology Officer) called us just before midnight on Christmas Eve and told us how instrumental Michael was in rescuing Healthcare.gov that we realized he had actually been leading the effort,” she said.

The March 10 edition of Time Magazine featured “Code Red: Inside the nightmare launch of Healthcare.gov and the team that figured out how to fix it” by Stephen Brill.

It’s a dramatic story “of a team of unknown — except in elite technology circles — coders and troubleshooters who dropped what they were doing in various enterprises across the country and came together in mid-October to save the website,” Brill writes.

Having such a large role in something under the national — and global — microscope, Dickerson said, was “very stressful.”

“We’d see ourselves — not ourselves, literally — but our project on TV every day at lunch … and not because it was such a success, but because it was in such bad shape for most of that time,” he said.

He stopped working full-time around Jan. 5 and returned to San Francisco, returning to Google as a privacy engineer.

With open enrollment’s end March 31, though, a new kind of relief emerged.

“Obviously we’re happy with the final score, seven million (enrollments) and change,” Dickerson said. “When we started in October, they said 4 million would be a huge success. Nobody thought there was any chance of making the original 7 million target.”

“We’re happy about that, but, really, that it’s over — that’s the important part.”