South Toms River Mayor Joseph M. Champagne, Jr. speaks to the attendees. The Toms river Area Branch of the NAACP held its 50th annual Freedom Fund dinner at the Clarion Hotel & Conference Center in Toms River, New Jersey. Friday, May 30, 2014. (Photo: David Gard/Correspondent )

In the 50 years of the Toms River branch of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People, the causes have been varied, but often link back to fostering community.

The 50th annual Freedom Fund Dinner hosted by the Toms River branch emphasized that point in speeches and awards from members of the community who came together for the anniversary banquet at the Clarion Hotel in Toms River.

Throughout its history, the branch has hosted cultural programs, history events, voter registration drives, drug abuse prevention lectures, civil rights and racial equality initiatives. The membership has worked closely with Ocean County College and the Ocean County Library, and local church and civic groups.

With this varied work, South Toms River Mayor Joseph M. Champagne Jr. said in his speech that love ultimately is what everyone is fighting for “regardless of race, ethnicity, nationality, gender. We are all seeking love, whether it be in the form of justice, equality, understanding.”

Ella McCown, a member of the branch’s executive committee, said one of the values of the NAACP branches is to bring together individuals and create power in numbers. During the earlier years of the branch, it was involvement in the Civil Rights Era and monitoring Ku Klux Klan activity in Ocean County.

“These days, the work is more about maintaining strong community presence and building communities,” she said. The purpose of events such as the Freedom Fund Dinner is to show that “We are here. We are here for the community.”

The event also serves to bestow annual awards. David E. Corbin, who was the first person of color to be elected Post Commander of the Toms River American Legion, was awarded the Community Service Award for his mentoring and leadership over the years. Corbin and Bahiyyah Abdullah both received the award, and state Sen. Ronald Rice, D-Essex, served as the keynote speaker.

Read or Share this story: http://on.app.com/1mEAjhT