1. Why Employee Benefits Will Become Irrelevant



MICHAEL KITCES: Projecting current trends forward for another several decades, it’s beginning to look like the workers of the future may have no more “employee benefits,” at least as traditionally viewed.

A framework of “perks” that employers gave employees to attract and retain them–originally because World War II wage controls to slow inflation had limited employers from simply paying their employees more in the first place–is giving way to an alternative where employers simply pay employees in full for services rendered, and employees are left to make their own decisions –for better or worse–about where and how to allocate those dollars for their needs.

RELATED: READERS RESPOND TO THE FUTURE OF THE (VANISHING) EMPLOYEE BENEFIT

For instance, one of the dominant trends in retirement over the past several decades has been the rise of defined-contribution plans, and the slow and steady decline of “defined benefit” pension plans. The shift marks a transition both in control of the assets (from employer to employee), but also more significantly a shift in responsibility for the funding and the outcomes (again from employer to employee). In other words, in the past employees funded a retiree’s pension income in retirement; now the employer simply gives a specified contribution toward the employee’s self-funding of his/her own retirement. The dollars may be the same, but it’s up to employees to allocate them.

With the rise of the insurance exchanges under the Affordable Care Act, a similar trend is now emerging in the world of health insurance. While in the distant past, employers may have simply taken on the responsibility of providing employee’ health insurance, rising costs have shifted many employers to only paying part of an employee’s coverage. Now with the infrastructure of health insurance exchanges (both public and private), the transition seems to be accelerating as employers consider whether the “best” option issimply to give employees a certain “defined contribution” dollar amount toward their monthly health insurance, and leave them to choose which plan they want to buy. Again, the dollar amounts may be the same, but it’s up to the employee to allocate them, and at some point in the near future the problem may even be that an increasing number of employees don’t want their employer’s health insurance because they already have their own from an exchange!

In the near term, those accustomed to having employers provide benefits may feel like something is being lost or taken away, though again employees don’t necessarily have to be financially disadvantaged by the transition. All it really means is that instead of an employer paying $X on behalf of an employee for a certain benefit, the employer pays the employee that same dollar amount and allows him/her to use the dollars as desired toward their own selection of benefits, from retirement to health insurance and more. All of which are increasingly available without needing an employer at all, given everything from IRAs to the health insurance exchanges.

In the longer term, though, it raises the question of whether the structure of employee benefits is really still relevant at all. After all, what’s the difference between an employer paying $50,000/year, plus $500/month for health insurance and a 3% contribution ($1,500) to a retirement plan, versus simply paying the employee $57,500 in salary and letting the employee make the decisions? In practice, the primary barriers to do so are simply the availability to gain access to those various benefits, but the shift is already on when it comes to health insurance and retirement plans. After all, if consumers could simply make an $18,000 contribution directly into their own IRA, and got what the employer would have given as a match in the form of salary instead, and enrollment could be automated (e.g., via a MyRA), is there any need for 401(k) plans at all?

Ultimately, there may be much debate about whether this transition is good or bad. On the one hand, it gives consumers more freedom to choose. On the other hand, it gives them additional responsibilities they may not be well equipped to handle. But either way, the reality is that as the defined-contribution trend grows and even accelerates from retirement plans to health insurance and more, it may be our inevitable future either way.

Michael Kitces is a partner and the director of research for Pinnacle Advisory Group, and publisher of the financial planning industry blog Nerd’s Eye View. You can follow him on Twitter at @MichaelKitces, or connect with him on Google+.

Other popular posts: