By Emma Lamberton | Vermont Watchdog

The U.S. Supreme Court on Thursday ruled 6-3 to allow states without insurance exchanges to continue receiving federal subsidies. Critics of the ruling say the decision does nothing to help Vermonters escape the state’s troubled health care exchange.

The King v. Burwell case had the potential to make Obamacare unaffordable for 6.4 million Americans receiving subsidies on the federal program. Michael Cannon, director of health policy studies at the Cato Institute, believes the court was swayed by this consequence, instead of looking at the law objectively.

“The court was afraid that if they didn’t let the president tax and spend without congressional authorization, Obamacare would throw cancer patients out of their health plans,” Cannon told Vermont Watchdog.

While President Barack Obama claimed a ruling for the plaintiffs would have victimized millions of Americans, Cannon said it is the Affordable Care Act that has created victims.

“The 6.5 million people in the Healthcare.gov states were deceived by this administration when they told them that Healthcare.gov coverage would be affordable. It’s not,” Cannon said.

According to Cannon, federal subsidies also trigger taxes against as many as 70 million employers and individuals in states that use the federal exchange, and those taxes continue to lack proper authorization for use as subsidies.

“The Obama administration is acting illegally against 70 million Americans, and spending 20 billion dollars this year, without any congressional authorization — and contrary to the express terms of the Affordable Care Act,” he said.

States like Vermont, which operate their own exchanges, expected federal subsidies to continue regardless of the ruling. However, Randy Brock, a former Vermont state auditor and state senator, said he does not think Vermont is in the clear.

“One of the big dangers of the subsidy problem … is that you can’t trust the federal government,” Brock said. “Time and time again, the federal government has offered money to the states to do certain things, that the states have then done. But in a federal-state partnership, if the senior partner, the federal government, decides later that it will not meet its share of the burden, that burden passes to the states.”

Brock added that the federal government can’t be trusted to provide the current level of subsidies indefinitely. He said many federal programs, including special education, Law Enforcement Assistance Administration, and Medicaid, have left Vermont picking up the tab.

“If you’ve been stung repeatedly with this scenario over many, many years, you should foresee this happening (again),” he said.

Moving forward, Brock said, the debate should be about how to lower health care costs so subsidies are no longer necessary.

Other Vermont voices reacted to Thursday’s ruling.

In a news statement, Darcie Johnston, founder of Vermonters for Health Care Freedom, accused the Supreme Court justices of “legislating from the bench.” Nevertheless, she said the ruling was an opportunity for Vermont to shut down its troubled exchange and transition to Healthcare.gov.

“This would save VT taxpayers millions in operating costs and provide more affordable choices in health insurance to all Vermonters,” she said.

Still, she a true fix of health care requires “a repeal or replacement that at least has some more free market, patient centered choices.”

U.S. Sen. Bernie Sanders, I-Vt., praised the Supreme Court for recognizing “the common-sense reading of the Affordable Care Act.”

“At a time when the United States is the only major country on earth that doesn’t guarantee health care to all Americans — and 35 million of our citizens today still lack insurance — it would have been an outrage to throw 6.4 million more people off health insurance,” Sanders said in a statement.

Contact Emma Lamberton at elamberton@watchdog.org