EWING -- The two 12th Congressional District candidates will debate each other tonight in their only scheduled debate of the general election season.

Assemblywoman Bonnie Watson Coleman (D-Mercer) bested three other Democratic primary candidates, most notably Sen. Linda Greenstein (D-Middlesex) in a primary election that was expected to be close but turned out to be a landslide.

Republican candidate Alieta Eck ran unopposed for the Republican nomination in the 12th District after a failed U.S. Senate bid against Steve Lonegan in the special 2013 primary election to replace deceased U.S. Sen. Frank Lautenberg.

Tonight's debate at the Mayo Concert Hall will be moderated by TCNJ political science professor Brian Potter.

Both are seeking to fill the seat being vacated by U.S. Rep. Rush Holt, a Democrat who has held the office for the past 16 years.

If Watson Coleman is elected, she will be the state's first African American woman in Congress.

Follow the live coverage from the press conference by refreshing this post frequently or clicking this link to load updates.

8:37 p.m. And the debate's over. The candidates fell almost completely along their party lines, with Eck often echoing her concerns with the Affordable Care Act and Watson Coleman using bills she's supported in the Legislature as examples of her views on Democratic tentpoles.

On Friday, TCNJ is hosting a candidate's forum with third-party and independent candidates in room 212 of the Education Building. In addition to Eck and Watson Coleman, Democratic-Republican candidate Allen Cannon, Truth Vision Hope candidate Kenneth Cody, Legalize Marijuana Party candidate Don DeZarn, Start the Conversation candidate Jack Freudenheim and Green Party candidate Steven Welzer have been invited to participate.

8:36 p.m. The candidates just presented their closing statements, to raucous applause from the audience (which has been cheering all night, ignoring Potter's constant reminders).

"We've had this incredible Congressman, Rush Holt, to rep this district for 15 years now. he's stood tall for the rights of individuals, for research and development, for STEM education, human rights, voting rights, women's rights," Watson Coleman said. "He's been our champion and Holt is supporting me in the 12th Congressional District.

"He's supporting me not because he hopes I'll carry out that work but because he's seen record I've established in my 15 years in the Legislature."

"I don't think that career politicians are the people we should be turning to for solutions to the problems they created," Eck said. "We have the highest cost of living, the highest foreclosure rate. That's New Jersey. Why are we going to send a politician who's been presiding over this state for 15 years to Washington, D.C. to do the same thing?

"We need a smarter, more efficient government in America, a government that abides by the Constitution and knows its own bounds."

8:31 p.m. Blunt question from Potter: "If in Congress you had to face a hard decision of raising taxes or going further into debt, debt or higher taxes?"

"That's a false question. You really can lower spending," Eck said. "There's no way you can tax the people more. We have a govt we can't afford. It'd kill jobs and put people into further foreclosure."

"To whom much is given much is required. The schism between the haves and have-nots has grown so tremendously that the rich are richer and the poor are poorer and the middle class doesn't exist anymore," Watson Coleman said. "If we dont' have a robust middle class, we don't have a healthy country."

While Watson Coleman said the state and country should prevent businesses from going overseas, Eck said the millionaire's tax -- which Watson Coleman said she supported -- "was no way to keep people in New Jersey."

8:28 p.m. Potter asked the candidates about conflicts in the Middle East.

Eck said she supported Israel, Watson Coleman said "they need to decide what degree (Israel and Palestine) can trust one another."

"Israel is our most dependable ally in that region. We need to ensure that democracy is sound. That's why the USA sends resources for Israel's safety and security. But it's not the United States' role or responsibility to enforce anything upon anyone."

8:22 p.m. Discussing the Hobby Lobby decision, Watson Coleman said she was adamently against it.

"Why are we prescribing to a woman anything different than what a doctor would prescribe for a man," Watson Coleman said.

"You want to empower women to buy the $20 birth control? Then whey are you forcing other people to pay for it," Eck said.

Watson Coleman asked Eck if she'd support equal pay for equal work, to which she replied that she was completely against discrimination in the workplace.

"But we have laws to prevent discrimination. We don't need to add more laws," Eck said.

8:22 p.m. On fracking:

"I'm not sure it's as environmentally dangerous as people think. It's making energy affordable and more plentiful," Eck said. "I'm worried about people in my district who can't keep their houses. Yes, every state needs to make sure things are done safely but we need to make sure we keep energy affordable and stop depending on foreign oil."

Watson Coleman said she was against fracking, particularly the pipelines -- such as the one proposed in Hopewell -- that could damage the environment.

"These pipelines would interfere with pristine properties that have been protected by the taxpayers that we expected to be preserved land," Watson Coleman said. "Not only the transmission but the construction of the pipeline would interfere and negatively impact the habitats, the growth the foliage -- all the things New Jersey holds so dear."

8:18 p.m. Potter asked for specific ideas on how to create jobs in Trenton, which Watson Coleman said would come from providing tax incentives for businesses to set up shop there.

"The capital of New Jersey can be an intellectual capital. We can encourage incentives so they come to the city of Trenton as opposed to a remote place off Route 1," Watson Coleman said.

Eck said there could never be adequate job growth without tax relief for businesses, again pointing to the ACA for example: Business owners are unlikely to go from 50 to 51 employees if they have to go through the laws and regulations that come with it.

"That's why we wind up with lots of business paying people under the table. To increase the number of jobs, you have to get government out of the way," Eck said.

8:13 p.m.The candidates were asked about how to lower the prison population.

Eck said she was in favor of decriminalizing recreational drugs, specifically marijuana: "Prison is getting clogged by young people using it recreationally, not that I think the government ought to say it's legal, although we'll see what happens in Colorado," she said.

Watson Coleman lauded the state drug court program, which takes people with substance abuse problems out of the criminal justice system.

"But it was all talk and no action: The governor took the money out of it," Watson Coleman said.

8:10 p.m. Potter asked about lowering the gun violence rate in the United States, starting with Watson Coleman who said she had voted against banning high-ammunition magazines.

"We balance the rights of individuals to safety and security. That's something Congress has been escaping from addressing. I'd pursue those issues because I believe they're important to our urban and suburban communities," Watson Coleman said.

Eck responded by saying that it's criminals who aren't obeying New Jersey's gun laws, "some of the strictest in the country.

"Adding more laws for law-abiding gun owners isn't going to make a difference," Eck said.

Eck turned towards the ACA again, noting that Medicaid is often not supported by mental health professionals, which Watson Coleman said was another way to address gun violence.

"If we can get to the root of hte problem, gun laws won't make any difference," Eck said.

eck - cimrinasl don't obey tnthe them. (nj has the strictest gunlaws int eh coutnry) adding more laws for law abiding gun owners isn't going to maek a differnce.

8:06 p.m. Potter asked if the U.S. needs more protection from Ebola.

"Ebola shouldn't be the subject of a political appointment. A physician should be making those decisions," Eck said. "Ebola is a very frightening disease and should be respected."

Eck said the borders should be closed to West African countries, where there has been an outbreak of the virus. "They shouldn't be allowed to come in for a while until we know the epidemic is quelled," Eck said.

Watson Coleman said there was no epidemic in the United States -- as all three cases were linked -- and is against closing the borders.

"Ebola is a very serious problem. New programs announced today will create standards that can be used in hospitals or if there's an encounter. This is a very serious issue and I agree with my opponent that we should be sending resources, humanitarian aid and whatever we can offer to address this," Watson Coleman said.

7:53 p.mWe're onto the question about the Affordable Care Act. Eck was rearing to go.

"The ACA was supposed to insure people who were uninsured and at the end of the day we'll have more uninsured people," Eck said. "People are losing their doctors, health insurance, the health plans they liked. I can't really think of anything that's affordable in the ACA."

The ACA will expand Medicaid, an "unbelivably flawed program" that will double the number of New Jerseyans on the program, Eck said.

Watson Coleman complimented the program for providing health insurance for 500,000 New Jerseyans and 8 million Americans who didn't before it was enacted. But she said it could have been made easier to sign up, calling out Gov. Chris Christie for opting out of creating a New Jersey health exchange.

"We certainly need to look at plans and make sure we're appropriately marketing those plans so those who don't (have health insurance) will," Watson Coleman said.

On rebuttal, Eck said the ACA will also add 72 percent more New Jerseyans to Medicaid, which will keep them from "finding a good job."



7:51 p.m. The next question is about same-sex marriage, which both candidates fell along party lines.

"Society has defined the union of one man and one woman for thousands of years and I don't think we should change that," Eck said.

"I'm certainly in agreement and in support of same-sex marriage being the law of the land," Watson Coleman said.

7:45 p.m. In the first question, the candidates were asked about what policies from their opposing political parties they can agree on.

Watson Coleman initially flipped the question and called for Republicans to come to an agreement on creating jobs, having unfettered access to voting and building infrastructure.

Eck complimented Democrats on their infrastructure funding, but noted that it's important "we focus on issues that really help people, not just take money from them and put them into government programs that wind up costing too much."

On rebuttal, Watson Coleman said she's "willing to work together with a few good moderate Republicans to make sure that social security, as well as Medicare, will not be harmed, touched or diminished in any form."

Eck replied by stating that $500 million in Medicare funding would be removed due to the Affordable Care Act, which Watson Coleman said she supported.

7:41 p.m. Watson Coleman lauded her policy platforms on social issues, such as the right to choose.

"I have a record on which you can see my accomplishments, my experience and the authentication in which I offer this candidacy," Watson Coleman said.

7:36 p.m. Eck called herself a "citizen legislator" who would make a difference in Congress. The Affordable Care Act, Eck said, was written without the input of practicing physicians "as if they couldn't trust us.

"Bills are written thousands of pages long and taxpayers bear the brunt of it," Eck said.

Eck called out Watson Coleman for calling out Eck's views on gender and equality, which Eck called an attack on her character.

"That's not my philosophy," Eck said. "At my charity clinic, we see people of all creeds and cultures, black and white, gay or straight, men and women and undocumented immigrants afraid of getting care elsewhere. We see them as valuable human beings and we care for them as if we would a family member."

"It's time the 12th District elected a woman who solves problems using her own time and money," she said.

7:30 p.m. Assemblywoman Bonnie Watson Coleman (D-Mercer), Alieta Eck and TCNJ professor Bryan Potter just entered the stage to applause from the audience at the Mayo Concert Hall. I'd estimate there's about 150 people here, but the room feels crowded.

"Congress is the most important legislative body in the world and you get a choice in that," Potter said.

Members of the Watson Coleman campaign were posted in the lobby of the TCNJ music building, asking passers by if they were interested in volunteering for the campaign.



Mike Davis may be reached at mdavis@njtimes.com. Follow him on Twitter @byMikeDavis. Find The Times of Trenton on Facebook.