Topics: 2014 midterms, Family, Gender, Gender Roles, Maternity leave, paid family leave, paternity leave, President Obama, sotu, Politics News

Whenever I write a piece about, say, incentivizing paternity leave or addressing the structural roots of the gender wage gap, I inevitably receive an angry email that includes some version of the following, Men and women want different things! Women want to stay home and men want to work and these policies are just social engineering! I am so hungry and sad but instead of eating or sleeping I am emailing you angry and condescending things while referencing your age and gender in an attempt to diminish your seriousness as a writer!

So imagine my utter delight when I read about a study in the American Sociological Review that found that men and women, if given the option, would prefer to share work and home responsibilities equally with their partners. According to the study, co-authored by David S. Pedulla, an assistant professor of sociology at the University of Texas at Austin, and Sarah Thébaud, an assistant professor of sociology at the University of California-Santa Barbara, a majority of the people surveyed were interested in building more egalitarian relationships. Researchers found this to be pretty consistent across education levels and genders.

Additionally, researchers found that family-friendly policies, which President Obama called “middle class economics” in his State of the Union address, make egalitarianism within romantic relationships even more appealing, particularly for women. So rather than government meddling, policies that expand access to affordable childcare or family leave actually help people realize the ambitions and expectations they already have for their lives and relationships.

“Our study provides compelling evidence that if policies such as flexible scheduling, parental leave, and subsidized child care were universally in place, women would be even more likely to want an egalitarian relationship with their partner and much less likely to want to be primarily responsible for housework and childcare,” Pedulla said. “These findings offer new insights that may be useful in guiding policymakers and organizations that are interested in reducing gender inequality and improving the work and family lives of young men and women.”

“This research highlights an important disjuncture between the ideals and preferences of young men and women and the workplace policies and practices that are currently standard in the United States,” according to Thébaud.

So men and women want more equitable relationships, but our current policies and cultural norms are getting in the way. Democrats spent a good portion of the 2014 midterms campaigning on equal pay and other family-friendly policies, and before he centered the issues in his State of the Union address, President Obama took an executive action to give federal workers paid family leave and urged Congress to follow suit. Democrats have made it a priority because these concerns tend to rank high on voters’ lists, and are supported across party lines.

According to data released last week by the Make It Work campaign, 79 percent of voters, Democrats, Republicans and Independents, want to require employers to provide paid sick days, 78 percent want to expand tax credits to help families take care of family members and 75 percent want to see childcare made more affordable.

“The paid sick days and minimum wage victories in the midterms showed that these issues have clear bi-partisan support, and voters will turn out to support these policies at the state or local level in the absence of action by Congress,” Make It Work co-founder and co-executive director Tracy Sturdivant said in a statement on the poll.