SAN FRANCISCO--(BUSINESS WIRE)--MCOL today announced launch of rNimble, an innovative new national healthcare microconsulting division, involving a national network of microconsultants available to ignite collaboration in healthcare. Detailed information is available at www.rnimble.com.

Krista Burris, rNimble Managing Director says, “rNimble’s focus is microconsulting – delivering on shorter-term projects that fill critical gaps in expertise. We are a network of healthcare experts with the passion, enthusiasm, dedication, and knowledge to help clients achieve objectives in the evolving healthcare space. As healthcare confronts significant changes related to the Affordable Care Act and broader goals to transition to a more sustainable and people-centric model, we have identified the need for incremental consultative services that bring together the ideation and execution of business strategies and initiatives.”

rNimble services are delivered by a network of independent contractor Team Members that can serve clients remotely or even on-site. These microconsulting projects typically involve: (A) discrete projects that include a deliverable, such as competitive analyses; strategy documents; developing content for an RFP; or writing a whitepaper or article; or (B) Providing knowledge & expertise, such as mentorship and advising; networking support; background information and resource location; or speaking engagements.

Burris adds that “We have built a platform that allows our microconsultant Team Members to build their own professional brand, while maintaining their existing consulting practice or other positions. We enhance their revenue, and provide valuable tools and resources in a flexible environment.” Consultants and other appropriate professionals wanting to know more about joining the rNimbe Microconsultant Team can find out more, or apply at http://rnimble.com/join-us.

Organizations interested in finding out more about retaining rNimble for microconsultative services, including focused 15-minute phone consults, can visit www.rnimble.com or contact email Burris at krista@rnimble.com.

About MCOL

MCOL is a leading publisher of health care business information, offering online memberships, newsletters, webinars, e-learning, directories, databases, web content, and much more to professionals since 1995. MCOL is a privately held corporation based in Modesto, California, with additional offices in Portland, OR and other locations. For more information, please visit www.mcol.com.