LITTLE ROCK — A bill containing Gov. Asa Hutchinson’s proposal to end the private option at the end of 2016 and create a task force to recommend alternative approaches to health-care reform cleared a Senate committee Wednesday.

Also Wednesday, a bill that seeks to end the Medicaid expansion program at the end of 2105 stalled in committee, and a bill containing an appropriation of federal funding for the private option advanced.

The Senate Public Health, Welfare and Labor Committee voted 6-1 to give a “do pass” recommendation to Senate Bill 96, known as The Arkansas Health Reform Act of 2015. Sen. Jim Hendren, R-Gravette, is carrying the bill for Hutchinson, his uncle.

Hendren told the committee the task force that would be created under the bill would need time to arrive at its recommendations for what should come after the private option.

“Those alternatives could range anywhere from traditional Medicaid expansion to a modified private option to no Medicaid expansion at all,” he said.

The so-called private option — Arkansas’ alternative to the Medicaid expansion envisioned in the Affordable Care Act — has used federal Medicaid money to subsidize private health insurance for more than 213,000 low-income Arkansans.

Sen. Gary Stubblefield, R-Branch, asked Hendren how many more people might be enrolled in the program if it were to continue through 2016.

Hendren said the eligible population is projected to be between 220,000 and 250,000, so total enrollment likely would peak at that level.

Stubblefield cast the only vote against the bill.

SB 144 by Sen. Linda Collins-Smith, R-Pocahontas, failed in the same committee in a 3-3 vote. The bill would end the private option at the end of 2015 and does not call for a task force to look for alternatives.

Collins-Smith said she was dedicated to “getting out state out from under the private option and any other Medicaid expansion the Obama administration may want to try.”

After the bill failed, Collins-Smith told reporters she planned to talk to committee members who voted against the bill to see if they had questions she could answer to alleviate their concerns.

The committee’s chairman, Sen. Cecile Bledsoe, R-Rogers, and Sen Scott Flippo, R-Bull Shoals, voted along with Stubblefield for Collins-Smith’s bill. Bledsoe and Flippo told reporters they voted for both bills to get them out of committee but said they favored ending the private option at the end of this year.

“The bill that I preferred did not get out of committee, so (Hendren’s bill) is the one that I will vote for,” Bledsoe said.

Hendren’s bill is expected to be considered by the Senate on Thursday.

The Joint Budget Committee on Wednesday endorsed SB 101, a budget bill for the Department of Human Services’ Division of Medical Services which includes an appropriation of federal funding for the private option for the next fiscal year.

The measure cleared the committee without discussion. Among those who voted for it was Rep. Stephen Meeks, R-Greenbrier, who said later he voted for the measure so it could get to the House floor but said he has not decided how he will vote in the House.

The bill needs a three-fourths majority vote in both chambers. It is expected to be considered in the Senate on Thursday.

Elsewhere Wednesday, a meeting of the Senate Judiciary Committee was interrupted when a woman in the audience collapsed. Sen. Jon Woods, R-Springfield, who had been presenting a bill, rushed to the woman’s aid.

Woods said the woman had no pulse and was not breathing, so he administered CPR until first responders arrived. He said the woman was revived with a defibrillator and taken to a hospital.

Woods said he knew what to do, “being an Eagle Scout and having lifeguarded for five years.”

The House Democratic Caucus met privately with the governor on Wednesday and later held a news conference in which leaders said Hutchinson expressed interest in working with the caucus and said they urged Hutchinson not to overlook the most needy Arkansans.

“It’s safe to say that he brought forth a message of really looking forward to working in a bipartisan manner with our caucus and all 36 of our members,” said House Minority Leader Eddie Armstrong, D-North Little Rock.

“Our anticipation and continued faith relies on the fact that from his tax cuts to his health plan, that he governs accordingly and responsively, not leaving out what we consider the least of these,” he said.