WASHINGTON, D.C. – Ohio insurance regulators have finished rate approval for 2015 "Obamacare" health policies, and your rates are going to go up by ... well, it depends.

Your rates might go up by only a few percentage points. They might even go down. Or they might go up a lot more.

The average you might have seen reported late last week, 12 percent, is simply a mathematical average released by the Ohio Department of Insurance after approving insurers' rate requests for the 2015 Affordable Care Act marketplace plans.

It is a straight average, comparing the average of premiums for all companies that say they will offer policies through the ACA marketplace next year -- the big insurers, the small insurers, the ones offering expensive, platinum-plated policies and the ones specializing in lower-cost coverage -- with the average premiums in place now.

This 12 percent figure brought swift criticism from politicians who dislike the Affordable Care Act, or ACA. Republican U.S. Sen. Rob Portman of Ohio and U.S. House Speaker John Boehner, Republican of West Chester, said the "double-digit" hike provides evidence that the ACA is costing Americans money that they could otherwise use for retirement, groceries or education.

But the average is not particularly illuminating, and is arguably misleading -- even before accounting for subsidies many buyers will get to reduce their actual costs. It can lead easily to false assumptions. The reasons for this are illustrated in the insurers' filings with the state Department of Insurance. The Plain Dealer reviewed a number of them late last week.

The best and most glaring example of what's wrong with the 12 percent figure involves Time Insurance, sold under the brand name Assurant Health. Assurant will be new to Ohio's ACA market in 2015. It could be a fairly small player in its inaugural year.

Its average premium -- $516.46, according to the state – happens to be significantly higher than other insurers', for reasons that will be explained shortly. Meantime, if you took just this one company out of the equation and did the math, the state's simple computation – still not a good one -- would lead to an average rate hike in 2015 of 9 percent, not 12 percent.

Nine percent is still decent hit. But that leads to the second problem. The state based its rate-hike claim by considering all insurers equal to one another. They are not equal.

The best way to illustrate this is with another company, Dayton-based CareSource.

CareSource is a dominant player in central and southern Ohio. If experience offers a clue, CareSource is likely to sell more Ohio policies than Assurant in 2015. CareSource also has a much lower average premium than Assurant.

In fact, at $316.11, it is $200 a month lower.

So here is CareSource, a big, low-cost player in the ACA marketplace, and it says it plans to expand its footprint. It also says in its filings that its individual-market ACA rates will rise on average by only 3.2 percent statewide in 2015 – and go down in some markets such as Dayton.

"A favorable and growing enrollment mix with over 31,000 members statewide, aggressive pricing and provider partnerships are all factors in keeping the rates affordable," said Scott Streator, a CareSource vice president. Citing one such rate hike, he said the average 21-year-old in the Cleveland area would see an increase of about $3 a month, or just over 1 percent.

You did not see that in the state's announcement. That's because to arrive at its 12 percent figure, the state regarded a new player, Assurant, and a Big Dog player, CareSource, exactly the same. It added their average premiums with 14 other insurers' and divided the sum to get a simple average covering all 16 insurance companies that want to sell in the market for 2015.

In its defense, the Department of Insurance cannot know with certainty what share of the market any insurer will capture in 2015. Perhaps someone will extrapolate enough data to at least come up with an estimate. But until then, the 12 percent claim lacks any real meaning. It's like treating McDonald's and Morton's equally when calculating the cost of dining out, without regard for the fact that infinitely more Americans will buy Big Macs than will splurge for a porterhouse, even if it's sublime, at Morton's.

None of this should be taken as critical of Time/Assurant. True, it has a higher average premium than Ohio's other players in the ACA pool. But one reason for that is because it sells a fuller array of policies than some of the other insurers, including CareSource.

Assurant's filings with the Ohio Department of Insurance show that the company will sell everything from catastrophic and bronze-level policies to expensive platinum policies that cover practically every health-care need with little or no deductible.

"Assurant Health individual major medical plans also include access to a broad provider network of high-quality doctors, hospitals and health care professionals, giving consumers the choice and access they value," said Mary Hinderliter, Assurant's vice president for communications.

CareSource confirms that it is not selling platinum policies. Neither are other large insurers including Anthem Blue Cross and Blue Shield and Medical Mutual of Ohio, according to their rate filings. Very few people even choose to buy platinum plans.

But Assurant makes them available, which is partly why it winds up with a higher average – one more reason the statewide average as calculated by the Department of Insurance is skewed.

So accept the 12 percent figure as a simple mathematical exercise lacking in context. For a better sense of coming ACA premium hikes, here are a few figures from the filings – approved by the state -- of three of Ohio's largest insurers.

Medical Mutual of Ohio

Average premium increase over 2014: 7.7 percent. Sample of specific plan increases: Market Classic 1000 Gold, 5.5 percent; Market HSA 2000 Gold, 8.7 percent; Market HSA 4000 Bronze, 8.6 percent.

Anthem Blue Cross and Blue Shield

Average premium increase over 2014: 8.9 percent. Sample of specific plan increases: Gold Pathway PPO 1250, 7.68 percent; Silver Pathway PPO 2500, 8.24 percent; Silver Pathway PPO 3000, 11.3 percent, Bronze Pathway PPO 4300, 13.57 percent.

CareSource

Average premium increase over 2014: 3.2 percent. Sample of specific plan increases: Gold Just4me Ultra: 5.15 percent, with variations of the same plan going down, rather than up, by 2.79 percent; Silver Just4me, 6.85 percent, with variations of the plan going down, rather than up, by 2.48 percent; Bronze Just4me, no price increase.