PHOTO/SAMUEL SAFFA

At the Missouri Times‘ #mogovdebate, Lt. Gov. Peter Kinder, former House Speaker Catherine Hanaway and businessman John Brunner answered questions about why the people of Missouri should turn out in August to give them the Republican nomination. Below is a summary of Monday’s main contentions from the three candidates.

How will you beat Chris Koster?

Hanaway argued that while Koster won the attorney general’s seat by saying he would be ‘no politics, all prosecutor.’ She said the reverse had happened. “He is all politics, no prosecutor.”

Kinder touted his ability to win and have success in urban areas.

“That record has been crowned with success in three statewide elections. I show up everywhere and fight for every vote.”

Brunner touted his outsider status and said that he offered voters “a compelling difference” as a businessman against a lifelong politician.

What will you do to stop Obamacare?

Kinder noted that he fought against the Obama administration by filing a lawsuit almost as soon as the law was passed.

Brunner said that he initially ran for Senate to try to make a conservative difference because of his displeasure with Obamacare.

Hanaway, however, took a dig at Eric Greitens, the only one of the four Republican candidates who was unable to attend the evening before candidate filings.

“I didn’t do what our absent opponent did,” she said. “I didn’t get in the car and go to the Democratic convention.”

Will you institute toll roads?

Not one of the candidates said they intended to institute toll roads.

“No more taxes, no more toll roads, the people have spoken,” Brunner said.

“MODOT is like a stray dog,” said Hanaway. “You feed it once and they keep coming back for more and more.”

Kinder said added that “Missourians will not invest more in transportation, nor anything else in state government.”

How far will you go to protect the Second Amendment?

Brunner quoted Reagan and called for a need to protect the entire Constitution, not only the Second Amendment.

“Freedom is always one generation away from extinction. We need a governor that can stand strong for our Constitution.”

Kinder made it clear that he was in favor of the Second Amendment with his A+ NRA rating.

“Some of these candidates, you’ve got to wonder what they’ll do… but you’ll know what I do,” he said.

Hanaway cited the need for people to protect themselves and said was pro campus and constitutional carry.

“Even our best first responders can’t be an immediate response.”

Will you stand up for pro-life issues?

Hanaway said, “The right to life is the most important right… I’ll defund Planned Parenthood.”

While each of the candidates came out against embryonic stem cell research, Kinder said that he would remove public funding for it, but still allow private institutions to pursue the practice if they chose, calling it a “rough compromise.”

Brunner said that using embryonic stem cells to save lives was a false compromise.

“I stand with life and I do not compromise. I do not believe there is a compromise between science and upholding life.”

How would you handle the situation at the University of Missouri and what would you do about the school’s board of curators?

Brunner said, “The University of Missouri is a tragedy for all Missourians. It casts a shadow across our great state.”

Hanaway said Gov. Jay Nixon had filled the Board with his “lawyer buddies” and that the Board should better represent the state.

Kinder said student-athlete strikes should be punished with revocation of scholarships.

Will you cut taxes?

They each said yes.

What have you done that you are most proud of that shows your conservative values?

Brunner cited his experience as an evangelical missionary and said that he appreciated the tenet of freedom of religion.

Kinder said that he has fought in the political arena for most of his life for conservative values.

“You name a conservative value in the last 30 years, I’ve been in the thick of it.”

Hanaway said she had focused on her family.

“My husband and I have tried to instill Midwestern values [in our children] and that opportunities come by the sweat of your brows.”