Sioux Falls, SD

Sioux Falls has struggled with a lack of low-income housing. However, one affordable apartment in town is looking for more tenants.

The Good Samaritan Society opened the City Center for seniors in Downtown Sioux Falls one year ago next month.

While they say it's been a big success, there's still room to fill.

The City Center Apartments opened almost one year ago, and are already a big hit with residents.

"Oh I love it. Just love it. Great people," resident Enid Johnson said.

"Yeah, it's been really fun. A lot of meeting new people. You know when you retire you kind of get in a rut. So this keeps you moving," resident Beverly Burke said.

Even though the place is a hit, there is still space that needs to be filled.

Right now there are about a dozen apartments open for rent, to the right candidates.

"We do have income guidelines, so a one person household the income limit is around $30,000. And for a two person household, that's around $35,000. So an applicant would have to be at or below that amount in order to live here," Senior Living Director Kellie Scholz said.

Residents must also be 62 years old and older. Because it is a senior living facility, the maintenance staff plays a big part in making tenants comfortable.

"Like, I'm going to be getting some valances for in here. So they're going to put up the hardware for me. And they hang pictures for you. Very helpful, very kind," Burke said.

The location is also a big hit, being just blocks from downtown shops, restaurants and Falls Park. But there's also plenty to do indoors.

"We have two social hours a week. One on Tuesday and one on Friday. And we have a bible study on Thursday night. It's just growing," Johnson said.

Residents say they love it so much, they want others to join them.

"We try to create an environment where people are loved, valued and at peace. And so I hope that's what we have created here," Scholz said.

"It's kind of like a community within the building. And that makes it comfortable to be around," Burke said.

The Good Samaritan Society will work with seniors to find a payment plan that will work for them.

You can find more about the apartments, at the Good Samaritan website.