Citing stable finances, Montgomery County next year plans to give its workers raises and increase spending on building repairs, capital purchases and operating line items.

Montgomery County commissioners on Thursday approved a $148 million general fund budget for 2016, which is a 6.4 percent increase from 2015.

The budget growth is possible because of a projected increase in sales tax revenue and, to a much lesser degree, fees and charges for services.

Related UPDATE on 2016 Montgomery County budget

The county will give workers a 2.5 percent wage increase, just as it did in 2015. The raises will cost the county about $1.6 million.

The county also has more than tripled the amount of general fund money it will spend on building maintenance and improvements. And the budget includes an increase in spending on replacing equipment and technology, such as sheriff’s cruisers.

“This is a good year, and we’ve had some tough years in the last few years … and now we’re able to do some things that we’ve been putting off, which is really important,” said Debbie Lieberman, president of the Montgomery County Board of Commissioners.

Additionally, the county for the first time in 15 years will increase operating line-item expenses for consulting agreements, professional services and office necessities.

“We have not invested this kind of money since before the recession,” said Joe Tuss, Montgomery County administrator.

The general fund, which accounts for about one-fifth of the county’s total appropriation, will increase $8.9 million from 2015.

The “all funds” budget will increase 2.1 percent to $821.4 million. That budget includes millions of dollars in state and federal grants, levy funds, fees from the water and sewer divisions and other sources.

Next year will be the fourth consecutive that the county will increase wages.

The economy continues to improve and revenue has bounced back, and the raises bring compensation up to reasonable and fair levels that allow the county to remain competitive in the marketplace so as to attract and keep skilled workers, said Tuss.

The recession forced the county to “right-size” itself through reductions in staffing and expenditures, and today the organization prioritizes financial discipline while providing citizens with the level of services they expect and deserve, Tuss said.

The total number of budgeted county positions for next year is 4,375, which is up 32 from this year. The general fund has 1,322 budgeted positions.

Sales tax receipts have increased steadily since the downturn and are expected to rise next year to $80.5 million, up 3 percent from the 2015 estimate and 9 percent from 2014. Sales taxes account for almost 55 percent of general fund revenue.

Consumers are spending more, and local retailers are seeing higher sales activity.

Changes under the Affordable Care Act expanded eligibility for and use of managed care services, which are taxable and have boosted receipts.

Although sales taxes are rising, the county next year projects flat revenue from property taxes and real estate fees. Investment income is expected to fall while local government funding is anticipated to see a slight uptick.

“Thank goodness our sales tax have bounced back, because if our sales tax receipts had the same trend line as all of these other revenue streams, we would be in a serious situation,” Tuss said.

General fund personnel costs are set at $91.3 million, which includes wages, benefits and retirement contributions.

Personnel accounts for more than 60 percent of general fund expenditures.

General fund operating expenses will increase 2.5 percent next year for the first time since around the turn of the century.

The increase will cost the county about $1.1 million and will bring operating line expenditures to $56.7 million.

Operating allocations pay for office supplies, furniture, equipment and contractual professional services, said Tim Nolan, the county’s director of management and budget.

County departments hire consultants for some work, such as architectural services or website updates.

Some county offices still use computers that run on Windows 98, officials said.

In addition, the county plans to spend $3.4 million on replacement capital, including data processing equipment, furniture and computer systems. The county allocated a little more than $2 million for this purpose in 2015.

The county plans to buy 20 new cruisers for the sheriff’s department in 2016. The county bought five vehicles this year.

The county also plans to spend $1.2 million for a server virtualization project that will upgrade the hardware and should reduce maintainence costs, officials said.

Spending on building repairs and maintenance will more than triple to about $3.3 million.

The county said it has 20 to 30 projects that will target roofs, crumbling concrete on the exterior of buildings and antiquated systems including plumbing and air-handling units.

“All of our buildings are aged,” Nolan said.