By of the

The 18-year-old charged with driving a stolen SUV and killing a couple in a hit-and-run crash is a "poster boy" for the challenge of addressing repeat offenders in the juvenile justice system, according to Milwaukee Police Chief Edward Flynn.

Before Michael Hobbs was accused of getting behind the wheel of that SUV, he was put on probation for driving a stolen truck last summer and had a warrant out for his arrest for driving a stolen minivan.

Two teen male passengers in the SUV had multiple prior arrests and, like Hobbs, are associated with the so-called Cut Throat Mob, a vehicle theft group.

"Our challenge ... isn't to throw darts at the rest of the system," Flynn said Friday. "We all need to be accountable for our piece of this."

To that end, Milwaukee Mayor Tom Barrett has called for the Milwaukee Community Justice Council to take up the problem of auto theft as soon as possible.

Auto thefts had been declining in Milwaukee — the drop from the first half of 2007 to the first half of 2013 was 54% — but skyrocketed in 2014. The first six months of last year showed a nearly 70% increase in reported auto thefts and attempted thefts compared with 2013. After a series of arrests last fall, the rate slowed.

The department ended with about a 52% increase year-to-year — from 4,385 in 2013 to 6,657 in 2014.

It's been difficult to pinpoint a single reason for the jump. Some have argued that a 2010 department policy that requires tougher standards for police pursuits has contributed, but the rules were in place for several years before the spike.

"Immature teen brains know: Flee from the police..." Flynn said. "We don't chase stolen cars if that's all it is, if they haven't committed a violent crime."

In the past 14 months, Milwaukee police arrested 334 juveniles for driving, or riding in, stolen vehicles. Of those, 22% were arrested two or more times in the same period.

Teens driving stolen cars contribute to the city's robbery rates, endanger other motorists and can put teens on the "fast track to that very mass incarceration everybody's so concerned about," Flynn said.

"If doing felonies as a juvenile nets you nothing at all, neither systems nor services, why should we be surprised that by 19 or 20 you're in grown-up prison for a serious violent crime?" the chief asked, acknowledging the problem is driven by a small percentage of youthful offenders.

Barrett said he has contacted officials at Milwaukee County Children's Court, the district attorney's office and county juvenile probation — who are all part of the justice council — to help ensure there are meaningful consequences when young people steal cars.

Such collaboration already has led to change. For example, officers now may access some juvenile data and can know immediately whether a teen or child is on probation.

Those conversations also led to a discovery even Flynn found surprising: Under the law, if an officer recognizes a teen driving a stolen car, but the teen drives away, the officer cannot get a juvenile arrest warrant.

Barrett also said it's important for city residents to protect their vehicles. As cold weather hit the area, many cars reported stolen had been warming up in driveways. The SUV involved in the fatal crash was stolen when its owner left the keys in the ignition.

"There has to be some responsibility for people to recognize that you don't leave your car running out in front of your house," Barrett said.

The Police Department has long tried to warn people of the dangers involved in leaving cars unattended with keys inside, "thus making them available for purposes of theft or 'joy rides,' which often leads to the commission of crime or serious injury or even death to innocent persons who become the victims of recklessness."

That text came from a department order issued in 1947.