Topics: Bernie Sanders, Editor's Picks, Elections 2016, Hillary Clinton, Media Criticism, Business News, News, Politics News

The Clinton Express wheezed its way into New York City this week, rolling into Greenwich Village to offload another “big speech,” this time on the economy. Whoever is driving this train must have considered Cooper Union as a possible station stop; a speech Lincoln gave there in 1860 may have made him president. But this speech wasn’t that big, not by a long shot. The campaign settled on a spot a few blocks away, a smallish auditorium over at The New School.

Even that venue was a bit of a reach. The New School has a history of innovative economic inquiry dating to its 1919 founding by such progressive lights as John Dewey and Thorstein Veblen, neither of whom, it’s safe to say, would be backing Clinton today. When the school opened, the New York Times said its announced purpose was “to seek an unbiased understanding of the existing order, its genesis, growth and present working.”

The country could use a fresh, unbiased analysis of the existing order. Clinton’s speech provided nothing of the sort.

Still, it was well received in some quarters. At Vox, where much of what Clinton says is well received, Matthew Yglesias called her pledge to prosecute financial crimes “the most important words she has spoken thus far in the campaign.” It’s not saying much, as she hardly ever says anything substantive, let alone important. Yglesias likens her rhetoric to Elizabeth Warren’s, but why Warren when so many other politicians now promise the same thing? He notes Clinton’s “trust gap” with “activists focused on the issue” but says those activists can take “succor” knowing that bringing such cases is one of the few ways a “sharply constrained” President Clinton would have of “leaving a mark.”

In other words, count on her doing it because she won’t be able to do much else.

In a piece written before the event and based on campaign backgrounders, Yglesias claims the speech marks Clinton’s passage from neoliberalism to “paleoliberalism,” as in the Paleolithic Age of hunter gatherers. He says it “hints at a fundamental philosophical difference” Clinton now has with her husband, her old boss and her old self, and that it shows she is now “less inclined to favor a market-oriented approach than a left-wing approach” in which the financial sector is “deliberately regulated in a heavy handed way rather than allowed to lead the economy.”

Yglesias says “left-wing interest group leaders” tell him they’re skeptical but he says “history suggests that presidents generally try to implement the agendas they have promised.” He also says Clinton was never “purely” a neoliberal—she backed a minimum wage hike and was willing to let government play a bigger role in health care—and that as president she’d extend financial regulation and help strengthen unions. He noted that Clinton would not be delivering a “laundry list” of specifics and that until she did no one could be quite sure what she was up to.

The Times’ David Brooks also thinks Clinton is “best viewed… as a new paleoliberal.” To Brooks it denotes a faith that “government is more competent at steering companies toward their own best interests than are the companies themselves.” He says that many of her ideas have been proven wrong, that voters don’t share her fondness for central planning and that she has “no plausible chance” of getting her agenda through Congress. Still, he says, she “hasn’t gone crazy” or ruined herself by “wandering into the class warfare swamps.” He thus concludes that politically she has “cleared the first hurdle of this campaign” by offering “a coherent response to today’s economic conditions.”

The Washington Post’s E.J. Dionne said “Clinton is making a major bid to shape the conversation” that “could mark the beginning of a genuinely substantive debate between Democrats and Republicans over how to define the nation’s economic problems.” He quoted a “campaign official” accusing Republicans of peddling “the same old proposals every Republican presidential candidate has been offering since Reagan”; unlike Clinton, whose package of new benefits includes “family leave, child care and more affordable access to college.” The official seemed not to know that, good as some of Clinton’s ideas may be, they are mostly the same ones Democratic candidates have been offering since Reagan.

Yglesias, Brooks and Dionne are fine writers. But their somewhat overlapping analyses, like Clinton’s speech, perpetuate some habits we need to break. Clinton is no “paleoliberal,” a more than faintly pejorative label liberals would do well to challenge. She, Bill and Barack Obama practically invented neoliberalism and remain members in good standing until proven otherwise. If your speeches are long on weepy tales of “everyday Americans” you met on the campaign trail, but short on policy prescriptions, the credit goes to David Axelrod, not Paul Krugman. If you’d raise the minimum wage but won’t say how much, you’re Mitt Romney. If you back the Trans Pacific Trade Partnership–and despite recent evasions she’s all for it–you’re fighting for capital, not labor.

I.F. Stone once counseled young reporters not to develop inside sources. He said reporters do more for sources than sources do for them, and that anyway most of what we need to know lies right under our nose, hidden like Poe’s purloined letter in a speech or a public record. It’s sound advice, but especially if you’re covering the Clinton campaign. Background interviews with insiders are catnip for reporters, few of whom would miss a chance to get out ahead of the pack. But if they’d wait for the transcript they might reap the full rewards of textural criticism. To wit:

Yglesias’ notion that presidents try to deliver on campaign promises may be right, notwithstanding Obama’s spotty record. (See ethics reform, whistleblowers, the surveillance state, the public option, the minimum wage, etc.) But if you parse Hillary’s speech you find that despite talking for 55 minutes she didn’t make any promises, or at least none specific enough to be politically actionable. Her handlers did a fine job of prepping the press for yet another dearth of detail. But at this point “instructions to follow” isn’t a viable message for Clinton, nor should any reporter react to such assurances from any politician with anything but a long, loud groan.

Clinton’s speech didn’t spark a “substantive debate between Democrats and Republicans.” If you’ve so much as glanced at the GOP field, you know they won’t be having one this year. Nor did it move the needle on the Democrats’ debate, which moves away from Clinton even as she runs to chase it down. It’s true for reporters and campaigns alike: If you focus too much on tactics, you miss the meaning of the race. What drives this race is not what the left wants; it’s what middle-class families want. Their economic anxiety and outrage at the condition of our democracy is transforming politics in ways Obama never imagined.

It’s this mood that David Brooks mistakes for the “class warfare swamps.” Voters prize civility and long for a populism without culprits or conspiracies–but sorely want to hear their righteous anger expressed. Clinton won’t do it, in part because she can’t offend the delicate sensibilities of her donors but also because, like Brooks, she mistakes the mood for a leftist insurrection. Many of us–see Paul Rosenberg’s wonderful article right here in Salon–have long argued that the old categories are defunct and that much of what the old order calls radical has long since gone mainstream. Soon everyone will see it. For now, let me suggest a rule: any policy enjoying majority support in every poll must henceforth be called centrist, not “radical” or “left wing.” If you aren’t sure, look it up.