Customized TV Listings are available here: www.latimes.com/tvtimes

Click here to download

TV listings for the week of June 14 - 20, 2015 in PDF format

This week's TV Movies

SERIES

When Calls the Heart The frontier-era drama wraps its second season with a two-hour finale. 8 p.m. Hallmark Channel

Jonathan Strange & Mr. Norrell Bertie Carvel and Eddie Marsan play the title characters in this new effects-laden fantasy series about rival magicians in early 19th century England. 10 p.m. BBC America

SPECIALS

Urban Cowboy: The Rise and Fall of Gilley's This new special recalls the real-life Texas honky-tonk that was the setting for the 1980 film starring John Travolta. 9 p.m. CMT

I Am Dying This documentary charts the final days of a terminally ill cancer patient. 10 p.m. National Geographic Channel

AFI Life Achievement Award: A Tribute to Steve Martin The actor, comic, author, magician, musician, etc., is feted by Martin Short, Steve Carell, Tina Fey and others in this star-studded ceremony. 10 p.m. TBS

Jeff Ross Roasts Criminals: Live From Brazos County Jail The stand-up comic famous for his putdowns performs for inmates in Texas in this new special. 11 p.m. Comedy Central

MOVIES

Get On Up “42's” Chadwick Boseman portrays R&B legend James Brown, a.k.a. the “Godfather of Soul,” in this 2014 bio-drama. 7:30 p.m. HBO

I Killed My BFF “30 Rock's” Katrina Bowden and “Rescue Me's” Olivia Crocicchia star in this new thriller about a friendship that leads to infidelity and murder. 8 p.m. Lifetime

A Walk Among the Tombstones Liam Neeson and “Downtown Abbey's” Dan Stevens star in this 2014 crime drama about a private detective who helps a drug trafficker track down his wife's killers. 10 p.m. Cinemax

SPORTS

Hockey The Chicago Blackhawks and the Tampa Bay Lightning meet in Game 5 of the 2015 Stanley Cup Final. 5 p.m. KNBC

WEEKEND TALK

SATURDAY

Good Morning America (N) 7 a.m. KABC

McLaughlin Group (N) 6:30 p.m. KCET

SUNDAY

Today (N) 6 a.m. KNBC

Good Morning America (N) 6 a.m. KABC

State of the Union With Jake Tapper Hillary Clinton's presidential bid, Clinton Foundation donations, GOP presidential contenders: Former President Bill Clinton. (N) 6 and 9 a.m. CNN

CBS News Sunday Morning The millennial generation; musician Mark Ronson; Megan Mullally and Nick Offerman; author George Saunders. (N) 7 a.m. KCBS

Fareed Zakaria GPS Russia and Ukraine: U.S. Ambassador to the United Nations Samantha Power; Iraq and ISIS: Council on Foreign Relations president Richard Haas; British politics: Nicola Sturgeon, First Minister of Scotland and head of the Scottish National Party. (N) 7 and 10 a.m. CNN

Meet the Press Hillary Clinton campaign chairman John Podesta; former Gov. Mitt Romney (R-Mass.). (N) 8 a.m. KNBC; 11 a.m. MSNBC

This Week With George Stephanopoulos 2016 election: Gov. Chris Christie (R-N.J.); 2016 election: Hillary Clinton campaign senior adviser Joel Benenson. (N) 8 a.m. KABC

FOX News Sunday With Chris Wallace 2016 election: Hillary Clinton campaign spokesman Karen Finney; Affordable Care Act, trade bill: Rep. Paul Ryan (R-Wis.); 2004 interview with Librarian of Congress James Billington. (N) 8 a.m. KTTV; 11 a.m. and 3 p.m. Fox News Channel

Reliable Sources Rupert Murdoch steps down; New Hampshire versus Fox and the Republican National Committee; Hillary Clinton and Jeb Bush presidential campaigns; the tabloids and the Duggars. (N) 8 a.m. CNN

MediaBuzz (N) 8 a.m. and 2 p.m. Fox News Channel

Face the Nation 2016 election: Sen. Bernie Sanders (I-Vt.); 2016 election: Hillary Clinton campaign manager Robby Mook; 2016 election: Sen. Lindsey Graham (R-S.C.). (N) 8:30 a.m. KCBS

60 Minutes Muslim fundamentalists in London may be helping to recruit fighters for ISIS in Syria; coal ash waste spilled in North Carolina; scientists study a dog that can recognize thousands of individual items. (N) 7 p.m. KCBS