The President of the National Coalition for Syrian Revolutionary and Opposition Forces Hadi al-Bahra, right, his Vice-President Hisham Marwah, second right, together with members of the National Coordination Body for Democratic Change Safwan Akkash, second left, and Khalaf Dahowd, addressed the media in Brussels on Friday. Associated Press

Leaders of two Syrian opposition groups announced in Brussels Friday their agreement to join forces and push for a political settlement of the Syrian crisis.

The two Syrian bodies have come to the table many times but it is the first time they have adopted a common position, which comes after the conflict has entered its fifth year. The United Nations has reported almost 1.2 million Syrians have fled the country and registered as refugees.

Leaders of the National Coordination Body for Democratic Change and the National Coalition for Syrian Revolutionary and Opposition Forces reached the accord after discussions seeking a joint position ahead of a resumption of peace negotiations in Geneva.

The two opposition bodies have tried before to come to an agreement, most notably in the first half of 2012 when they held meetings in Cairo. This week’s agreement as Staffan de Mistura, the Swedish diplomat and UN special envoy for Syria was in Damascus to press efforts to find a political solution.

At a press conference in Brussels, they jointly condemned “terrorism” carried out by Islamic State and the Iranian-backed Hezbollah, as well as Iran’s military intervention in the country. They also called for the international community to protect civilians, and stressed the importance of a transitional Syrian government to restore stability.

The agreement ostensibly brings together the two largest opposition groupings in Syria, but the influence of the accord at this stage of the conflict is questioned by analysts given the country is now fragmented into fiefdoms controlled by warring factions and armed groups, including extremists like Islamic State and the al-Qaeda-affiliated Nusra Front.

The agreement does not completely bridge their political differences over armed struggle against Syrian President Bashar al-Assad. The National Coordination Body for Democratic Change is a coalition of non-armed opposition groups that advocates peaceful opposition to the Assad regime, while the Syrian National Coalition fully supports fighting the regime and is affiliated to many rebel groups inside Syria.

Hisham Marwah, vice-president of the Syrian National Coalition said that Iran could play an important role in the area, if it changed its policies toward Syria. In light of last week’s nuclear agreement reached by Iran, the U.S., U.K., France, Russia, China and Germany, to prevent the country from producing a nuclear weapon, Mr. Marwah, said that the EU should push Iran to play a constructive role.

“Iran should withdraw its troops from Syria, should stop killing Syrians, stop supporting Assad,” he said.

–Sam Dagher in Beirut contributed to this article