TheBlaze Radio host Jay Severin says he believes Obamacare is comparable to slavery, and Republicans are failing miserably in highlighting to the American people why it is wrong.

“Here’s the supposed opposition party, the party of Lincoln, no less, with the issue all teed up,” Severin said on the Glenn Beck Radio Program Friday. “We have congressional hearings; we’ve got a power of subpoena; we’ve got Secretary Sebelius, a national TV audience. Here’s our chance for the loyal opposition to tell America what’s wrong with Obamacare. And what I listened to … was people saying, ‘Hey, your web site ain’t working, ha-ha.’”

Severin said he was struck by how few people spoke about the perils of Obamacare itself, rather than just the website’s flaws.

“Imagine we had this hypothetical hearing, and on the stand under oath we have the chief administrative officer in charge of initiating slavery, and the very best objection we could conjure is, ‘Hey, your sign-up process isn’t working properly. You really screwed that up. This proves it’s time to delay and fix it.’”

“Fix it?” Severin repeated. “Fix what? I mean, I believe Abe Lincoln could have summoned an argument of greater moral stature than, ‘Hey, your slavery arrests are way behind schedule! Let’s fix it. Just imagine if you got it working properly, we could be processing millions of human beings like gangbusters.’”

Lincoln probably would’ve said something along the lines of, Severin asserted: “Slavery is wrong. It’s immoral. It’s anti-constitutional, and it’s not in the inefficiencies of how you’re rounding people up, but rather in the immorality of enslaving them! A more effective means of signing them up is – and can never be – a rational or a moral measure of the success.”

While Beck said he agreed with and was struck by Severin’s analogy, he said he felt the need to press him on how exactly Obamacare is comparable to slavery.

Severin argued that under Obamacare, “the government forces us to buy and do things we don’t want, taxes us for it,” and “it will end up murdering people.”

Among other things, Severin referenced Dr. Ezekiel Emanuel’s advocacy for a way of determining who gets medical care in scarcity situations, which the doctor termed “the complete lives system.” Rather than each doctor doing all they can for each patient, Emanuel argues that treatment should be based on a number of factors, like the “quality-adjusted life years” the patient has ahead and “promoting and rewarding social usefulness.”

Under Ezekiel’s plan, people ages 15-40 years old would get the most treatment, partially because they can contribute the most to society.

“Adolescents have received substantial education and parental care, investments that will be wasted without a complete life,” Ezekiel wrote in a 2009 article. “Infants, by contrast, have not yet received these investments. Similarly, adolescence brings with it a developed personality capable of forming and valuing long-term plans whose fulfilment requires a complete life.”

Ezekiel Emanuel served as special advisor for health policy to the director of the White House Office of Management and Budget from 2009 to 2011 and is the brother of President Obama’s former chief of staff, Rahm Emanuel.

Severin commented: “In this whole ‘arc of usefulness,’ once you fall outside the arc of usefulness, then you just become a bottle of spoiled milk. This is the man and this is the philosophy on which the so-called, and very real, ‘death panels; are based.”

You can watch video of Severin’s discussion with Beck, below:

Your browser does not support iframes.

The full episode of The Glenn Beck Program, along with many other live streaming shows and thousands of hours of on-demand content, is available on just about any digital device. Get it all with a FREE TRIAL.

–

Other Must-Read Stories: