Morgantown Doctor Meets With President Obama

Written by Your 5News Team

Last updated on February 04, 2015 @ 6:50PM

Created on February 04, 2015 @ 5:59PM

While the House votes to repeal Obamacare for the 56th time, there are those who think that parts of the law are beginning to work. One of them is a mental health professional in Morgantown, who wrote a letter to President Obama and wound up getting the chance of a lifetime thanks to his response.

In spite of all the debate, there's at least one doctor in our area who believes Obamacare has done some good things for the health care industry.

Meeting the President can be a daunting task, but Dr. Susanne Choby told 5 News that President Obama was warm, witty, and enjoyed meeting with her and 11 others who wrote letters to the President regarding Obamacare. Dr. Choby, a psychologist with a practice in Morgantown, was one of them.

"It was a really interesting experience," she said. "Far less intimidating than I thought it was going to be. The White House--they make it very inviting. But it still is a bit humbling."

Though Dr. Choby recognizes that Obamacare has it's share of detractors, she told 5 News that since the law was implemented she is beginning to see benefits. Previously uninsured patients would sometimes skip appointments with her in fear that they couldn't afford the appointment. She said that many of these people were working two jobs and just trying to scrape by.

"There are a lot of people coming in for services working multiple jobs," she said. "They would work one job in retail and then work as a waitress or a waiter. And they were employed, but they weren't qualifying for either a medical card or commercial insurance because they just could not afford the policy."

It all started with a simple letter to President Obama. She had no expectation of the letter being read by him, let alone a response. But a response, and an invitation, came her way.

"I was driving home from work one day and I realized that I had gone through an entire clinic day without seeing someone who did not have coverage," said Dr. Choby. "I thought that, as far as coverage goes, as far as expanding coverage, which is the idea of the legislation, that it had been a success."

Most importantly, she's just happy that people who need treatment are now more likely to receive it.

"There's a large portion of the country--a lot of people including the working poor--that now have the access to health care that they're able to have it available," she added.

Dr. Choby called the meeting with President Obama a little overwhelming, but said she was glad to have had the experience.

Share