Some big changes are coming to one of the largest health insurance providers in Texas.

Blue Cross Blue Shield of Texas is phasing out their PPO or Preferred Provider Organization just for individuals signed up for insurance.

News 3 looks at who the changes will affect and why it will mean less choice for finding a physician.

Blue Cross Blue Shield of Texas recently announced they would be phasing out their individual PPO plans because it was no longer sustainable at the cost being offered.

Instead customers will be switched to an HMO or Health Maintenance Organization.

"When costs rise and claims rise the only way they can really control costs is limit that doctors network," said Ross Gunnels who is a Vice President and Broker for Anco Insurance in Bryan.

Gunnels said he's starting to get a few calls from his clients about the changes.

It's important to note the PPO is not going away for those with employer or group PPO plans.

"The reality is is a lot of people are either going to have to choose a new doctor if they want to stay with Blue Cross Blue Shield or find another health plan that provides them that same doctors choice," said Gunnels.

The new changes won't go into effect until January 1st, so there's still some time for customers to ask questions and also see what new doctors Blue Cross Blue Shield adds to their HMO plan.

Currently the College Station Medical Center is the only hospital in network for the HMO locally.

Gunnels says the number of local doctors who are part of the HMO is also limited.

"They're trying to add more physicians and hospitals but that's going to be dependent on whether or not those providers want to sign up in the HMO network," said Gunnels.

Another limitation with an HMO is medical care typically has to be coordinated through your primary care physician, who has to give a referral to see a specialist.

Blue Cross Blue Shield of Texas was the only insurance provider to offer an individual PPO plan with nearly 400,000 Texans in it.

New individual plan and rates will be available in October.

We have more information from Blue Cross Blue Shield of Texas in the related links section of this story.