Expanding Medicaid in Kansas would be budget-neutral and might generate savings, according to a report released Tuesday.

The report projected expanding Medicaid through the KanCare program would cost an average of $53 million annually from 2016 to 2020, but that other savings would offset those costs. Savings also could exceed costs, making expansion an advantage for the state’s budget, the report said.

The Sunflower Foundation commissioned the report, and consulting firm Manatt Health Solutions compiled it. The foundation makes grants related to health issues and lists “strengthening the state’s health care safety net” as one of its priorities.

The Affordable Care Act, commonly known as Obamacare, expanded Medicaid to people earning up to 138 percent of the federal poverty line, or $16,243 per year for a single person. In 2012, the Supreme Court ruled that portion of the health care law was voluntary, giving states the option of expanding Medicaid or retaining their previous limits. Kansas hasn’t opted to expand KanCare, and limits it to adults who earn less than 33 percent of the poverty line and who either have a child, are pregnant, have a disability, or are older than 65. For a family of three, the adult would only be eligible if the family income was $6,630 or lower, though the children still would be eligible at higher incomes.

Childless adults who don’t meet any of those provisions aren’t eligible for KanCare, regardless of how low their incomes may be.

Eileen Hawley, spokeswoman for Gov. Sam Brownback, hinted the report had a political bias, and reiterated concerns the federal government might not fulfill its pledge to finance most of the costs.

“It is little surprise that a study authored in part by a Kathleeen Sebelius appointee who worked to implement Obamacare and Medicaid expansion would advocate for Medicaid expansion,” she said. “The Governor has consistently said we must first take care of the developmentally and physically disabled on a waiting list before expanding Medicaid to able-bodied adults, and that any expansion must include a work requirement and sustainable funding.”

Sheldon Weisgrau, director of the Health Reform Resource Project, said the foundations that backed the report chose Manatt because of its experience in the area of Medicaid expansion.

“They have decades of experience in this area and are steeped in the kind of expertise that can help legislators in crafting a Kansas-based solution,” he said in a statement. “It’s unfortunate that the administration has chosen to attack one of the authors rather than consider the substance of the report.”

The Kansas Division of the Budget found a cost of $790 million to cover newly eligible adults, people who were eligible before but didn’t realize it and people with disabilities on waiting lists for home- and community-based services. The Sunflower Foundation report removed about $524 million in costs related to the disabilities waiting lists, because Medicaid expansion doesn’t require the state to reduce the waiting list. That would bring the cost for KanCare expansion alone to $264 million, or $53 million annually through 2020.

The federal government would pay the full $53 million in 2016. Kansas’ share would be about $2.7 million in 2017, $3.2 million in 2018, $3.7 million in 2019 and $5.3 million in 2020. The state would pay 10 percent of the cost of KanCare coverage from 2020 on.

The report argued using federal Medicaid funds would reduce the need to spend funds from the state general fund on health care. For example, Kansas spent about $69 million on mental health care and $6.3 million on substance abuse treatment in 2014, but wouldn’t have to spend as much if some of the recipients were enrolled in KanCare, the report said.

Expanding KanCare eligibility also could reduce expenses on health care for prison inmates, people with disabilities who receive cash assistance and people who are uninsured and receive uncompensated care, the report said. Kansas spent about $47 million on prisoner care in 2011, $4.9 million on the MediKan program for disabled people receiving cash assistance this year and $28.9 million to partially reimburse health centers for uncompensated care in 2014.

The state also would benefit from a higher Medicaid reimbursement rate for some people who are eligible for KanCare now, the report said. The federal government covers 56 percent of the cost of KanCare for people with disabilities, pregnant women and some people whose medical bills are so high that they “spend down” their income to a level where they are eligible. If people in those groups became eligible based on their income under expansion, the federal government would cover 100 percent of their KanCare costs in 2016, and 90 percent from 2020 on. That would reduce the $348 million Kansas spent on covering people with disabilities, $201 million for the “spend down” population and $61.5 million for pregnant women this year.

Kansas also would collect more money through its HMO Privilege Fee if more people were covered, according to the report.

The Health Care Foundation of Greater Kansas City, Kansas Health Foundation, REACH Healthcare Foundation, Sunflower Foundation, United Methodist Health Ministry Fund and Wyandotte Health Foundation sent a joint letter to Brownback and members of the Legislature urging them to expand KanCare.

“The potential benefit to the state budget alone indicates that legislators can no longer afford to simply say ‘no’ to KanCare expansion. We call upon legislators to give KanCare expansion serious consideration and an open debate, allowing diverse opinions a chance to be heard in committee and on the chamber floors,” the letter said. “Kansas’ severe and growing budget crisis recently prompted legislators to pay a consultant $2.6 million in hopes of finding more savings and efficiencies. Yet for two years, Kansas has ignored a policy decision that could be saving the state millions of dollars right now, while providing more than 150,000 uninsured Kansans health coverage: KanCare expansion. Many of the states that have embraced expansion are led by Republican governors and conservative legislatures. If they can find state-based solutions, so can Kansas.”