Buy Photo Chinese gold medal-winning Olympians Sun Linlin and Meng Wang have fun with their speed skaters at camp. (Photo: Michael Izzo/Staff photo )Buy Photo

Some of the best speed skaters in the world were at Mennen Arena this week, led by two gold medal-winning Chinese Olympians.

Sun Linlin’s International Garden State Speedskating Camp brought top talent from the East Coast and overseas from China, Taiwan and Israel to the arena where about 40 people, ages 6 to 50, had signed up for the five-day event.

The camp was designed to be a fun summer activity with a serious purpose: to improve speed skating skills and introduce young athletes to those from other areas of the world.

“We have some of the top ranked junior skaters here in their age group, all here to train together in this camp. I’m proud to bridge the gap in nationalities,” said Tony Liu, president of Garden State Speedskating, a 36-year-old club run out of Mennen Arena. Liu brought Chinese Olympic gold medalist Sun Linlin to instruct the course.

“We wanted Linlin to instruct, promote, and spread speed skating internationally and in the U.S. while providing a camp experience,” Liu said. “To travel this far is a lot of sacrifice, but that’s her passion to teach.”

This was Sun’s third camp in America, but her first in New Jersey.

“I love my sport and I want to help these kids,” Sun said.

Sun invited a guest coach, Meng Wang, a four-time Olympic gold medalist, the most decorated Chinese Winter Olympic athlete ever, and a world record holder.

“She is like the Michael Phelps of speed skating,” Liu said.

Monday through Thursday consisted of two four-hour sessions per day, and Friday morning was the final skating session of the camp. The sessions featured racing, exercises, drills, and fun and games, including skating through a tunnel made out of protective mats.

“I liked getting to skate with my friends,” said Katherine Liu, 11, of Basking Ridge. “And the games. I liked going through the tunnels of mats.”

Her 8-year-old brother, Justin, just liked skating as fast as he could.

Sun said she’s seen serious improvement since the camp began Monday, and even from Thursday evening to Friday morning.

Much of the camp was focused on the fundamentals.

“If you don’t have the foundation, there is no high level,” Sun said.

Sun brought six speed-skating children from China, varying in age from 6 to 14 years old, including two of the country’s top juvenile skaters.

“I want Chinese skaters to learn the culture, and everyone to learn from each other and make friends,” Sun said. “When I was little, I didn’t have the chance. That’s why I do this.”

Liu was extremely pleased with the positive response and the turnout of about 40 skaters from all ages and skill sets, some beginners and others internationally ranked.

Far from a beginner was Yoni Subin, 16, of Washington, D.C., who has Israeli citizenship and skates in world events for that country.

“I started seven years ago with simple ice rink lessons and realized I wanted to go fast,” Subin said. “I realized there must be a sport for that somewhere.”

Sun plans to continue to work with Garden State Speedskating, and hold a winter camp at Mennen Arena this year.

“Linlin can offer tremendous support to local speed skaters,” Liu said. “We want to emphasize international speed skating here in Morris County. This is our home rink and we want to support the kids here who want to learn.”

Sun said she can sense the kids need a coach here.

“I can feel they need me. That’s why I came, that’s why I’m staying,” Sun said. “I’ve got so much to say and so much to teach. This was just the beginning.”

Staff Writer Michael Izzo: 973-428-6636; mizzo@dailyrecord.com

Read or Share this story: http://on.app.com/1mqC0T1