When the California Labor Commission ruled that Uber drivers are employees and should therefore be entitled to benefits, it showed how out of touch our regulators are with the new economy.

The ruling is another reflection of outdated thinking about the employee-employer relationship. Digital platforms and apps are reinventing the intersection of supply and demand. This change may have skyrocketed with ride- and home-sharing, but we will soon use these systems for all types of services, from parents finding Little League batting coaches for their kids, to truckers picking up extra loads on their routes.

These new platforms are creating profound change. Over the last 40 years we've gone from a workforce where an employee had two or three employers over his or her lifetime to workers now switching careers regularly and even scaling by hiring their own employees along the way.

Back in the day of the single-employer model, it was efficient to run benefits (health care, insurance, unemployment) through the employer. But that model is rapidly aging and is in need of an update. As digital platforms become clearinghouses for supply and demand, we will flip from a world where an employer has many employees to a society where each employee has many employers.

Advertisement

Call it the personal enterprise economy or the platform economy, but as workers become full-time free agents, they will earn money from many different sources.

This new labor model complicates the issues the California Labor Commission is seeking to address. In the personal enterprise economy, we'll have to create new social structures to distribute the benefits and services that traditionally came from companies.

That means we'll have to rethink the health care model and increasingly offer citizens the opportunity to buy insurance through exchanges. The Affordable Care Act cracked the door on new constructs. Now we must kick it open in order to figure out how to decouple benefits from employers. It means building new models for workers to contribute to the unemployment and social security systems that serve as safeguards and supplement retirement income.

Our social structures and safety nets must adapt to these changes, and the sooner the better.

The good news is we've done this before. When our economy went from agrarian to industrial, we adjusted our laws and social structures. We created formal education to prepare workers to meet new job demands. Labor unions formed when the growth of corporations at the start of the 20th century threatened an imbalance between worker and employer.

The app economy creates a new opportunity to reimagine our structures to ensure that as the sharing economy redefines the marketplace, we adjust accordingly.

Every worker should have access to essential benefits. The challenge we'll need to face is finding the most effective way to safeguard their rights and provide benefits moving forward. I'd suggest that we don't yet know how we will conquer this challenge.

But the California Labor Commission's approach is certainly not the answer. It's the same tired approach that threatens to stifle innovation and the economy. That won't work long-term.

We need to remember that social structures are designed to work around our economic realities, not the other way around. When the Internet first emerged, a very frustrated bureaucrat complained that, "The Internet is threatening the tax system." That was backward thinking then, and it's backward thinking today to think that we should clamp down on a positive economic and societal phenomenon simply because it doesn't fit into the way we're used to doing things.

The economy is always changing, and we must, too.

Mike Montgomery is executive director of CALinnovates. He wrote this article for this newspaper.