Blakely

Area residents will have a chance to start 2016 by giving the gift of life at a blood drive honoring the memory of a young man who died in 2011.

The “Remembering Lou” blood drive, which will take place at the Mid-Valley Health Care Center on Monday, Jan. 4, from 2 to 7 p.m., will honor Lou Ruspi Jr., a native of Archbald, who died Dec. 23, 2011, at age 26.

Known for his humor and constant smile, Mr. Ruspi was a graduate of Valley View High School who was attending Keystone College. He was a member of both the Lone Pine Hunting Club and the St. George Family of the St. Ubaldo Society, and worked at Farina Landscaping and Bazil’s Restaurant in Clarks Summit.

Everyone who donates blood at the event will receive a T-shirt and be entered into a basket raffle.

For more information or to schedule an appointment, call Brenda Conlon at 570-202-0748.

— JEFF HORVATH

jhorvath@timesshamrock.com, @jhorvathTT on Twitter

Carbondale

Residents of the Carbondale Nursing Home and Rehabilitation Center got a special visit last week from some holiday carolers spreading Christmas cheer.

For the second year, the Mountain Sky music festival venue family showed up laden with gifts and baked goods and singing Christmas tunes.

Delia, Holly and Duncan Geyer, all siblings from the Blue Ridge School District, played traditional Christmas songs on violin, while Ella Casper, 9, and Amelia Gerken, 10, greeted residents and passed out treats.

“I think they were pleasantly surprised by the amount of gifts and treats we brought,” said one Mountain Sky organizer, Melanie Casper. “Christmas being the time of giving back, it just seemed very appropriate to take care of some folks and brighten their day a little bit.”

Many in the community had supported the Scott Twp.-based music venue earlier this year as Mountain Sky struggled to secure several municipal permits to continue operating. During a contentious process that spurred debate over the venue’s neighborliness, Mountain Sky operators promised to remain upstanding members of the community.

They were holding up their end of the deal Sunday, one nursing home worker said.

“The holidays are busy for everyone,” said Recreation Director Karissa Cawley, who added that leftover baked treats still abound for residents to enjoy. “For them to take the time out of their personal lives, it’s really special, and it just shows their sense of community and how they find it important.”

— JON O’CONNELL

joconnell@timesshamrock.com, @jon_oc on Twitter

Jessup

As the year draws to a close, the Jessup Hose Company No. 2 hopes to receive some last-minute donations to cap its 2015 fund drive.

Company members sent out about 1,800 donation requests in September but have only seen about 35 percent of those returned. Chief Steve Pitoniak said that is less than the 40 percent return rate they usually see.

“It costs about $9,000 to equip just one firefighter, and we have to pay for our own equipment,” Mr. Pitoniak said. “We use donations to replace old equipment and to get new items, which better enables us to do our jobs and protect the community.”

The newest vehicle in the company’s fleet is a rescue truck that cost roughly $527,000. The company receives only $10,000 annually from the borough — money that is used to cover fuel costs.

The drive officially ends Dec. 31, but the company will accept donations after that date.

— JEFF HORVATH

jhorvath@timesshamrock.com, @jhorvathTT on Twitter

Lackawanna County

A Lackawanna County buildings and grounds crew brought a truckload of donations to St. Francis Commons, a transitional living facility in Scranton for homeless veterans.

The items, donated last week, were the result of a food drive the county launched in late November. Although the public was invited to donate, most of the contributions came from county employees, said county spokesman Joseph D’Arienzo.

Food pantries have been struggling this year because the lingering budget impasse continues to hold up their state funding.

Commissioner Patrick O’Malley expected the food drive to become an annual initiative.

— KYLE WIND

kwind@timesshamrock.com, @kwindTT on Twitter

■

Lackawanna County commissioners recently extended the county’s contract with Scranton-based benefit consultant Kistler Tiffany Benefits for six months.

The existing three-year contract, with $50,000 in annual brokerage service fees, was previously to expire at the end of the year, said Brian Loughney, deputy director of human resources.

“This will carry us over in 2016 and keep us in compliance with the Affordable Care Act and other major health care implications,” Mr. Loughney said.

Commissioners did not sign a longer-term agreement because a new administration will be taking office in January.

At the same time, Commissioner Jim Wansacz said choosing the consultant was a long process and expressed some concern about the new administration having enough time to resolve what the county will do after the extension expires.

—KYLE WIND

kwind@timesshamrock.com, @kwindTT on Twitter

Old Forge

More than 20 families from the Old Forge School District had their holiday made a little brighter, thanks to donated food baskets.

Borough Councilman Chuck Karam, through his company Bulldog Fireworks, facilitated a drive to assemble 25 baskets of holiday food to donate to a list of families prepared by elementary Principal Nathan Barrett.

“They picked them up at school at dismissal, and it was really touching,” Mr. Karam said. “The people who came were very appreciative.”

The baskets contained groceries, a ham from an anonymous donor, desserts donated by Pennsylvania Ambulance and a $25 gift certificate to Rinaldi’s Cafe on Main Street in the borough.

“We ended up having a great, great turnout,” Mr. Karam said. “They were wonderful Christmas food baskets.”

— SARAH SCINTO

sscinto@timesshamrock.com, @sscintoTT on Twitter