If you’re running for the Senate on health care, you might want to actually write your own health care section on your own campaign website and in an op ed you publish. At the very least, you’d take down the plagiarized material after being busted for plagiarism two weeks ago.

So, your new health care plan would be original, since you are running on how much you know about health care. You certainly wouldn’t steal your health care plan from a primary opponent, whom you had criticized for being a JD not an MD. Someone you had accused of having “no credibility on this very important issue.”

You also would not steal some more from Karl Rove, even if tempted because he’s been on such a fail streak for the last few years and you love to ride the coattails of losers.

That is, unless you were a Republican pediatric neurosurgeon named Monica Wehby running on obstinacy and obstruction as the Republican Senate candidate in Oregon, in which case, plagiarism may be sort of a plus.

Andrew Kaczynski found the second round of plagiarism and wrote about it for BuzzFeed:

The Oregon Senate candidate’s first health care plan copied from a Karl Rove survey; her new plan includes copied sections from her primary opponent. She’s a doctor… The Oregon Republican Senate candidate plagiarized her health care plan, again. In a weird twist, Monica Wehby’s new health care is also plagiarized — but even stranger, it’s plagiarized from her primary opponent Oregon Rep. Jason Conger, whom she criticized repeatedly during the primary on health care.

Wehby goes on to prove that getting an MD doesn’t mean a person can understand policy any more than getting a JD means a person should be tossed into the operating room to do brain surgery on a 12 year old child — especially not after being brainwashed by science deniers. It is equally horrifying to see people who do not even follow or understand the law running to write the laws. (Plagiarism is the theft of intellectual property.)

There are actually things to know when legislating. Like, how to read a bill. How to comprehend a bill. How to put a bill or law in context. Hint: Know some facts, know some history, be unwilling to make up your own just because you love Karl Rove.

In an op-ed for Register Guard , BuzzFeed notes Wehby wrote (er, plagiarized):

It would start with two main goals: make real the guarantee that if you like your plan, you can keep your plan — in short, keep the promise that Merkley and Obama made and broke.

For the love of God, will someone explain to Republicans and the media that the reason the plans were no good anymore is because they were not good enough to meet the new standards under Obamacare? If you liked that old less than the current plan so much, it’s possible that you might have brain damage, in which case, Monica Wehby ‘s credentials say she is qualified to help you.

She just can’t help herself. But then, that was suggested earlier when Wehby was accused of stalking her ex boyfriend and entering his home without permission and harassing his employees. Her ex was contemplating getting a protection order against her, so plagiarizing is sort of a meh incident. Luckily for her, he’s big into Republican politics, so he’s keeping his mouth zipped.

Aren’t these the sort of qualifications we want in the Senate? Thanks, GOP. Luckily for the country, polls have her trailing her Democratic opponent, Jeff Merkley.

She is, however, yet another example of why the Republican Party can’t be trusted in positions of great importance like the Senate, let alone the White House. Wehby is but one in a continuing trend of conspiracy-oriented, reality-challenged candidates the GOP is attracting. This is what happens when you will take anyone who is willing to sell your lies. Eventually you end up with a party full of con artists and unstable true believers.

A double plagiarizing neurosurgeon running on health care that she steals from people she has criticized as being clueless about health care. You can’t make this stuff up.