Anthem's fourth-quarter earnings tumbled 64 percent as the health insurer absorbed some sizeable expenses and booked fewer customers than it expected through the Affordable Care Act's public insurance exchanges.

The Blue Cross Blue Shield insurer continued to expand its business from government programs like Medicaid and reaffirmed its forecast for the new year. But earnings fell short of Wall Street expectations, and its stock price fell almost 5 percent Wednesday.

Overall, fourth-quarter earnings totaled $180.9 million, down from $506.7 million in the previous year's quarter.

Adjusted results totaled $1.14 per share, while operating revenue, which excludes investment gains, rose more than 6 percent to around $20 billion.

Analysts expected, on average, earnings of $1.21 per share on $19.91 billion in revenue, according to a survey by the data firm FactSet.

The insurer said Wednesday that it booked in the fourth quarter $51.5 million in costs tied to its pending acquisition of rival insurer Cigna Corp.

Operating revenue from the insurer's government business, which also includes privately run Medicare plans, jumped 17 percent to more than $10.6 billion. Anthem made its name nationally as a provider of private Blue Cross Blue Shield coverage, but it pegs more of its future growth on government business.

The company expects to expand its government business even more once it completes its $48-billion acquisition of Cigna and adds that company's Medicare Advantage customers. That acquisition is undergoing regulatory review, and it has drawn concern from doctor groups and some members of Congress over how it may affect consumers.

Anthem said Wednesday it still expects the deal to close in the second half of this year.

An analyst asked Chairman and CEO Joseph Swedish about the federal regulators' sanctions against Cigna, which placed a moratorium on the company adding new Medicare Advantage and Medicare prescription benefit customers, because the company has not followed the rules on appeals, and because there are problems with how it shapes the formulary that determines payments for prescription drugs. The Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services said the agency had brought these problems to Cigna in past years, and they had not been corrected.

Swedish replied, "We are kind of considering it, as you would expect. …We will be vigilant and I'm certain that as time marches on, we'll learn more. But quite frankly at this stage, there's really nothing for us to say regarding what impact it may have regarding Cigna.

"And with respect to the transaction itself, we are clearly unwavering with respect to our commitment to the deal. This does not have an effect on the deal process and obviously as we learn more, we will certainly feather it into our considerations. But, at this stage, we just do not believe it has a material effect on our transaction."

Anthem stock closed at $131.23, down $6.53, or 4.7 percent.