(CBS News) WASHINGTON -- About 3.5 million Americans have been told their health insurance will be canceled because their plans don't meet the minimum requirements of Obamacare. We met up with those who stand to benefit from health care reform and those who would not.

CBS News

Karen Defnall did not vote for the President -- and was no fan of health care reform -- until she learned that Obamacare could be a very good deal for her.

"I perceived this as a blessing and if it comes into fruition, I'm very grateful for this," said Defnall.

Defnall, who runs a small day care in Virginia, is about to lose her current policy with Anthem Health.

Her monthly premium now, at $771, will go down under Obamacare to $221, thanks to a federal subsidy.

She also saves on out of pocket costs.

Defnall's current policy has limited coverage for preventive tests, pediatric care and the emergency room. But all of that is covered under the new law, and could reduce her out of pocket costs, around $1,500 this year -- to zero.

WH docs: Paper applications for Obamacare were problematic, too

Take HealthCare.gov offline until it is fixed, Feinstein and Rogers say

Obamacare website failed in tests just before launch date

CBS News

Her policy under the new law covers all of that, but adds a list of new essential benefits, including pediatric dental care and maternity care -- benefits Sager does not need.

But many others feel betrayed by health care reform, and they include Anita Sager. "I'm very upset. Very upset," said Sager.

Sager is also a business owner in Virginia and is losing a policy from Anthem Health. Her monthly premium now, $392, would rise 34 percent under Obamacare to $527 -- and she gets no federal subsidy, because her income is too high. Her current policy covers doctor visits, hospitalization and prescription drugs.

"It's not necessary for me, so why should I be forced to pay for a service I don't need? I don't think that's fair," said Sager.

The president is under fire now for breaking that longstanding promise that no one would lose the insurance that they like. But the president's supporters point out that before healthcare reform, people lost insurance all the time by getting sick and canceled. Under health reform, that's now illegal.