Photo

On paper, it looked like a well-planned mini-festival of Jewish composers over two nights at Carnegie Hall.

The pianist Evgeny Kissin, who feels strongly about his Russian Jewish heritage, presented “Jewish Music and Poetry” on Wednesday, offering commanding accounts of three sizable neglected works by Ernest Bloch, Alexander Veprik and Alexander Krein, along with his deep-voiced, vividly dramatic recitations of Yiddish poems by Yitzhak Leybush Peretz. Then, on Thursday, Leon Botstein conducted the American Symphony Orchestra in “Russia’s Jewish Composers,” a program of shorter works by Krein and Mikhail Gnesin, Anton Rubinstein’s Cello Concerto No. 2 and the American premiere of Maximilian Steinberg’s 40-minute Symphony No. 1.

That these programs took place on successive days, however, was just a “terrific coincidence,” as Mr. Botstein, the orchestra’s music director, explained during a preperformance talk on Thursday. In any event, these two evenings offered a rare look into a fascinating cultural tradition. The history of Jews in Russia in the several decades surrounding the 1917 revolution is an amalgam of “segregation, poverty, exclusion, persecution and extraordinary intellectual and cultural achievement,” as Mr. Botstein wrote in extensive program notes.

Mr. Kissin, continuing his Perspectives series at Carnegie Hall with his program, took the audience deep into the larger Jewish culture by giving extraordinary performances of three teeming pieces. Here was a classical-music superstar revealing profoundly personal connections to a rich heritage. I left the hall with newfound intellectual respect and personal regard for this dedicated artist.

He began with a stupendous account of Bloch’s 25-minute Piano Sonata (Op. 40), composed in 1935. Born in Switzerland, Bloch became American by choice and “bristled at the label of ‘Jewish composer,’” as the scholar James Loeffler writes in excellent program notes. Yet Bloch was strongly attached to the expressive musical language of Jewish Eastern Europe and drew upon Yiddish musical syntax, as he did in this sonata.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Soon into the somber opening of the first movement, a stern three-note motif prods through murky, restless piano textures. The music evokes, and somehow deftly blends, disparate influences: grim Expressionist harmony, plaintive klezmer melodic writing, even hints of jazzy dance. The searching qualities of the piece continue even during a tranquil middle movement, a pastoral; the finale is like a stormy march that scatters that main motif.

Then, using a microphone, Mr. Kissin recited from memory the poems by Peretz, a Polish Jew who lived from 1852 to 1915. He said, in a recent New York Times interview, that he learned Yiddish from his maternal grandmother, and grew to love the language and culture. For all his confidence as a virtuoso, Mr. Kissin has always had an awkward stage presence; he almost never speaks to audiences, not even to introduce the numerous encores he often plays. So it was startling to see him in a theatrical mode, speaking with earthy expressivity, relishing the Yiddish words and conveying the ambiguities of these poems, which, in his presentation, came across beautifully.

He recited 14 in all, in two groups, each engrossing. I especially like “Time,” where time is presented as a woman who goes her way, knows nothing of “close” or “far,” who hears not whether thousands rejoice or thousands need bread. The overall sentiment conveyed in the poem, and by Mr. Kissin, seemed to be resignation: What are you going to do about it?

In “My Muse,” the poet says that his muse is no dainty flower or butterfly, nor a nightingale singing a sweet tune, but an “old Jewish woman,” her face “an ugly ruin,” or an abandoned wife with orphans, to quote Mr. Loeffler’s translation. Mr. Kissin sounded like a wizened Jewish elder telling the sad truth.

He gave a brilliant account of the Piano Sonata No. 2 (1924) by Veprik, who was born in Ukraine in 1889 and died in California in 1958. A composer who helped found the Society for Jewish Folk Music in St. Petersburg in 1908, Veprik spent four years in the early 1950s in a gulag under Stalin. As this sonata made clear, his music combined Jewish musical idioms with avant-garde style in the manner of Bartok. The final piece was “Suite Dansée,” by Krein (1883-1951), who was born and remained in Russia. This inventive suite has Neo-Romantic touches and tuneful episodes, and recalls the texturally murky style of Scriabin, the composer’s mentor. Mr. Kissin played magnificently.

The American Symphony Orchestra program began with another intriguing work by Krein, “The Rose and the Cross,” subtitled “Symphonic Fragments After Aleksandr Blok,” the Russian symbolist poet. I also liked Gnesin’s “From Shelly,” another symphonic fragment, this one a curious blend of wayward lyricism, diffuse chromatic harmonic writing and evocations of Wagner. Rubinstein’s Second Cello Concerto, a 30-minute work from 1874, received a rousing ovation from the audience, especially for the elegant, accomplished soloist, Istvan Vardai. I found this unabashedly Romantic piece a little light, too eager to please. The cello, playing animated and often melodic lines, dominates, with not much competitive back-and-forth with the orchestra in the way of most concertos of that period.

In his talk, Mr. Botstein expressed enormous respect for the early Symphony No. 1 by Steinberg (1883-1946), a student of Rimsky-Korsakov at the same time as Stravinsky. He became Stravinsky’s rival and Rimsky-Korsakov’s son-in-law. The piece, completed in 1906, is impressively orchestrated, often inventive (especially the slow movement, which seems to unfold as a continuously flowing melodic line), and ends with a hurtling finale. I found the music, over all, somewhat conventional.

Mr. Kissin chose bolder, wilder pieces to play and gave inspired performances. To end the evening, he recited another Yiddish poem, one of his own, he told the audience. Titled “Ani Maymin” (“Credo”), it begins with the father of Abraham asking his son, “Why are you not like all the others?” In the final line, Abraham answers: “If I am like the others, who will be like me?”

Well said. We certainly need someone to be Evgeny Kissin.