Photo

BOULDER, COLO.

WHAT: A four-bedroom four-bath midcentury house

HOW MUCH: $1,295,000

SIZE: 2,894 square feet

PRICE PER SQUARE FOOT: $447.47

SETTING: This house is in Hillcrest, an neighborhood on a hill overlooking downtown Boulder. The curved streets, lined with brick ranches that have often been renovated by newer residents and young families. Downtown, about a mile downhill, is organized around the four-block-long pedestrian-only Pearl Street Mall. There’s also a small shopping center about a half-mile west with a Whole Foods supermarket.

INDOORS: The house was built in 1952 and extensively remodeled within the last year by Dale Hubbard of the Boulder firm Surround Architecture. Common space is anchored by a great room with vaulted, skylighted ceilings, light-colored floors, floor-to-ceiling windows and a white-brick fireplace. The kitchen is a corridorlike space with a Wolf-range, a Fisher & Paykel dishwasher and slab counters. Here, a garage-style door rolls open to an Ipe wood deck that runs along the back of the house, shaded by a hackberry tree.

Three bedrooms, including the master, are on the main level. The master bathroom has a glass shower and a double vanity. The fourth bedroom is in the finished basement, as is a room used as a home theater.

OUTDOOR SPACE: There’s a yard and raised garden beds

TAXES: $4,468 annually

CONTACT: Leyla Steele and Zach Zeldner, Re/Max Alliance on Walnut, (303) 859-3110 / (720) 480-7650; leylasteele.com

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

•

WASHINGTON

WHAT: A two-bedroom two-and-a-half bath condominium

HOW MUCH: $1,295,000

SIZE: 1,575 square feet

PRICE PER SQUARE FOOT: $822.22

SETTING: This condo is in a former parking garage in Georgetown, an upscale mixed-use neighborhood on the Potomac River known for its historic row houses, high-end stores and the occasional cobblestone street. At the end of the block, there’s a walking and biking path that winds along the river through lush Rock Creek Park. A subway stop is a few blocks away, in Dupont Circle. Downtown is a mile and a half away.

INDOORS: The three-story building dates to 1922 and was converted to condos in 2007. This unit consists of a great room with bedrooms at both ends. Floors are hardwood; ceilings are 12 feet tall; and the rooms all have large casement windows to keep the space bright. The living area of the great room has floor-to-ceiling built-in bookshelves and recessed lighting. The kitchen appliances are by Bosch. Bathrooms are done in limestone. The unit conveys with a storage area and a parking space in an underground garage.

OUTDOOR SPACE: A small patio

TAXES: $9,896 annually, plus $835 a month in condo fees

CONTACT: Michael Brennan Jr., TTR Sotheby’s International Realty, (202) 330-7808; michaelbrennanjr.com

•

ATLANTA

WHAT: A four-bedroom two-and-a-half-bath farmhouse

HOW MUCH: $1,300,000

SIZE: 3,200 square feet

PRICE PER SQUARE FOOT: $406.25

SETTING: This two-story 1910 farmhouse is in a wooded residential pocket of Buckhead, a mixed-use district in northern Atlanta. When the house was built, Buckhead was rural; it was subdivided in the 1950s during a postwar housing boom.

The Lenox Square mall, one of the largest in the southeast, is about a mile away. The 268-acre Chastain Park, a mile and a half from the house, has a golf course, tennis courts, a pool, ball fields, horseback-riding trails and an amphitheater where the city’s orchestra holds concerts during warmer months. Downtown Atlanta is less than 10 miles away.

INDOORS: The house retains nearly all of its original features, including hardwood floors, crown molding, wavy-glass windowpanes, hardware and three wood-burning brick fireplaces. (There’s even an old well out front.)

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Ceilings are more than 10 feet tall throughout. The kitchen, which has a white-porcelain farmhouse sink, dark cabinets, granite counters and stainless-steel appliances, was updated during renovations from 2005 to 2007. There is a sunroom off the dining room. A covered porch off the living room runs the length of the house. The four bedrooms are upstairs. Two, including the master, have fireplaces; the master also has an en-suite bathroom.

OUTDOOR SPACE: The lot is a little under an acre, with a terrace and a stone patio that includes a brick fireplace designed to look like a wall left over from a ruined outbuilding.

TAXES: $8,625 annually

CONTACT: Mary Ellen Jones, Harry Norman Realtors, (404) 316-0449; harrynorman.com