An interview of President Sheila Bair by News Editor Catalina Righter.

1. The Elm heard that Washington College is considering the possibility of outsourcing Health Services to the nearby University of Maryland Shore Medical Center. Can you give us more information about what this option would look like for the College.

In my inaugural remarks, I established access and affordability as twin goals that would drive the early years of my tenure as Washington College’s 28th president. With respect to affordability, I am committed to reviewing all options for reducing the costs of attendance at the College, without sacrificing the quality of our educational or co-curricular offerings. As an initial step, I announced last December that the College would freeze tuition at its current level for next year. Given recent increases of about three

percent per year, this will result in a savings of about $1300 per student next year. Over four years, this one-year freeze will save students almost $5500. Still, we need to do more, and I am open to exploring any and all options to reduce College expenditures that would result in savings that could be passed along to our students directly or used to support future decisions to not increase tuition and fees. Student health care is a large expense for the College, so we have a fiduciary obligation to determine whether the same services can be provided in a comparable manner at much lower cost to the College (and thus lower cost to our students).

In February, Ken Kozel, President and Chief Executive Officer of University of Maryland Shore Regional Health, requested a meeting with me regarding the future of health care delivery on Maryland’s Eastern Shore, including the implications for current and future services at the Chestertown Medical Center. I expressed concern regarding the public discourse that the direction was to reduce diagnostic services and procedures, as well as impatient care. This could have negative impact on students, faculty, and staff. During our discussion, Mr. Kozel asked if there were ways that the hospital could support the College, and I agreed that this was worthy of further conversation involving many more stakeholders at both the College and Shore Regional Health. This conversation has just begun, and we are going to carefully weigh all of our options before committing to a course.

2. What are the benefits of this option for the College that have caused you to consider it?

We are fortunate to have a medical center that adjoins our campus. The Chestertown Medical Center is mere steps from our current Health Services, so transportation would not be a hurdle for a partnership. The Affordable Care Act requires all citizens to maintain health insurance. Because of the scale of our operation, we are not able to bill insurance companies for the care that the College provides. If we were to partner with the hospital, this might permit the College to rebate the health fee that we presently charge all students. Health Services costs the College twice what is generated in revenue from the student health fee. If these dollars were no longer needed for College-sponsored medical care, they could be reprogrammed for other institutional priorities or used to defray a future increase in tuition. There could also be potential benefits for our current employees in health services, as the compensation provided by the hospital for their medical providers is greater than what has customarily been provided by the College. Finally, a partnership would also provide access to a larger workforce of health care providers and the potential for direct care beyond the College’s current hours of service (Mondays through Fridays, 8:30 a.m. – Noon and 1:00 p.m. – 4:00 p.m.).

There is also a potential benefit to the long-term financial viability of our local hospital in both the continuation and expansion of services and in-patient care if the College’s health care services are added to the Chester Hospital Center’s financial model.

3. Where in the planning and decision process is this considered change? Can you give us any rough timeline to when people will hear more information about this?

A follow-up letter was sent to Mr. Kozel in early March inviting further conversation. We are awaiting a response so that an initial meeting can be scheduled. Any decision on whether or not to partner with the Chestertown Medical Center will be driven by the quality, availability, and affordability of services provided to our students. We will also assure that any agreement would protect our current employees in health services.

4. What are the obstacles and considerations that you foresee against a plan for outsourcing?

This opportunity is relatively new and very preliminary, so we have not yet had an opportunity to fully consider all of the pros and cons of such a transition in clinical care. We would need to undertake a full evaluation in consultation with the College’s Health Service staff, as well as with other strategic partners on campus who have close and regular interaction with Health Services.

5. Will this option for the College be affected if the Shore Medical Center decides to reduce their services to only include outpatient care?

It is unlikely such a transition would have a major impact as the WC Health Service only provides outpatient care.