Health Insurance Claim Form (Photo: Getty Images )

Potential voters questioned in a survey said, by a 45-37 percent margin, that South Dakota should expand Medicaid in line with the original intent of the Affordable Care Act.

The poll of 800 registered voters across the state also showed 18 percent undecided. Mason-Dixon Polling & Research of Washington, D.C., conducted the phone survey Oct. 20-23. The poll was sponsored by Argus Leader Media and KELO-TV. Results have a 3.5 percent margin of error.

Medicaid is a government program that uses federal and state money to give health insurance to people too poor to acquire it otherwise. It's been a political lightning rod since 1965, and especially since Congress tried to force states to expand the program when it passed the Affordable Care Act in 2010.

The issue itself is not on the South Dakota ballot in the Nov. 4 election, but it divides the candidates for governor.

Poll: Expanding Medicaid in S.D. The Argus Leader and KELO-TV asked 800 people: Would you support or oppose expanding Medicaid coverage in South Dakota to include those not covered under the provisions of the recently enacted federal health care reform law? Overall

Democrats

Republicans

Independents

Jackie Haggin, 81, of Sioux Falls, said her elderly mother benefited from Medicaid when she lived in a rest home. She thinks younger, working-age adults should be able to benefit from the same program.

"What they call the working poor have a pretty tough time," Haggin said Friday. "If it was possible for us to help them, we should, to a point anyway."

"Expanding it would be a good idea," said Rachel DeMots, 38, of Vermillion, who is working on a Ph.D. in ecology at the University of South Dakota. DeMots and her husband have two children on Medicaid while they have coverage they bought on the federal insurance exchange. Current law creates an unintended gap that prevents people earning less than the federally defined poverty level from gaining subsidized coverage on the exchange. Expanding Medicaid would cover that gap. It also would help many young adults, including graduate students in transition, who do not yet have full-time jobs offering insurance, she said.

"Most states have done it. Why South Dakota is denying it, I don't really understand," DeMots said.

Larry Waite, 56, of Spearfish, thinks otherwise.

"We've got enough people on welfare getting free stuff," he said.

Sylvia Elerick, 70, of Dakota Dunes, also opposes an expansion.

"Our country is in a lot of trouble. Part of it is the freebie program," she said.

Elerick was a welfare reform worker for 20 years when she lived in Iowa.

"Most of my clients ... were poor because they chose to be that way," Elerick said. "It's like everything. The poor have their low-rent housing and food stamps. It's not a life I would want to lead. They're caught and the government has trapped them where they seem perfectly willing to stay, as opposed to taking their licks in the real world and working their way up the food chain."

The Affordable Care Act, as passed in 2010, required states to expand Medicaid as one part of national health reform. But the Supreme Court, while upholding most of the health law, ruled in 2012 that the Medicaid expansion must be optional rather than a requirement. So far, 22 states have made the expansion, five more are pursuing a variation of that and one state has a waiver approved by the government, according to statereforum.org. South Dakota is among the other 22 states that have not expanded Medicaid.

Republican Gov. Dennis Daugaard has opposed an expansion, saying he does not wish to create a new entitlement for able-bodied adults. The state currently offers coverage to children, disabled residents and pregnant women who need assistance, he said.

The Affordable Care Act was designed to put more people on Medicaid as a companion feature to the new system of tax credits for people who buy insurance on the federal exchange the law created. The tax credits are for people earning 100 percent to 400 percent of the federally defined poverty level. People earning less than 100 percent would not need the credits, because they would qualify for Medicaid and get their health insurance free of charge, as the law was written. When the Supreme Court axed that portion of the law, that left those under 100 percent with no assistance unless states expanded Medicaid.

The federal government also has indicated that states choosing to expand must offer Medicaid to people up to 137 percent of poverty. Daugaard twice has asked the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services to allow South Dakota a compromise position, to expand up to 100 percent, but not 137 percent. The offer was rejected both times, his office said. The issue could come up again in the 2015 Legislature, with a third such request to follow.

The federal offer is to cover almost all of the expansion costs in early years before states begin to share the tab. It could provide coverage for 48,000 South Dakota residents.

Susan Wismer, the Democratic candidate for governor, said the state is leaving a fortune on the table by dragging its feet on expansion. Wismer, a state legislator from Britton, argued in a debate in August that South Dakota hospitals are losing more than $250 million a year from federal money that would flow into the health care system if Medicaid were expanded here. Daugaard said in the same debate that expansion would be a new $95 million burden on the state budget from 2017 to 2020.

Another candidate for governor, independent Mike Myers, also thinks the state should accept the federal offer to expand Medicaid.

Question: Would you support or oppose expanding Medicaid coverage in South Dakota to include those not covered under the provisions of the recently enacted federal health care reform law?

Support ...

... Statewide 45%

... Men 42%

... Women 47%

... Democrats 73%

... Republicans 25%

... Independents 40%

Oppose ...

... Statewide 37%

... Men 44%

... Women 31%

... Democrats 10%

... Republicans 58%

... Independents 37%

Undecided ...

... Statewide 18%

... Men 14%

... Women 22%

... Democrats 17%

... Republicans 17%

... Independents 23%

Coming Tuesday

In the print editions, see poll results on the U.S. Senate race and EB-5. Online @argusleader.com and on KELO, see poll results from the U.S. House and governor's races.

Read or Share this story: http://argusne.ws/1tVF3b9