Topics: From the Wires, News, Politics News

During Marco Rubio’s first year in the Florida Legislature in 2000, the 29-year-old lawmaker filled out the required forms detailing his personal finances. On the line listing his net worth, Rubio wrote: “0.”

Since then, he has risen to lead the state House as speaker, won election to the U.S. Senate and earned at least $4.5 million at a series of six-figure jobs and by writing a best-selling memoir. Yet his net worth has improved only modestly.

Like many Americans in the days since the recession, Rubio and his family — he has four children — have struggled in the housing market.

Factor in some questionable moves with money and a hefty load of student loans, and it’s clear that the Republican presidential candidate’s real estate dealings often have been a drag on his finances despite an income most would relish.

“He’s like any normal American with four kids that has a mortgage,” said Bernie Navarro, a past president of the Miami-based Latin Builders Association, who has advised Rubio on his real estate transactions.

“He goes through what any normal family goes through, living with a salary, and he has to make adjustments.”

Rubio made two in the past few weeks:

—he sold a home in Tallahassee, Florida, that he owned with a former colleague. That freed Rubio from a monthly payment on an interest-only loan and the cost of upkeep. But he lost money on the deal.

—he consolidated the debt on his primary residence in West Miami, Florida. The original mortgage required only payments of interest on the principal in its first decade. Rubio has only paid off about 4 percent of overall principal since buying the house.

At end of last year, Rubio was worth no more than $355,000, according to an analysis of his personal financial disclosures records filed with the Senate. That does not include any equity he may have in his West Miami home or proceeds expected from his second book, published in December.

Rubio, 44, has spoken of being torn between a drive for public service and the need to support his family. At times, he has made decisions that put politics ahead of his personal comfort.

He and his wife, Jeanette, moved in with his mother-in-law to make ends meet at the start of his political career.

At other points, Rubio’s political connections have helped financially.

One of Rubio’s biggest political backers, Miami billionaire Norman Braman, hired Rubio as his attorney after Rubio left the Florida Legislature in 2008, and Braman funded a teaching position at Florida International University that Rubio still holds.

In his 2012 memoir, “An American Son,” Rubio writes about how early in his career as a lawmaker, he was initially unsure he could keep his full-time job as a lawyer while spending months at the state Capitol.