Topics: Bernie Sanders, Editor's Picks, Hillary Clinton, Jacobin, Nevada, New Hampshire, Super Tuesday, Elections News, Politics News

This article originally appeared on Jacobin . Its latest issue, Up from Liberalism , is out now.

I.

Bernie Sanders won four states: Oklahoma, Minnesota, Vermont, and Colorado. Hillary Clinton won seven states: Alabama, Arkansas, Georgia, Massachusetts, Tennessee, Texas, Virginia. That means, altogether, that Sanders has five states (those four plus New Hampshire), and Clinton has ten states (those seven plus Nevada, Iowa, and South Carolina).

But here’s the critical thing: the elections in Nevada, Iowa, and Massachusetts were either close or extraordinarily close. A little bit more time here, a little bit more organizing there, and they could easily have tipped his way. In other words, Sanders could very easily have seven states now to Clinton’s eight. He doesn’t, and coulda shoulda woulda is just that. But what this does mean, going forward, is that we have the opportunity to turn potential into actual. We’ve got time, we’ve got organizing, we’ve got money: let’s make use of it all.

Clinton’s strongest weapon is the aura of inevitability that she and her supporters and the media have concocted around her. Part of that is based on reality, part of it is based on superdelegates (which I refuse to concede), and part of it is based on spin. Don’t accommodate the superdelegates, don’t accommodate the spin.

II.

The exit polls in Massachusetts, which Clinton won narrowly, are fascinating. Here are some highlights:

Sanders got 41 percent of non-white voters (they don’t break down the category further). I want to come back to this. Sanders beat Clinton among voters making under $50,000, and voters making between $50,000 and $100,000. The only income group she won was voters making over $100,000. Among first-time voters, Sanders got a whopping 71 percent of the vote. Among independents, Sanders got 65 percent of the votes. Sanders won among very liberal voters and moderate voters. Clinton did better among married women than she did among unmarried women.

Also, related to the gender question, in Oklahoma, Sanders nearly tied Clinton among women voters (48 percent for Clinton, 46 percent for Sanders).

III.

I’ve seen lots of claims that Sanders is only winning because of white men; among every other demographic, he loses. That simply isn’t true.

In Vermont and New Hampshire, he beat Clinton among all women voters. In Oklahoma, as I said, he nearly tied Clinton among women voters. In Nevada, he nearly tied her among Latino voters (though the experts are still debating that one). In Massachusetts, as I said, he got 41 percent of non-white voters.

We don’t have any exit polls for Colorado and Minnesota (at least not on CNN’s website, which is the one I’ve been using), but given the size of his victories there, I would be surprised if Sanders didn’t win or tie with Clinton among non-white voters and perhaps women voters.