Topics: clickbait, Internet, Language, vocabulism, Life News, Entertainment News

“Vocabulism” is a Salon series about how the Internet is killing the English language, one word at a time.

The online world has recently engaged in a frank and intermittently illuminating conversation with itself over the meaning — if there is one — of the word “clickbait.” From Ben Smith’s somewhat credible argument that BuzzFeed doesn’t do clickbait (and that it wouldn’t work anyway) to Tim Marchmann’s denunciation of the concept itself to assorted thoughtful takes from all over, the debate doesn’t seem to be losing steam. But perhaps the only point that’s really been clarified thus far is that, as Digiday put it, “If you ask 10 people what clickbait means, chances are you’re going to get 10 different answers.”

The online intelligentsia do seem to agree that tease-iness has always been an integral part of the journalistic equation, but that headlines recklessly exploiting the “curiosity gap” — the oft-considerable distance between what an article promises and what it actually delivers — can be pretty damn annoying. The classic example of this phenomenon is the heavily mocked headline style that made Upworthy both popular and a punch line (think of feeling singularly un-amazed after clicking on a “What happened next will amaze you” teaser). But such brazen gimmickry could only bewitch readers for a short time before they wised up, and the expiration date on the “let’s trick our readers” strategy thankfully arrived a few months ago.

Thus clickbait — or whatever you want to call it — has now, in the manner of a hemorrhagic fever, evolved. It’s finished with its low-hanging-fruit phase, and has attached itself to a new form of curiosity-gap exploitation, one that’s more insidious, but no less irritating. The hallmark of this subtler iteration, as far as I can tell, is the phrase “The Real Reason.” To wit:

Jennifer Garner reveals the real reason why she wanted her and @BenAffleck's daughters to take karate http://t.co/T3DQh2Mhtl @CBBVips — People Magazine (@people) November 21, 2014

The real reason no one hugs on Downton Abbey http://t.co/i7pC68PUR8 — VANITY FAIR (@VanityFair) November 11, 2014

Kendall Jenner reveals the REAL reason she won't let her sisters come to the shows she walks: http://t.co/li2Bc6a4iX pic.twitter.com/o46HG5IGU3 — Harper's Bazaar (@harpersbazaarus) November 22, 2014

This headline construction may not read as bait-and-switch material at first blush, but make no mistake, it’s a classic of the genre; it merely takes a less obvious tack than its clumsier ancestors. Rather than presenting a heretofore-unknown tale of amazing unbelievableness (“The Message This Veteran Wrote on a Restaurant Receipt Will Make You Cry — And Think”), “The Real Reason” gaslights readers into believing that their experience of the news has been an inauthentic one. In other words, instead of employing the traditional strategy of luring the reader with what turns out to be a moldy carrot, these headlines convince readers that the carrot they’ve already eaten was moldy, and offers them a fresh new carrot, which turns out to be — oh, the humanity — covered in mold.

A cursory search reveals a wide variety of such infractions. There’s the pedestrian anecdote dressed up as a stunning revelation (“The Real Reason Steven Spielberg Never Directed a Bond Movie”). There’s the not-very-surprising epiphany disguised as a game-changer (“The Real Reason Pop Musicians Die Young”). There’s geopolitical obviousness dressed as counterintuitive wisdom (“What’s Really Behind Jerusalem’s Explosion Of Violence?”). And there’s the knowledge-dropping explanation that most people probably could have just guessed (“Here’s the Real Reason Beyoncé Doesn’t Tweet”). There are a million of these — many of them perfectly fine, even solid, articles that simply don’t need to make a claim that they’re advancing a revolutionary point of view.