Congressman Mike Doyle (D, PA-14) went on Morning Joe today and discussed the Affordable Care Act. Here are some snippets of his conversation:

Democratic Rep. Mike Doyle of Pennsylvania, who voted for the initial Obama health care bill, said Thursday that members of his caucus want an opportunity to go on the record in support of allowing people to keep the insurance they had. Doyle told MSNBC in an interview that at a White House meeting Wednesday, House Democrats told Obama about “the frustration level that many of us have” with the health care roll-out. Doyle said Democrats warned Obama that “if you don’t give us something by Friday” to fix the insurance cancellation problem, then many Democrats are likely to vote for the pending House bill sponsored by Republican Rep. Fred Upton of Michigan, which would accomplish that goal.

Doyle, being in a very safe D+15 district should know better. Politically, it does not look good that people are getting their health insurance plans cancelled — but the Affordable Care Act already allows these very plans that are getting cancelled to remain in effect until 2015, which means that it is the insurance companies, not Obamacare, that are canceling people’s health insurance.

Doing away with junk health plans is a feature, not a bug, of the Affordable Care Act. The sole reason why people “liked” a vast majority of these plans is because they were cheap and they never used them. If you pay $40/mo for health insurance, most people would like that plan — but if it only covers one ER visit every two months when there’s a full moon, you’re likely going to be knee-deep in debt when you need surgery your plan covers zero percent of and ends up being $10,000.

The Upton bill that Doyle spoke of above essentially changes the definition of what the Affordable Care Act already says is a “grandfathered plan.” It deems any plan in effect as of January 2013 as “grandfathered,” and therefore does not have to meet the new health law’s minimum standards. The legislation would also allow these plans which meet do not meet these minimum standards to enroll new members, which is not an fix, but a reversal of the current health law — and is a horrible, horrible idea.

Mr. Doyle, if you’re unsure what that legislation would likely mean for the majority of Americans, it’s higher premiums. Allowing these [already] grandfathered plans to enroll new people will allow all the young, healthy Americans to buy these junk plans and leave the insurance marketplaces with all the new sicker subscribers. And if you only have sicker subscribers on the marketplace, insurance costs will go up for the rest of your constituents.

To be clear, I’m all for fixes to the Affordable Care Act to make it better — as it is certainly not perfect — but I am extremely opposed to political legislation that would undermine the law. And I would have hoped that Representative Doyle would have thought about how this would affect his constituents first, before opting for the best political maneuver.

It’s also true that there are a percentage of Americans (~3%) who will potentially have their plans dropped and have to pay more:

I’m all in for administrative or legislative fixes for these folks who aren’t super wealthy. But these ‘fixes’ can’t be brought up solely for political reasons that would end up undermining the law in the process — and you’d hope that representatives in very safe districts would realize that.

And if you’re reading this at noon on Thursday, November 14th — check out http://www.whitehouse.gov/live for President Obama’s remarks on these problems. Hopefully his number one plan is to actually fix healthcare.gov.