By Daymond Steer

FRYEBURG – Fryeburg Academy's board president said the school's leadership was surprised and disappointed that eight of the nine former cleaning staff members, who were recently outsourced, did not take jobs with the private company that will be doing their work from now on.

Last month, the academy announced that nine academy cleaning/maintenance jobs would be outsourced to BSC Cleaning Services of South Portland, Maine. The former school workers say they were treated coldly by administration, but the administration says the move was necessary in light of a 17 percent student enrollment drop since 2008.

Chairman of the board, Christopher Gordon, an academy graduate from the class of 1981, answered questions about the outsourcing in an interview last week. He said the academy has been looking for ways to better position itself in the face of declining enrollments.

Gordon explained the school serves three markets: local students, day tuitioned students and the boarding students.

"If you look at the demographic trends in the region, not just the local area, the number of students is going down," said Gordon. "We look out through the 12 grades. If you look at the kindergartens in our sending towns we're going to have less students for the next 10 or 12 years from the local population — a lot less students."

Gordon said the enrollment drop since 2008 represents a multi-million-dollar decline in revenue.

"It's a significant drop," said Gordon adding this isn't the first time the local population of students has dipped. "The academy has been around since 1792 and we don't take that lightly. It's one of the oldest schools in the country. We're trying to make sure it's financially very sound, physically very sound and certainly academically (sound)."

The academy is going to be "fine," said Gordon adding a decrease in the local student population is a challenge that school officials will have to address. Attracting more boarding students can only do so much, he said.

The academy is unique in that it's a private school that serves seven towns that do not have a high school. Gordon explained that the academy has a liaison committee that meets with the MSAD 72 School Board, and the head of school also attends school board meetings. MSAD 72 sends its superintendent to academy meetings, said Gordon.

Gordon explained that the academy was looking for a cleaning company that used the latest equipment and offered extensive training to its employees.

"When we talked to some of the cleaning companies, they felt they could do the same work or better for less money, which frankly, in these economic times is a good thing," said Gordon. "The thing that happened, which I think was a big disappointment to the board, was we thought that the employees would all take jobs with the new company because they were offered the same job in the company. We didn't expect that most of them would decline. I think the board was disappointed and surprised they didn't take the new jobs."

Workers cited a lack of benefits as a reason why they didn't continue with BSC.

Gordon said BSC uses the Affordable Care Act exchanges to provide insurance.

"Our understanding was the premiums the employees would pay were very similar if not less than what they were paying under the academy program," said Gordon. "It was a different scenario but it shouldn't have cost them more money."

One of the workers said married people with dual incomes would take a big hit by going to the exchanges.

When asked about how the employees were treated, Gordon said the academy's employees are important to the board and administration. Gordon reiterated that they were "very surprised" eight of nine staffers didn't take the jobs.

The workers wondered if the private company would do as good a job as they did.

BSC Cleaning Services will be obligated to work to a certain level and their performance will be monitored, said Gordon.

On Friday, The Conway Daily Sun received an anonymous letter signed "The Friends of Fryeburg Academy." It included a list of eight names of former employees who they say have left, been fired, forced to resigned, forced to resign due to "impossible working conditions."

Gordon said he knew those names but declined to comment on personnel issues. He said some of those people left on their own free will. He also noted that the academy is a large organization — implying some turnover is to be expected.

One of the things that irritated the former cleaning staff members was that shortly before the outsourcing was announced, head of school Erin Mayo changed her Facebook profile to an image of Lady Tremaine (the stepmother from Cinderella) petting her cat, Lucifer.

Mayo said she changed her profile as a result of an inside joke that had to do with her cat, Grace. She said it was unrelated to the cleaning staff.

"I know Erin well and there's no way that was intentional," said Gordon. "I certainly think that it was sort of a very unfortunate coincidence but it had absolutely nothing to do with this issue at all. Erin has been more concerned about these employees than anybody else. So, I think the idea that she would somehow do something on her Facebook page related to it doesn't make a bit of sense."

Meanwhile, a Facebook page has popped up to support the former cleaners. It's called "Friends of FA Cleaning Crew." As of Monday afternoon, the page had 253 likes.

"This is a place to show your support of the FA cleaning crew," stated the page. "Please share a positive note of support, fond memories or picture."

At a recent interview, former staffers said they think the academy is spending at least part of the money it is saving through outsourcing on acquiring a house at 686 Main Street.

On Aug. 25, Mayo contacted the town's code officer to withdraw a plan to use the building for "professional use" and said she would submit one for an educational use.

Gordon said the academy is in the process of entering into a lease for the building and the farmland behind it for the purpose of creating an outdoor education center. The center would tie in items on the regular curriculum, like biology, chemistry and earth science, to the physical environment. Academy representatives are doing a lot of research into this subject and have been meeting with groups like the Appalachian Mountain Club and Harvard, said Gordon, adding the lease will allow the academy to try out this plan.

The house and surrounding land would allow students to have their science lessons in the field rather than just a classroom. The nearby house would offer convenient classroom space. The house is also something of an aesthetic landmark.

Gordon said the academy used to have a farm.

The project would also help the academy offer "a semester away" program and new summer programs.

"The obvious comparison is how can you be buying or leasing big buildings at the same time you're trying to cut cost on cleaning," said Gordon. "I know that our goal for that facility is to be revenue positive not revenue negative."

Gordon said he understands why people would be concerned about the building program in light of the staff cuts.

The new building and land wouldn't just be about farming, said Gordon, adding environmental science is a popular field among college students.

"I will tell you that I teach a lot of graduate courses and I have a lot of students who don't want to go to Wall Street anymore," said Gordon. "There is a lot of interest in the outdoor environment."

The academy is a great place to have an outdoor program because of the nearby White Mountains and the Saco River, said Gordon. Environmental sciences can involve lessons on how to run a sustainable business, how to protect the environment and how to clean up the environment, he said.

"If we can educate a generation that really understands the natural environment, that can't be a bad thing," said Gordon.

The new outdoor education center has to go through the planning board process but it could be up and running in a few months, said Gordon adding some of the courses already exist. Some new programing could take three years to get going. This new center could create new jobs in the future, said Gordon.

The former workers also pointed out that Mayo's husband was hired to replace an English teacher.

Mayo addressed the issue with her husband.

"A full-time English teacher, Franz Ritt, who was slated to return this fall, notified us in July that he had accepted a position at a school in Connecticut," said Mayo. "We have distributed his five class sections across two part-time people — a teaching intern (three classes) and my husband (two classes), who himself has more than 25 years of experience teaching English at the high school and college levels."

Gordon reiterated that Mayo's husband is "filling in" for a teacher who decided to leave.

"When we hired Erin we knew that her husband was a teacher and we certainly inquired if he wanted to be part of the facility if a position opened up," said Gordon, adding Mayo was initially resistant to the idea.

When asked if this was a perfect storm, politically, between the outsourcing, the new building and Mayo's husband, Gordon replied that the Facebook timing was unfortunate and Mayo's husband is an excellent and experienced teacher. Gordon repeated that the board had hoped the employees would go to BSC Cleaning Services. Gordon said the board takes its fiduciary and educational duties seriously.

"We certainly don't feel good that these people chose not to stay at the academy," said Gordon. "When you're a 200-year-old school, you can't just sit back and do things the way the administration and the board have done them."