HIAWATHA – U.S. Speaker of the House John Boehner visited Iowa the past two days, hoping to provide a boost to three Republican congressional candidates. Monday afternoon, Boehner, retiring Third District Congressman Tom Latham and candidate Rod Blum held a rally at the Cedar Rapids GOP Victory office. Iowa Speaker of the House Kraig Paulsen was also on hand.

“It’s real simple. If you want higher taxes and you want bigger government, vote for the Democrats. If you like Obamacare, go out there and vote for the Democrats. But if you want a smaller, less costly, more accountable federal government, vote for Joni Ernst and vote for Rod Blum,” Boehner told a crowd of 100 activists packed into the Victory office.

There is a strong sense among Iowa Republicans that Blum could pull off a big upset in the First District race. Those hopes were bolstered by a new Loras College poll that shows Blum leading Democrat Pat Murphy by a narrow margin, 43.6%-42.1%.

“13 weeks ago, the first poll was taken. We were down 11 ½ points. A poll was released today my friends and for the fourth straight week, we are ahead in this race,” Blum said to big cheers from the audience.

“A point and a half ahead. It’s all going to come down to turnout. We can’t take anything for granted in this race or Joni Ernst’s race, correct? We’re in the red zone, we’ve got to push this ball across the end zone,” Blum added.

Due to Blum’s strength as a candidate, the National Republican Campaign Committee recently purchased $400,000 worth of TV advertising time in the Cedar Rapids market to assist the Republican hopeful.

Pat Murphy, a former Iowa Speaker of the House, emerged from a crowded primary to become the Democrats’ nominee for the congressional seat. The Democrat-leaning First District is currently represented by U.S. Senate hopeful Bruce Braley. It is a seat the Dems were confident they would easily hold. Now, they see it possibly slipping away.

“I’m a big believer in Rod’s chances here,” Boehner said. “He’s worked hard over the last couple of years to put himself in this spot. There are seven days left. All we’ve got to do is keeping working the way we have over the last six months for the last seven days and guess what, we’re going to have a brand new congressman from this district right here.”

Congressman Tom Latham, who is close friends with Boehner, is travelling around the state with his colleague to assist the Iowa GOP ticket. Latham is stepping down from his Third District seat after 10 terms in Congress. He speaks very highly about Rod Blum’s potential in the U.S. House.

“This is such an exciting time for all of us that we have this great opportunity to bring a person with great temperament, somehow who is going to be a real honorable person in Congress, and that is what this gentleman has,” Latham said as the crowd applauded.

“I was telling Speaker Boehner coming in here that he would be an ideal congressman because he gets it, he understands the threats that we have around the world, he understands our economy here, he understands what it really takes to work to get the job done, and to listen you folks,” Latham added.

Speaker Boehner also campaigned with Second Congressional District hopeful Mariannette Miller-Meeks later Monday and Third District candidate David Young on Sunday.

Photo courtesy of Emma Aquino-Nemecek