Buy Photo Former Riverwood mayor Lawrence Boram shows the Riverwood Park and Playground area owned by MSD along Charbdin Place, where the agency plans a sanitary sewer overflow basin. (Photo: Martha Elson/The Courier-Journal)Buy Photo Story Highlights The Riverwood overflow basin is among projects mandated under a federal decree to protect waterways

The basin project is deemed less intrusive than replacing pipes along 26 properties and other areas

The Riverwood Park and Playground is at an MSD-owned site that used to be a sewage treatment plant

Riverwood resident Drew Davis recalls what a relief it was when the Metropolitan Sewer District eliminated a small, sewage treatment plant in a low-lying area of the city about 15 or 20 years ago and restored the property to a grassy area with trees that's now used as a park and playground.

Davis, who lives on Charbdin Place across from the park site in the small city off Blankenbaker Lane near Indian Hills, said the reaction was "Hallelujah!"

"It was an eyesore and it stunk," he said of the treatment plant.

To the dismay of Davis and some other residents near the site, MSD — which still owns the property and has been leasing it for $1 a year to the city — is back and moving forward with a plan to put a new, underground storage basin there, along with a pump station, backup generator, driveways and fencing.

The purpose of the $7.5 to $8.5 million Muddy Fork Interceptor SSO (Sanitary Sewer Overflow) Storage Basin project is to keep raw sewage out of the Muddy Fork of Beargrass Creek — which runs along the back of the property.

Sewage can enter the creek when the sanitary sewer system becomes overloaded with excess water and overflows. That can happen when storm water leaks into cracked pipes, household water enters the system from sump pumps connected to the sanitary system and for other reasons.

MSD officials voluntarily have met several times and communicated with city leaders and other residents since January to discuss the plans, and the project is now out for bid, Steve Emly, MSD's chief engineer, said. The plans also were reviewed by Louisville Metro planners through the Community Facilities Review process, he said.

The plan was changed in 2012 from a pipe replacement project, which would have involved excavation work on several thousand feet of underground pipe along 26 properties, plus right of way areas, he said.

Emly said the installation of the storage basin will be less disruptive and invasive, because it will involve only one property, which MSD owns, compared with disturbance on six acres if the sewage pipes were replaced. Once the area is restored, part of it can still be used as a park, he said.

The Riverwood is one of several underground storage basin projects planned at different sites in the city — including off Brownsboro Road in Clifton Heights and at Lexington Road and Grinstead Drive/Interstate 64. The aim is to pipe overflow water to the basins — also from combined sanitary and storm water systems — so that it can be held temporarily and allowed to drain gradually back into the regular system.

Those projects are among 64 costing nearly $850 million that are mandated under under a consent decree with the federal Environmental Protection Agency. The agreement requires MSD to make dramatic improvements by 2024 to its leaky system to keep sewage out of local waterways.

But former Riverwood mayor Lawrence Boram, who has lived since 1974 at the top of a hill on Charbdin Place, sent a letter this month to residents saying the park area would be "severely compromised" by the basin project and advocating a return to the pipe replacement concept — which he said would be a "more permanent plan."

John Brown, another nearby resident, contends that "a certain percentage" of the pipes "have massive leaks, and those are the ones that should be repaired," he said. Otherwise, "they shouldn't be spending all this money, when they could just fix the pipes."

Boram and the other residents near the site say the project is not of as much concern to others in the city because they don't live near it. In a preliminary chart shown at a July 14 public meeting, the pipe replacement project was estimated to cost about $8 million compared to about $7 million for the basin project.

Boram would like to see the locations of the basin and building at the park site switched, so that the building is farther from the road.

But Emly said he has corresponded with Riverwood officials after a meeting with the city's architectural review committee about the subject and presented reasons why the configuration could not be changed, including hydraulic inefficiency.

Boram agrees that improvements need to be made to the sewer system, relating how the force of water in the system has blown manhole covers off in the street, before they were bolted down.

But he calls the basin project an "easy out" and said it "may or may not work."

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1B5rzZw