Remarks by Matthew Shay

Monday, January 18, 2016

Retail’s BIG Show

(As Prepared for Delivery)

Good morning!

Welcome to Day Two of Retail’s BIG Show! We’re happy to have you all here this week for another great program.

We kicked things off yesterday by opening the expo floor to give our attendees three full days to interact with 580 exhibitors here this week.

We’ve got 300 speakers and 150 educational sessions that will pique your interest. There are 80 countries from around the world represented here.

We have retail visionaries and business leaders like Steve Joyce, Mike Ullman, Alex Gourlay, Terry Lundgren, Ken Chennault, Kevin Plank and many, many more. You won’t want to miss a minute of their sessions.

And in just a few minutes, General Colin Powell will join us to share his thoughts about leadership in an uncertain world, and the lessons learned from a lifetime of serving our country. Our own NRF Chairman, Kip Tindell, will join General Powell for a conversation that I know we are all looking forward to hearing.

And to help everyone stay fueled up and centered, we’ve added some food trucks and free yoga sessions. You might even find some warm chocolate chip cookies and Hershey kisses sprinkled around the building — so be alert!

Last night we held our second annual Foundation Gala to benefit the NRF Foundation. If you couldn’t join us, you missed an inspiring evening and star-studded event — think of it as the Golden Globes of Retail, but with Mindy Grossman instead of Ricky Gervais.

I’m proud to report we raised more than $1.6 million — in one night! Congratulations!

Thanks to all of you who joined us last night to celebrate the all-stars in our industry, and help pave the way for the next generation of retail rock stars.

This is my fifth time at the BIG Show, and it’s far and away my favorite event of the year. The energy, enthusiasm and passion for retail all comes together at the BIG show, and it makes each January something special.

It’s a great way to kick off the New Year — by celebrating retail’s successes … discussing our challenges … and working together to seize the tremendous opportunities that lie ahead.

And the timing for this meeting makes sense. The month of January is named after the ancient Roman god Janus. Janus was the inspiration for January because he was the god of doorways and transitions … of beginnings and endings. His image was represented with two faces — one looking backward to the past and one looking forward into the future.

That idea captures our goal at the BIG Show. Many of us are still reflecting on 2015 — what we accomplished, what we learned. But we’re also focused on the year ahead — what will 2016 bring for the industry? What will it mean for my business? And how can I make the most of it?

Most of us would agree that looking back is critical for a clear-eyed appraisal of the future. Winston Churchill said, “The farther backward you can look, the further forward you can see.”

So as I was getting ready for this week, I looked back at what’s changed since my first BG Show. For five years now, we’ve been taking that long walk together through that great corridor here into the North Hall … . And filling the entire Javits convention center with 35,000 retailers and exhibitors.

Each year, we’re bringing together a more diverse and representative group of retailers — discount and department stores, home goods and specialty stores, Main Street merchants, grocers, wholesalers, chain restaurants and Internet retailers — to explore the future and drive innovation.

And we’re devoting incredible human and financial resources to advance the industry ... resources that this year for the first time will climb to more than $60 million to create advocacy, communications and education programs that will keep the retail industry competitive.

Did you know that in the past five years, the BIG Show and Shop.org — and more than 100 other NRF events — brought together more than a quarter of a million people?

Or that the NRF Foundation has awarded more than 800 scholarships — worth more than $4.3 million — to support the next generation of retail stars?

That we published more than 60 research reports documenting the indispensable role of retailers to the economy, job creation and innovation?

Or helped place 150,000 news articles mentioning NRF in publications here at home and around the world?

That we conducted more than 5,000 meetings with members of Congress on critical issues like sales tax fairness, data security and labor regulations?

Had 60 million visits to NRF.com — 60 million! — 25,000 social media posts and more than 1 million views of our YouTube videos?

Or that we’ve literally taken the retail show on the road, with our “Retail Across America” campaign here at home, and on international trips around the world … creating new partnerships, strengthening relationships and promoting retail?

That’s where we’ve been the past few years. From the beginning, it was our goal to create a more robust and active and influential NRF. But as a smart man once said, “A goal without a plan is just a wish.”

That’s why right here, five years ago, NRF’s Board of Directors adopted a strategic plan to change the trajectory of the NRF, and of the image of the retail industry itself. And five years later, it’s clear that the plan we adopted is paying big dividends.

The plan radically transformed every aspect of NRF, from the organization's mission to our branding and everything in between. It took us back to our roots, as retail advocates and the voice of the retail industry.

We made substantial investments in programs to advance NRF’s advocacy, communications and education efforts and tell the true story of retail.

Putting advocacy first meant building a more muscular government relations operation to lead our policy efforts. It meant creating a robust, best-in-class communications department to tell our story and promote the retail industry. And building a new research department to analyze policy issues and validate the critical role of retail in our economy.

It meant reimagining the Foundation, which with last night’s successful Gala has raised nearly $3 million (in just one year!) to promote retail careers. It meant launching the Retail Job Board, which last year posted 95,000 positions and had more than 3.2 million visitors!

And, most visibly to all of us here this week, it meant we needed to transform this show. We’ve invested in attendee experiences, added a third day of exhibits and gained exclusive control of the entire convention center … like the rest of NRF, it would be unrecognizable to an attendee from just a few years ago!

All of this progress shows that we’ve got a plan, it’s paying dividends and we’re on the right track … but as Will Rogers said, “You can be on the right track and still get run over if you’re just sitting there.”

So we’re not just sitting here … we’re putting these new programs and resources to good use to achieve our policy priorities.

For example, last summer NRF played a significant role in winning approval to pursue a trade deal that will open new markets around the globe for the retail industry. We fought tooth and nail to protect thousands of retailers from harmful provisions in the Affordable Care Act. And we won.

We helped get the latest transportation bill over the finish line. And just before Christmas, we won the extension of dozens of tax laws that are critical for retailers. One of the biggest achievements was winning a permanent extension of depreciation provisions ... which will make it easier, and more affordable, for retailers to remodel and invest in their stores.

We’ve invested in robust new digital campaigns to help tell our story, and help us spread retail’s message to more people than ever before.

It’s been an exciting and productive few years. We accomplished a lot. And we learned a lot — lessons that will drive continued improvements in NRF programs and increase our impact.

We’ve learned about the importance of storytelling through the success of “This is Retail” and “Retail Across America.” And we plan to build on that success to provide an even more vivid picture of retail’s vital contributions to our economy.

We’ve learned that recruiting, engaging and retaining the next generation of retail leaders is critical. And through the NRF Foundation, we’re increasing efforts to make sure that the best and the brightest of the next generation understand the value and the rewards of a retail career.

We’ve learned that the policy challenges we face won’t be getting any easier ... regardless of who sits in the White House, or controls Congress.

So we’ll continue expanding our influence in Washington and pushing to advance retail’s top priorities, issues like sales tax fairness, tax reform and patent litigation reform ... and all the others that impact retailers’ ability to compete and do business.

We’ve come a long way in a few years — our advocacy footprint in Washington matches our economic footprint across our country — and we’re fighting above our weight class on policy issues. But in spite of all we’ve accomplished, I’m confident that our greatest victories lie ahead.

At NRF, as we think about the year ahead, our mission is clear: to be the voice of retail on Capitol Hill and wherever the issues take us … to fight for retailers on the most critical economic and political issues of our time … and to tell the story of this great industry so all of you can focus on serving customers, creating jobs and driving our economy.

And though the retail industry itself is in a constant state of change, NRF’s mission to promote and advance the retail industry has never been more clear — and our ability to deliver on that commitment has never been more certain.

With your support, we’re telling retail’s story more powerfully than ever. We’re advocating on retail’s behalf more effectively than ever. And we’re promoting retail’s future more successfully than ever.

We still have a full two and a half days of BIG Show remaining. I hope you’ll enjoy every minute — whether it’s on the expo floor, listening to a keynote speaker or at one of our social events. And I hope that after this experience, the Big Show will become your favorite event of the year, too.

On behalf of the entire NRF team, thank you for the privilege of representing this great industry. We are proud and excited to do what we do for you every day.

Thank you for being part of the BIG Show — and for your support of NRF not just here in New York, but the whole year ‘round.

Enjoy the rest of the show and have a great week.