Today's Orlando Sentinel Letters to the Editor for March 5, 2016.

Combining positions could create conflict

Justin Dearborn has made his first big mistake as the new CEO of Tribune Publishing, the parent of Orlando Sentinel Media Group, by combining the publisher and editor roles as announced Thursday ("Sentinel editor now publisher, too").

I have the utmost respect for the leadership provided by the former publisher, Nancy Meyer, and the experienced new publisher and editor, Avido Khahaifa.

Dearborn fails to see the inherent conflict of interest he is creating by combining these two very different roles. The next time a scandal develops involving one of the newspaper's largest advertisers, Khahaifa will be forced into the untenable no-win position of having to decide between aggressively pursuing the story or not risking the loss of a big revenue-generating customer. In the article, he said he knew where the "fault lines" run between the revenue and newsroom sides of the organization."

Justin Dearborn, CEO of Tribune Publishing Tribune Publishing Justin C. Dearborn, announced as new CEO of Tribune Publishing Co. on Tuesday, Feb. 23, 2016. Justin C. Dearborn, announced as new CEO of Tribune Publishing Co. on Tuesday, Feb. 23, 2016. (Tribune Publishing) (Tribune Publishing)

Having made this change at seven other Tribune newspapers, Dearborn said these managers have the trust of their readers and maintain the highest standards of integrity. With no disrespect whatsoever intended to Khahaifa, just ask anyone on the street if they trust any newspaper to be unbiased and objective. Combining these two roles only serves to increase readers' skepticism of the media.

To help the community understand it, reporter Mary Shanklin should delve into what's going on at this very influential Orlando company with the same vigor as Kate Santich did on the termination of Carol Wick as the CEO of Harbor House.

George W. Koehn Orlando Sentinel Editorial Advisory Board member from Winter Park

Set aside politics

As the legislative session winds down, I keep a close eye on not only what bills pass, but why they are held up by legislative action or, in the end, a governor's veto.

The Orlando Sentinel gave us an example of this Thursday, reporting that UCF Downtown passed but still faces a budget issue and a governor's veto ("UCF wins approval for downtown plan"). This happened last year because Senate President Andy Gardiner and Gov. Rick Scott disagreed.

In my little corner of the world, the training and job development we want to do for the developmentally disabled passed all the hurdles the Sentinel talks about. For example, our job program called Giving Real Opportunities for Work is in the Senate and House budgets for $316,060, and our communities have raised $105,000 in local match. But due to the tenuous relationship between the governor and legislators, it faces a session-ending possible veto, which would inhibit jobs for our disabled and stifle their independence.

Does this make any sense in the face of real people issues rather than politics as usual?

Jim Berko volunteer board of directors, Seminole Work Opportunity Program

Obamacare sacrifice

Conceptually, I like Obamacare, but as someone whose family fits in the upper-middle-class profile, the reality of it disappoints. My husband and I have incurred a ridiculous increase in premiums and co-pays, as well as deductibles, since the Affordable Care Act was passed; plus we are now subject to a 3 percent additional tax for Medicare. This is after paying more than $150,000 in taxes.

Nothing in life is free. Somebody will pay. Consider it in the concept of salvation. Grace is free for us, but Jesus paid with his life. I'm all for helping those in need, but I'll be darned if I will pay by sacrificing my family's well-being and future retirement for free stuff for others, and that is exactly what the Democratic candidates for president expect.

Diana Douglas Clermont