By Jon Blau, Herald-Times, Bloomington, Ind. McClatchy-Tribune Information Services

June 07 --The sidewalks on South Park Avenue are seemingly evaporating, the top layer of concrete flaking into puddles of dark gray sand.

For the residents of Elm Heights , the crunch of pellets under their feet seems to be one defect too soon. This stretch of sidewalk was installed by city crews in 2011, long after walkways that have grown weeds where curbs used to be. These otherwise fresh slabs are "scaling," what it's called when concrete surfaces break apart, exposing a bumpy underbelly of stones suspended in the mix.

The scaling isn't contained to one neighborhood, either. Nor is it limited to public projects. Layers of concrete are peeling off the sidewalks and handicap ramps at a private development on the corner of Hillside Drive and Henderson Street . That concrete was poured last summer.

As concrete scales, it grates on the people involved. The residents along the path of South Park Avenue don't want to fund another sidewalk. Max Lauchli , owner of Dwellings LLC , the developer of the Hillside-Henderson project, has no choice but to sink thousands of dollars into grinding down his sidewalk and topping it off. Rodney Clark , the local mason who finished Lauchli's concrete the first time, knows of at least a handful of other job sites in Bloomington where his handiwork is crumbling.

"It's a mess," Clark said, swiping his work boots over a lake of concrete pellets off a driveway on Jennifer Drive . In his 30 years, he's never experienced a spate of scaling like this. "It has to be the concrete."

That's a conclusion many people have reached, including officials with the city of Bloomington .

Terre Haute -based Central Indiana Ready Mix provided the batches used by city crews to install the sidewalks on South Park Avenue . Central Indiana Ready Mix was also Clark's supplier, and over the past few months, he's been receiving complaints from clients, whose year-old sidewalks and driveways are flaking.

Getting money back could be tricky, however. City attorney Mike Rouker contacted the business this week about potential reimbursement for the scaling sidewalks, but the company did not have insurance to cover defective concrete. He will meet with representatives from the company at some point, but the city will have to prove the concrete is defective.

Clark refused to pay the company for its batches of concrete and found himself in court in Vigo County -- and lost.

John Newlin managed Central Indiana's Hendricksville plant before it was sold to Sagamore Concrete in Fishers . He's now retired, but he suggested at least a couple of theories about why the concrete is scaling, other than the mix.

People are not supposed to put salt on a sidewalk that is less than a year old, but they do, and this past winter was especially harsh. Masons all too often finish newly poured concrete by spraying water on it, even though it can dilute the surface, which often isn't sealed.

"If the concrete was bad, the whole batch would be bad, and the entire sidewalk would be falling apart," said Newlin, who served on the Monroe County Plan Commission for several years and ran for county commissioner in 2012. "The entire sidewalk would be crumbling, from top to bottom. What they have is a surface problem."

He makes one simple observation.

"I tell all of them, if you think the concrete is bad, take Central Indiana Ready Mix to court," Newlin said. "You'll spend a lot of money, and you'll probably lose."

Still in business

Last week, city officials believed Central Indiana Ready Mix was out of business, because the number listed on the company's website diverted calls to Sagamore Concrete in Fishers . Lauchli was under the same impression, saying he doubted there would be any way to "squeeze" a refund out of the concrete supplier.

What he finds himself left with are brand new buildings but handicap-accessible ramps that are chipping beyond their years.

"For us, it's an embarrassment," Lauchli said. "We put a tremendous amount of work into creating a beautiful development, not just for ourselves, but for the entire community, because that corner had been such an eyesore. We are going to fix this, one way or another."

But Central Indiana Ready Mix is, in fact, in business. This week, The Herald-Times was able to reach one of the company's representatives, Michelle Naimola-Hunter , via an email address provided in the state's list of certified woman-owned businesses. She said the company was still in operation and had relocated to Terre Haute . Since then, Rouker, from the city's risk management office, has scheduled a meeting with Central Indiana Ready Mix representatives and will present them with a list of locations where officials believe the concrete is defective.

First, he will have to drive from site to site, inspecting the concrete for damage with other city employees.

It will take at least a full day to do it.

Since 2010, the city spent $119,000 on Central Indiana Ready Mix concrete, including more than $33,000 in 2011 for sidewalk installations along Park Avenue , between First Street and Atwater Avenue , and on Seventh and Eighth streets. Among its nearly 270 transactions with the city, the concrete company supplied batches for sidewalks along Moores Pike and the Moores Pike roundabout, totaling about $14,000 in 2010 and 2012.

"What's unfortunate in this case is the defect wasn't readily apparent," Rouker said. "It took the passage of time for us to see there was a problem."

Some Central Indiana Ready Mix concrete has passed the test of time. The sidewalks along Moores Pike and near the roundabout don't appear to be scaling. But at least a couple of sidewalks poured at about the same time as the Park Avenue project, in June and July 2011 , do appear to be suffering from the issues seen in Elm Heights . Chunks of the surface of concrete have peeled away from one of a handful of sections installed in the 300 block of South Jackson Street , as well as multiple slabs of sidewalk in the 500 block of East Fourth Street .

On the other hand, Newlin said, he has seen a lot of sidewalk poured with concrete from other companies, such as IMI and Prairie, scaling all over Bloomington .

"There is no question, there is a problem," he said. "Whether people want to accept the truth or not, that's another story."

Newlin would argue that the city has a more widespread problem with the de-icing product it uses during the winter, Cargill's ClearLane. The chemicals in it, including magnesium chloride, can be corrosive to concrete, Newlin said. Salt sticks to car tires and ends up on driveways, and the concrete pops off along the tire tracks.

Rodney Clark was confused, though, when he looked at a driveway on West Daffodil Court. No one has moved into the house, but the concrete is flaking near the garage door.

"If it was the salt, why would it be happening there?" he asked.

Salt has been proven to have negative effects on concrete, according to Jason Weiss , a professor of civil engineering and the director of the Pankow Materials Laboratory at Purdue University . While he has not inspected the city's concrete, he was sent a picture of the South Park Avenue sidewalks. His first impression was that the sidewalks were indeed scaling, which he said doesn't generally reduce the strength of the concrete. It's not ideal for appearance, though.

The reason salt leads to scaling on concrete isn't exactly known, Weiss said, but theories point to the fact that salt lowers the freezing temperature to prevent ice from forming and increases the level of saturation in the concrete. When the water seeping into the concrete's pores inevitably freezes, it will expand. That creates pressure -- and can crack concrete. There are multiple aspects of the concrete mixing process that can produce batches more or less susceptible to scaling, Weiss said, and sealant can reduce the risk, but it's hard for him to pass judgment on what's causing the South Park Avenue sidewalk to crumble from just looking at a photograph.

With her crews on the ground, Public Works Director Susie Johnson holds to the pattern she sees forming.

"Whether our guys did the work, or a private company did it, when we are seeing these problems," she said, "it's always Central Indiana Ready Mix."

Newlin holds his ground.

"They just want someone to blame, because they didn't finish it right," he said. "That was a good mix we sent them."

___

(c)2014 the Herald-Times (Bloomington, Ind.)

Visit the Herald-Times (Bloomington, Ind.) at www.heraldtimesonline.com

Distributed by MCT Information Services

Wordcount: 1432

[jetpack-related-posts]