Topics: 2014 elections, 2016 Elections, Citizens United, Dark Money, political influence, Politics News

People milled inside a former men’s club, enjoying the roaring fire, the deep leather chairs and rare tapestries while talking of money and politics – something voters do while drinking at salons. On this particular evening — six days before the midterm elections of 2014 and almost five years after the Supreme Court’s disastrous Citizens United v. FEC decision — the buzz inside Santa Barbara’s University Club was about the onslaught of political advertising. For weeks now, strangers had been ringing voters’ doorbells, telephoning their homes at night, and stuffing their mailboxes with oversize, glossy, political brochures arguing for (and against) candidates and proposals.

“It’s gotten to the point where I’m afraid to answer the door,” said one man.

Corporations, unions, executives and professionals all over the land were pumping billions of dark dollars into this off-year election, yet no one seemed to know who was backing whom. “That’s exactly the point,” said Liz Kennedy, counsel for the New York-based Demos, a public policy organization. At the invitation of the Walter H. Capps Center for the Study of Ethics, Religion and Public Life at UCSB, the garrulous Kennedy was here to discuss our perverted “democracy.”

“Nonprofit political groups are being set up for the express purpose of hiding the identities of funders,” she said. As a result, America now has a donor class.

For the past few years, some of these donors have manufactured voter identification laws allegedly to stop the infinitesimal number of actual cases of voter fraud. “But these laws have impeded voters and blocked access to the polls,” said Kennedy. Many Americans, such as homeless veterans, single moms and unemployed dads, can’t afford to pay for the documents needed to secure a government-issued photo ID. Even so, this cunning voter ID law concept hits upon the perfect solution for the far more pressing problem of shadowy political funds.

We need donor ID laws, the sooner the better.

This off-year election may not have drawn many voters, but it attracted a ton of money. Much of the nearly $4 billion came from corporate executives, professionals, business associations and nonprofit groups designed to hide funders’ identities. Corporations are not required to seek approval from their stakeholders; in fact, shareholders don’t even have the legal right to know if and how a company is spending money in politics. A century ago, before the University Club opened, it was illegal for a corporation to spend money on a federal election. A classic private club member, Teddy Roosevelt, had won the presidential election with corporate backing, but once in office he urged the passage of the Tillman Act (1907), which outlawed “this sordid practice of blackmail.” That frustrated a lot of oil men and corporate trustees. Yet, Citizens United and other cases have taken us back to the robber baron days, spawning creation of super PACs, which accept unlimited contributions from corporate, union and individual coffers.

The donor class argues that even workers, through their unions, can play this money game. But labor groups are at a distinct disadvantage in the cash fight. To put it in perspective, total revenue for all labor unions in 2013 was $20.8 billion. But total corporate profits from just the fourth quarter of 2013 were $1.9 trillion. According to the Center for Responsive Politics, business interests dominate organized labor by about 15-to-1. So, clearly, unions have a fraction of Big Business’ political power.

But unions have far more disclosure requirements. They must reveal their political spending, both direct and indirect, every year, for federal, state and local elections. Businesses, on the other hand, must reveal only political ad spending for federal candidates––not state or local ones. If a union fails to report its activity, it faces criminal penalties. Not so for corporations. Unions have to reveal their political spending to the public; businesses don’t. In fact, big business is allowed to secretly funnel as much dark money as it wants through 501(c) groups, 527s, and newly formed “social welfare” groups that often act as corporate fronts.

In other words, it’s impossible to know who is stuffing slick fliers into your mailbox and sending strangers to your door on weekends.

Earlier this month, there were a record number of anti-fracking measures on ballots across the country, according to InsideClimate News. They were in four Ohio towns; in Denton, Texas; and in Santa Barbara, San Benito and Mendocino counties in California. Considering that California was the third-highest crude oil-producing state in 2013, interest in its anti-fracking initiatives extended far beyond state lines.

An expensive battle was fought here, in Santa Barbara, over Measure P, which would have banned fracking. The measure was seen as a litmus test, since Santa Barbara rose to national prominence in 1969 after a massive offshore oil rig blew and spilled into the ocean. For eight days, 100,000 barrels of a dark oleaginous substance leaked into hundreds of square miles of water, tarring 100 miles of coastline and killing thousands of fish and fowl. The tragedy drew network news cameras that showed graphic images of oil-caked pelicans and dead otters. “It was heartbreaking,” said activist Pat Robertson. The national outcry spawned the birth of the Environmental Protection Agency, the Clean Water Act and the modern-day environmental movement.