The first CEO of Obamacare Kevin Counihan discusses his new job to run Healthcare.gov, and what he learned from the private sector.

By most accounts, Access Health CT worked very well, even in the first months of Obamacare open enrollment last fall when other exchanges, including HealthCare.gov, stumbled badly. Connecticut's exchange reached its target goal for enrollments in private plans four months before the close of open enrollment, and was among the top seven states in the nation when it came to signing up residents believed to be eligible for the insurance.

This success prompted Counihan to offer up the state's expertise and its technology to other states for a fee.

Connecticut's success also drew the attention of the Obama administration, which several months ago announced plans to appoint, for the first time, a dedicated CEO for HealthCare.gov. On Tuesday, officials revealed that Counihan had been tapped for the job.

Read MoreMd. Obamacare contractor subpoenaed



Maryland, whose own exchange had been a disaster, in April said it would use Connecticut's software for enrollment for the 2015 season. Counihan, at that same time, told CNBC that his exchange was in talks with four more states about them using Connecticut's model.



But in a press release Tuesday, the Health and Human Services Department revealed the number had more than doubled. "Nine states have contacted Connecticut's exchange about implementing its technology," it read.

When CNBC's "Street Signs" asked Counihan on Tuesday about those states, he said, "I really can't share the names."

"Connecticut's had some good conversations with several states, and we'll see what happens," he said, adding "We definitely believe there's a big opportunity to make this scalable."

Kaiser's Levitt said that in addition to Maryland, the obvious candidates to be talking to Connecticut are Oregon, Minnesota, Massachusetts and Hawaii—all of which experienced serious technological problems with their state-run exchanges.



Other potential candidates, he said, include some of the seven "partnership states," which are actively encouraging their residents to sign up for Obamacare plans, but whose enrollment functions are handled by HealthCare.gov. Those states are Arkansas, Delaware, Illinois, Iowa, Michigan, New Hampshire and West Virginia.

"There are a number of states that ... want to run their own exchange, but who for a variety of reasons couldn't get their act together in the first year," Levitt said.