BEAVER CREEK — After he finished fifth in downhill at the Sochi Olympics last year, there was something about the way Travis Ganong carried himself that hinted he realized he was no longer chasing the world’s best downhillers. After paying his dues for five seasons on the World Cup, he knew he was one of them.

Three weeks later he captured his first World Cup podium. This past December he captured his first World Cup win. And on America’s downhill course Saturday, with a massive crowd cheering him into the finish, Ganong became the first American man to win a world championships medal in downhill since Bode Miller and Daron Rahlves went 1-2 in 2005.

Ganong took silver, 0.24 of a second behind gold medal winner Patrick Kueng of Switzerland. The bronze medal went to another Swiss, Beat Feuz. American Steven Nyman missed a medal by 0.03 of a second, finishing fourth.

“It’s just unreal to be able to come here and perform like this in a world championships setting,” said Ganong, who is from Squaw Valley, Calif. “I’m so stoked. It’s perfect.”

Ganong agreed that the downhill in Sochi was a major turning point. It was his first-ever Olympic race, and he was the top American .

“Sochi was a great race for me,” said Ganong, 26. “After that I just kind of took off. This is a building process. You have to learn how to ski downhill. It’s such a dangerous sport and on the limit, you have to know how to ride that fine line between risk and reward and know how to get to that reward at the end of the day.

“I knew I could ski fast, I knew I had it in me to be competitive at the highest level. It was just a matter of figuring out how to conquer the nerves and conquer the over-excitement of being at these big events.”

On Saturday, he did.

“I woke up and I just told myself, ‘Hey, be relaxed. You’ve been skiing your whole life, you know how to ski. Don’t think about it, just go have fun and enjoy the day. Make some good turns and keep it simple.’ I love skiing. I have passion for it.”

Because they’re both from the Lake Tahoe area, Rahlves was a hero for Ganong and later became a mentor. Rahlves is here, and Thursday night they went over video of Rahlves’ run in a 2003 World Cup downhill here when he set the course record.

“He was kind of showing me how he cut off line here and there, where to look for extra time, how to always look for your tuck,” Ganong said. “Especially today, it was super windy so you had to stay really low and aerodynamic. He’s been a great mentor and helped me out throughout the years. He’s a cool guy.”

Ganong and Rahlves, who left the tour in 2006, shared a lift ride Saturday morning.

“He looks up to Daron for sure,” said U.S. men’s coach Sasha Rearick. “Daron is a guy that brings fire, who has tremendous energy and passion and desire. I think Travis has learned that from him over the years and inspires that side of him.”

Now they both have silver medals in downhill. The championships have another week to run, but Ganong leaves Sunday for a few days of skiing back home with friends before returning to the World Cup. He’s fired up because the Tahoe area just got two feet of snow.

“Life is hopefully like a never-ending powder run,” Ganong said. “Or the perfect downhill like today.”

John Meyer: jmeyer@denverpost.com or twitter.com/johnmeyer