COLUMBUS, Ohio -- The federally run marketplace offering Ohioans health insurance plans opens for business beginning Tuesday, but Ohio will not have any of the so-called navigators trained and in place to guide people through their options.

The organizations that will provide the navigators must first be certified to handle the work, and none had been certified as of Friday, said Chris Brock, a spokesman for the Ohio Department of Insurance.

Navigators also must be trained, and the first wave of trained navigators will not become available until at least mid-October, according to the Ohio Association of Foodbanks, the lead organization in a large consortium of groups that will provide navigators.

But the Department of Insurance is unconcerned. And the head of the association of foodbanks says it will be a good time for people to start doing their homework.

“A lot of this is about managing the expectations and ... getting our current staff through training,” said Lisa Hamler-Fugitt, executive director of the food bank association.

“I think that if anything, there is just such a media frenzy, I’m likening it to Y2K,” Hamler-Fugitt said. “The only thing that happens on Oct. 1 is that the federal marketplace comes online.”

The marketplace is part of the implementation of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, commonly known as Obamacare. Beginning Tuesday, those who need to buy individual policies -- people who do not already have health insurance through their jobs or some other source -- will be able to go to the online marketplace and see what plans are available for Ohio.

The navigators also are included in Obamacare. They are intended to help guide people through the plans, explaining costs and differences. Navigators will present information on all plans available, unlike brokers and agents who generally have information on the plans that they sell.

There are a handful of organizations coordinating navigators, but the Ohio Association of Foodbanks is by far the largest. It operates the Ohio Benefit Bank, a large online service that, in partnership with the state and nine of its agencies, four federal agencies and more than 1,100 faith-based and community organizations, connects Ohio’s families with work support programs and tax credits.

After the state certifies that the organizations fit the criteria, the individual navigators who work for them also must be cleared.

Hamler-Fugitt said the food bank association submitted its paperwork to the state Friday. She expects the navigators -- 30 to 40 paid staff -- will be trained and ready for work sometime between mid October and Nov. 1. That should still leave plenty of time for them to assist those who need help, she said.

Open enrollment runs through March 31, 2014. People who enroll by Dec. 15 will be able to get coverage effective Jan 1, 2014. After that, the coverage would take effect the next month after it is purchased.

In the meantime, people looking to buy insurance should start doing their homework, she said.

“What I’m saying to folks is that what people need to start thinking about now is the documentation they have to pull together,” Hamler-Fugitt said. They should gather information like the name of their doctor, a list of their medications, any regular treatments and procedures they now have and an estimate of their income.

"They're going to have to look at what their budgets can afford, because they'll have premiums, they'll have deductibles, they'll have co-pays."

From the state’s perspective, even if people need guidance right away, they should be able to find it, Brock said.

Anyone can buy insurance online from the exchange. They may also buy health insurance from agents around the state. Those agents and brokers, Brock said, are licensed and regulated by Ohio.

Brock said he doubts there will be any community in Ohio where someone who needs help sorting out insurance issues will not be able to find it.

The reason the navigators aren’t trained and ready to go, Hamler-Fugitt said, is a function of time.

Ohio Association of Foodbanks was notified Aug. 15 that it would be the main coordinator. The association didn’t have it’s first conversation about the program until Aug. 22.

But on Aug. 29, the organization was served with a request for vast amounts of information sought by the Republican controlled Energy and Commerce Committee.

“It was a lot,” said Hamler-Fugitt. “That took me personally off line from the project for two weeks.”

That the program could be up and running by mid October, though, is quick, said Hamler-Fugitt. She credits help from the state Insurance Department with smoothing the process.

"They have been more than gracious and helpful," she said. "This is all new for all of us."

Through its handling of the Ohio Benefit Bank, which Hamler-Fugitt described as the largest benefit system in the nation, the food bank association has a long history of dealing with programs like Medicare and Medicaid.

“I’ve done this work for a long time,” she said. “I don’t care if was publicly funded or privately funded, we haven’t ever brought in a program of this magnitude without at least six months lead time.”