WASHINGTON -- The conservative Crossroads GPS spent $6.1 million in a single day against six Democratic Senate candidates, including Sen. Mary Landrieu, D-La., and two House candidates, according to the Political Moneyline website.

Crossroads, founded by former George W. Bush political advisor Karl Rove and former GOP lobbyist and now Virginia Senate candidate Ed Gillespie, spent the money October 21 on TV ads, media production and ad placements, Political Moneyline reported. According to the political website, Crossroads GPS, which doesn't disclose its donors, spent $465,586 for ads opposing Landrieu, and $14,015 for media production.

The Center for Responsive Politics (CRP) separately reported that Crossroads GPS has spent a total of $1.64 million against Landrieu, almost half last week, the second highest total just slightly behind the National Rifle Association's $1.69 million. The conservative Americans for Prosperity has also spent heavily in anti-Landrieu ads, but most haven't been disclosed to the Federal Election Commission because the group argued they were not political ads -- asking voters to ask Landrieu to change her position on the Affordable Care Act and other issues, not necessarily vote against her.

Crossroads GPS, the NRA and Americans for Prosperity don't disclose their donors.

The three independent groups spending the most on ads opposing Landrieu's leading Republican opponent, Rep. Bill Cassidy, R-Baton Rouge, are the Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee, $3.67 million; the Senate Majority PAC, $2.4 million, and Patriot Majority USA, $2.14 million, according to CRP. Patriot Majority doesn't disclose its donors, while the Senate Majority and Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee disclose contributors.

The Senate Majority PAC is led by two former aides to Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid. Republicans say that Reid has blocked votes to approve the Keystone XL Pipeline and other bills to create more oil and gas jobs.

A total of $418,170, all from the Senate Conservatives Fund, was spent to promote the candidacy of Tea Party Republican Rob Maness. No outside groups seems to be targeting Maness for negative ads.