Steve Stricker tees off on the 10th hole Saturday during the third round of the PGA Championship at Whistling Straits. Credit: Mark Hoffman

By of the

Haven — A couple of guys in Packers shirts were two holes away when a loud cheer went up.

"Must be some action over there," one said to another. But it wasn't Jordan Spieth or one of the leaders or someone making a spectacular 25-foot putt.

It was a 48-year-old, in a simple dark polo shirt, neither flashy in his look nor his game, and yet beloved just the same.

At every tee and with every shot, every birdie and par, they cheered for "Strick" and shouted "On Wisconsin." And with every round of applause, Steve Stricker held up a hand and looked back at them with the most modest nods of thanks.

By the time the Madison resident walked up to the 18th green of Whistling Straits in the PGA Championship on Saturday with wife Nicki by his side carrying the bag, the fans lucky enough to have a seat in the stands rose to their feet in a standing ovation.

"I'm feeling a lot of energy out of that. I'm feeling a lot of love around here. It's nice," said Stricker. "It's constant chatter all the way down to the green, in between the green and the next tee. It's a lot of fun and something I'm not used to — but it's also a lot of fun to play in front of."

Stricker had a job to do, of course, and he did it well again in Round 3, shooting a 1-under-par 71 for a 2-under 214 total. But given that his 2016 season is uncertain, was it possible Stricker was taking it all in? The sea of spectators along the ropes, following him from hole to hole, and the familiar breeze of Lake Michigan, and maybe this, his last major on the PGA Tour?

It was hard not to look around and soak up every glorious moment.

"I haven't asked him if he is — but I kind of thought about it today," said Nicki, who is filling in as his caddie. "I kind of tried to look around a little bit — without getting caught looking around too much.

"The fan support is really cool. It's unbelievable, really."

Stricker said last week that this PGA Championship may be his final major. Now, to be clear, Stricker is not calling this any kind of farewell tour. When he said that, he was just being a realist. He has no tour exemptions for 2016 and essentially is playing golf part time. Back surgery in December is paying off because he feels great, but the facts of age and status remain, and so he just acknowledged what everybody already was thinking.

That's not the plan — just the possibility.

"I'm going to try to play in more majors — it's just that I don't know if that can happen," said Stricker. "I'm playing a limited schedule, I'm not up there in the world rankings anymore. It won't be by lack of effort — I'm going to try to get back in to some of these.

"I'm not exempt for any (tournaments in 2016). I've got work to do if I want to get back in to playing some of these."

That work can resume Sunday, his final day of the 2015 season. He is so committed to finishing strong here — he shot 71 and 72 in the first two rounds — that he headed right to the practice area after putting in nearly five hours on the course Saturday.

There are, after all, twentysomethings making this game look easier than it really is, and Stricker is not ready to concede anything.

"I'm excited about the way I've been hitting it this year," said Stricker. "I feel like I got some strength back. I got some length back. I'm getting out there with some of these guys that are quite a bit younger. That excited me — that I've still got some pop in there."

And then there are the real moments again, like the fact his older daughter had a tennis match Saturday that kept her away. Steve and Nicki were excited for their kids' arrival Saturday night to see him play the final round Sunday.

With professional golf not making a regular stop in the state since the U.S. Bank Championship in Milwaukee dissolved in 2009, Stricker is truly appreciative of the home cooking and crowd this week.

"I don't get this opportunity or experience on a regular basis to play in front of my family, friends, home state of Wisconsin. It's great. I'm having a blast this week," said Stricker. "I was glad to be around for the weekend — I wanted to do something a little more special and get up there in contention, but it's not happening so far.

"Maybe one good round tomorrow and we'll see what happens."

All that is certain for Stricker in the future is he will be a host for the new Champions Tour event sponsored by American Family Insurance next year in Madison. While he won't be eligible to play — he will be 49, players have to be 50 — he will help with the event and look at raising money for charity.

Stricker also has not ruled out trying to qualify for the Wisconsin debut of the U.S. Open at Erin Hills in 2017.

So then, it is very simple. Stricker will enjoy everything Sunday and then at some point concentrate his goals for 2016.

"He's definitely looking forward to playing next year," said Nicki.

"I'm going to continue to play. I'm not quitting the game. I'm going to keep trying to improve," said Stricker.