'The Spark that ignites quite a fire:' Imminent release of CIA 'torture' report could put Americans and embassies in harm's way, warn intelligence officials



National Intelligence Council pressures W hite House against the release of information on CIA interrogation techniques



Officials say the report could inflame anti-US passions in the Middle East

Sen. Dianne Feinstein remains locked in battle with the Obama administration over redactions that 'obscure key facts' in the report

The report shows CIA techniques were 'far more brutal than previously understood'



American citizens and embassies could be at risk of attacks if the US Senate releases a lengthy intelligence report on CIA interrogation techniques.

The warning comes from the National Intelligence Council, which is pressuring the White House to keep the report under wraps to avoid inflaming anti-US passions abroad, lest more violence breaks out throughout the Middle East, reported Yahoo News.



'It doesn’t take a rocket scientist to figure out if you release a report like this at a time when terrorism is surging all over the Mideast you are handing the other side a recruitment tool,' ex-CIA Director John McLaughlin told the news outlet. 'It’s blindingly obvious.'

People who have read the full report say it shows that the CIA interrogation program was far more brutal than previously understood, and that agency officials repeatedly misled Congress and the Justice Department about what was being done to al-Qaida detainees.

US intelligence officials warn that the report could inspire violent protests, such as it happened after the release of photographs showing abusive treatment of prisoners at the Abu Ghraib prison (pictured)

Violent protests broke out across the Mideast when photos surfaced showing prisoner mistreatment at the Abu Ghraib prison, such as the one seen here

Sen. Dianne Feinstein, who chairs the Senate Intelligence Committee, has been locked in battle with the Obama Administration over the release of a summary outlining the practices.

Intelligence officials handed Feinstein an executive summary, or about 480 pages of the 6,300-page report, but the senator complained that the highly-redacted excerpts 'obscure key facts that support the report’s findings and conclusions.'



'Until these redactions are addressed to the committee’s satisfaction, the report will not be made public,' Feinstein vowed in a letter to the president.



Director of National Intelligence James Clapper says about 85 percent of the report on the 'detention and interrogation' program is declassified.

Sen. Dianne Feinstein, who chairs the Senate Intelligence Committee, is demanding that the Obama Administration release more information regarding the CIA's interrogation techniques

Of the rest of the material, about half of the redacted material is footnotes, mostly done to protect classified information that could harm ongoing operations or active agents, he said.



But for some, even that kind of information can be inflammatory.



President Obama put a halt to the CIA's advanced interrogation program. Advocacy groups say the Senate's report could be the last chance for public accountability on the matter

'The Mideast is a tinderbox right now and this could be the spark that ignites quite a fire,' one intelligence official told Yahoo News.

'This will be an ugly story when it comes out,' added another source to the news website.



The 6,300-page report, along with a CIA rebuttal, represents the most detailed accounting to date of a set of bitterly controversial interrogation, rendition and detention practices the CIA carried out in the years after the Sept. 11 attacks — practices many Americans now consider to have been immoral or illegal.

President Barack Obama stopped the practices when he took office, but he decided against a 'truth commission' to examine what happened. Criminal investigations conducted in secret resulted on no charges.

Activists rally in front of the White House in 2013 to demand President Obama close down the Guantanamo Bay prison, where US prisoners were allegedly tortured

Advocacy groups say the Senate's summary could be the last chance for public accountability on the matter.



It's long been known that the CIA used slapping, stress positions, sleep deprivation and other harsh tactics on several detainees and a near-drowning technique known as water boarding on three of them.

The CIA's use of water boarding has drawn particular scrutiny since it is considered the harshest technique on the list of those used.

The report asserts that the other tactics, as applied, were just as harsh and extremely brutal — though no unique, life-saving information was gleaned from applying the methods.