People Moves of the Week: Houlihan Lokey, Meketa Investment Group, Gordon Brothers

Mesa co-founder Mark Patricof to join Houlihan Lokey through deal; Meketa name co-CEOs; Gordon Brothers expands valuation division

Carter Ledyard & Milburn LLP — The New York law firm brought in Mitchell Shapiro as a partner. Shapiro’s practice concentrates on antitrust, trade regulation, class action, electronic payment systems and complex commercial litigation. He joins Carter Ledyard from MCShapiro Law Group PC, where he spent roughly 11 years. He began his career at Stroock & Stroock & Lavan LLP and, after that, McDermott Will and Emery.

Citizens Bank — The Providence, Rhode Island-based bank named Quincy Miller and Lisa Maass (pictured) to lead Citizens’ engagement with civic, business and community leaders across Massachusetts and Connecticut, respectively. Miller succeeds Jerry Sargent, who will focus on leading Citizens’ middle market business, which spans businesses with annual revenue of $25 million and $500 million. Prior to joining Citizens in 2006, Miller spent nine years at M&T Bank in New York City and in Harrisburg, Pa., where he was vice president and retail regional manager. Maass, like Miller, is a member of the company’s executive leadership group. She joined Citizens from Connecticut Bank and Trust in 1994 and has led middle-market banking in the state since 2011.

Gordon Brothers — The Boston investment firm's valuation division, Group Gordon Brothers-AccuVal, announced that Francis Garvin has joined as director, business development serving Connecticut, Maine, Massachusetts, New Hampshire and Vermont. Garvin, a 20-year lending veteran, will lead the sales efforts in the northeast region by working closely with private equity and asset-based lending professionals.

Houlihan Lokey — The co-founders of Mesa Securities Inc., a New York-based independent advisory firm, are joining Houlihan Lokey. Mark Patricof (pictured), Jerome Levy and Brian Richards are set to work within the Los Angeles-based investment bank's technology, media and telecommunications (TMT) group as managing directors. Patricof will oversee the group as co-head with Houlihan veterans John Cooper, Rob Louv and Chris Wilson. The announcements comes as part of Houlihan's recent purchase of Mesa. The deal will boost the TMT group to more than 30 officers across Houlihan's offices, including New York, Los Angeles, San Francisco and London.

Meketa Investment Group — The Westwood, Massachusetts-based firm called up Stephen McCourt and Peter Woolley will become co-chief executive officers of, effective July 31. Meketa’s founder, Jim Meketa, will assume the role of chairman of the board. Managing principals McCourt and Woolley have been with Meketa since 1994 and 1996, respectively. As co-CEOs, they will oversee management, while continuing to play significant roles in the firm’s research and consulting activities.

Milbank Tweed Hadley & McCloy — The New York law firm adds to its transportation and space practice in London with partner Nick Swinburne. Swinburne was previously a partner in the London office of Clifford Chance. His practice includes advising companies in the aviation and shipping sectors.

Wind Point Partners — The Chicago-based private equity firm added Kristie Goodman Davis as director of investor relations. Davis joins Wind Point from Boston-based Fisher Lynch Capital. In the past, she has held a number of leadership positions including vice president of marketing at Parish Capital in Chapel Hill, North Carolina, and several financial, accounting and compliance roles at Southern Company in Atlanta.

For more information on related topics, visit the following: