Buy Photo The Brandon family, left to right: Jed, Emma, Susan, Mimi and Mary. (Photo: photos by Trevor Mitchell/News-Leader)Buy Photo

Both protesters and supporters stood outside Springfield’s Planned Parenthood clinic Saturday morning, mirroring similar protests planned across the nation by people who want to defund the health care organization.

More than 100 people lined both sides of East Battlefield Road in front of the clinic, holding signs that read “Men Regret Lost Fatherhood” and “Abortion Kills Children.”

In the parking lot of the clinic, around 30 Planned Parenthood volunteers and supporters clad in pink shirts held signs reading “Don’t Take Away My Care.”

Before rain began to drive away both sides, people at the rally discussed why they’d made a point to attend.

Katie Langenberg said it was the recent undercover videos released about Planned Parenthood — which show staff discussing fetal tissue donations. Planned Parenthood denies the accusations that it profits from the sales of fetal body parts.

Langenberg said people needed to spread the word that women have a choice. “Abortion hurts women,” she said.

In the clinic’s parking lot, Stacy Sherrod said she was concerned about the “hyperfocus” on abortion in this debate, and worries that people’s attention is being drawn away from the other services that Planned Parenthood provides, such as health care and birth control.

Buy Photo Stacy Sherrod said she’s worried about the "hyperfocus" on abortion in this debate to defund Planned Parenthood. (Photo: Trevor Mitchell/News-Leader)

“They do more to prevent abortions than any clinic in town,” Sherrod said.

Before the institution of the Affordable Care Act, Sherrod said all of her health care needs were met at the clinic — and they were essential when she had a breast cancer scare.

Alexander Johnson, a past intern with Planned Parenthood, said two transgender people had spoken earlier about the inclusivity they experienced at the clinic — something they weren’t finding at other health care providers around the city.

Buy Photo Alexander Johnson talked about two cancer patients he says Planned Parenthood made cancer survivors. (Photo: Trevor Mitchell/News-Leader)

He also said he it was a lifeline for lower-class citizens of Springfield, who couldn’t find care anywhere else.

“I understand where they’re coming from,” Johnson said of the protestors. “When you have a moral point of view, it’s very hard to see another moral point of view.”

Johnson said abortions — which are not a service provided by the Springfield clinic — make up only 3 percent of what Planned Parenthood does.

“They want to make the abortions they do unnecessary,” Johnson said.

The Brandon family doesn’t see it that way. Holding signs that read “Hearts lungs and livers? P.P. Delivers” and “Planned Parenthood sells baby parts for $$,” they said they hoped to be the last protesters out, even as rain poured down.

“What they’re doing is wrong,” said Susan Brandon. “They’re using federal funding to murder babies.”

As the last protesters left, cars driving down Battlefield occasionally honked in support, and Planned Parenthood supporters, clad in pink plastic ponchos, retreated back inside the clinic.

“I’m not mad at them for their opinions,” Johnson said, looking at the few protesters left. “I want them to know that Planned Parenthood is a vital part of the community.”

Susan Brandon didn’t agree. “You can receive health care anywhere else.”

Read or Share this story: http://sgfnow.co/1JcGpmm