Tough negotiation looms for Butler Area School District

Email Newsletters Sign up for one of our email newsletters.

Butler Area School District teachers are working under the terms of a contract that expires in a little more than a month.

A tough negotiation looms, said Neil Convery, a board member who is on the district's bargaining team.

“It will be difficult. Everyone has to understand the realities of the budget,” he said.

Tom DeGeorge, a teacher at Center Township Elementary School who represents the district's 526 teachers, said the two sides are closer than they were.

More talks are scheduled for Wednesday. The contract is a one-year extension of a five-year deal that expired in June 2014.

The union is concerned about the district's proposal to pass more health care costs onto teachers, DeGeorge said.

“They want a lot of changes in the plan: high deductibles, higher premiums and co-pays. We have offered to introduce gradual changes, phasing this in,” he said.

Teachers now pay $30, $60 or $90 toward their health care each month, depending on their plan.

Employees paying more of their health care is inevitable and under consideration in many districts, said Jim Buckheit, director of the Pennsylvania Association of School Administrators.

In 2018, the Affordable Care Act's so called “Cadillac” tax will hit insurance and related perks valued at more than $10,200 for singles and $27,500 for families.

Taxing such benefits is a major policy shift in generations-old tax policy and has many opponents, including the National Education Association.

“There are pretty severe financial penalties with this. The new health care law requires consumers to have some skin in the game,” Buckheit said.

Typically, government employees have had generous benefits. In Pennsylvania, state employees contribute 4 percent of their pay to benefits.

This year, Butler Area's starting annual salary for teachers is $42,393. The average teacher's salary, about $50,000 this school year, will be lower next year after 21 teachers retire.

These are lean financial times for the district. This month, the school board voted 6-3 for a proposed budget that does not raise taxes but contains a $4.5 million deficit. It would be closed by taking from cash reserves, putting the accounts below the state's recommended level.

The budget does not factor in $1.9 million in state money the district expects to receive, however.

Pressure was great to avoid a tax increase, said board member Bill Halle, who, like Convery, voted against the budget.

“A lot of the board members are struggling with our contract and the comparison with the real world of business. Many people in the private sector are paying five times or more and getting far less of a health plan,” Halle said.

He wants to pay teachers enough to keep the good ones, and scrimp on other expenses.

“I'd rather see them scrap a lot of the new technology than get rid of teachers. Technology gets outdated; teachers don't,” he said

Rick Wills is a staff writer for Trib Total Media. He can be reached at 412-320-7944 or rwills@tribweb.com.