The Colorado Senate on Friday gave preliminary approval to a bill that makes changes to Colorado’s controversial construction-defects law — changes that proponents say will reinvigorate the moribund condominium construction market.

The Senate passed the measure, Senate Bill 177, on a voice vote with Republicans in the majority. It is scheduled to face a third and final reading next week before heading to the House, where it faces significant opposition in the Democrat-controlled chamber.

House Speaker Dickey Lee Hullinghorst, D-Boulder, declined to speak about the bill Friday but told reporters in January that she had serious reservations about it.

Senate Republicans on Friday lauded the measure, which would make mediation or arbitration the preferred method of dispute resolution in construction-defects cases while barring homeowner associations from changing the project’s declarations to open up the possibility of a lawsuit. It also would require that a majority of all homeowners in a condo or homeowners association approve legal action before it is taken.

Proponents have touted the bill as a necessary step toward helping people, especially young families, afford a home in one of the nation’s tightest housing markets.

Current law, they say, makes it too easy for homeowners to sue over construction problems, like sinking foundations or interior mold, driving up insurance and other costs for builders. That in turn, they say, has dried up the condo market, which claims nowhere near the share of housing starts in Colorado as it did a decade ago.

Sen. Tim Neville, R-Littleton, ticked off a lengthy list of cities and counties in the metro area where no condo projects are underway.

“It’s not a coincidence here folks — the costs are prohibitive,” he said.

The bill would help reverse that trend, Neville said.

Democratic Sen. Jessie Ulibarri, who co-sponsored the bill, said the housing supply has become so tight that a rental unit next to a refinery in Commerce City listed on Craigslist at $1,400 a month.

Senate Bill 177, he said, will act as a “pressure valve” helping reduce the upward push on rental rates and home prices.

But most other Democrats weren’t buying the affordable-housing assertion. Sen. Rollie Heath, who represents a district covering Boulder, said the bill effectively shifts the risk of faulty construction from the builder to the homeowner — or to “those who are least able to afford it.”

“I don’t believe the bill is about getting people into their first house,” Heath said. “As an affordable-housing bill, I have to say, this bill does not get us there.”

Sen. Linda Newell, D-Littleton, said she thought highly of mediation as a dispute resolution method but objected to Senate Bill 177’s provision that homeowners can’t change their condo declarations, which are typically written by builders at the time of construction.

“It’s unconscionable,” she said.

Todd Weiss, who lives in a Douglas County condo that was beset with defects, condemned the bill as one that would strip from homeowners any “credible recourse” to get builders to fix their mistakes.

“We had to quickly mobilize to have the residents in our community change our builder-written governing declarations before we could move forward with holding the builder responsible for the expensive construction defects they left us with when we bought our homes,” he said.

John Aguilar: 303-954-1695, jaguilar@denverpost.com or twitter.com/abuvthefold