As a kind of companion piece to my last post on the liberal and conservative visions for health insurance, I strongly recommend reading this post by Mike Konczal, which strikes a note that you can expect to hear sounded more often on the left if the Obamacare rollout continues to go badly. Contra conservatives suggesting that HealthCare.gov represents some kind of discrediting moment for liberalism, Konczal argues that the potential policy problems associated with a nonfunctional web portal really just point to the problems with neoliberalism — a much-debated term of art, but defined for his purposes as the post-1970s idea that social insurance should be “heavy on private provisioning and means-testing,” that it should preserve as much “choice and competition” as possible, and that it should be delivered at the state level or through state-and-federal coordination rather than by the federal government alone.

It’s precisely these elements in Obamacare, he writes, that threaten to turn an IT mess into a policy disaster, because they have forced policymakers to build exchanges with too many moving parts, figure out sliding subsidies, and make sure to fine-tune things so that health insurers play ball and stay solvent. Whereas under “the older, New Deal form of liberalism,” there would just be a straightforward universal federal guarantee of health insurance — and if the website didn’t work, well, it would be an inconvenience but not really a problem for the underlying policy. (“My man Franklin Delano Roosevelt may not have known about JavaScript and agile programming,” Konczal quips, “but he knew a few things about the public provisioning of social insurance.”)

His post then goes on to pick up on my Sunday column’s point that a neoliberal policy failure here could present problems for any kind of conservative alternative:

Some of the more cartoony conservatives argue that this is a failure of liberalism because it is a failure of government planning … However, the smarter conservatives who are thinking several moves ahead (e.g. Ross Douthat) understand that this failed rollout is a significant problem for conservatives. Because if all the problems are driven by means-testing, state-level decisions and privatization of social insurance, the fact that the core conservative plan for social insurance is focused like a laser beam on means-testing, block-granting and privatization is a rather large problem.

To which I would just say that the problems I foresee are more political than intellectual or conceptual. If the Obamacare exchanges are a mess and the individual market is facing cost spirals, then conservatives are going to face some understandable skepticism (more even than usual!) from voters if they talk up the virtues of free market health care and the individual marketplace in 2016 and beyond. But in principle, the distinction between Obamacare’s approach to health policy and the conservative version of means-testing, block-granting, and competitive marketplaces is clear enough. That’s because while Obamacare may be using neoliberal rather than New Deal-style means, it’s still chasing essentially left-of-center ends: It seeks a level of universality and comprehensiveness that conservatives don’t think is necessarily worth pursuing. And it’s that quest, those goals, that require the complicated mandate-regulate-subsidize combination that could undo the individual marketplace if the enrollment isn’t where it needs to be and the subsidies and fines and regulations aren’t successfully fine-tuned.

In other words, pace Konczal, the potential problems with Obamacare aren’t necessarily “driven by means-testing, state-level decisions and privatization of social insurance.” They’re driven by the law’s attempt to employ these (notionally) decentralized means while still seeking essentially centralized ends. Thus Obamacare retains a big role for private insurers … so long as they agree to behave more like public utilities than traditional insurance companies. It leaves a major role for the states … so long as they build their exchanges and spend their Medicaid dollars the way the federal government says. It lets individuals shop for insurance plans that suit their needs … but restricts the kinds of plans that they’re allowed to buy. And this mismatch of (or, if you prefer, dishonesty about) means and ends does, indeed, require a level of complicated regulatory fine-tuning that’s a lot more vulnerable to IT glitches than a single payer system would be.

But these problems don’t loom nearly as large in the conservative alternative. You aren’t trying to get everyone comprehensive coverage, so you can offer most people a flat tax credit rather than trying to hit a precise subsidy level for every would-be buyer. You’re trying to deal with uninsurable people separately rather than folding them into the same insurance pool as everyone else, so you don’t have to promise insurance companies a vast new market of “young invincibles,” design a mandate that nudges these invincibles into the system, and then hope that enough of them sign up. And you aren’t trying to micromanage what happens at the state level to the same degree, so you’d probably face fewer conflicts and fewer surprises the Obama White House has had to deal with on that front.

Now the cost of this more decentralized approach is, admittedly, that it leads to something less than universal, comprehensive coverage. My previous post tried to tackle whether the potential benefits might outweigh that cost. But whether they do or not, at the very least such a reform would be much less vulnerable than Obamacare to the kind of problems cropping up this month.