Team USA runner eager to take next step in distance career

Neely Spence Gracey was an eight-time Division II national champion while running at Shippensburg University, setting four NCAA records along the way. ( Cliff Grassmick / Staff Photographer )

International Pro Team Challenge TEAM USA MEN Aaron Braun, Patrick Smyth, Abdi Abdirahman, Bobby Curtis, Jared Ward, Sean Quigley, Parker Stinson, Brian Shrader, Augustus Maiyo. TEAM USA WOMEN Kristen Zaitz, Neely Spence Gracey, Brianne Nelson, Mattie Suver, Renee Bailee, Alisha Williams, Amy Van Alstine, Kara Lubieniecki, Addie Bracy. WHEELCHAIR Men Joshua George, Matt Davis, Matthew Porterfield, Adam Bleakney, Scott Parson, Peter Park, Jacob Heilveil, Bradley Ray, Tyler Byers, Denny Gordon, Marshall Hamilton. Women Amanda McCroy, Cheri Madsen, Dawna Callahn, Tina Vogel, Katja Stokely, Abby Farrell. INTERNATIONAL TEAMS Men Team Kenya Team Mexico Team Ethiopia Team Eritrea Team Morocco Women Team Kenya Team Mexico Team Ethiopia Team Japan Team Eritrea

If you're runner in Boulder and you haven't run with Neely Spence Gracey, just wait.

A newcomer to Boulder in the past few months, Gracey has already made herself a big part of the local running community.

"I feel like I'm Team Boulder, because there's a bunch of groups out here, there's different coaches and they've all been extremely welcoming to me," she said. "I like to go to group runs, at the running stores and meet up with the local runners. I find their stories extremely inspiring."

Advertisement

Her story is pretty good, too.

After years of being connected to Boulder off and on, Gracey, 25, will finally get a chance to compete in the Bolder Boulder this year as a part of Team USA in the International Pro Team Challenge.

"I've known about Bolder Boulder for as long as I can remember, because when I was a baby, I cheered my dad on while he ran the Bolder Boulder," she said. "So, it's fun being able to participate finally after years of watching the event and never actually running."

Her father, Steve Spence, posted back-to-back top-15 finishes in 1988 and 1989. He's also well-known in the distance running community for winning bronze in the marathon at the 1991 World Championships and placing 12th in that event at the 1992 Olympics in Barcelona.

Gracey is working on a nice career of her own. She was an eight-time Division II national champion while running at Shippensburg University, setting four NCAA records along the way.

As a professional, she's posted several top-five finishes in various races since 2011.

Now, after years of spending her summers training in Boulder, she and her husband, Dillon Gracey, have moved here, and she hopes that furthers her development.

"There's really no better environment anywhere that I've been that promotes running as much as Boulder does," said Gracey, who owns a private coaching business with her husband. "It's really an ideal community. We've known we wanted to ultimately end up out here."

This could be an ideal time for Gracey to be in Boulder, as she looks to take that next step in her career.

"Each experience (as a pro) has allowed me to grow and make changes that can move me forward, and in the last six months I've (set personal records) in five events, so it looks like things are on the upswing," she said.

Primarily a short-distance specialist, Gracey has started transitioning to longer distances, and has actually already qualified for the 2016 Olympic trials in the marathon. The Bolder Boulder is going to be one of the few 10Ks in which she has competed.

"I actually ran my first half marathon in February and loved it, and I'm really looking forward to exploring and developing more in the longer distance events," she said.

She couldn't think of a better race than the Bolder Boulder to push her along, and is eager to finally hit the course her father ran years ago.

"I love road racing and this is one of the largest road races in the world, so how awesome is it to be a part of something like this?" she said. "I'm really excited about the event, about the experience, about the opportunity that I have, but I also want to make sure that with that excitement comes a little bit of pressure because I do want to represent well."

Brian Howell: howellb@dailycamera.com, on Twitter: @BrianHowell33.