Coming up this evening at 9, Piers Morgan welcomes the return of Tony Robbins and Nick Walczak for an inspiring primetime interview that comes on the eve of the one year anniversary of the Sandy Hook Elementary school shootings.

Walczak himself is a school shooting victim, having been one of the five students fired upon as part of the February 27, 2012 incident at Chardon High School in Ohio.

Left to live in a wheelchair as a result of his injuries, Walczak has formed a bond with Robbins, a man internationally known for his positivity, and messages of hope.



As part of a previous edition on "Piers Morgan Live," Robbins felt compelled to invite Walczak to join him in helping support those impacted by the December 14th shootings in Newtown. Without hesitation, the teenager accepted, and this evening he shares details of the experience:

"It was a very, very powerful, powerful event. We introduced ourselves, we told our story. I feel like I got a lot out of that, and I feel like the other families, they got a lot out of it too," explains Walczak. "You just feel the connection in the room, when you're talking to survivor's, survivor's families. It's a connection that I feel like, is necessary, to be able to keep going on a positive level."

Joining the program from California, Robbins shares specific details of the ways in which he aims to help those trying to overcome personal tragedy and devastation:

"What I'm really into is uncovering the psychology of what drives somebody, and how they can heal. And there are all kinds of studies that have been done over the year on post-traumatic stress, but there are few studies done on post-traumatic growth, how people have been through the most-horrific experiences a human being could possibly imagine, and not only transcend the experience, but actually grow so much they can help other people, and that is my absolute passion," he tells Morgan. "So, the way I help people, is I try to empower those to make that transformation."

Watch the clip above to hear Walczak and Robbins further discuss their journey and partnership, and for the full interview, watch CNN at 9 p.m.

-–

» Follow Piers Morgan Tonight on Twitter

> Follow "Piers Morgan Tonight" on Instagram