“I’m dying,” said the 25-year-old model Martha Hunt, pushing a set of two-pound weights above her shoulders.

Behind her, the trainer Justin Gelband offered instructions and encouragements.

“Now very small, start here,” he said, demonstrating a diminutive squat punch. They swayed back and forth in unison, like video game characters fending off a foe.

A few minutes later, Hunt paused and grimaced.

“My bottom’s feeling that,” she said, pounding her hips.

For eight years, Gelband has sculpted the figures of women who grace the world’s catwalks and “most beautiful” lists.

“Irina Shayk came to class the other night,” he said, perched on a red exercise ball, referring to the former Sports Illustrated cover model. “It makes the other girls feel comfortable, like, ‘Wow, these girls do it too.’ ” But while the long-legged and lithe sing his praises (Karlie Kloss called him “extraordinary” in an email), Gelband said his primary aim is to offer his services to those less genetically blessed, including cubicle dwellers who wear stilettos only for special occasions.

“I didn’t start with the models, I didn’t start with celebrities; I started with normal, everyday women who needed to lose dress sizes for a wedding or for a situation,” he said. “We did that, and then the other things fell into place.”

Gelband, 41, got into fitness as a child, running and swimming, playing soccer and tennis. He swam competitively for two and a half years at Rutgers, where he studied exercise science and sports management. After graduating, he moved to Los Angeles, where he was recruited by a branch of 24 Hour Fitness while he was training a girlfriend.

Gelband eschewed heavy weights and aggressive cardio for dumbbells in the single digits and Lilliputian movements — squatting down just a couple of inches, for example. At 24 Hour Fitness, Gelband asked his boss to let him take over the regimen of six women who were 50 to 100 pounds overweight, promising he could “do better for them and their bodies.”

“The training style was something they had never seen at the time,” he said.

Then he met Miranda Kerr.

“After the 2007 Victoria’s Secret show, after Miranda’s body looked the way it did, that was it,” Gelband said, referring to the toned, taut midsection Kerr paraded down the runway that year. “I started getting phone calls.”

He relocated to New York, where he met his eventual business partner, Vanessa Packer. A fashion stylist who was frustrated with her workout, Packer took to Google for new exercise methods and stumbled on Gelband’s website.

“It wasn’t about, ‘I need to spend two hours in a gym and kill myself,’ ” said Packer, 30. “It was like, ‘I can do a solid 45 minutes and really elongate and lengthen and get fit in the way I wanted to be fit.’ ”