It seems minimum wage has always been a controversial topic. Attention to the subject has grown in recent months and with today's comments by President Obama, it's sure to start even more debate.

Grateful and the Great Depression aren't two words that are normally in the same sentence but without the Depression, we might not have the standard for minimum wage.

President Franklin Roosevelt signed in law the Fair Labor Standards Act in 1938 which established that industries had to pay at least 25-cents an hour for a 40 hour work week. That act helped bring stability to the country's work industry.

Fast forward 76 years and the conversation is about raising the federal minimum wage to $10.10. Up from its current level of $7.25. Public opinion seems to be in favor of the raise but only if employees deserve it.

Danny White is the owner of Race City Amusement Park and has approximately 80 employees. White said "Does everybody get a pay raise? No sir, they don't. In my opinion, some people don't deserve a pay raise and some people, they deserve it. So, you give the pay raise based on merit. Not because the government says you have to do it."

Amirah Witten is visiting from Georgia and said, "To be honest with you, i don't think there should be a minimum wage period. I think that people should get paid for the work that they put in."

Some say that while the 10 dollar wage would be good for employees, it will snowball into higher prices on everything else.

White added, "If we increase the minimum wage, then we have to increase not only the price of our soft drinks, but the price of our rides and stuff out here. When you look at the overall thing, it gets to be very complicated."

Most people though just want to make a living wage that doesn't leave them struggling from paycheck to paycheck.

Witten added, "How can someone survive and actually live a fruitful life on $7.25, $7.50 an hour, you know? That's what I get paid at least."

While business owners are willing to pay their employees fairly, they say employees shouldn't just rely on the minimum.

White said, "I think minimum wage is a fair thing for most people, especially young people. I think minimum wage, as you get older, you set your own wage based on what you do."

President Obama already signed an Executive Order mandating that all government contracted employees get paid at least $10.10 an hour.

He'll continue to urge Congress to vote on a federal minimum wage that matches.