<p>Greg Johnson</p>

Starting a new business is hard. Starting two new businesses, even harder. Particularly in the fraught field of health insurance.

Jerry W. Burgess is the founding chief executive officer of Community Health Alliance, the Knoxville-based Consumer Oriented and Operated Plan for Tennessee established under President Barack Obama’s Affordable Care Act. Burgess is also the founding CEO of Consumers’ Choice Health Plan, South Carolina’s ACA-established CO-OP.

In fact, the two CO-OPs share senior management. Chief Operating Officer Judy Slagle, Chief Information Officer Barrie Parker, Chief Financial Officer David Young, General Counsel Kathi Grant Willis and Chief Medical Officer Dr. Eric Quivers, according to the CO-OPs’ websites, serve in both the Volunteer State and the Palmetto State. Roles may be the same but results could not be different.

A series of management missteps has left CHA, the Tennessee CO-OP, begging for members and bleeding dollars. In its startup year in 2013, the company offered “free” cellphones to folks who bought CHA plans until the state intervened. CHA set rates so high only about 2,000 Tennesseans chose CHA. In 2014, CHA’s rates were so low enrollment jumped by more than 30,000, growing so far so fast that Tennessee’s insurance commissioner asked the Department of Health and Human Services to suspend enrollment due to CHA’s “tenuous financial condition.” In 2015, CHA will increase premiums 44 percent, on average, for the 2016 coverage year after regulators suggested an exorbitant rate hike might be necessary to make CHA “sustainable.”

Such a big jump will likely limit growth CHA so desperately needs. At the end of 2014, according to an inspector general’s report, CHA had only 9 percent of its projected enrollment while the South Carolina CO-OP had exceeded projected membership by 138 percent. The same IG report showed Consumers’ Choice lost only $3.8 million while CHA lost $22 million. Premium income in South Carolina was almost $165 million. In Tennessee, only $6.6 million.

For his efforts in 2013, Burgess was paid $458,196, according to a New York Times report, more than 10 times the median household income in Tennessee. “I am not overpaid,” Burgess said in the Times story. “My compensation is similar to that at nonprofit health care enterprises of similar size.” Burgess told the Times half his salary came from the struggling Tennessee CO-OP.

But IRS Forms 990 for 2013, required filings for nonprofits, show Burgess received his full salary from Consumers’ Choice in South Carolina and no pay from Community Health Alliance in Tennessee. Burgess, Slagle, Parker, Young and Willis were paid a combined $1.4 million. Why such poor Tennessee results for such rich executive pay? CHA did not respond to multiple requests for comment.

CHA was awarded $73 million in federal startup funds by HHS. More than 35,000 Tennesseans now depend on CHA for insurance. Taxpayers and Tennesseans deserve a focused, full-time management team. Burgess et al. should be all in or all out. Based on results, the choice for CHA’s board should not be hard at all.

Greg Johnson’s columns appear on Wednesdays, Fridays and the second Sunday of each month. Follow him on Twitter @jgregjohnson. Email him at jgregjohnson@hotmail.com.