Hope Fletcher is busy.

The Silver Creek High junior regularly rotates through her roles as Boulder barista, deck-building intern, food bank volunteer, diehard cheesehead, archery hobbyist, varsity softball player and typical teenager.

And this year, Fletcher also became a grant-writer as her three-person team landed a $1,550 grant for their school's Physical Education program as part of a Civics in Action Project.

Two Silver Creek High teachers run the CAP program as part of the social studies curriculum. The projects require small groups of students to identify something they want to change in their school, community, city, state or country and make concerted efforts toward that goal, documenting their progress the entire way. Students have worked with school administrators on start times and have written letters to local newspapers or government representatives to influence policy.

Hope Fletcher Age: 17 Occupation: Student, Que's Coffee barista Years in St. Vrain Valley: 17

This year, Fletcher and two of her varsity softball teammates wanted to land more funding for the Silver Creek PE program.

"Originally, we started interviewing the head of the PE department, Sara Whiteley and she just started talking to us about how there's not a lot of funding there," Fletcher said. "We realized that they get basically no money. It's like $2,000, and that's nothing. That's about two packs of dodge balls."

The three girls explored various options for getting more money funneled to physical education including charging a fee per students to families for equipment, like might be levied in other classes, but they quickly scrapped that idea. They met with Principal Erick Finnestead, who walked them through the different kinds of grants they could apply for.

They settled on applying for a grant through the Silver Creek High School Education Foundation grant, a non-profit which focuses on improving the school. The girls interviewed the PE teachers, asking where specifically a grant could make the most difference, and Fletcher herself filled out the grant and submitted it to the foundation.

They chose to ask for 24 heart rate monitors so the PE department could collect better data on the amount of exercise kids get throughout their day as compared to a PE class.

The group hopes that the concrete data on exercise provided by the heart rate monitors could help St.Vrain Valley School District reel in increased amounts of federal grants for physical education.

"If they can show that our students are having a certain heart rate throughout every class period, the government could hopefully give them more funding for the district, which will eventually get to Silver Creek and other high schools," Fletcher said.

Justelle Grandsaert (page XX), Fletcher's teacher for the CAP project, said she was happy for their group, especially because not all of the projects were successful in their goals.

"Hope is an extraordinary individual. ... She holds true to her beliefs and convictions and at the same time she is inquisitive and asks thoughtful questions about the other side. She is thorough."

Fletcher said the project was important to her because family has ingrained a love her sports in her.

Her maternal grandfather, the late Bob Foster, was a PE teacher and the first head football coach at Fairview High School and led a long career in local athletics before his death in 2010.

"Grandpa, before he died, pretty much taught me everything I know about sports, and I grew up around sports," said Fletcher, who plays first base and outfield on Silver Creek's varsity softball squad. "We've had season tickets to (University of Colorado at Boulder) football for like 50 years. We go to every single CU game."

On the question of National Football League allegiance, however, Fletcher said she stays true to her dad's midwestern roots.

"The (Green Bay) Packers are my favorite football team because my dad's diehard Packers," Fletcher said. "We all have jerseys, and we all have cheeseheads."

Fletcher said she believes exercising through competitive sports is important for young people, adding that softball has provided a group of like-minded teenage girls she can bond with.

"There really is a team aspect to it. Everything we do is team-oriented, like we have team dinners, scavenger hunts and come up with team slogans," Fletcher said. "And I like being active. It's a good way to focus your energy in positive ways rather than just like, sitting on the computer."

For now, Fletcher is awaiting the delivery of the hard-won heart monitors and in between shooting archery in her backyard for fun, and prepping for her ACT test.

Karen Antonacci: 303-684-5226, antonaccik@times-call.com or twitter.com/ktonacci