Buy Photo Frank Pallone (Photo: File photo )Buy Photo

Rep. Frank Pallone is a traditional liberal Democrat who proudly proclaims his belief in an activist government.

His opponent, Anthony Wilkinson, is a conservative Republican who thinks government should stay out of our lives as much as possible.

For many voters, that’s all they need to know to make a decision in the 6th Congressional District. It might even be more than they need — Pallone’s name recognition alone might be enough, or merely the “D” and “R” labels next to the candidates’ names. Most elections run along a similar course, with a large percentage of votes cast more or less by default.

Pallone will benefit from all of that, and is an almost certain winner. But he is also deserving of support that extends beyond party stereotypes. Pallone was first elected to Congress in 1988 and is seeking his 14th term in the House. He knows how to get things done and continues to serve his district well. He receives our endorsement for re-election.

Pallone has never taken his eye off the particular concerns of his district communities, especially regarding environmental protections along the shore. He was a key player in a ban on ocean dumping back in his earliest days in Congress, and has been a persistent opponent of offshore drilling. He has also been a leader in the fight for superstorm Sandy relief.

But outside the district, Pallone may be best known as one of the chief architects of the Affordable Care Act. That means he knows more than most the balance of pros and cons in the act and how best to fix problems without losing the benefits. Pallone is proud of the ACA’s achievements, and he’ll be needed on Capitol Hill moving forward as the health reforms continue to evolve and attempt to withstand Republican assaults.

Pallone is also well positioned to take on a new, powerful position — as top Democrat on the powerful House Energy and Commerce Committee. He says that’s a prime goal for his next term, and New Jersey would only benefit from having a key legislator in such an influential spot.

Wilkinson of Old Bridge is a Detroit, Mich., native with a far-right ideology — pro-life, pro-gun, anti-gay marriage — that is somehow strangely blended with a professed desire to help the urban poor. The result is an amalgam of positions that repeatedly emphasize spending cuts while also noting the importance of certain government investments. Wilkinson also holds to an overwrought faith in the private sector to fill the gaps of government assistance where benefits have been curtailed or eliminated.

Wilkinson, 49, is a lawyer who switched gears mid-career to become a public school teacher for a time before returning to business law, so he brings a healthy diversity of personal and professional experience to his candidacy. Wilkinson might be better served getting his political feet wet in a lower office; there’s promise here, but he doesn’t yet seem to have figured out how to piece his positions together into a coherent, consistent message.

The 6th Congressional District contains parts of Middlesex and Monmouth counties.

Read or Share this story: http://on.app.com/1wqwSla