At some point in time, most parents face the fact that their kids do not want to take their parent’s calls, return their parent’s calls or reply to their parent’s texts. Parents buy their kids phones for many reasons, but it’s especially important for parents to be able to reach their kids at any given time. And we’ve all felt like Glenn Close in Fatal Attraction when she declared,

“I’m NOT going to be ignored.”

Tired of being constantly ignored by her kids, Sharon Standifird, a mom from Houston, Texas decided she’d had enough. So what did this mom do? According to The Independent, Standifird consulted with designers and developers, and after a few short months, created the ingenious app called, “Ignore No More.”

Parents would be wise to forego their latte this week and fork out the inexpensive $1.99 to purchase this fantastic new app available on android, with the iPhone version quick on its heels.



According to Uproxx, “Ignore No More” is an easy to install app. Standifird says, ‘It takes away texting, it takes away gaming, it takes away calling their friends.”

Once your child’s phone is locked, their smartphone screen goes completely blank, with the exception of a list of approved contacts. The child has two choices at that point, as per Uproxx. In order for them to be able to resume normal functions on their phone, they can either call their parent and kindly ask for the password to unlock the phone, or they can call 911.

Sharon Standifird, parents all over the United States now love you! The Independent reveals the great reviews already posted at the Google Play Store regarding the “Ignore No More” app. One mom, Liane Parker, wrote,

“My son hates it and I love it,” while another mom, Kamiya Keyes Mewborn declares, “Love the idea, even good for bedtime when you want them off the phone.”

The fallout will no doubt be the mayhem caused by the grumpy teenagers who baulk at the idea of their parents having the control to lock their phones. Even Standifirds own son admitted, “I thought it was a good idea, but for other people, not me,” as reported by The Independent. Sounds like similar arguments about Obamacare. Is there an app for that?

From all the thankful parents to Sharon Standifird — We give you a virtual high five.

Photo credit: Bizreport.com