Mike Lucas for Dow Jones

From this morning’s LBO Wire:

Summit Air Ambulance is lifting off from Texas Next Capital’s portfolio. The firm has agreed to sell Summit Air to Reach Air Medical Holdings LLC, a division of Kohlberg Kravis Roberts & Co.-backed Air Medical Group Holdings Inc., Amy Or reports. Summit uses medically configured helicopters and airplanes to transport injured patients from accident scenes and community hospitals to places where they can receive higher levels of care.

More stories available to LBO Wire subscribers: BelHealth Investment Partners is exiting specialty pharmacy Aureus Health Services in a sale to grocery chain Meijer Inc…Charlesbank Capital Partners and M/C Partners are buying the infrastructure management business of publicly traded enterprise data, analytics and software-as-a-service company Acxiom for up to $190 million…and Jordan Co. has acquired DiversiTech Corp., a manufacturer and distributor of air-conditioning and heating products.

(LBO Wire is a daily newsletter with comprehensive analysis of all the investments, deals, fundraisings and personnel moves involving private equity firms. For a two-week trial, visit http://on.wsj.com/DJPEVCNews, scroll to the bottom and click “try for free.”)

Elsewhere on the Web:

The Securities and Exchange Commission took the first in a series of steps aimed at giving regulators a better handle on risk in the $60 trillion asset-management industry, Andrew Ackerman reports for The Wall Street Journal.

Carlyle Group is nearing a close on its latest technology fund above its €500 billion target as it agrees to the fourth exit from its second tech fund, selling The Foundry Visionmongers Ltd. to HgCapital for £200 million, Yolanda Bobeldijk reports for LBO Wire’s U.K. sister publication Private Equity News (subscription required).

U.K. firm Electra Private Equity saw its diluted net asset value per share rise 12% in the first half of its financial year and said it would make its first-ever dividend payment, according to Reuters.

Also from Reuters: Joseph Bae, a KKR dealmaker sent to Hong Kong 10 years ago to set up its Asian operations, will move back to the U.S.

Oaktree Capital Management co-Chairman Howard Marks said Europe has become more attractive than the U.S., even with “virtually all assets trading above their intrinsic value,” according to Bloomberg News.

Also from Bloomberg: KKR’s Henry Kravis and his wife, Marie-Josee, are giving $100 million to Rockefeller University to help create a laboratory building in Manhattan. This is the second recent nine-figure check that a private equity executive has written for a university, after Yale University announced a $150 million gift earlier this month from Blackstone Group Chief Executive Stephen A. Schwarzman.

Write to Thomas Dunford at thomas.dunford@wsj.com