More dead dogs were found in northern Tulsa County, animal advocates originally thought it might be the remnants of a dog fighting ring, now they say things look even more suspicious.

The Tulsa County Sheriff's Office said they are investigating this incident, but some animal rights advocates don't believe deputies are taking it seriously.

It's a nasty sight along the side of a Tulsa County road; multiple dead dogs, some with their bodies slit.

Lori Hall, with Oklahoma Alliance for Animals, said, "This one right here his chest is cut open, so what's going on? Why is the need for the chest to be cut open?"

Oklahoma Alliance for Animals members were called to 56 Street North and Yale in December. They found pit pulls, some dead, some barely hanging on.

Since then, they've found even more dogs. They think all signs point to a possible dog fighting ring.

"When dogs fight, they go for the neck and there's some conditioning going on with that neck, so you wonder was he in a fight," said Hall.

Another sign of animal abuse, an ice chest full of raw meat.

"What I understand with the meat, they will put gunpowder in the meat and feed it to the pits to fight and it upsets their digestive systems and makes them meaner and want to fight more," Hall said.

Hall said one dog was found next to another that appears to have been hit by a car. And further down the street, an abandoned pit bull that had just given birth.

When we first reported on this, Tulsa County Sheriff Deputies told us it was strange so many dogs were found in the same area. They have since said they're investigating and they're taking this matter very seriously.

"If these dogs are being neglected," Hall said. "Wrapped in a sheet and then dumped out here, something's going on and we would really like some answers on what's going on."

There is a $25,000 reward for anyone with information that leads to an arrest and conviction.

The Oklahoma Alliance for Animals said it has gotten some tips, but it needs a lot more to know exactly what happened to these dogs.