RAISE YOUR VOICE: Share your own opinion online at dallasnews.com/sendletters. Sign up for Sounding Off or submit a guest column (and include your full name and contact information) by visiting dallasnews.com/voices.

Do you think Dallas County property taxes should be raised to pay for the new Parkland Memorial Hospital? Why or why not?

Neil J. Orleans, Richardson: If property taxes are not raised, how are the services rendered by Parkland Memorial Hospital going to be paid? None of us wants to pay additional property taxes, but with an increase in hospital services anticipated and a decrease in Medicaid funding, what are the alternatives?

Rod Scales, Far North Dallas: I am not surprised that we are getting a tax hit for the new Parkland Memorial Hospital. I realize there is a need, but it seems like Dallas County is subsidizing the adjoining counties who don’t have such a facility. I think they make a contribution, but how much? Do the South American countries reimburse us for treating the unauthorized immigrants? Is it deducted from our foreign aid to them? Why not print what Parkland has invoiced these countries and local counties and how much of that has been paid? Impossible to find on the Internet. This would present a fairer case to the taxpayer when asking for the increase.

Ernest Stokely, Far North Dallas: The issues surrounding the financing of Parkland Memorial Hospital go back 50 years or more. The problem is Parkland is a regional medical resource, but none of the surrounding municipalities and counties want to sink a dime into sustaining Parkland. Since we don't have an income tax in Texas, property taxes are about the only available revenue to support infrastructure like Parkland Memorial Hospital. The question is, whose property taxes should rise? Surrounding counties and municipalities should pay a proportional share. The only solution would have to come from the Texas Legislature, a body almost as dysfunctional as Congress.

Kathy Minde, Richardson: I am not sure what other option there is to pay for the hospital other than property tax. My understanding is patients from other counties can use Parkland. If there is not already, it would seem fair to find a way to make other counties pay for their residents’ use of Parkland. I don’t mind paying the slight extra in property taxes to upgrade the facilities, but would hope the patients using it who cannot pay do not abuse the privilege. On the bright side, people who itemize their deductions can use property taxes to reduce their federal tax liability and reduce the impact of the increase.

Richard Edwards, Richardson: Yes. There are functions of different levels of government. As much as we would like our taxes to remain level, these government functions (hospital, roads, schools, courts, etc.) have employees that get raises just like everybody else. I do not begrudge them raises. I do have problems with the highest levels getting compensation that far exceeds the salaries of their employees.

Sydney McQuoid, Far North Dallas: Dallas County is losing Medicaid funding because Gov. Perry rejected Medicaid expansion under the Affordable Care Act. Texans’ taxpayer dollars are being forfeited for political gain. As long as Republicans hold the governorship, taxpayers will be on the hook. November is the time to vote for fiscally responsible Democrats including Wendy Davis and Leticia Van de Putte who will accept Medicaid expansion. Eligible Texans will have health insurance, reliance on expensive emergency rooms will decrease and taxpayers will benefit because federal dollars will come home to Texas. Parkland’s balance sheet will improve under this scenario.

Byron Kern, Richardson: Taxpayers are already helping to pay the medical costs of many who use Parkland. These include not only Dallas County legal citizens, but also unauthorized immigrants and people from other nearby counties who do not have a hospital like Parkland. Unauthorized immigrants also attend the public schools, and legal citizens are paying for this. I would agree to the tax increase if only legal Dallas County citizens were permitted to use Parkland.

Morris D. Fried, Richardson: Surprise, surprise. Our conservative governor and Legislature do everything they can to sabotage the Affordable Care Act and refuse, as a matter of “principle,” to accept federal money to expand Medicaid and this is a small part of the result. Along with higher than necessary mortality (from supposedly pro-life politicians), our hospitals are left with the high cost of emergency treatment of all of the uninsured and have no choice but to pass the cost on to us.

Mike Lysell, Richardson: The new Parkland Memorial Hospital has to be paid for so raising the tax rate seems appropriate. I’m not sure if the full 3 cents is needed, however.

In addition, if the state would join the expanded Medicaid program, it would result in more money to cover more of the uninsured patients seen every year by Parkland. And if more of the working poor had coverage, it could also mean fewer visits for emergency care. Our state appears determined to keep taxes low at the state level, but that results in higher local taxes. The hospital must provide medical care to all in need and it has to be paid for someway.

LaRuth Morrow, the Reservation in Richardson: In 2008, the Dallas County voters reached out in good faith to fund the new Parkland Memorial Hospital. Now we are six years down the financial road and the hospital district is looking for alternative funding because of the rise in building and maintenance costs. The failure of the state and national government to keep their funding promises has passed the bill to the responsible tax-paying citizens who have increased financial responsibilities of their own. A surface overview of public hospitals show that the uninsured use the emergency rooms for primary care. In spite of all the national programs to help the poor, this population is growing and the uninsured is growing with them. I do not support raising property taxes to pay for the new hospital as this is like punishing the responsible.