Call 573-815-1776 or email tribtalk@columbiatribune.com to contribute.

Jim Robertson, managing editor

You must login to view the full content on this page. Screen Name or Email Password Forgot? Remember me on this computer Login Screen Name or Email Now I remember! Or, use your facebook account: facebook Need an account? Create one now.

“People got lured into a feeling of utopia with the gas prices we’ve had for the last months. Now that we’ve bought up all those gas guzzlers, V-8s and all the cars that would not sell, watch what happens next. You’ll probably have to have a hundred dollars or more to fill up the tank once.”

“We’ve got something a lot more dangerous to our country than ISIS. It’s the enemies from within. It’s the GOP that will not represent America no matter what they swore in their oath. They just say ‘no’ to everything. If Hillary does win, they will take bad sportsmanship to the next level.”

“I saw how toddlers are using guns to hurt other people or shoot themselves. What kind of parent leaves a gun out where a toddler can get it? That is the most irresponsible thing a parent can do, and I do not understand that.”

“Instead of instituting a hiring freeze and cutting jobs, programs and services that benefit the students at Mizzou, I would love to see the highly paid administrators and perhaps the tenured faculty members take a voluntary pay cut. Leadership starts at the top.”

“When you get too many people going around carrying guns, you increase the chances that some ignorant person is going to be jealous over somebody or somebody’s going to get drunk, and this could be a bad situation for somebody that’s got a gun in their hands.”

“To the person who said we need more job killers like Obamacare — what they don’t realize is people like me cannot afford Obamacare. I cannot afford the $700 a month for the premium. So what’s Obama going to do about this? Obamacare is ridiculous. I should be able to pay a monthly premium based on what I want covered and what I can afford, not what the government tells me I can get.”

“So the city council wants to put a roundabout at Green Meadows. This town has gone roundabout-crazy. There’s just too many of them. They’re stupid. People won’t go around, and they cut you off. This town is going to be known as the town of roundabouts instead of the University of Missouri at Columbia.”

“I mailed a first-class letter on March 20 from the Columbia post office drive-through. On April 25, I got confirmation that the letter arrived at its Denver destination — 36 days after mailing. Something is bad wrong with the postal system.”

“Jim Robertson, I see that somebody had called in about Bruce Springsteen canceling his tour, and then you supported it by saying opinions are one thing but laws are another and that cancellations are his way of expressing his opinion. So I’m taking it that you endorse Bruce Springsteen doing so because he is of such outstanding moral fiber.”

Robertson replies: I endorse expressions of opinion.

“One of the major problems we have in society is the large number of unfit parents who either will not or cannot take care of their children and raise them to be productive, law-abiding citizens. Republican politicians want the government to force women to bring even more unwanted children into the world. That is a recipe for social disaster.”

“In looking for a new system president, the UM curators might do well to wait until the November election is over and the political climate of the state and nation has been determined. A quality person is more likely to serve if he or she knows someone has their back.”

“Jim, I just want to respond again to the fact that our legislators in the state of Missouri are wasting so much of our money trying to go after Planned Parenthood. It’s quite a joke. I would like to leave this quote from Sister Joan Chittister: ‘I do not believe that just because you are opposed to abortion that makes you pro-life. In fact in many cases your morality is deeply lacking if all you want is a child born but not a child fed, not a child housed, not a child educated. And why would I think that you don’t? Because you don’t want your tax money to go there. That’s not pro-life. That’s pro-birth. We need a much deeper conversation on what the morality of pro-life is.’”