The fight over Medicaid expansion has left casualties on both sides of the state line.

On Saturday, Mercy Hospital in Independence, Kansas, closed, following 18 months of discussions regarding the future of health care in the town of 9,200.

Kansas Hospital Association spokeswoman Cindy Samuelson said Independence has some of the same struggles as other rural hospitals — a declining population and trouble recruiting and retaining physicians — but she also said the state’s unwillingness to expand Medicaid cost the hospital $1.6 million annually and played a role in the decision.

“You know that had to have an impact,” she said.

It was the first hospital closing in Kansas in nine years.

It came on the heels of an announcement last month by Via Christi, a Catholic hospital network based in Wichita, Kansas, that said it lost $14 million in 2013 and again in 2014. It also said it was behind budget by $3.3 million for the current fiscal year, which started July 1. Via Christi runs the hospital in Pittsburg. VIa Christi administrators blamed the financial loss on the state’s decision not to expand Medicaid.

Across the state line, in Lamar, Barton County Memorial Hospital also has felt the impact of the Missouri General Assembly's decision not to expand Medicaid in recent years.

“In 2014, we wrote off about $750,000 in uninsured, and that’s a significant amount of money for us,” said CEO Wendy Duvall. “We are very much struggling, being a small, stand-alone hospital not affiliated with anybody, and we don’t have money coming in from elsewhere. ... To compound the problem, in rural areas you have a higher population typically of lower income residents who have less opportunity for jobs that are going to provide them health care coverage.”

But even bigger hospitals in the region are feeling the pain.

Joplin’s Freeman Health System controller Mike Leone said Freeman has seen about a $1 million decrease in reimbursements by the federal government for uncompensated care for each of the past three years.

He said he believes that trend could accelerate if Medicaid is not expanded.

No relief in election year

The decision by states to expand their Medicaid programs was made optional by a 2012 decision by the U.S. Supreme Court that also upheld other provisions of the Affordable Care Act, commonly known as Obamacare.

Thirty-one states and the District of Columbia have adopted expansion. But in Kansas and Missouri, with legislatures dominated by Republican majorities, as well as 17 other states, the idea of accepting additional federal funds to expand the program’s rolls has been a non-­starter.

And no one is expecting relief any time soon.

In Kansas, Gov. Sam Brownback has said repeatedly that the state won't expand Medicaid until disabled Kansans already on Medicaid are removed from a home services waiting list.

Melika Willoughby, Brownback's deputy director of communications, said in a recent email that "Medicaid expansion creates new entitlements for able-bodied adults without dependents, prioritizing those who choose not to work before intellectually, developmentally, and physically disabled, the frail and elderly, and those struggling with mental health issues."

She referred to it as “morally reprehensible,” and said there are no plans by the administration to expand Medicaid.

Brownback, as well as many other state politicians, have pointed to the Affordable Care Act as the cause of the financial health care struggles across the state rather than the decision not to expand Medicaid. Brownback also has disputed the notion that the hospital closing in Independence was a result of the state’s opposition to Medicaid expansion and said "they should blame it on Obamacare."

Sara Belfry, communications director for Kansas Department of Health and Environment, said expansion would cost the state more than $1.2 billion in the first 10 years.

Many Missouri Republicans also have said they are unwilling to expand Medicaid because they argue it is a Trojan Horse.

Had Medicaid already been expanded, Missouri would not have had to pay anything for the first three years, through 2016. But in 2017, the federal government will begin shifting a share of those expansion costs to the state, until in 2021 when the federal government will only be paying 90 percent of the cost, with the state picking up 10 percent.

Senate Appropriations Chairman Kurt Schaefer, R-Columbia, said at the beginning of the 2015 legislative session that Medicaid expansion could ultimately cost Missouri hundreds of millions of dollars, and he didn’t trust the federal government to keep up its end of the match.

"All that money will have to come from education. Absent a massive tax increase, that will decimate public education funding. The K-­12 formula is already $450 million underfunded because of the general revenue growth in the existing Medicaid program, and expansion does nothing to stop the continued yearly growth of the existing Medicaid population of 900,000 people.”

Other Republican legislators, including Tom Flanigan, R­-Carthage, House Budget Committee chairman, have also expressed concerns that the federal government will not keep up its end of the bargain, and will continue shifting to states additional costs of the Medicaid expansion.

And last week, state Rep. Charlie Davis, R-Webb City, said he also has concerns with Medicaid expansion and its contribution to the mounting national debt, as well as the abuse, fraud and wasteful spending in the system now.

He said he also is concerned that expanding benefits to include everyone up to 138 percent of the federal poverty level would mean loss of benefits to children who can receive benefits up to 300 percent of the federal poverty level and for pregnant women who receive benefits up to 180 percent.

“We provide Medicaid for them, but if the state was to expand it to 138 percent of the federal poverty level, look at how many children and pregnant women would actually be cut off,” he said.

Davis also said it is unlikely the issue will come up again in 2016 because it is an election year.

Mercy Hospital Missouri spokesman Mike Peters also said that it’s unlikely any action will be taken by the General Assembly next year.

Up next

On Nov. 3, a coalition of Kansas hospitals that includes Via Christi will hold an educational meeting for state politicians to try to convince them to expand the program in that state; on the agenda is a discussion about how Republican-controlled Indiana achieved Medicaid expansion.

Kansas state Sen. Jacob LaTurner, R-Pittsburg, who represents an area from Fort Scott, Kansas, to the Oklahoma border, said he plans to “take a serious look at it and look carefully at what can be done in the next session.”

In particular, he said, he’s interested in finding out more about rural hospitals that "already are struggling and are having a tougher time.”

Peters, the vice president of government relations for Mercy’s Missouri hospitals, said non-expansion in Missouri has proven to be “creating a hardship” for hospitals and health systems of all sizes since January 2014.

“When a small hospital closes, those patients have to go somewhere to seek care. They travel to a bigger hospital. The care for those patients doesn’t go away, it shifts to another location,” he said.

Last summer, Mercy announced plans to lay off 300 to 350 workers out of a 40,000-member workforce. Mercy operates in seven states, including hospitals in Joplin, Carthage and Springfield, the one that closed in Independence, as well as a hospital in Fort Scott, Kansas. It also operates a critical care hospital in Columbus, Kansas, and numerous clinics around the region.

The health care company has cited the lack of Medicaid expansion in Missouri as one of the reasons for the layoffs.

That announcement last summer followed one in the summer of 2014, in which Mercy said it was cutting 220 jobs from its workforce.

Both job cuts included workers in Carthage and Joplin.

In 2014, Ozarks Community Hospital in Springfield also said it had to lay off up to 60 of its employees in the region, out of about 800 employees. Hospital officials also blamed layoffs on the failure to expand Medicaid in the state.

In a news release as part of advocacy efforts by the coalition of Kansas hospitals, Via Christi said changes because of the hospital's financial losses include reducing 110 full-time positions through attrition over the past 18 months across its network, scaling back spending on projects that aren’t significantly underway, and halting all discretionary spending for travel, education, meetings or other similar costs.

Through attrition and a small layoff, Duvall’s staff at Barton County Memorial is down by 30 employees this year. The hospital, one of the largest employers in Barton County, had 220 workers in 2012 and now employs 160.

Freeman CEO and President Paula Baker said staff has not yet been reduced, but as the hospital assesses adding new physicians, the losses must be taken into consideration.

“The point I always like to make is the financial impact is something of interest, but far, far greater than that impact is the impact it has on those individuals who don’t have coverage and as a result can’t avail themselves of the services they really need,” Baker said. “That’s the biggest tragedy of the failure to pass it.”

‘Misperceptions’

Baker said she believes one of the barriers to expanding Medicaid in Kansas and Missouri is the "misperception that it is a vehicle to subsidize individuals who are not working."

“That’s really not the case at all,” she said. “Many, many of the eligible under this plan are the working poor. Both adults are working, but aren’t able to earn very much money.”

In Barton County, Duvall said “a significant portion” of the patients her hospital treats are families of four with an income of $40,000, and with both spouses working.

“They are working, trying as hard as they can to make ends meet and take care of their families, but they can’t afford health care coverage,” she said, “so we end up eating the cost.”

“Anyone who walks into our emergency room, we have to treat, we don’t have the option,” Duvall said. “And that number is increasing, because people can’t afford to go to the doctor, because docs will demand payment, so they end up going to the ER.”

“Then if they need medication, where do they go to get that medication? Prescriptions are expensive. That’s what not expanding Medicaid has done to not just us, but everyone across Missouri,” she said.

Marketplace insurance covers those whose incomes are above 143 percent of poverty level, but about 16 percent of Barton County falls into the gap where they have no coverage, Duvall said.

“Here, they’re taking up our more expensive resources,” she said. “ER doctors are taking care of people who have sore throats, colds, the flu, instead of taking care of someone who needs emergency care.”

At the KHA, Samuelson argues that many of the 150,000 uninsured Kansans who would be eligible for coverage under expansion work as dishwashers, housekeepers, janitors, landscapers, bus drivers, child care workers, retail salespeople and fast food workers in Kansas communities.

A coalition of groups supporting efforts to expand Medicaid in Missouri say the act would ensure health care for about 300,000 residents who fall in a "coverage gap" between the state's current Medicaid levels and coverage under the federal Affordable Care Act.

Krista Postai heads up the Community Health Center of Southeast Kansas. Based in Pittsburg, it has clinics in several Southeast Kansas towns including Baxter Springs.

“Between 40 and 45 percent of the people we serve are uninsured,” said Postai, who added the lack of Medicaid expansion has cost the CHC $2 million.

Samuelson said that from a statewide perspective, by the end of 2015, more than $355.3 million in federal reimbursement cuts, additional fees and taxes intended to support the ACA will leave Kansas and go to Washington, D.C., to be spent in other states that are expanding their Medicaid programs.

“One argument against expansion that we discussed was that it wasn’t affordable, but the federal government is covering the full cost of Medicaid expansion for the first three years (2014, 2015, 2016) and then transitioning to 90 percent payment by 2020,” Samuelson said. “Kansas will pay only 10 percent of the cost. This is much less than the 40 percent Kansas pays for our current Medicaid program.”

The Associated Press contributed to this report.

———

©2015 The Joplin Globe (Joplin, Mo.)

Visit The Joplin Globe (Joplin, Mo.) at www.joplinglobe.com

Distributed by Tribune Content Agency, LLC.