SACRAMENTO — A day after a state senator revived a bill to hike the state’s cigarette tax by $2 a pack, a new Field Poll unveiled Thursday found that two-thirds of California voters back such a tax increase.

That’s one of the key findings in the second part of the polling firm’s ninth annual health policy survey, funded by the California Wellness Foundation.

The poll also found that voter satisfaction with the state’s health care system overall has steadily grown from 50 percent in 2008, to 52 percent in 2012, to 58 percent today — nearly two years after most of the provisions of the Affordable Care Act went into effect.

“That’s my biggest take-away,” said Mark DiCamillo, director of the Field Poll. “The passage of the law has really led to a more satisfied view of how the state health care system is working.”

Still, 4 in 10 voters told pollsters that they and their families paid more for health care over the past year. And a similar proportion said it’s difficult for them to afford health care.

Meanwhile, 78 percent of voters said they favored increasing government oversight of health insurance companies to ensure their listings of in-network doctors and other health care providers are up to date. Only 18 percent opposed the idea.

At the state Capitol on Wednesday morning, DiCamillo presented an early look at the survey to a panel of five health care experts and about 50 audience members.

While most of the discussion focused on the first-day poll results that showed a majority of California voters are embracing the reforms introduced by the Affordable Care Act — commonly called “Obamacare” — the tobacco tax issue was extremely timely.

That’s because during this month’s special legislative session, lawmakers began laying the groundwork to pass a new tax on health care plans that would fund health care for the poor, as well as a package of anti-smoking bills that aim to lower the state’s health care costs by reducing the number of Californians who use tobacco products.

Dr. Richard Pan, D-Sacramento, is sponsoring the new bill that would raise the cost of a pack of cigarettes by $2 — a measure similar to his bill that stalled in the Legislature earlier this year. He noted that California’s current 87-cent-per-pack tobacco tax makes the state 33rd in the nation, far below New York, which charges a tax of $4.35 a pack. The state levies are on top of a $1.01 federal tax on cigarettes.

Pan’s measure would also impose a groundbreaking tax on e-cigarettes. The legislation also stipulates that the revenue collected must be used to increase the number of physicians in California, combat bootlegging and support existing health care programs managed by the state.

Advertisement

“California had been a leader in the fight against Big Tobacco, but tobacco is still costing us money and lives — and it has to stop,” Pan said in an interview with this newspaper.

Because tax and fee increases require the support of two-thirds of lawmakers in both houses of the Legislature, Democrats seeking to raise taxes will need help from their GOP colleagues.

A rally for the $2-per-pack tax was held Wednesday next to the Capitol by the Save Lives California coalition, made up of groups such as the California Medical Association, the American Cancer Society, the American Lung Association and the Service Employees International Union.

The coalition said that if the Legislature fails to muster the two-thirds vote to pass the tax, it will put the tax proposal on the 2016 ballot.

The need for new revenue to cover the state’s growing health care costs is “critically important,” she said, noting that there will be a “big hole” in the state’s budget for Medi-Cal, the state’s health program for the poor, unless the Legislature acts to pass a new tax on managed health care plans.

Pan said he knows it won’t be easy to convince Republicans to support a tax increase, but he said he believes a tobacco tax is a “win-win” for taxpayers because it would increase revenue and decrease costs simultaneously.

“It’s time to step away from the rhetoric and look at the facts,” Pan said. “But if my colleagues refuse to support this, we’ll take it to the ballot. The people will pass this.”

DiCamillo said he’s not surprised that respondents expressed such overwhelming support for a $2-per-pack cigarette tax, because so-called “sin taxes” on tobacco and alcohol have always been popular.

If the Legislature fails to enact the tax, he said, the poll results showing 67 percent support for the measure may not mean much if the issue goes to the ballot and voters are bombarded by negative advertising paid for by Big Tobacco.

One of the biggest controversies generated by the Affordable Care Act is the issue of inaccurate provider directories listed by health insurers. The issue has remained a sore subject for thousands of Californians who over the last 22 months enrolled in a health care plan under the health law only to discover that doctors and hospitals listed under their plans were not accepting them.

Senate Bill 137, carried by Sen. Ed Hernandez, D-West Covina, would require health plans and insurers to post accurate health care provider directories on their websites.

The Assembly Appropriations Committee was set to take up the bill on Thursday morning, but the high estimated costs to implement the change may hinder its success.

The poll of 1,555 California registered voters was done over the phone from June 25 to July 16. While the majority of the interviews were conducted in English, 328 were done in Spanish, Cantonese, Mandarin, Korean, Vietnamese, Tagalog and Hindi. The poll has a margin of error of plus or minus 2.6 percentage points.