Jay Carney on midterm elections: 2014 ‘not going to be a good year for Democrats’

A few days after enduring a good scolding from Sen. John McCain (R-Ariz.), former White House press secretary Jay Carney continued his stint as a political commentator on CNN by weighing in on the Democrats’ chances in the November midterm elections.

On “State of the Union” Sunday, Carney said plainly that it won’t be a “good year” for Democrats running for Congress.

“It’s not going to be a good year for Democrats by definition,” explained Carney. “The sixth year is always particularly bad for a president’s party.”

Moreover, he suggested that the best outcome that Obama’s party can expect in November is to “barely” hold onto its majority in the Senate.

“There’s no outcome in November that anybody could say would be great for Democrats, except for barely holding onto the Senate,” Carney asserted.

However, Carney also said that a positive outcome for Republicans — that is, winning a majority in the Senate and House of Representatives — would also have its disadvantages for the GOP.

“The problem for Republicans, if they win, is Americans begin to think ‘We hate Congress’ and it’s now clear that one party is in control of Congress,” supposed Carney.

Whether Republicans gain control of the Senate or Democrats maintain their own, Carney admitted that the “terrible gridlock” about which President Obama too often complains will remain in Washington.

“I think either outcome produces terrible gridlock,” stated Carney. “What we’ve seen for the last two years, I think, is record gridlock.”

Carney’s comments come just days after election forecaster Stuart Rothenberg predicted that Republicans will achieve a “net gain of seven seats” or more in November and hence will overtake the Senate and take control of Congress.

CNN announced last Wednesday that Carney would join the network as a political commentator, and he began his new career fittingly by weighing in on and defending Obama’s speech about his ISIS strategy.