More than 12,000 people who purchased policies through Cover Oregon could owe a combined $1.12 million at tax time because of errors in subsidized premiums issued by the health insurance exchange.

The vast majority of people affected are expected to owe no more than $10 per month that their policy was in effect. That figure is not final, however, because a $10,000 consultant's study intended to settle the question did not succeed. The exchange is planning to commission a second, more in-depth study.

The problem that Cover Oregon was using an incorrect formula to award tax credits to qualified consumers, potentially affecting more than 10,000 people, was first reported by The Oregonian on Sept. 5.

Exchange officials declined to provide estimates at the time, but on Sept. 15 told lawmakers the erroneous formula affected only about 800 households. Sen. Chip Shields, D-Portland, expressed skepticism and suggested the exchange bring in an outside consultant to double-check.

Shields' comment was prophetic. Within about a week, officials realized the true number was much larger. Exchange officials announced a study to double-check their internal estimate.

A document released under Oregon Public Records Law shows that an internal staff estimate completed on or about Sept 23 found errors in 12,772 policies, or 38 percent of those who received tax credits. The total amount paid out incorrectly by the exchange was $1.12 million, according to the estimate.

On Oct. 2, exchange officials hired Carl Batten of ECONorthwest to look into the new staff estimate. However, they then realized that his findings, submitted Monday, did not expose the full problem -- so they are now planning a second study.

Batten only looked at tax credit errors caused by the exchange's erroneous formula. He found that type of error affected 7,490 households, causing erroneous payments of about $360,000. However, his study also noted there were "other apparent discrepancies," meaning other tax credit errors caused by different problems, said Cover Oregon executive director Aaron Patnode on Thursday. Batten's study did not look at the other problems.

Patnode said that the staff estimate completed in September of nearly 13,000 policyholders affected may be a better approximation of the overall problem. The exchange estimates that each policy covers an average of 1.7 people.

The vast majority of errors were $10 or less per month that the insurance policy was in place, according to the staff estimate. Only 252 policyholders are subject to an error of more than $10, and 79 are subject to errors of more than $100 per month.

People who've received too much in tax credits could be hit by the IRS at tax time under Affordable Care Act rules.

Under the federal health law, people can submit their projected incomes to the health exchange to receive credits in advance of filing taxes. Doing so can reduce the monthly cost of health insurance premiums up front.

The tax credits went to those with incomes ranging from 138 percent to 400 percent of the federal poverty level. Individuals earning between $15,860 and $45,960 and facing a $5,000 yearly premium would receive a tax credit worth between $630 and $4,480, according to the group Families USA.

Patnode said he is looking into possible ways to compensate people who were given lower premiums than they qualified for. "We're concerned about the families that are impacted by this," he said.

The more extreme cases of owing money may be curbed by federal rules that cap the amount of tax that would need to be repaid. Individual filers making twice the federal poverty level or less couldn't be required to repay more than $300.

Families making nearly four times the poverty level could have to repay as much as $2,500 under the same tax credit reimbursement caps. People with year-end income of more than four times poverty level will have to repay the full amount of tax credits received, however.

Federal and state officials urge consumers receiving the credits to make sure they keep their projected income information updated. To avoid owing money at the end of the year, any changes should be reported promptly by calling 855-268-3767.

Exchange staff first noticed the erroneous tax credit formula in January, but were focused on fixing the exchange's technology problems, Patnode said.

Now that Oregon is using the federal exchange starting Nov. 15, he said, the tax credit issue should be over. When open enrollment begins, everyone who signed up for private plans through the exchange will need to re-enroll in a 2015 plan by Dec. 15 if they want to keep their coverage uninterrupted.

--Nick Budnick