As the half was winding down, North Henderson was in control.

Smoky Mountain didn’t know that though. The Mustangs scored seven unanswered points in the final minute of the half to turn a five-point deficit into a two-point lead at 23-21 at the end of the second quarter.

The Knights (20-2, 12-2) never recovered and Smoky clinched a share of the WNC Athletic Conference title with a 62-45 victory on Wednesday night at North.

Drew Williams hit two free throws late in the second quarter to put the Knights up 21-16. North had all the momentum.

Then, Austin Baumgarner rattled off consecutive baskets.

The Knights were clinging to a 21-20 lead and were going to hold for the final shot. The Mustangs (20-3, 12-2) pressed and stole the ball. It ended up in the hands of Trey Tritt, who released it from halfcourt for a 3-pointer at the buzzer.

“It absolutely took the wind out of our sails,” North coach Justin Parris said. “You could just feel it.”

The Mustangs then took control in the second half, extending the lead to double digits and North never really got back into it.

A big part of that was foul trouble. Star guard Austin Nelson had two fouls in the first quarter. He got his third early in the third quarter.

Those early fouls affected how the Knights played in the second half, Parris said.

“In the second half, we got less aggressive because of that foul trouble,” the coach said.

Drew Williams led the way with 17 for the Knights. Ryan Decker chipped in 11 and Nelson had 10.

Tritt led the Mustangs with 22 points.

North will host Franklin tonight at 6 in the first round of the WNCAC conference tournament.

GIRLS

SMOKY MOUNTAIN 51, NORTH HENDERSON 33

North Henderson battled Smoky Mountain in the first half on Wednesday night.

Shelly Banz scored six points early, and the Lady Knights were down just 23-18 at the half.

The second half belonged to Smoky though. Smoky (21-2, 13-1) started the third quarter on a 15-0 run and North never recovered.

Caroline Marsh led North with 12 points. Smoky had 12 different players score, but none reached double digits.

North (7-16, 3-11) will play in the first round of the WNCAC tournament on Friday. The opponent was not available as of the press deadline.