House to vote on tax extenders

With help from Sarah Karlin and Rachana Pradhan

TODAY: THE END OF YEAR VOTING SPRINT BEGINS — First up: the House will vote today on the tax extenders package, which includes the medical device tax delay, among other issues. The omnibus spending bill will get a vote Friday, before it heads over to the Senate for consideration. So far, it looks like the bills are a lock for passage: even the conservative House Freedom Caucus isn't giving Speaker Paul Ryan too much grief, POLITICO reports: http://politi.co/1IVw9lS

Story Continued Below

THOSE OBAMACARE PROVISIONS ARE DELAYED … BUT THEN WHAT? — "The budget deal negotiated on Capitol Hill would strike a $35 billion hole in Obamacare’s financing, but the real concern that is now scaring economists is that the moratorium on three taxes is just the start of their permanent repeal," Pro's Jennifer Haberkorn writes. That's a hefty price tag for delay — but full repeal would cost the government upwards of $250 billion over 10 years. Jen continues: "[Peter] Orszag and other economists who support the ACA said in interviews with POLITICO that the budget deal’s one- and two-year cuts to the ACA taxes are not catastrophic on their own. But the long-term risk of repeal or continuous delays — a pattern that has played out many times before — is worrisome. … Many economists warn that undermining the long-term cost containment in Obamacare — of which the Cadillac tax was a key component — can end up hurting the whole law. The ACA was built on three pillars — an expansion of health insurance coverage, deficit reduction and cost containment. 'You need all three,' Orszag said." The full Pro story, here.

CLINTON HINTS AT OPPOSITION TO OBAMACARE'S 30-HOUR RULE — The Democratic presidential frontrunner made waves earlier this fall when she broke with the White House to oppose the Cadillac tax. And now Hillary Clinton is suggesting she's not in favor the law's 30-hour workweek rule — long opposed by Republican lawmakers. "That’s why [companies] are going to part-time. That, and also, the Affordable Care Act," she said, referring first to family leave requirements. "We've got to change that because we have built in some unfortunate incentives that discourage full-time employment. A lot of employers believe if you don’t work 40-hours a week you don’t get benefits. … There is a disincentive in our system that we need to deal with and I really worry about it because there is trend to try and move more and more people into part-time work." The 30-hour rule took effect in January; a House vote that month repealing the mandate was supported by every Republican and 18 Democrats. Sen. Mitch McConnell hasn't yet delivered on a promise to bring the issue up for a vote in his chamber.

SIDE EFFECTS INCLUDE: PRIVACY VIOLATIONS? — Like convenience stores and tech companies, drug companies are now offering price discounts and subsidies to patients who are willing to hand over their medical data. And as Pro's Darius Tahir reports, "The details of that exchange can be easy to miss: they're in the fine print." He explores copay cards and patient assistance programs that often explicitly ask patients to waive their HIPAA rights. "There doesn't seem to be much interest in regulating or legislating the requests away; these days on Capitol Hill, listeners hear more complaints about what HIPAA prevents than what it enables," he writes. "Companies use data to understand how a drug is performing across a population, but also to gain insight for marketing to, or communicating with individual patients, says Robert Merold, an industry consultant. The data requests in the subsidy programs, he added, are mostly focused on the latter use — direct communication." Plenty more here, for Pros: http://politico.pro/1k4etbU

GOOD THURSDAY MORNING and welcome to PULSE, where we couldn't help but think of the novel Station Eleven when we read yesterday's GAO report on how well prepared the nation's airports and airlines are for virus. (Hint: not very well prepared — and neither the Transportation Department nor the CDC think their agencies should lead efforts to develop a preparedness plan.) That's here: http://1.usa.gov/1NTYaug. If you read Station Eleven, you know how paranoid we're getting now — so help us tamp that down by sending some other book recommendations, tips and comments to emershon@politico.com and @eemershon.

"I fly like paper, get high like planes. If you catch me at the border I got PULSE in my name."

UNINSURED DON'T KNOW ABOUT SIGN-UP DEADLINES — There may be a whole hullabaloo in Washington when HHS extends an ACA deadline for two days, but most of the uninsured can't even say when open enrollment ends, according to a new Kaiser Family Foundation poll. Just 7 percent of uninsured respondents correctly said January was the deadline to enroll, they found, though another 20 percent guessed it was the end of this year. About 20 percent said they'd been personally contacted about signing up for coverage in the last six months. Once again, affordability is the main reason they're not signing up — relatively few cited any other reasons. Yet, about 55 percent said they plan to get coverage in the next few months.

— Kaiser also asked about support for "Medicare-for-all," which Democratic presidential candidate Bernie Sanders favors. Democrats and independents like the idea, but even Democrats say it wouldn't be a driving issue behind their vote.

** A message from PhRMA: For the last 100 years, heart disease has been the leading cause of U.S. deaths. But these numbers are slowly declining, thanks in large part to innovative new treatments. With nearly 200 medicines in development to treat cardiovascular disease, patients have never had more hope to live longer, healthier lives: http://onphr.ma/1mb2Dyv.**

MEANINGFUL USE BILL MIRED IN HOSPITAL POLITICS — Congress was all set to vote this week on a mostly uncontroversial package of Medicare tweaks, mostly on meaningful use requirements — but alas, hospital politics may be mucking that up. House Democrats have asked to add a controversial hospital payment provision — which would exempt some facilities from payment reductions included in a budget package earlier this year — to the otherwise uncontroversial bill. Republicans, though, don't want to deal with the hospital payment issue until next year. Democrats are now holding up that underlying bill until they get their way, and their opposition got the smaller package pulled from the voting schedule. Last night, Sen. Ron Wyden and Reps. Gene Green and Jim McDermott — all Dems — dropped a similar package that adds the hospital payment provision and does not include a provision on MA star ratings, Dem staffers tells PULSE. Lawmakers could still drop the drama and voice-vote the uncontroversial meaningful use bill, but it could also end up all getting put off until next year. We're tracking.

THE TREASURE HUNT CONTINUES — Your PULSEr has a feeling we might be unearthing omnibus provisions for the next several years … but for now, a few more for your radar:

— POPULAR FDA VOUCHER PROGRAM EXTENDED: The omnibus spending package extends FDA’s rare pediatric disease priority review voucher program until Sept. 30, just as the popular incentive was about to sunset. The program encourages companies to develop drugs for rare diseases in children by rewarding FDA approval of one of these products with a voucher for an expedited review of another drug. The program has been popular, and companies who’ve obtained a voucher have been able to sell them for hundreds of millions of dollars — yes, that’s how valuable companies believe getting their drug on the market just months sooner may be. Martin Shkreli’s plan to take advantage of a similar voucher program for drugs that treat neglected disease in developing countries has drawn attention to loopholes that may allow companies to profit from the program even if they don’t invest in new drugs.

— AND SUBSTANTIAL MENTAL HEALTH FUNDING: The omnibus also offers full funding for assisted outpatient treatment programs that give courts the ability to mandate treatment for severely and chronically mentally ill people. It's the first time Congress has funded these programs, which were authorized in earlier legislation. Indeed, separate grants for the same kind of AOT programs have been a major sticking point in the debate over Rep. Tim Murphy's mental health legislation in the House.

— The bill puts $15 million toward Mental Health First Aid, a training program for law enforcement officers, educators and school bus drivers. It also authorized an early intervention program for individuals experiencing schizophrenia or bipolar disorder.

— EXCHANGES MAKE IT, TOO — The omnibus includes language requiring CMS to make sure state-based exchanges aren't using federal grants for operational expenses, which is prohibited by the ACA and has been a focus of Republican probes. The ACA required state-based exchanges to be financially self-sustaining at the start of 2015, but CMS has allowed states to keep spending federal grants on developmental expenses under no cost extensions for funding that was already awarded. CMS Acting Administrator Andy Slavitt told a House panel last week that federal officials have denied states grant funding requests more than 60 times this year … Separately, Rep. Rick Allen introduced legislation on Wednesday requiring failed state exchanges to return money to the federal government. More here: http://1.usa.gov/1ZdADIx

— Not enough "omnibender" news for you? Pro's Bernie Becker has a giant overview of all the winners and losers, health-related and otherwise, here. (A quick preview that won't surprise you: Obamacare wasn't on the list of winners.)

ACA SIGNUPS, PRE-SURGE: 1.3M — That's how many people signed up in the sixth week of enrollment. Through Dec. 12, 4.2 million have signed up for 2016 plans, including 1.5 million new customers, CMS said. Those figures don't account for the "unprecedented" spike in interest over the last few days, ahead of the deadline for obtaining coverage beginning Jan. 1.

ANOTHER STUDY SHOWS HIGHER PREMIUMS — The average premiums for Obamacare's silver plans increased by 11.3 percent from 2015 to 2016, and the average individual deductible for silver plans spiked by 17.7 percent, according to data released by the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation and Manatt Health Solutions. (Silver plans, of course, are the most popular exchange product and help set the benchmark for subsidies.) Like others before it, this study found significant variance across the country. RWJF's Kathy Hempstead points out that the gap between the cheapest and most expensive plans widened in 2016, suggesting insurers are still trying to find the right products for the new markets. "Carriers are still kind of experimenting and trying to figure out a winning model," she said.

RE-INTRO'D: NURSE WORKPLACE SAFETY BILL — Sen. Al Franken is reintroducing the Nurse and Health Care Worker Protection Act, which would forbid nurses from manually lifting patients and establish other safety standards. Hospitals would have to develop safe patient handling plans, too. The legislation builds on continuing private sector efforts to address widespread injuries among nurses, who currently suffer more workplace problems than construction or mining workers. And it follows an OSHA memo this summer that laid out new ways that the Labor Department inspectors can help ensure hospitals are protecting worker safety.

ROSENBAUM TO CHAIR MACPAC — Sara Rosenbaum, a GWU health policy professor, will chair the Medicaid- and CHIP-focused group. GAO also announced seven new commissioners to fill expiring spots: Brian Burwell, Toby Douglas, Leanna George, Kit Gorton, Stacey Lampkin, Penny Thompson and Alan Weil.

WHAT WE'RE READING

NEJM's editorial board writes that gun violence is an assault on public health: https://t.co/5dAfrLMrjI

The Daily Caller reports on internal investigations at the Phoenix VA medical center that show officials were never held accountable for retaliating against whistleblowers: http://bit.ly/1P8gFuc

Another risk corridor casualty — this one in Sen. Marco Rubio's home state of Florida. The Miami Herald reports on an insurer in the state that will lay off employees now that it can no longer participate in the Obamacare exchange: http://hrld.us/1P8gXRG

HHS wants more states to take federal funding for data mining to improve Medicaid fraud detection, Modern Healthcare reports:http://bit.ly/1P9wouV

Exercise can help you get over colds faster, according to a new study written up in the NYT: http://nyti.ms/1P9xW83

** A message from PhRMA: The future has never been more promising for the more than 85 million Americans living with cardiovascular disease. Nearly 200 innovative medicines are in development to treat heart disease and stroke. These therapies have the potential to build on the progress made by existing treatments, reducing repeat hospitalizations and death. Learn more at http://onphr.ma/1mb2Dyv.**

** A message from National Community Pharmacists Association (NCPA): Many Medicare drug plans effectively require the use of “preferred” pharmacies that are inconvenient for patients. That means a long trip or higher copays to stick with the pharmacies that patients like. In urban areas, these plans often fail to meet the government’s standard for pharmacy access. In rural areas, “preferred” pharmacies are often 20+ miles away! Support H.R. 793 / S. 1190. This bipartisan legislation is supported by leading consumer advocates and would let patients use any pharmacy willing to accept the “preferred” pharmacy terms and conditions. Learn more at www.ncpanet.org/pharmacychoice. **