Former President Ronald Reagan, who announced in November that he suffers from Alzheimer's disease, hasn't recognized his biographer for six months and once referred to books as trees. (Photo: Bob Galbraith, Copyright 1995 The Times Shreveport)

The American Presidency Project maintains more than 110,000 documents online. These include press releases, speeches, policy statements, party platforms and letters. In sorting through Christmas messages delivered by presidents dating back to Herbert Hoover, the editorial board happened upon a gem dated Dec. 25, 1982. It is President Ronald Reagan’s Christmas Day radio address to the nation. He thanked a Wisconsin father for sharing a letter from his son, John Mooney. The sailor wrote it to his parents from aboard an aircraft carrier.

“It’s a true Christmas story in the best sense,” said the Republican president. Then he proceeded to read this letter:

Dear Mom and Dad,

Today we spotted a boat in the water, and we rendered assistance. We picked up 65 Vietnamese refugees. It was about a two-hour job getting everyone aboard, and then they had to get screened by intelligence and checked out by medical and fed and clothed and all that.

But now they're resting on the hangar deck, and the kids — most of them seem to be kids… are sitting in front of probably the first television set they've ever seen, watching 'Star Wars'. Their boat was sinking as we came alongside. They'd been at sea five days, and had run out of water. All in all, a couple of more days and the kids would have been in pretty bad shape.

I guess once in awhile we need a jolt like that for us to realize why we do what we do and how important, really, it can be. I mean, it took a lot of guts for those parents to make a choice like that to go to sea in a leaky boat in hope of finding someone to take them from the sea. So much risk! But apparently they felt it was worth it rather than live in a Communist country.

For all of our problems, with the price of gas, and not being able to afford a new car or other creature comforts this year. ... I really don't see a lot of leaky boats heading out of San Diego looking for the Russian ships out there. After the refugees were brought aboard, I took some pictures, but as usual I didn't have my camera with me for the REAL picture — the one blazed in my mind.

As they approached the ship, they were all waving and trying as best they could to say, 'Hello America sailor! Hello Freedom man!' It's hard to see a boat full of people like that and not get a lump somewhere between chin and bellybutton. And it really makes one proud and glad to be an American. People were waving and shouting and choking down lumps and trying not to let other brave men see their wet eyes. A lieutenant next to me said, 'Yeah, I guess it's payday in more ways than one.' (We got paid today.) And I guess no one could say it better than that.

It reminds us all of what America has always been — a place a man or woman can come to for freedom. I know we're crowded and we have unemployment and we have a real burden with refugees, but I honestly hope and pray we can always find room. We have a unique society, made up of cast-offs of all the world's wars and oppressions, and yet we're strong and free. We have one thing in common — no matter where our forefathers came from, we believe in that freedom.

I hope we always have room for one more person, maybe an Afghan or a Pole or someone else looking for a place where he doesn't have to worry about his family starving or a knock on the door in the night ... and where all men who truly seek freedom and honor and respect and dignity for themselves and their posterity can find a place where they can finally see their dreams come true and their kids educated and become the next generations of doctors and lawyers and builders and soldiers and sailors.

Love, John.

“Well, I think that letter just about says it all,” said Reagan. “Merry Christmas, and God bless you.”

Read or Share this story: http://dmreg.co/1YFMuwZ