Topics: Body Image, Body Issues, body of truth, Dieting, Dietland, Editor's Picks, fat, weight, Life News

Harriet Brown and Sarai Walker both write about women and weight. Walker’s novel, “Dietland,” tells the story of Plum Kettle, a woman (like so many of us) who’s battled with weight her whole life, and who finds a surprising and radical solution to the “problem” of being a woman who doesn’t fit in. Brown’s work of science journalism, “Body of Truth: How Science, History, and Culture Drive Our Obsession with Weight—and What We Can Do About It,” tackles many of the myths and assumptions we hold about weight, health and beauty, and suggests ways we can let go of at least some of our preoccupation with the number on the scale. Both writers want to change the conversation around weight. They recently chatted about what it will take to change that larger cultural conversation.

Harriet Brown: One of the similarities between our books is the words we use to talk about weight. Or one word, anyway.

Sarai Walker: People are very uncomfortable with the word “fat.” To the general public it’s jarring to hear that word used in a matter-of-fact way, when it’s usually used as an insult.

Brown: I use it about myself, and maybe about other people in a big-picture way. But I probably wouldn’t use it to describe another person unless I knew how they felt about it.

Walker: When I was doing my Ph.D., I registered for a couple of fat studies conferences. And it was a little uncomfortable for me at first. But the name “fat studies” forced me to say it. I went to these conferences and watched the way people used the word without any baggage. When I thought about it, all the alternatives are worse. Overweight, implying there’s an ideal weight.

Brown: Obese, which has become a diagnosis.

Walker: What else is there? Chubby, zaftig …

Brown: Thick, curvy, heavy. They all seem vaguely insulting to me.

Walker: They’re all just trying not to say the word “fat.” Why not use it? The way I talk about it unsettles some people. But that’s not a bad thing.

Brown: It’s part of changing the larger cultural conversation. Changing the rhetoric is one way to start to do that.

Walker: Language is so powerful. People take notice.

Brown: What do you hope people will notice when you use the word “fat”?

Walker: The ultimate goal is to destigmatize the fat body. So to destigmatize that word is a first step. Ideally, to live in a world where different types of body shapes and sizes are all accepted. Where there’s not one that’s the norm and all the others are considered to deviate from that. I’m trying to normalize the idea that fat isn’t this horrible thing. It’s just how some people are. Some people are fat, some people are thin. And what does fat even mean sometimes?

Brown: Like the word “healthy.” What does that mean? These are comparative words. They’re not absolute or objective.

Walker: Something as small as a little three-letter word that unsettles people so much is dispiriting. It shows how far we have to go.

Brown: I wonder if you’ve gotten some of the same kinds of feedback I have. I get emails saying, “You’re a horrible person who’s going to be responsible for killing thousands of people because you’re irresponsibly promoting this unhealthy lifestyle.” I mean, hello — I’m not promoting anything. I’m telling some truths that actually should feel pretty damn liberating.

Walker: NPR interviewed me and did a Facebook post about it, and a lot of the comments were like that. It seems to be the reaction from a large segment of the population. I think it’s hilarious when someone leaves a comment on a review of my book saying, “But obesity is unhealthy!” Do you think I haven’t heard that rhetoric before? I wonder if this a different version of mansplaining.

Brown: Thinsplaining. It’s a thing.

Walker: So how do you respond?