Luke Morrison

Achievement: Luke Morrison is the winner of the 2014 Conservation Writing Contest for Oldham County and the Area 4 winner for the state. Area 4 is Bullitt, Jefferson, Oldham, Marion, Spencer, Washington, Shelby and Nelson counties.

Background: The purpose of the contests, sponsored by the Kentucky Farm Bureau Federation and Kentucky Association of Conservation Districts, is to educate students on soil, water, forestry and wildlife conservation. Curriculum is available for teachers to use in their classrooms, and students in grades 1-5 may submit artwork, and students in grades 6-12 may enter an essay. This year’s theme was “Protect Kentucky’s Soil.” This year more than 47,000 students participated in the art contest and more than 17,000 participated in the writing contest.

Other local winners:

Emma Talbott, Sacred Heart Model School, Jefferson County winner in the Jim Claypool Art contest

Sarah Duggan, DuPont Manual High School, Jefferson County winner in the Conservation Writing contest

Owen Rairick, Camden Station Elementary School, Oldham County winner in the Jim Claypool Art contest.

Why he wanted to enter: Luke’s science teacher assigned the contest entry to the class. “I like science and I really enjoy writing,” said Luke. “I wanted to try it out and get as far as I could.”

What he learned: Luke said he learned about the benefits of soil conservation, the value of cover crops, and “what it takes to help plants grow,” he said, adding that “we should treat the soil like the skin of the earth — treat it properly and take advantage of how important the soil is.”

What he wishes everyone would do: “Stop fertilizing and using chemical treatments on their lawns.”

Luke’s home life: Luke lives in Crestwood with his parents and his two younger sisters.

Teacher Quote: “Luke is self-confident and comfortable with who he is as a middle school young man,” said Dennis Mangum, teacher at East Oldham Middle School. “He has so far been able to balance doing very well academically, being an athlete on our school's teams, and getting along with all of his peers.”

Future plans: Luke is considering careers in science or in law enforcement.

He enjoys: basketball, playing the guitar and piano

To enter the 2015 contests: This year’s theme is Kentucky’s Wild Side.” Information will be posted in September at http://conservation.ky.gov/Pages/ArtandWritingContest.aspx

Meet the achiever

Achiever: Luke Morrison

Age: 14

Grade: Eigth

School: East Oldham Middle School

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1JepVdC