Topics: economy, Editor's Picks, GOP, independents, kennedy, libertarians, Media Criticism, New York Times Magazine, Rand Paul, Ron Paul, The Right, Media News, Politics News

Libertarianism has a clever marketing trick. It tries to pitch itself as synonymous with “independent.” As in, if you’re an “independent” voter who’s fed up with both the Republican and Democratic parties, as many are, you’re a natural fit for libertarianism, a neutral collection area for those disenchanted with the two-party duopoly. Since a lot of people are fed up with the two-party duopoly, then, it would follow that libertarianism is growing and on the cusp of arriving as a viable national force. Nick Gillespie and Matt Welch, two editors at the libertarian magazine Reason, pitch libertarianism in this vein in their 2012 book “Declaration of Independents.” And Welch, along with fellow libertarians Kennedy (the former MTV VJ) and Kmele Foster, host a show on the Fox Business Network called “The Independents.”

But being an “independent” or, someone who’s looking for something other than the bundled packages that the Republicans and Democrats are selling, does not automatically make one a perfect candidate for libertarianism. That’s because libertarianism isn’t a void, it’s an ideology that’s selling its own bundle package. And some of its main components are far from what the disenchanted are looking to buy.

Why are we prattling on about the damn libertarians again? We apologize — but but but, um, the New York Times Magazine made us! With this week’s big story, “Has the ‘Libertarian Moment’ Finally Arrived?” This appears to be the latest in the NYT Mag’s recent series of credulous political cover stories, following the recent hit “Can the G.O.P. Be a Party of Ideas?” (Coming next: “Are Social Conservatives Ascendant?” “Is Bobby Jindal the Next Reagan?” “Will New York City Become a Bastion of Conservatism?”)

The argument for the “Libertarian Moment” at long last coming to save us from the scourge of the duopoly is something along the lines of this: Younger people are more socially liberal than previous generations but they also hate the stifling jackboot of the government and want the freedom to #disrupt existing economic paradigms with their apps and their Ubers and so forth. Throw in their suspicion of foreign intervention, and you have a generation perfectly molded for libertarianism:

Emily Ekins, a pollster for the Reason Foundation, says: “Unlike with previous generations, we’re seeing a newer dimension emerge where they agree with Democrats on social issues, and on economic issues lean more to the right. It’s possible that Democrats will have to shift to the right on economic issues. But the Republicans will definitely have to move to the left on social issues. They just don’t have the numbers otherwise.” A G.O.P. more flexible on social issues might also appeal to another traditionally Democratic group with a libertarian tilt: the high-tech communities in Silicon Valley and elsewhere, whose mounting disdain for taxes, regulations and unions has become increasingly dissonant with their voting habits.