HIPAA reforms increasingly likely — Overdue HHS rule could affect payments in data breaches

With help from Arthur Allen (@ArthurAllen202) and Joseph Marks (@Joseph_Marks_)

HIPAA ON THE CHOPPING BLOCK?: Congress is getting an earful from tech companies and health care providers about the short comings of HIPAA. Lawmakers could change the landmark 1996 privacy law as soon as next year. The Morning Consult’s Jonathan Easley reported Sunday on a House Energy and Commerce Committee hearing where witnesses pleaded with Congress to address the law and allow providers to better take advantage of technology to improve patient care. The use of cloud computing is one example that is strangled by HIPAA, Amazon’s vice president of global public policy said last week. Advocates of big data analytics and integrating behavior health into mainstream medicine say these areas also are hurt. The Energy and Commerce Committee has been getting an earful about HIPAA during its 21st Century Cures hearings. Chair Fred Upton has said the committee hopes to start drafting legislation by the end of the year, with the goal of passing a bill in early 2015. It’s increasingly likely changes to HIPAA would be included.

Story Continued Below

Read the Morning Consult story here: http://bit.ly/1uwWwGY. Check out the Modern Healthcare story on HIPAA here: http://bit.ly/1zdfuRT.

DATA BREACH CASES IMPACTED BY OVERDUE HHS RULE: Meanwhile, the health privacy world has been waiting 2 1/2 years for HHS to issue a rule that could, in theory, provide payments to tens of millions of people whose health information was compromised by data breaches. The potential impact of the rule is huge. Federal health officials say that 33.7 million individuals have had their health information stolen, hacked or otherwise wrongfully disclosed — more than one in 10 people in the U.S. since 2009.

To date, courts have refused to compensate anyone whose records were stolen or viewed unless they can show that harm resulted. But HHS was instructed by the 2009 HITECH Act to define who is a “harmed individual” and allowed a percentage of penalties and settlements related to HIPAA violations. “I think it could be a real game changer, but I couldn’t guarantee that,” said Jo-Ellyn Sakowitz Klein, a health privacy expert and attorney at Akin Gump. “The devil would be in the details. It would depend on how far the agency went in the rule making.”

Pros get the story here: http://politico.pro/1ny82gB

eHealth tweet of the day: @ReportingHealth Technology can’t replace the face to face in medicine http://bit.ly/UrhczP

Welcome the Monday edition of Morning eHealth where I’m your guest host. We’re still beaming from eHealth Editor Arthur Allen’s successful book reading at Politics & Prose Bookstore in Washington yesterday evening. If you haven’t heard, his book on how two typhus experts outsmarted the Nazis was published this month. Send your tips, comments and feedback to dpittman@politico.com. Follow us on Twitter at @David_Pittman, @Morning_eHealth and, @ POLITICOPro.

ON TAP THIS WEEK: Health IT policy wonks won’t have much of an opportunity to stop and enjoy the summer as the schedule this week continues to be busy. The American Telemedicine Association holds its This Month in Telemedicine on Tuesday. On Thursday, the House Small Business Committee hosts a hearing on telemedicine’s use in small medical practices. The Health IT Policy Committee’s JASON taskforce meets the same day.

Morning eHealth has also learned about a bipartisan meeting of the Senate Finance and HELP committees Tuesday regarding health IT. It’s part of a series of discussions the committees are holding with stakeholder groups throughout the recess to gain feedback on the meaningful use program. “One key goal is to come away with guidance on how to ensure we’ll have interoperability,” a committee staffer told us. We’re following the story.

HAVE MORE EVENTS? Let us know and we’ll include it on our calendar. Drop us a line at ehealthcalendar@politicopro.com.

ONC RESPONDS: Karen DeSalvo, national coordinator for health IT, fired back Sunday at a hard-hitting Boston Globe article from July 20 that questioned the safety of EHRs. DeSalvo, in a letter to the editor, called it “disappointing” the story failed to mention the benefits the technology can bring. “A fully electronic health system can help identify and prevent potential medical errors,” she said, going on to mention her work to create a health IT safety center.

Read DeSalvo’s letter to the editor here: http://bit.ly/1tRaYpd. Find the July 20th story here: http://bit.ly/1p5U7h5.

GAO TO CMS: REBID $30 MILLION INFO SECURITY CONTRACT: The Government Accountability Office sustained a competitor’s protest of $21 million CMS information security contract award to a Florida company, according to decision released Friday. The protester, DC-based Iron Vines, successfully argued that CMS failed to evaluate the realism of vendors’ bids, specifically their labor costs. Iron Vines bid $30 million for the project but lost out to Spann and Associates, which bid $20 million. GAO recommended that CMS re-evaluate bids and reimburse Iron Vines the cost of its protest. The solicitation sought services, personnel, material equipment and facilities to support information security program activities for CMS’s Enterprise Information Security Group. The GAO decision was released in January but held under a protective order until a redacted version was released Friday. The decision: http://1.usa.gov/1nLJiSU

NAME CHANGE FOR AAFP HEALTH IT CENTER: The American Academy of Family Physicians’ Center for Health Information Technology will now be called the Alliance for eHealth Innovation as it shifts its focus and priorities. As family doctors have adopted EHRs, the academy wants to focus on optimizing their use and potential. “This new direction focuses more broadly on eHealth,” said Alliance Director Steven Waldren. Read more about it here: http://bit.ly/X1i3so.

ICYMI: TAXPAYERS SHOULD FRONT NATIONAL INFORMATION EXCHANGE: A national health information exchange infrastructure will cost U.S. citizens each from $1.50 to $2 per year, DeSalvo estimated Friday. That cost, which amounts to around $450-$650 million, should be paid by taxpayers and not health care providers, she said during an appearance before the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality’s National Advisory Council.

Meaningful use program funding is starting to dry up, and most of the $2 billion in incentive money budgeted to ONC projects such as health information exchanges is spent, DeSalvo noted. But there will be continuing costs, she indicated, to reach the national goal of interoperability.

“We’ve expected the health care system to pay for that. That’s not right. In a fee-for-service system, to ask providers to pay for it is perverse, because it’s a burden on them,” she said. “You want it to be free so you are encouraged to use it all the time. It’s a public good … it’s everyone’s responsibility.”

Pros get the story here: http://politico.pro/1mTfxd2

STUDY ON TELEMED SAVINGS ‘MISLEADING’: A study published earlier this month that questioned the potential cost savings of telemedicine is misleading and puts forth “unwarranted conclusions,” a leading researcher and former American Telemedicine Association president wrote in a rebuttal. The study in question deemed the cost-effectiveness of the technology “inconclusive” after reviewing nine studies that met researchers’ inclusion criteria. However, Rashid Bashshur of the University of Michigan Health System’s eHealth Center questioned the study’s methodology, saying the researchers filtered out some of the most important studies. Only three of the nine included in the “review of reviews” were published in the last five years.Bashshur teamed up with economist Timothy Reardon to dissect the study in a letter to the editor set to be published in the next issue of Telemedicine and e-Health.

WHAT WE’RE CLICKING

The L.A. Times address the issue of privacy and wearables and mobile health apps. http://lat.ms/1rW99a4

“Does telehealth diminish physician-patient relationships?” reads a headline in Medscape. http://bit.ly/1rOXESW

Health IT Outcomes’ Ken Congdon wonders if Apple, Epic and IBM will be health IT’s “dream team.” http://bit.ly/1mTjf6g

Google wants to collect anonymous genetic data to better understand what a human being should be, the Wall Street Journal reports. http://on.wsj.com/1pfMy7u

How a House Oversight Committee hearing on the FTC’s data security enforcement was anything but. http://bit.ly/1oyyF59

Google Glass could be a patient privacy nightmare. http://bit.ly/WJbET3

POLITICO presents Morning Money Breakfast Briefing: Join POLITICO's Chief Economic Correspondent Ben White as he takes his daily newsletter Morning Money live interviewing Tim Massad, the chairman of U.S. Commodity Futures Trading Commission, on the intersection of Washington and Wall Street. Find out more and RSVP at politi.co/1zdixcI, or join the conversation on Twitter using #MorningMoney.