A closely-watched gauge of service sector activity eased more sharply than expected in November, a small red flag amongst a recent spate of stronger economic data. It was the steepest one-month decline for the index since November 2008.

The purchasing managers’ index from the Institute of Supply Management fell to 55.9% from 59.1%. Economists polled by MarketWatch had expected a reading of 57.5%.

Any reading over 50% signals expansion, and ISM’s index has stuck near high levels in recent months. But many of the sub-components also sank in November. The gauge of business activity fell 4.8 points to 58.2%, and new orders, a proxy for future activity, fell 4.5 points to 57.5%.

Even employment, which has been steady, declined. It fell 4.2 points to 55.0%. The employment measure in ISM’s November manufacturing index, released Tuesday, was the only bright spot in that index, which tumbled to a 6-year low.

With the Federal Reserve’s December policy meeting looming ahead, analysts are scrutinizing economic data, particularly about jobs, even more carefully than usual.

With job gains averaging over 200,000, and following strong signals from most Fed officials, economists expect policymakers to enact the first interest rate rise in nearly a decade in December.

The Labor Department will release employment figures for November on Friday, the last such report before that meeting.

The Fed has been close to raising rates for some time, but one economic headwind after another stayed its hand. The plunge in the price of oil capped inflation and has buffeted the manufacturing sector as energy firms slash their capital budgets.

But growth in the more insulated services sector, which includes everything from retail to health care, has stayed sturdy throughout the year.

ISM’s survey respondents mostly pointed to growth in November, but also noted some concerns. “Customers’ outlook on their revenues is softening,” one said. A health care representative said the Affordable Care Act was pressuring revenues.

Yet another noted that retail expectations for the fourth quarter were “high,” while a respondent from the Finance and Insurance industry said, “Conditions are holding steady for a profitable year and fourth quarter.”

Ian Shepherdson, chief economist for Pantheon Macroeconomics, said in a note to clients that he expected ISM’s report to rebound. “The ISM non-manufacturing headline often moves in line with the short-term growth rate of real core retail sales. We expect sales to rebound in Q4, so the ISM index should not fall further,” he wrote.

More from MarketWatch