Rep. Ron Kind (left) is running for re-election in the 3rd Congressional District against Republican challenger Tony Kurtz. Credit: Campaign photos

By of the

The 3rd Congressional District stretches from the driftless hill country of the southwest to the flat, sandy farmland of central Wisconsin — an area represented by Democrat Ron Kind of La Crosse since 1996.

His opponent for the House seat is Tony Kurtz, 47, a 20-year veteran of the U.S. Army who flew helicopters and was a veteran of the Gulf War, and who says Kind had been in Washington too long.

Kind, 51, a lawyer, has cruised through most of his elections and he is favored again this year. He faced a tough race in 2010 against then-state Sen. Dan Kapanke (R-LaCrosse), owner of the LaCrosse Loggers of the Northwoods League. Kind won by 3.8 percentage points.

Joe Heim, a University of Wisconsin-LaCrosse political scientist, said Kind has a more moderate voting record than fellow House Democrats from Wisconsin — Gwen Moore of Milwaukee and Mark Pocan of Madison.

"He's a Democrat who jumps off the reservation once in a while," Heim said.

That's in keeping with western Wisconsin, he said, which has "tended to look more 'D' than 'R,' but if you ask people what they are, two-to-one they will tell you that they are conservative."

The two biggest cities are LaCrosse and Eau Claire. Under reapportionment in 2011, the district added Stevens Point. One distinguishing feature of the 3rd is that it's teeming with colleges, including six state universities: UW-La Crosse, UW-Platteville, UW-Eau Claire, UW-Stout, UW-River Falls and UW-Stevens Point.

The new boundaries took Democrats out of the district of Rep. Sean Duffy, a Republican, and plopped them into Kind's. That gave Duffy a more Republican advantage; Kind got a more Democratic tilt, according to Heim.

Kurtz, of Prairie du Chien, is playing up his military experience and background in business and farming.

An Ohio native, Kurtz moved to western Wisconsin after leaving the military because his wife, also a military veteran, grew up in Westby in Vernon County. He started a business teaching accident investigation and safety program management to military units. He also farms more than 200 acres, most of it organic crops.

Kurtz comes into the race as a veteran, businessman and farmer — an attractive combination. But the odds are stacked against him because he is taking on a popular incumbent who has a commanding financial advantage.

Not surprising, Kurtz is trying to turn Kind's tenure in Washington into a negative.

"We have a 12%, 13% approval rating in Congress, and yet we keep putting the same people back," Kurtz said.

Kurtz faults Kindfor supporting the Affordable Care Act. He also says Kind has to own up to some of the responsibility of the ever-deepening federal debt, which is approaching $18 trillion.

Creating an economic environment to help business grow is critical, Kutz said, but he echoed sentiments made by Gov. Scott Walker, a Republican, in his first debate with Mary Burke in Eau Claire.

"We don't have a jobs problem in this state. We have a work problem," Walker said.

"There is a true disconnect right now," Kurtz said. "There are a lot of jobs right now in this district. I can't tell you how many businesses I talk to who have job openings."

Kind shot back. "That's the classic blame-the-person approach," he said.

On fiscal issues, Kind touted his 2011 vote in favor of a balanced-budget amendment, which would have required the government to not spend more than it takes in. The bill, which required a two-thirds vote, was rejected by the House.

The amendment, pushed by many in the GOP, had support among some Democrats.

Kind said the Affordable Care Act is providing health care coverage to more people who previously lacked that coverage, especially those with pre-existing conditions. "If it's not a success, then (Kurtz) is obviously not in touch with the thousands of people who were falling through the cracks," Kind said.

Kind, who is viewed as a possible candidate to run against Republican U.S. Sen. Ron Johnson in 2016, had $2 million in contributions from Jan. 1, 2013, to Sept. 30, according to the Federal Election Commission. He spent $846,676, figures show.

Kurtz raised $228,324 through Sept. 30 and has spent $145,846.

In a new 30-second TV spot, Kind portrays himself as an independent voice in Congress. He criticized the growing polarization in Congress, in an interview. He also bemoaned the retirement of U.S. Rep. Tom Petri, a Republican with a voting record more moderate than the rest of the state's GOP delegation.

"I could sit across the table and work with him," Kind said. "We can't afford to be losing more of these voices."