Health-conscious restaurant to take space at 1600 Pearl St.

Ben Bellavance, of J&R Electric, carries a ladder while doing construction Aug. 25 at LYFE Kitchen on Pearl Street in Boulder. ( Jeremy Papasso / Daily Camera )

Three years after the first LYFE Kitchen restaurant opened in Palo Alto, California, the burgeoning health foods-focused chain is on a tear.

Officials for the cash-flushed LYFE Kitchen have cherry-picked prime locations for the "Love Your Food Everyday" company's eco-conscious mission and its under-600-calorie fare.

Following openings in the Chicago area and in Park Meadows mall in Denver, the chain is weeks away from opening a restaurant in downtown Boulder.

LYFE Kitchen plans to open its doors in the street-level westerly slice of 1600 Pearl St., a space formerly occupied by Café Gondolier.

As such, it also will neighbor the booming Boulder Brands Inc., which this week announced plans to expand its headquarters throughout the 1600 Pearl building by leasing a 25,000-square-foot retail site that has sat vacant since 2007, when the now-defunct Borders Books & Music departed downtown for the Twenty Ninth Street mall.

LYFE Kitchen's Boulder restaurant, which is the chain's 10th location and will serve as a new competitor in the region's crowded fast-casual restaurant industry, has been more than three years in the making, officials said.

"Boulder was one of the sites we actually looked at in the very beginning," said Mike Donahue, co-founder and chief brand officer. "It came down to Palo Alto and Boulder. I think there was more available in Palo Alto (at the time)."

Advertisement

Both communities had demographics favorable to the concept, he said, noting their high-tech focus and health-minded residents.

The gears churning within LYFE Kitchen include a business team consisting of former McDonald's executives; a culinary crew that spans the likes of Art Smith, longtime personal chef to media magnate Oprah Winfrey, and vegan chef Tal Ronnen; and a group of celebrity "ambassadors" such as actress Jennifer Garner and football player Troy Polamalu.

Its founders saw the market opportunity to create a nationwide restaurant chain built on a range of healthy fare and purpose-driven and socially responsible approaches, Donahue said.

"We believe that LYFE Kitchen is on a mission," he said. "It's a campaign with no election date. It's really to provide great-tasting food that is affordable and convenient and, oh, by the way, happens to be good for you."

The health-conscious, under-600-calorie approach is a major component of LYFE Kitchen, but the company's other mantras include food anchored in taste, and culinary and operational approaches grounded in social and environmental responsibilities, he said. By having wine on tap, for example, LYFE can save an estimated 2 to 3 tons of solid waste yearly, he said.

Donahue considers LYFE to be forging new ground in restaurants. The "lifestyle restaurant," as he calls it, sits between fast-casual and the casual and fine dining segments.

A distinguishing aspect is LYFE's design and hybrid service model that includes ordering at a counter and later table service.

The fast-casual segment — limited-service operations such as Noodles & Co. and Panera Bread Co. — outpaced the overall restaurant industry in 2013, according to data from Technomic Inc.

Sales at fast-casual restaurants increased 11 percent last year, officials for the Chicago-based food service industry research firm reported in May.

LYFE Kitchen appears positioned to capitalize on the growth while having some characteristics that could put the chain in its own category, said retail analyst Jon Schallert, president of the Schallert Group Inc. in Longmont.

Since 2013, LYFE Kitchen has raised at least $36 million, the lion's share coming earlier this year, according to U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission filings. LYFE officials say the company also recently has reached agreements with new investors.

"Right now, they're going to be successful," Schallert said. "Even if a single restaurant fails right now, they have the finances to keep it going."