Three-year contract provides access to thousands of tutorial videos in topics such as business, photography and software

For more information: colorado.edu/lynda

Time to unleash your "inner nerd," University of Colorado students, faculty and staff.

The university this week announced a three-year contract with the video tutorial website Lynda.com that gives everyone on the Boulder campus unlimited access to thousands of training videos on topics ranging from business to coding to photography.

Susan Nevelow Mart, an associate professor and director of the law library, helped bring Lynda.com access to CU. So far, people on campus seem excited, she said.

"I got an email from someone the other day saying she finally gets to indulge in her 'inner nerd,'" Mart said. "Having access to this is a real benefit."

All CU students, faculty and staff can now access the website's materials, including tutorials on Excel, Google Apps, Photoshop, InDesign and countless softwares. The site also features classes in business, architecture, marketing, education and other industries.

Individual memberships to the site range from $20 a month to $38. CU is paying $300,900 for a three-year contract with the site, which translates to about $2.64 per person per year, according to CU spokesman Ryan Huff.

The CU-Boulder contract with Lynda.com resulted from conversations about information fluency, or the ability to think critically and communicate using an array of platforms.

"It's sort of the intersection of domain knowledge and critical thinking and presentation and research skills," Mart said. "Domain knowledge is obviously the domain of professors who teach specific subjects, but people need to be able to communicate their ideas and apply what they've learned to new things."

Mart and other faculty members helped lead the Lynda.com initiative as part of the Boulder Faculty Assembly Leadership Institute, a year-long program for the university's future leaders.

The website is a place for instructors to send students, for example, if they expect students to use a specific software or presentation tool in class.

"We can expect from our students a domain knowledge, whatever topic we're teaching, but then expand on it throughout their academic career so they're able to present those ideas and they're picking up critical thinking skills," said Ruth Heisler, one of the faculty members who proposed the idea to campus administrators.

It also gives students, faculty and staff the ability to explore new tools that they can bring back to the classroom or work.

"You can either do a whole course of study or you can just focus in on that one thing you need to know right at the moment," Mart said. "I think it teaches self-sufficiency. It teaches ownership of our own learning. It's certainly not a replacement for a class in statistics, but it adds a little something to everyone's portfolio of things they can use to make sure they have and their students and our staff have the skills they need."

Sarah Kuta: 303-473-1106, kutas@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/sarahkuta