Photo

RALEIGH, N.C. — Thom Tillis, North Carolina’s Republican candidate for the United States Senate, is partial to the first page from his party’s national playbook this year. It involves mentioning his Democratic opponent, Senator Kay Hagan, in the same breath as President Obama, and doing so as often as possible.

“This president and Senator Hagan failed the people of this country, and in particular North Carolina,” Mr. Tillis said Wednesday at a rally with Mitt Romney, the former presidential candidate.

But in a year defined more by what voters do not like than what they do, in North Carolina politics, Democrats can be just as motivated as Republicans. So while Republicans bang away at Mr. Obama, Ms. Hagan and her supporters have been equally relentless in raising the specter of Mr. Tillis, the State House speaker, and the conservative agenda the legislature has enacted since he and his fellow Republicans gained control of both chambers in 2010.

Photo

The strategy was evident a week before Election Day at a cozy coffee shop in Asheville. Before introducing Ms. Hagan to a crowd of supporters, Anna Stearns, treasurer of the Young Democrats of North Carolina, blamed Mr. Tillis and his colleagues for shortchanging public schools, passing a bill that restricts ballot access, cutting funding to Planned Parenthood and opposing expansion of Medicaid benefits to 500,000 North Carolinians under the Affordable Care Act.

Mr. Tillis, she said, had led “one of the most destructive legislative sessions in history.”

The liberal outrage over North Carolina’s lurch to the right has kept the race between Ms. Hagan and Mr. Tillis — one of the crucial contests that could determine control of the Senate — close to a dead heat, with Ms. Hagan perhaps clinging to a small lead in polls.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

The two campaigns and allied outside groups have dumped nearly $102 million into the race, making it the most expensive in the nation, according to the Center for Responsive Politics. Much of that has gone into attack ads that paint Mr. Tillis as the leader of a right-wing fringe, and Ms. Hagan as a “rubber stamp” for the president’s policies.

Photo

At the coffee shop, Edna’s of Asheville, the negative feelings toward Mr. Tillis seemed like a natural resource begging to be tapped. Many voters who had shown up for the early-morning rally were nonnative North Carolinians gravely concerned about the Republican Party’s new sway in their adopted state. (Gov. Pat McCrory, who took office last year, is also a Republican.)

“This is not the state I moved to five years ago,” said Marilynne Herbert, 70, who relocated from the New York City area.

In two brief stump speeches on Tuesday, Ms. Hagan berated Mr. Tillis. In Asheville, she criticized him for opposing Medicaid expansion during his Republican primary campaign, only to say in recent days that it might be a good idea.

“He is flip-flopping on that issue right now because he knows it’s the right thing to do, and he knows North Carolina’s going to get there,” she said. “He is using people’s lives as a political football, and that is wrong, wrong, wrong.”

The next day in Raleigh, a few hundred Republicans gathered at a cavernous sheet metal plant for the rally with Mr. Romney.

Some voters said they were turned off by the tone of the campaign. “There’s so much negativity that I almost think that what they stand for gets lost,” said Helen Clary, 45.

Photo

But speakers also gave full-throated support to the conservative turn at the State Capitol.

“Somebody asked me the other day, ‘What are y’all going to do if you get control of the Senate?’ ” said Richard Hudson, a freshman United States representative from Concord, a Charlotte suburb. “I said, ‘We’re going to do exactly what the North Carolina legislature did when they got control.’ ”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Tom Murry, a Republican state representative, argued that his party was responsible for a “Carolina comeback,” saving the state from recession-era malaise with pro-business policies that helped bring the unemployment rate down from 10.5 percent in November 2010 to just under 7 percent today.

Mr. Romney said, “A vote for the opponent of Thom Tillis would be a vote for President Obama’s policies.” He added, “I don’t want to see President Obama’s policies furthered any more in this country than they have been.”

Mr. Tillis was last to take the mike. He said Ms. Hagan had struggled in recent debates to give examples of the work she was proud of. It was a problem that he promised not to have.

“I’m proud of my record as speaker of the House,” he said, “and I’m going to be proud of my record as U.S. senator.”