President Obama’s presidency started just as the nation was falling into the Great Recession. The first several months saw a flurry of legislative efforts designed to shore up holes in a boat taking on water. The term bailout became part of the American vernacular. Financial systems of the United States came to a virtual standstill, leaving businesses, homeowners and individuals without access to loans and other needed capital. It would be several months before the American people would fully grasp the severity of the worst financial crisis to face the country since the Great Depression. In the end, the recession would result in the loss of 9 million jobs and an economy that would shrink by several billion dollars.

In spite of the deficit from where he began, President Obama has been able to steer the nation into a remarkable recovery, and it is directly related to his policies.

As the economy slowly moved forward over the next six years, thanks in large part to key legislative initiatives that were passed during the first two years, critics of “big government” decided to criticize the government’s response to the crisis. Naturally, this coincided with the 2010 midterm election, leading to selective amnesia as to exactly who was responsible for the inherited crisis and high unemployment.

Conservative critics in Congress began to resist consumer-oriented initiatives, such as the Consumer Protection Act and the creation of the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau. They turned against bailouts, which they championed for Wall Street, when the president pressed for investments into infrastructure and jobs.

This led to the Republicans gaining the majority in the House of Representatives, the legislative body that controls the government’s purse strings.

The successful passage of the Affordable Care Act, which was also seen as key to helping the economy, saw business groups up in arms. The Chamber of Commerce claimed that President Obama was anti-business, in spite of the fact that the stock market has seen record highs throughout his presidency. Critics continued to blame the president for low job numbers and poor economic performance throughout the 2012 campaign. It did not prevent him from being reelected, but did keep control of the House in the hands of Republicans.

Even at the four year mark, however, it was clear President Obama’s initiatives were working.

The 2012 book “Bulls, Bears, and the Ballot Box” explored how the policies of presidents affected the American economy. The authors looked at the economic performance in relation to various policies from FDR through the first term of President Obama. While there are multiple things that impact the economy, the authors found that presidential policy decisions were key factors in the success – or failure – of the economy.

They also say that President Obama could possibly be the best economic president this nation has ever had.

The much-maligned auto industry bailout helped maintain 1 million jobs and in the end added more than 400,000 new jobs. The far from perfect, but somewhat improved tax codes, which slightly raised taxes on higher income Americans, helped reduce the deficit to the lowest levels since before the George W. Bush administration. Even the Affordable Care Act, which just became fully implemented this year, has already seen a reduction in out-of-pocket healthcare spending and the number of Americans without health insurance at its lowest levels since the 1990s.

When we are reminded at how bad things were, the turnaround can only be described as remarkable.

The improvement hasn’t been easy. Every initiative passed was watered down significantly from the President’s proposals, and only after very public and protracted fights. Furthermore, President Obama has faced unique factors, such as an unusually large retiring population of baby boomers, and a shifting economic base away from manufacturing. The unprecedented political opposition has prevented many other initiatives from going forward, possibly slowing down the recovery in the process.

As Congress heads into the final weeks of the midterm elections, many critics of the president will claim he has done little on jobs. The data shows that this is also untrue. With job losses beginning before he took office, the unemployment rate continued to rise in the early months of his first term. However, for most of the past 5 years, more jobs have been added than lost. Admittedly, many of those jobs gained were part-time and at wages lower than pre-recession levels. This is why the President has fought for an increase in the minimum wage.

Nevertheless, 10 million private sector jobs have been added, and it is expected that by the end of this year an additional 2.5 million jobs will be added. The current unemployment rate of 6.1 percent is at pre-recession levels. Economists estimate that by next summer, the unemployment rate could be as low as 5.4 percent.

Even conservative economic hero Ronald Reagan never reached an unemployment rate that low – and he had a better economy to work with.

The past six years has also been a boon for the investor class. During the previous administration, there were two stock market crashes. There have been several record highs for the stock market during President Obama’s six years in office. Two weeks ago it reached a milestone high of 2,000 for the first time in history. As Los Angeles Times columnist Michael Hiltzik points out , if you had bought stocks on the day of President Obama’s inauguration, you would have seen a 148 percent gain in your investment.

For all of this, we can truly blame Obama.