"War is declared. Get prepared", the masked figure says in the video in reference to ISIS.

The video, originally posted in French, has been translated to English below.

The Islamic State militant group responded to Anonymous' declaration of "total war", calling the hacker group "idiots" while offering guidance to followers to prevent cyber attacks. "We are upping our game, you will now be hit by major cyber attacks".

Anonymous has been active in fighting ISIS, a group that uses social media to promote its message.

While there is little doubt that the wheels of the United Kingdom, the USA and French security services have been quietly and constantly turning to disrupt the Islamic State's digital presence, we can't help feel that Anonymous joining the party will yield very public results.

"Anonymous worldwide will track you". As FitzGerald described it, "Anonymous, in other words, is fully capable of launching successful attacks-and ISIS knows it".

Islamic State threatens to attack NY in new video

The state of emergency also allows police to perform house searches day and night instead of performing them only at daylight. It has released many hostage execution videos to threaten the West and admonish its Arab allies for targeting the group.

'Anonymous everywhere in the world is going to hunt you down, ' a hooded figure in black, wearing the group's signature Guy Fawkes mask said in French.

While it is easy for members of Isis to set up a new Twitter account, it is hoped the action will cause disruption for the terror group.

"These attacks can not remain unpunished", the man said in French.

The group has also shared links on Pastebin with information on how to find Islamic State-linked accounts and report them in order to get them removed. We Do Not Forgive, We Do Not Forget. War is declared. Prepare yourselves.

Throughout the year, the group has tracked, hacked, unmasked, and reported thousands of Twitter accounts it claims are spreading propaganda in support of ISIS. We are the Anonymous, we are legion.