ALBUQUERQUE (KRQE) – Two families are suing for what happened at a popular place for kids.

They say their kids were hurt at an Albuquerque trampoline park. They want the park to pay up, claiming the waiver they signed won’t hold up in court.

Kids rushed into Gravity Park near San Mateo and Alameda and parents like it because, “After they’re done, they go home and sleep,” Linda Solis says.

However, some say they won’t be taking their kids back. Christopher Saucedo is the attorney for a Rio Rancho family who is suing, saying their 15-year-old son broke his ankle on a trampoline.

“A trampoline gym or park like that should have more supervision. It should have more direction,” Saucedo says.

The Gravity Park owner says a safety video plays in the park, rules are posted and everyone signs a waiver explaining the risks.

“We explain in the waiver that same exact thing. There are certain rules to be followed. If they’re not followed, there’s certainly potential for injury,” says Zane Hansen, co-owner of Gravity Park.

Attorneys tell KRQE News 13 that New Mexico law isn’t clear when it comes to waivers and even if you sign, it doesn’t always mean a business is off the hook.

“These waivers, I do not believe are enforceable,” Saucedo says. “It’s not a true warning of the danger.”

If you ask Paul Archuleta who is to blame he’ll say, “I think that it does fall on the business itself to a degree. Yeah, they should be able to help out with expenses if something happens and that’s just common.”

Solis disagrees.

“I don’t think it was their fault,” says Solis. “You’re a kid. You’re going to jump. You’re going to hurt yourself, and you’re going to jump a certain way but I wouldn’t blame the Gravity Park.”

Saucedo says the teen who broke his ankle had to have surgery. The family wants those medical bills paid for and stricter rules at the park. Another family is suing Gravity Park for similar reasons. The attorney says a 12-year-old broke her ankle when she slipped through the padding that covers the springs on the trampolines.