People Moves of the Week: Evercore, Star Mountain Capital, Jones Day

Evercore hires tech specialist to begin in June; Star Mountain taps former Citigroup PE co-founder; Detroit restructuring head Kevyn Orr returns to Jones Day

Azalea Capital — The Greenville, South Carolina-based private equity firm hired Barbara Anderson to be controller and chief compliance officer. Anderson, a certified public accountant, will oversee all financial reporting, risk management and regulatory compliance for Azalea and its portfolio companies. Prior to her arrival at Azalea, Anderson spent the majority of her 25-year career in the New England with several well-known companies, including KPMG LLP, as well as Norwalk, Connecticut-based Xerox (NYSE: XRX) and Greenwich, Connecticut-based real estate company Starwood Capital Group.

Evercore (NYSE:EVR) — The New York investment bank tapped Anil Rachwani to be a senior managing director in its technology group beginning in June. He will be based in Evercore's London office. Rachwani was most recently a managing director at JPMorgan Chase & Co. (NYSE: JPM) where he spent 13 years and led the technology investment banking franchise for Europe, Middle East and Africa.

Harvest Partners SCF LP — The New York-based financial adviser has announced three new hires: Steve Duke, April Blackmon Meyer and Caldwell Zimmerman. Duke has joined Harvest as a principal. He was most recently a principal at CCMP Capital Partners. Meyer, the firm's new marketing associate, was most recently at JAT Capital Management. Zimmerman Also comes aboard as an associate. He was most recently an associate at private equity firm Arsenal Capital Partners.

Jones Day — The New York law firm announced the return of partner Kevyn Orr, who recently served as Emergency Manager of Detroit, ushering the city through the nation's largest municipal bankruptcy. Orr worked at Jones Day's Washington office for 12 years prior to being tapped by Michigan Gov. Rick Snyder for Detroit. Jones Day later became the city's lead attorney in the Chapter 9 case, earning $58 million over the course of the roughly 18-month case. Orr is set to return on May 1 to Jones Day's Washington, D.C., office, where he will take over as partner-in-charge in the business restructuring and reorganization practice. Orr succeeds Gregory Shumaker, who will turn to overseeing the firm’s global disputes practice.

Sperry Mitchell & Co. Inc. — The New York investment bank recently announced a slate of promotions: Tom Pogacnik has been promoted to managing director, Daniel Officer has been promoted to senior vice president and Melissa Cole has been promoted to senior associate.

Star Mountain Capital LLC — The New York alternative asset manager brought in Todd Benson as a senior adviser. Benson is the former managing partner the private equity group at Citigroup (NYSE: C). Before that, he served as a managing director in Salomon Smith Barney's investment banking division where he specialized in technology, media and telecommunications M&A.

Tarter Krinsky & Drogin LLP — The New York law firm recently hired four attorneys from Spizz Cohen & Serchuk PC. The new arrivals include partners Alex Spizz and Perry Cohen, as well as counsels Arthur Goldstein and Paul Richard Karan. The latest hiring round marks the continuing expansion of Tarter Krinsky & Drogin, which deepened its attorney bench by nearly 25 percent in 2014.

For more information on related topics, visit the following: