All eyes will be on the U.S. Supreme Court in the coming days and weeks as the justices decide an array of high-profile cases that could have lasting implications.

In the next few weeks, the Supreme Court will rule on cases involving the Affordable Care Act, same-sex marriage and whether a Confederate license plate is protected as free speech. The watch is now on to when those rulings will be issued.

The next rulings will come Thursday morning. After that, you can look to June 22, June 25 and June 29 for a flurry of decisions.

Here's what's left and what the decisions will mean for Alabamians:

Same-sex marriage: Lots of Alabama eyes on this one as it could decide once and for all if same-sex marriage will be legal throughout the country. An Alabama judge approved such unions earlier in the year but legal wrangling put them on hold. According to reports, this could be one of the final rulings issued by the court, so we could be looking at the end of June. Court watchers expect a ruling in favor of gay and lesbian couples.

Affordable Care Act – This one is a hard to predict and recent comments by President Obama shows he has concerns the court could toss out the federal subsidies that cover healthcare for 6.4 million people in the U.S. At issue is whether the law prohibits that financial aid in places such as Alabama that didn't establish its own healthcare exchanges. The ramifications are huge (you can see some graphics showing that here.) The five Republican-appointees on the court will likely decide the issue and we all know how that turned out last time. Alabama currently has 168,816 Marketplace enrollees for 2015, of which 89 percent - or 150,256 - receive premium subsidies. All that's at stake.

Confederate license plates- The Sons of the Confederate Veterans' request for a car tag featuring the Confederate flag is at the center of case that's being watched closely by free speech advocates. Texas, which denied the request, maintains it should have the right to reject any tag that it says violates public standards. This one is an interesting case, as the more left-leaning members of the court may find themselves defending a Confederate flag in the name of free speech. If the court says states can't regulate the tags, it could be a free-for-all in the license plate arena.

What else?

There are other issues facing the court, too. Justices will also be deciding on rules related to emissions from coal and oil-fired power plants; a case determining what constitutes housing discrimination; and if methods of execution involving new drugs are constitutional.