From “The Clintonian Roots of Obamacare” by my AEI colleague Scott Gottlieb:

In the coming year, Clinton can be expected to turn back to this well-honed theme and to blame any of the health-care system’s problems, which she has done more than just about anyone to advance over the years, on the greed of assorted special interests, rather than on the failure of the left’s economic assumptions. She will be buoyed in these efforts by sharp increases in the cost of medical care and insurance, which she will blame not on the shortcomings of Obamacare, but on the avarice of doctors, hospitals, and especially the companies that manufacture drugs and medical devices. Health-care costs are likely to be a central theme in the next Presidential election. …

By embracing Obamacare and scapegoating the health-care industry for its ongoing problems, Hillary Clinton is merely pursuing the fulfillment of her original vision for American health care. She is the author of most of Obamacare’s elements, and many of the pieces of the regulatory apparatus have not yet been fully activated. Obamacare, like its blueprint, Hillarycare, established the tools necessary to exercise the required control on the health-care industry, if it has yet to put all those tools to use.

Clinton’s NHB envisioned a much more robust and direct role for government in managing access to medical technology and procedures and a more active role in price setting than that being realized by Obamacare so far. A President Clinton would be more likely than Obama to finally constitute IPAB and set it loose regulating the whole industry. The elements of even greater control of medicine are all embedded in Obamacare, but these provisions are still waiting for their full exercise. This is the unfinished element of the progressive health-care agenda, the detailed outline of which was first laid down more than 20 years ago.

Obamacare, like Hillarycare, principally asserted government control over the delivery of health care. Clinton’s 2016 platform will no doubt focus on exercising that control as a means to forcibly lower prices to make the coverage itself, in her words, more affordable. Of course, Obamacare’s problems go well beyond high prices. But even on the price issue, Clinton looks likely to offer yet another false premise. Prices aren’t rising because businesses are exploiting Obamacare, as Clinton seems set to profess, even if some might be. Prices are going up mostly because businesses are following the law’s dictates — rationally responding to an irrational framework that was invented largely by Hillary Clinton.