Forecasters say the Denver area could get another round of thunderstorms Sunday afternoon and evening.

It has become a familiar pattern.

After Friday night’s storms toppled power lines and brought a monsoon of heavy rainfall, another downpour hit downtown Denver early Saturday afternoon. Nearly 0.65 inches of rain dropped in less than half an hour, the National Weather Service said, dousing crowds at the Capitol Hill People’s Fair in Civic Center park.

About 2:15 p.m., an inch or two of standing water was still on downtown streets under a sunny sky after the storm moved east to the plains. A couple of hours later, tornado warnings were issued for Fort Morgan and for Kit Carson County in far eastern Colorado.

The prognosis for Saturday evening along the Front Range was less grim than in recent days, which saw tornadoes, heavy rain and hail occurring frequently.

But forecasters cautioned that scattered storms could turn severe Saturday night. At 4:40 p.m., the Weather Service issued a severe thunderstorm watch through midnight for northeastern Colorado, including much of the metro area. About 7 p.m., country singer Luke Bryan’s concert at Sports Authority Field was delayed by lightning, prompting fans to crowd stadium concourses.

“We’ll have another round of scattered heavy rain and hail today and tomorrow,” Weather Service meteorologist Chad Gimmestad said Saturday. “And then we’ll be back to normal warm temperatures on Monday.”

Although the risk was considered low, heavy rain of more than an inch per hour could cause localized flooding, given saturated soils, according to the Weather Service’s midafternoon forecast.

For Sunday, the Weather Service was predicting a lower chance of severe storms, putting the chance of rain at 60 percent for Denver, mainly after 5 p.m.

The high temperature is forecast to reach 74 degrees, before warming to 80 on Monday under partly sunny skies and a 20 percent chance of showers and thunderstorms.

Each day through next Saturday is forecast to have a slight chance of storms, holding out the hope of a drier week.

Jon Murray: 303-954-1405, jmurray@ denverpost.com or twitter.com/JonMurray