Fashion mogul Diane von Furstenberg said she will launch a high-tech purse that automatically—and cordlessly—charges smartphones.

The purse, which does not yet have a price tag, will go on sale in limited edition this holiday season, before rolling out broadly next year. The designer is working with an undisclosed technology partner on the handbag.

"My role in fashion is really solution driven," von Furstenberg said. "I'm always on the go, so [it's important] you have everything at the right time."

The idea of creating a handbag that charges a smartphone isn't entirely new. Kate Spade recently announced that it will launch a similar product line this fall.

Related: 16 Must-Have Products to Make Your Home Smarter Right Now

Von Furstenberg, a regular in Sun Valley, Idaho, took the stage at this year's Allen & Co. conference for a panel on the future of fashion, along with Spanx founder Sara Blakely.

She's there to meet with technology companies as she works to bring fashion into the future.

"Technology is the biggest revolution," von Furstenberg said. "It's such a big part of our lives, we do everything with technology, so it's not even separate anymore. It just is."

Related: 10 Biggest Tech Flops of the Century

Though she doesn't wear an Apple Watch, the designer said she's also interested in wearable technology. At her New York Fashion Week show in September 2012, she sent models down the runway wearing Google Glass.

But von Furstenberg cautions the term "wearable tech" will soon become obsolete.

"Wearable technology won't even be a word anymore, because everything you do will have technology," she said.

Von Furstenberg added that technology isn't just important for the future of fashion products—it's already crucial to their marketing.

"If you're interested in millennials, everyone is on social media and everyone is a brand," she said. "It's very interesting to brands to see how they can work with a generation, who each of them is [their own] brand."

This article originally appeared on CNBC.

Read more from CNBC:

For an airline upgrade, miles aren't the best

How movie theaters are striking back against Netflix

14 retailers shaking up the industry