Note: The opinions expressed in this article are not necessarily those of the editors of this site.

There’s nothing like a little secrecy to get the conspiracy theorists all hot and bothered. In fact, the more secrecy inherent in the honey pot the more loudly the conspiracy honey bees will buzz.

On February 26, 2015, the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) announced that Net Neutrality would become law (1). In less than 24 hours, a conspiracy theory was cooking over the commission not making its new rules public (2). After all, lack of evidence must be evidence of conspiracy.

FOX News and Alex Jones aside, there are legitimate questions about whether or not the FCC has the authority to regulate the Internet, or, for that matter, whether they are attempting to do so in the best way possible.

In order to establish freedom for all Internet users (both commercial enterprises and end users who are simply consumers, trolls, or social media butterflies [not an exhaustive list]), Tom Wheeler and the gang decided to reclassify the Internet as a utility (3).

Okay, imagine, if you will, that the federal government decided to reclassify public highways as a public utility. That’s kind of what we’re talking about here.

The difference, however, is that there is no cabal of corporations (and never have been) trying to turn the interstate highway system into an oligarchy of private enterprise where the few, the proud, and the rich get to determine who has access, how fast they can go, and where they can park their downloads. There is such a cabal on the Internet. Their names are Comcast, Verizon, and AT&T.

I don’t know who PressResetEarth is, but they ask a very good question in their YouTube video:

Indeed, what was wrong with the Internet before the new rules?

Why the Internet Was Broken (Or At Least Bruised)

If you listen to the anti-Neutralists, like Senator Ted Cruz (R-Texas), government should not be in the business of picking winners and losers (4). Of course, no one has ever advanced a good argument as to why Verizon and Comcast should be able to pick them either.

Instead, the anti-argument is disguised as a pro-liberty argument. Just let the Wild West reign, so the argument goes, and the market itself will pick the winners and losers. Except that if you put a giant dwarf gobbler in a room full of little people, there won’t be any pint-sized bi-peds left after dinner.

This issue exists at all because Net citizens like watching their late-night Internet porn and streaming re-runs of The Walking Dead (5).

Last year, Verizon and Netflix got into a spat over video streaming speeds (6). Verizon, despite its denials to such, was caught throttling Netflix’s traffic and extorting the smaller company to pay for bandwidth upgrades.

I’m no techie, but when the majority of experts on a given subject speak out for or against something, it’s a pretty good bet that they’re onto something (7).

On the other hand, I’ve never been one to follow the crowd.