Florida Insurance Commissioner Kevin McCarty was honored with a Lifetime Achievement Award at the Florida Association for Insurance Reform's 3rd annual awards dinner Thursday night.

In a statement, FAIR said McCarty, the state's first non-elected insurance commissioner, "is recognized as a champion for consumers and a stabilizing force in the property insurance market."

McCarty has steered the industry through numerous challenges since 2003, including "balancing consumer protections with the need to return Citizens [Property Insurance Corp.] policyholders to the private market and reduce the risk of additional assessments for all Floridians," FAIR said.

McCarty also oversaw reduction of worker's compensation rates by more than 50 percent, "navigated the changing regulatory environment resulting from the Affordable Care Act" and helped the state "overcome the unprecedented 2004-05 storm seasons" when Florida was hit by eight named storms.

Neal said in an email statement on Friday: "For over a decade, Commissioner McCarty has consistently and successfully guided the transformation into a robust competitive property insurance market to the benefit of consumers. Despite an often difficult political environment and multiple hurricanes, he has earned recognition as one of the most effective state regulators in the country.His award from FAIR was well earned."

The dinner was at Kovens Conference Center at Florida International University's Biscayne Bay Campus in North Miami.

Demotech Inc. founders Joe Petrelli and Sharon Romano Petrelli were honored with FAIR's Founder's Award. A financial analysis company founded in 1985, Demotech reviews and rates more than 400 regional and national insurance companies, including title underwriters and other specialty carriers.

Last year, FAIR gave its Lifetime Achievement Award honorees to former Sen. Locke Burt, who founded Security First Insurance Co. after finishing a 13-year state Senate career.

FAIR calls itself a non-partisan, non-profit educational organization "that promotes a robust insurance market and also protects consumers and policy holders."

rhurtibise@sun-sentinel.com, 954-356-4071