Topics: Books, gays in hollywood, Hollywood, LGBT, Entertainment News

Squeamishness about addressing gay-related subjects is a fact of life in the entertainment industry. In its 2014 Studio Responsibility Index, an annual study of LGBT representations in the previous year’s major Hollywood films, GLAAD reported that, of 102 studio films, only 17 had gay, lesbian, bisexual, or transgender characters of any kind. Most of these were tangential minor roles or, worse yet, as GLAAD put it, “outright defamatory representations.” The LGBT characters “received only minutes — or even seconds — of screen time, and were often offensive portrayals.” And those fleeting depictions were also remarkably racially homogeneous: “Of the 25 different characters counted (many of whom were onscreen for no more than a few seconds), 19 were white (76%) while only 3 were Black/African American (12%), 2 were Asian/Pacific Islander (8%), and 1 was Latino (4%).”

Although smaller, independent films have focused on gay plotlines since the ’70s and ’80s, when Brokeback Mountain became an unexpected box-office hit in 2007, and after 2008’s Oscar-winning Milk, many thought that, surely, Hollywood had broken a final barrier. But building gay, lesbian, bisexual, or transgender characters into a film’s central plotline — especially when that involves depicting physical intimacy — is something the industry is still reluctant to do. In 2013 director Steven Soderbergh couldn’t get his biopic about Liberace, Behind the Candelabra, made by any major studio, even with huge stars like Michael Douglas, playing Liberace, and Matt Damon, playing Liberace’s partner Scott Thorson, and a relatively small budget of $5 million.

Soderbergh said he was “stunned,” telling The Wrap that every major studio turned him down. “They said it was too gay. Everybody. This was after Brokeback Mountain . . . it made no sense to us,” he said. But where Brokeback Mountain represented sex between its two cowboy characters as tender and nonthreatening, Behind the Candelabra was proudly garish and up-front in its depictions of gay intimacy — some of it in groups, lots of it in hot tubs. Even though, as characters, Liberace and Thorson were living in the glass closet, the film itself refused to “cover” them. Its main character was gender nonconforming, to be sure. By portraying the older Liberace, the flamboyant queen, meeting and seducing the much younger Thorson, Behind the Candelabra activated the kind of threat — the fear — that Rachel Riskind’s work has uncovered in straight-male response to gender-nonconforming faces.

“Studios were going: ‘We don’t know how to sell it,’” Soderbergh said. “They were scared.” HBO picked up the film, which won several Emmys, perhaps breaking through that fear — and challenging it— but only HBO was willing to take that chance. HBO is notable for its successes with LGBT-themed work, including the series Looking (which is one of few shows to deal even remotely honestly with gay men’s lives today, and which was renewed after its first season) and the groundbreaking 2014 film of Larry Kramer’s The Normal Heart, produced and directed by Ryan Murphy, which reached far beyond a gay viewership and set records for HBO. But these are the rare breakouts that garner massive media attention or win awards. The overall landscape is bleak.

In television, too, we tend to focus on the shows that buck the trend of invisibility or undisguised defamation. Landmark moments — like Laverne Cox’s performance in Netflix’s Orange Is the New Black, or the Amazon-produced series Transparent — are the exceptions that prove the rule. GLAAD’s 2013 index noted that LGBT representations are less “scarce and regressive” in television than in film, but the group still found the paucity “surprising.” It’s great that we have RuPaul’s Drag Race serving up fabulous entertainment on the niche gay network Logo. And Ryan Murphy’s Glee has been among the few standouts aimed at a wide audience and has done an enormous amount to affirm LGBT young people, depicting openly gay teens expressing physical intimacy and tackling homophobia and bullying. But by and large, LGBT characters on television, when they are represented at all, tend to be offered up in covered forms, with their difference diminished to a note so soft you can barely hear it, especially on network shows. It’s a response to what is often called the “ick factor,” the fear of turning off an audience by challenging its implicit bias. (“Is TV too gay?” one news story on a Fox affiliate asked a few years ago, referring specifically to Glee.) Just as people who find the thought of LGBT relationships uncomfortable may still tell a pollster they support gay rights and equality, they also might not mind the character of the funny gay friend or neighbor who comes in and out on a sitcom or drama. They wouldn’t want to see these characters fired from their jobs or prevented from marrying, but they’d also prefer such characters remain sexless and, thus, harmless. A study published in the American Sociological Review in November 2014, in fact, concluded that though a large majority of respondents said they supported full civil rights for gays and lesbians, they would rather not see same-sex public displays of affection. “Of the heterosexuals interviewed, 95 percent said they approved of a scenario in which a straight couple kissed each other on the cheek in public, but only 55 percent approved of a gay couple doing the same,” Al Jazeera America reported of the study, which surveyed one thousand Americans. “When asked if it were a lesbian couple, 72 percent of straight people approved.” And these results represent those who actually would admit to implicit bias. Rachel Riskind’s research, described in chapter 2, would suggest that a much lower percentage truly would be comfortable with same-sex intimacy. Also reflecting Riskind’s research, this study found that heterosexual men appear to be more threatened than women, with a larger percentage of that population disapproving of public displays of affection among same-sex couples.

Salon writer Daniel D’Addario has pointed out that ABC’s Scandal features “a semi-realistic depiction of a married gay couple,” though their “homosexuality was less important than their love of power.” And he criticizes Modern Family for its depiction of a gay married couple that treats the characters as “vehicles to show how tolerant straight people are.” (BuzzFeed writer Louis Peitzman memorably described Modern Family’s Mitch and Cam, who rarely show intimacy of any kind, as “two gay men who don’t even seem to like each other.”) This is covering. Having a couple on TV who are dads who don’t have sex isn’t enough, not in 2014, if we’re to challenge assumptions and break through implicit bias. “By and large, gay characters are sexless,” Peitzman wrote following a comparative study of portrayals of kissing and sex among characters in opposite-sex and same-sex couples on TV shows. “And when they’re not, their trysts are still more insinuation than anything explicit. It comes down to depictional equality: If the straight couples on a show are making out, the gay couples ought to be able to make out too.”

Gay and transgender characters continue to be deployed as reliable laugh lines on television sitcoms too. (Jokes at the expense of gays are endemic on late-night shows and in stand-up comedy as well, with hardly any repercussions.) CBS’s hit Mike and Molly has been notorious, using the terms shemale and tranny to refer to transgender women, and came under criticism from gay groups in early 2013. The ugly jokes continued. Blogger Sue Kerr laced into the network later that year in a blog essay on Huffington Post, noting how in the first fifteen minutes of a randomly selected episode she counted jab after jab at lesbians, gay men, and transgender women — ten in total.

Transgender people are perhaps the least well served by television representations, as in so many areas. GLAAD studied ten years of transgender depictions in 2013, looking at every major broadcast network and seven cable networks. Most of the depictions were abysmal. Transgender people were slotted into a victim role at least 40% of the time, and were killers or villains at least 21% of the time. Antitrans language and slurs were present in 61% of portrayals. The reality — including the brutal hate crimes and the disproportionate criminalization of transgender people of color — is barely reflected in popular culture.