It is one of the most recognisable skylines in Britain, one that has floated above the Fens for many centuries. The soaring West Tower of Ely Cathedral and its delicate, octagonal Lantern Tower together create a silhouette known locally as “the ship of the Fens”, which can be seen from miles across the flatlands that fan out from the city.

But not for much longer, say conservationists, thanks to insensitive new development. It is typical of the threat facing so many cathedral cities and historic towns and has led English Heritage, which advises the Government, to propose an official designation for them that will protect their unique character.

In Ely, a new bypass to solve traffic congestion is to be built on raised embankments, and will cut across the view of the ancient cathedral that greets those approaching the city from the south and east, as it has pilgrims for the past 900 years. And the land between the road and the River Great Ouse, which currently marks the southern city limits, seems destined to be filled in with more of the flat-pack housing estates that serve the 50 per cent-plus of residents who use Ely as a dormitory town for Cambridge’s Silicon Valley, or London, just an hour away by train.

Despite a local campaign, and a viable alternative proposal from English Heritage that would have eased the traffic congestion without ruining the view (and all for the same £36 million budget), construction will start on the bypass next year. The relevant Cabinet minister, Eric Pickles, declined to call it in for review, preferring to trust local decision-making processes.

“I’m very sad about Ely,” says Simon Thurley, English Heritage’s chief executive, who announced yesterday he is standing down next year. “As a place, it is such a precious asset that its fate should not just be a question for a small group of local councillors, but of concern nationally and internationally.”

And where Ely goes, many other historic towns may follow because of the unprecedented pressure on local authorities to accommodate new homes (Ely, with a population of just 19,000, is required in government plans to build 3,400 by 2025) and boost the economy. That is the conclusion of “The Sustainable Growth of Cathedral Cities and Historic Towns”, a report compiled for English Heritage by the consultants Green Balance, and published today. It highlights the failure of the planning process adequately to protect such treasures of the national landscape as Ely.

In theory, there shouldn’t be a problem. The National Planning Policy Framework document, produced by Eric Pickles’s Department of Communities and Local Government, spells out “conserving and enhancing the historic environment” in its list of priorities. In drawing up a “Local Plan”, it states, councils must “recognise that heritage assets are an irreplaceable resource and conserve them in a manner appropriate to their significance”. So why, then, is the Ely bypass happening? Well, higher up the National Framework’s pecking order of priorities is the need “to boost significantly the supply of housing”.

“Heritage considerations,” the report acknowledges, “are having some impact on the scale of redevelopment at historic towns, but this is secondary to the determination of both central and local government to provide the necessary homes, jobs and facilities needed by a rising number of households.”

In some of the 20 cathedral cities and historic towns it surveys – notably Bath, Lincoln and Chester – it does find evidence of good practice, local planners seamlessly stitching sustainable new development and economic growth into long-established environs. “It fascinates me to see how so-called creative and digital industries all want to operate out of converted historic warehouses in city centres,” notes Simon Thurley.

But elsewhere the report warns of the threat posed by proposed schemes to the historic character of a number of other places, including Durham, Lichfield, Salisbury and Winchester. The “cultural approach” of councillors is critical. “The economic well-being of towns is councillors’ primary concern, though this is being interpreted differently from place to place. Councillors could take views ranging from heritage being beneficial to a town’s distinctiveness and economy to it representing a burden and a drag on investment.”

A stroll round Ely suggests that its leaders may lean towards the second category. Its historic core – built on sandstone that stood above the marshy terrain, later drained in the 18th century to become agricultural land – contains 204 listed buildings. But such protection orders do nothing to spare them being hidden under an ever-widening skirt of hastily erected industrial estates, out-of-town supermarket parks and large-scale housing developments by investors with apparently little concern about blending in with the vernacular style that makes the city so attractive to tourists.

Its high street boasts a good proportion of thriving independent businesses – notably the celebrated Toppings Bookshop – and only a handful of chain stores. Yet at least one local councillor has been heard of late saying that Ely needs to attract a shopping centre developer. Even the church authorities, the custodians of the cathedral, were at one stage said to be contemplating building houses on Deans Meadows – an oasis in the heart the city – before a benefactor stepped in and paid them to drop their plans.

When the local population is ready to fight for the look and character of their home city, it can move mountains, as the English Heritage report shows has happened in Bath. Yet with half of Ely’s working population commuting elsewhere, it has proved hard to summon up public pressure. Many of those who move from Cambridge do so because house prices are lower, not because they fall for Ely. Attitudes to the mass house-building that threatens to swamp it are changing rapidly, too. In 2010, the British Social Attitudes Survey showed that 46 per cent mostly opposed it, with 28 per cent largely in favour. Four years later, those figures now stand at 31 per cent opposed with 47 per cent in favour.

Then there’s the complexity of local government in Ely – as elsewhere in small historic towns and cities. What happens in Ely is decided by not one but three sets of councillors – a city authority, with limited powers, the Ely-based East Cambridgeshire District Council, with planning control, and Cambridgeshire County Council. In most examples of good practice highlighted in the English Heritage report, single-tier unitary authorities are shown to be more effective.

Some concerned heritage organisations have been looking to Europe’s historic cities for inspiration. Delft in Holland, Lund in Sweden, Tubingen in Germany and Chartres and Bayonne in France have all been held up as examples of how better to balance heritage protection with development – by, for instance, restricting expansion in favour of reusing existing city sites, removing cars from centres, improving public transport and, in France, drawing up Scots (“schemes of territorial coherence”) that link planning for a city’s historic centre with the larger region around it.

And English Heritage has a new proposal of its own that it has been promoting with the government. Working with Visit England, it is pushing for cathedral cities and historic towns to be given a special accolade that recognises their rich heritage, rather like the French system of designating specific “towns of art and history”. These will, it is intended, make extra funds available, encourage sensitive development and promote both tourism and civic engagement.

“We are not talking about creating some ghastly heritage ghetto,” stresses Simon Thurley, “but rather a way of raising their status. Sometimes it can take an outside accolade to make local people appreciate what they have.” He points to the transformation of Liverpool’s city centre as a result of it being named European City of Culture in 2008, or the ongoing revival of Hull since it was named UK City of Culture for 2017.

“It’s not new levels of planning controls we need for our cathedral cities,” he says. “What we need to do is encourage local communities and local authorities to treasure what they have got. The heritage of a place can be a real force for good – not just in terms of well-being and how it looks, but economically, in attracting new employers, creating jobs and making for a more confident place. At the moment, because of bad development decisions, too many historic towns are killing the golden goose.”

The Angel Awards, supported by The Daily Telegraph, celebrate local people who rescue heritage at risk. This year’s winners will be revealed at a West End ceremony on Monday November 3. See some of the shortlisted candidates on the English Heritage YouTube channel, or win free tickets to the ceremony by emailing angels.tickets@english-heritage.org.uk.