“Orale (Spanish for “what’s up?”), homies,” is how every “FernieVision” video begins.

Luis Fernando “Fernie” Munoz, co-operator of Lupita’s Mexican Restaurant, has been making short videos every week to give Kansas Avenue construction updates and remind people to check out the downtown businesses who are struggling to bring in customers.

“It started out with crazy weather reports,” Munoz said. “And people liked my weather reports so much that they started liking them and requesting them.”

Munoz said his videos got so much popularity with his friends on Facebook and fans of Lupita’s Facebook page, he began recording more on his iPhone — now he uses an Android, though.

“Then when the constuction started, that’s when I kind of blew it up,” he said. “I mean, we’re not alone down here in downtown. We’re one big happy family.”

He makes at least one video a week, but sometimes can produce up to four a day, depending on how much free time he has. The videos range from 45 seconds to around two to three minutes in length.

Sometimes he will give an update on construction, other times he talks about the “Thirsty Thursdays” and live music Lupita’s hosts every week.

“I turned it around for Lupita’s because with my videos, I started to ask for help and people actually listened,” he said.

Now, Munoz has a “FernieVision” Facebook and Twitter account, along with his YouTube page. He said some of his videos have gotten more than 80 shares on social media, which he said helps get the word out about the restaurant and other downtown businesses. He said he has had customers come from Elwood and St. Joseph, Mo., just because they saw his videos.

“I never planned for it to blow up,” he said. “But you know what? I’m very grateful because this is family-owned and family-operated and we did need help. I was being sincere in my videos. Not only does Lupita’s need help, downtown needs help in this construction. There’s shops talking about closing.”

Other downtown businesses have gotten more customers because Munoz has mentioned them in his videos or on Facebook posts.

“Everywhere I go, I like to give support,” he said. “To me, these places are important.”

Some of the videos include Spanish translations for Munoz’s family and friends in Mexico, because he said they want to know about the updates with the restaurant.

He said he has never used a script for his videos, which he thinks makes them more personal.

Now that the videos have grown in popularity, Munoz said it has become more neve-wracking to film them.

“I am very nervous now,” he said. “Because before, it was just me being silly. Now, I feel like I have a level set that I have to reach. That’s kind of why I’ve had less videos the last few days. But, I’m working on that.”

Ultimately, he said making the videos are fun, even with the popularity.

“I always have fun, that’s one thing I love to do,” he said.