The Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services this week announced a proposal to cover an annual low-dose CT scan for Medicare beneficiaries at high risk for developing lung cancer.

Medicare defines high-risk individuals as those 55 to 74 years of age with a smoking history of 30 pack years — either a pack a day for 30 years or 2 packs a day for 15 years and so on — and who are current smokers or have quit smoking less than 15 years ago.

Under the Affordable Care Act, effective preventive measures –as determined by the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force — are included in the “essential health benefit” and are covered beginning Jan. 1 for those individuals who meet the screening criteria and are enrolled in state health marketplace plans, Medicaid-expansion programs and new private insurance plans.

“This proposal by Medicare will save lives, increasing the low survival rates associated with lung cancer, our nation’s leading cancer killer,” said American Lung Association chief executive Harold P. Wimmer.

Lung cancer causes 30 percent of all cancer deaths in America. It kills 150,000 people a year. The survival rate for lung cancer is lower than for any other common cancers, such as breast, colon and prostate.

“Studies have clearly shown that individuals at high risk for lung cancer should receive this low-dose CT scan every year because it can help catch lung cancer in the earliest stages,” said Dr. Peter Sachs, associate professor of radiology at the University of Colorado Hospital.

The hospital is now offering screening for early-stage lung cancer to high-risk patients referred by their physicians who have no personal history of lung cancer.

Medicare proposes requiring facilities performing CT scans to submit initial screen findings, follow-up and the patient’s ultimate health outcomes.

Radiologists serving Medicare patients must have significant experience in reading CT scans for possible lung cancer and the radiology imaging centers must have significant experience in advanced diagnostic imaging.

Many private insurance plans already pay for lung cancer screening.