An employee getting coverage for the first time will pay about $150 a month. Employees who previously had 100 percent premium coverage will pay more than they did in 2015. For example, Otterbein said his sous chef is now shelling out $1,100 a month for family coverage.

But now that A Restaurant must pay for roughly 30 employees who are opting for insurance, it will pay only 70 percent of the premium and cover employees only.

Before the ACA mandate, A Restaurant paid 100 percent of healthcare premiums for about eight upper-management employees as a perk, co-owner Jordan Otterbein said. That included coverage for spouses and dependents.

Starting in 2016, the Affordable Care Act requires employers with 50 to 99 full-time-equivalent employees to offer health coverage to their full-timers. Employers with 100 or more full-timers have been required to offer health insurance since early 2015.

Marin is a modern American diner that will offer breakfast all day. When diners get the bill, it will indicate hospitality is included. At The Guild, the bill will be discreet. Members of the Club 33-style restaurant will be billed through a tab-style system that sends your itemized check via email thus eliminating the "end of the meal" check altogether.

Restaurant Marin and The Guild Club, new dining concepts by Chef Noah Blom and his wife Marin Howarth, are opening in December at South Coast Collection in Costa Mesa. The couple also owns the award-winning restaurant, Arc, at SoCo.

The owners of two high-profile Orange County restaurants are taking a stand on rising labor costs by implementing controversial changes that could lead to sticker shock on your next dining bill.

In Newport Beach, A Restaurant is tacking on a 2 percent surcharge to cover soon-to-be-required employee health benefits totaling an estimated $72,000 a year. The surcharge is effective Tuesday. Six miles away at hipster enclave South Coast Collection in Costa Mesa, Chef Noah Blom is taking a different approach: he’s scrapping tips and bumping menu prices by as much as 25 percent at two new restaurants.

“’Hospitality included’ is how we like to call it,” Blom said. “There are some people that won’t understand, and the menu prices will shock them.”

The three restaurants appear to be the first in Orange County to openly link price increases to government-mandated healthcare premiums and wage hikes.

On Jan. 1, California’s minimum wage increases $1 to $10 an hour. On the same day, the Affordable Care Act kicks in for businesses that employ 50 to 99 full-time workers – impacting dozens of independent restaurants.

“It’s hitting all sorts of small businesses between the eyes,” said Jordan Otterbein, co-owner of A Restaurant, of the ACA mandate.

Russ Bendel, vice president of the California Restaurant Association’s Orange County chapter, said other local restaurateurs have discussed surcharges, but none have made the jump until now.

“With all the new regulations, especially wages, I think you’ll start seeing more people follow suit,” said Bendel, owner of The Vine, a wine country bistro in San Clemente.

Matt Sutton, vice president of government affairs and public policy at the CRA, said the ACA has had a huge impact on the hospitality industry. “A law like this is the biggest policy change that restaurants have had to comply with – possibly ever,” he said.

Surcharges, Sutton said, have become an “emerging trend” in California as clusters of restaurants in the Bay Area and Los Angeles have adopted such policies as a matter of survival.

“We are seeing it pick up now,” Sutton said. “You do have this layering (effect) of additional costs that’s making (restaurants) alter business models.”

A Restaurant: Cut jobs or add surcharge?

When A Restaurant’s Otterbein began crunching the numbers for 2016, the outlook didn’t look good.

Of the restaurant’s 59 eligible full-time employees, roughly 30 so far have opted to take advantage of health insurance, Otterbein said. That’s four times more than during the restaurant’s last open enrollment period.

Otterbein, whose business partner is Hollywood filmmaker McG, said the added cost to cover those 30 employees amounts to roughly $6,000 a month. To maintain profits at his fine dining establishment on the Pacific Coast Highway, he looked at other options. They included cutting 10 jobs or risking a $36,000 fine by not offering insurance to anyone.

“I discussed every possible option,” he said. “Without exception, everyone thought (the surcharge) was the right thing to do and a good idea.”

Amy Evans, president of Colibri Insurance Services in Sherman Oaks, said it is challenging for businesses offering insurance for the first time to predict their costs.

“It’s a tough spot for a business owner to be in, especially in an industry with such low profit margins,” said Evans, a health insurance broker who helps California employers navigate ACA.

A Restaurant’s surcharge comes a year after several popular Los Angeles restaurants implemented a 3 percent surcharge.

Predictably, the fee didn’t go over well with some diners.

In September, a class-action lawsuit was filed against a handful of top Los Angeles restaurants, including Suzanne Goin’s Tavern. The suit alleges the dining establishments are price fixing.

“The issue here is you can’t do this together and influence the market,” said attorney Daniel R. Sterrett, whose Los Angeles firm filed the suit.

Sterrett said he has no problem with restaurateurs acting on their own to add surcharges, like A Restaurant is doing.

“There’s nothing wrong with a surcharge on the menu if you’re above board and not deceptive about it,” he said.

Otterbein said the surcharge will be transparent – posted on menus and checks as a charge added to “cover employee benefits.” For a party of four at dinner, the likely surcharge would total $6, or $1.50 per person.

He hopes loyal customers will embrace the fee because they know it directly benefits workers. Still, complaints are inevitable, he said.

“If someone doesn’t want to pay it, we’ll smile and gladly take it off,” he said. “I’m not going to argue with a customer.”

Sutton, of the state’s restaurant association, said surcharges are more palatable to diners than menu price hikes.

“When you build it into the price (of food), they get sticker shock, and they don’t understand why it’s there,” he said.

Hospitality included: risk or relief?

Steeper menu prices are a risk Chef Noah Blom is willing to take.

His no-gratuity policy will apply to his new restaurants, The Guild Club and Restaurant Marin, both slated to open later this month at South Coast Collection in Costa Mesa.

At his critically acclaimed Arc, where each dish is cooked over an open fire, tipping will remain, Blom said.

He and his wife, Marin Howarth, said they hope that including the cost of hospitality in the overall food prices will be a relief to diners.

“Tips makes people uncomfortable,” said Howarth, managing partner of the couple’s DirtySexyHappiness Hospitality Group.

With “hospitality included” in menu prices that are on average 25 percent higher than normal, Blom said he can level the playing field among his staff. All minimum wage staffers, from dishwashers to servers, will get paid $15 an hour starting Jan. 1.

Blom offered the Register an exclusive first look at Marin’s menu prices.

The modern diner, named after his wife, features a seafood-centric all-day breakfast menu. A homemade yogurt dish with berries and toasted brown sugar oats is listed at $14, while a gourmet “Egg McMuffin” style dish will be priced at $20. The latter, Blom notes, is a large dish – a fried egg topped with shaved bacon, spinach and aged cheddar on a 6-inch English muffin made from scratch.

Blom said the egg dish might have cost $15 or $16 under the old tipping structure.

Blom’s hospitality-included policy comes a month after famed restaurateur Danny Meyer announced plans to eliminate tipping at his New York City restaurants. The policy is being phased in this month.

Meyer operates Union Square Hospitality Group, whose restaurants include, The Modern, Union Square Cafe, Gramercy Tavern and Blue Smoke.

Like Blom, Meyer is also raising wages. By paying $5 more an hour than the mandated state minimum wage, Blom and his wife hope to attract staff who want to make the hospitality business a career.

“There will be blowback and we’ll lose some servers, but we think it’s right,” Blom said.