Exploring Tanzania’s Rubondo Island Rubondo Island offers diverse wildlife and breathtaking views. fullscreen A view of the beach and the surrounding forest on Rubondo Island Asilia … The wild and unlikely tale of Rubondo dates to the 1960s, when the Tanzanian National Park service turned over the keys to this densely forested Nantucket-size island in southwestern Lake Victoria to famed German zoologist and Oscar-winning documentary filmmaker Bernhard Grzimek. Asilia … Transfers to Rubondo involve several short flights and average $500 each-way. Charles Runnette … The Rubondo Airstrip Charles Runnette … Egrets on the edge of Rubondo Island. Charles Runnette … Rubondo’s native wildlife includes vervet monkeys, spot-necked otters, crocodiles, hippopotamus and sitatungas (a cousin of the antelope). Charles Runnette … A park ranger searching for the Chimpanzees while hiking on Rubondo Island. Charles Runnette … Visitors can go boating on Lake Victoria to birdwatch and fish for Nile Perch and tilapia. Asilia … Rubondo Island Camp, the island’s only guest accommodation, comprises of eight luxury huts, a sprawling open-air main public area and a luxury tree house. Asilia … To the north of the camp is the ranger station and, at the very top of the island, Africa’s newest—and possibly best-protected—colony of chimpanzees live in the forest under a thick canopy of trees. Asilia … The beach at Rubondo Island Camp Charles Runnette … of SHOW CAPTION HIDE CAPTION fullscreen of

THE ROAD TO Rubondo Island is neither easy nor well trod. After three bush flights, I found myself at an airstrip in Northern Tanzania’s Serengeti National Park, where the flights to Rubondo originate.

“Is this your first visit to the island?” my young, RayBan-sporting South African pilot, Denise Ellinas, asked me as we walked to the plane ahead of the handful of other visitors. “Yes,” I nodded, wondering if she could possibly be mistaking me for the sort of adventurer who makes a habit of returning to one of Africa’s remotest corners.

“I’ve flown all across Africa and I can tell you that Rubondo is special—a really unique spot,” Captain Ellinas said.

The wild and unlikely tale of Rubondo dates to the 1960s, when the Tanzanian National Park service turned over the keys to this densely forested Nantucket-size island in southwestern Lake Victoria to famed German zoologist and Oscar-winning documentary filmmaker Bernhard Grzimek.

Quickly seeing the deserted island’s potential as a protected habitat for endangered wildlife, Mr. Grzimek began to introduce a number of species to the island, including elephants, giraffe and gray parrots. Somewhat surprisingly, all of the newcomers established habitats on the island without upsetting its native wildlife, which includes vervet monkeys, spot-necked otters, crocodiles, hippopotamus and sitatungas (a cousin of the antelope).

But Mr. Grzimek’s greatest coup remains his successful population of Rubondo with chimpanzees from zoos and circuses across Europe roughly 45 years ago. Unwanted by their previous owners because of aggressive behavior toward humans, the eight males and nine females he brought to the island rapidly adapted to their new home. Today, the colony is thriving and has more than doubled in size.

ENLARGE Lake Victoria from Rubondo Island's shoreline Photo: Asilia

As our plane descended in the fading light after the two-hour flight, Captain Ellinas offered up a quick aerial overview of the island. Just south of the airstrip, on a small beach, sits Rubondo Island Camp, the island’s only guest accommodation, comprised of eight luxury huts, a sprawling open-air main public area and a luxury tree house. To the north of the camp is the ranger station and, at the very top of the island, Africa’s newest—and possibly best-protected—colony of chimpanzees live in the forest under a thick canopy of trees.

“The chimps are settling into their nests for the night just about now,” Captain Ellinas told us just before we landed. (Chimpanzees, it turns out, literally make their beds almost every night.)

Signing in at the open-air hut that functions as the island’s airport, I felt we’d landed in an otherworldly place. There was no cell service and we were clearly outnumbered by the wildlife. “I’m expecting Mr. Rourke to appear any moment and say ‘Welcome to Fantasy Island!’” said Jeff Graper, who, along with his wife, Janet, was visiting from Eugene, Ore. Moments later, our guide, a Tanzanian 20-something named Elisante William, greeted us with Champagne on the airstrip.

Later that evening in the open, breezy, public area of the camp, which has an old-school Mexican-resort vibe (shades of “Night of the Iguana,” but in a good way), I met with Mr. William and Milton Mpuche, the camp’s general manager, to talk about tracking the chimpanzees the following day.

I’d read that the odds of actually spotting Rubondo’s chimps, who are naturally wary of humans, are low, and Mr. Mpuche did not offer false hope. “The rangers have been staying close to the chimpanzees for more than a year to habituate them to humans,” he said. “But it takes time. Right now you have no more than a 40% chance of seeing them up close.”

Ever the optimist, I signed on for a demanding all-day hike deep into the lush, unspoiled forest the next day.

ENLARGE Guests fishing in Lake Victoria Photo: Asilia

Lake Victoria, nearly the size of Lake Superior, has the sort of imposing white caps you see in the ocean, which made for a bumpy, hourlong speedboat ride to the northernmost tip of the island. When we arrived, Mr. William, two armed park rangers, Mr. Mpuche and I waded to the shore past a few hungry-looking crocodiles and into the thick of the chimpanzee habitat.

The dark, humid forest streaked with vines seemed prehistoric. Thick fig trees and evergreens created a heavy canopy that made my sunscreen entirely unnecessary. During our grueling five hours of nonstop hiking and bushwhacking, we startled several wide-eyed sitatunga and saw a couple of elephants ambling down a nearby path. We had one “whoa-that-was-close!” moment with a Great Dane-size monitor lizard and came across dozens of chimpanzee nests, which the animals make from branches. But no matter how hard we strained our eyes in the dimness of the forest, we could not make out a single chimp.

‘The dark, humid, vine-streaked forest seemed prehistoric’

After pushing our way through bush and shrub, climbing up and down hillsides and through at least a dozen small valleys, our guide told us we were getting close to the chimps. Mr. William radioed ahead, the rangers radioed back; we ran in one direction, the chimps ran in the other. Able to swing from the vines hanging from the fig trees and completely at home on their own turf, the chimps remained consistently just out of sight. Exhausted, we admitted defeat and headed back to camp on the boat. We motored through the lake more slowly this time to watch the white-headed African fish eagles hunting for a meal, crocodiles slipping in at the water’s edge and hippos lazily grazing on the shore.

I spent the remainder of my three days on Rubondo taking shorter hikes in the forest and boating on Lake Victoria to birdwatch while others fished for Nile Perch and tilapia. Oh, and I spent plenty of time by the pool.

ENLARGE Jason Lee

While wildlife is the highlight of any trip to Rubondo, my night in the Robinson Crusoe-style treehouse was a close second. Perched in a tall tree overlooking Lake Victoria, the open platform with a copper tub and a bed draped in mosquito netting might actually have been my closest chimp encounter: I heard plenty of rustling all through the night, but I can’t say with any certainty which of the noises were made by chimpanzees.

Though I didn’t see any chimps, I agree with fellow guest Mr. Graper, who said, “Would I come back? In a heart beat! It’s worth a second trip even without the chimpanzees.”

So, Captain Ellinas, I will be returning to Rubondo. I’ll see you next year when, according to Mr. Mpuche, the chimps should be a little more used to human visitors.

The Lowdown // Chasing Chimpanzees on Rubondo Island

Getting there: KLM flies daily from New York to Tanzania’s Kilimanjaro International Airport. Transfers to Rubondo involve several short flights and average $500 each-way. Contact Hippo Creek Safaris (hippocreeksafaris.com) or another safari specialist for specific routings.

Staying there: Rubondo Island Camp offers luxury accommodations while minimizing impact on the environment.The camp was taken over last year by Asilia, a high-end African-safari camp operator, which upgraded its guiding program and renovated the rooms and public areas. Asilia is working to responsibly habituate the island’s chimpanzee population to human visitors. The camp was recently designated as one of National Geographic’s 38 “Unique Lodges of the World,” which means that it embodies the National Geographic Society’s values of sustainability, authenticity, enrichment and excellence (from about $700 per person per night, including all meals and activities; asiliaafrica.com).

Corrections & Amplifications

Elisante William is Mr. William on subsequent references. An earlier version of this article incorrectly referred to him as Ms. William. (Oct. 21, 2015)