FARGO – Plants can be a beautiful way to decorate your home, but they offer more than aesthetic benefits. They can also serve as air purifiers and natural humidifiers.

While I have trouble keeping plants alive, they thrive under the care of my green-thumbed husband.

I teased him recently that he was turning our home into a jungle. Almost every window is adorned with at least one plant, as are several other surfaces throughout the house.

But I can’t complain. The other day, after my husband brought home a new batch of plants, the air smelled so fresh I thought someone must have left a window open. They were all closed.

Here are five plants touted for their air-filtering abilities.

English ivy

English ivy is particularly useful in eliminating airborne fecal-matter particles, according to Healthy and Natural World. It also helps soak up carcinogens from second-hand smoke and doesn’t require much maintenance.

It has also been shown to filter out formaldehyde found in some household cleaning products, according to Mother Nature Network.

But it is toxic to dogs, cats and horses, the American Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals states.

Snake plant

The snake plant, also called mother-in-law’s tongue, is one of the best for filtering out formaldehyde, according to Mother Nature Network, and it will thrive in low-light, humid conditions, like a bathroom.

The highest levels of airborne formaldehyde have been detected in indoor air, where it is released from various consumer products such as building materials and home furnishings, according to the United States Environmental Protection Agency.

The EPA considers it a probable human carcinogen.

The snake plant is easy to care for and is unique in how it takes in carbon dioxide and releases oxygen at night, according to Healthy and Natural World.

But the ASPCA states it can be toxic to dogs and cats.

Aloe

Aloe is easy to grow and helps clear formaldehyde and benzene, a byproduct of chemical-based cleaners and paints, according to Mother Nature Network.

Another benefit is the gel found inside the plant’s leaves can be used to treat cuts, burns and skin conditions like psoriasis and cold sores, according to WebMD.

Aloe is toxic to dogs and cats, according to the ASPCA.

Spider plant

The spider plant filters benzene, formaldehyde, carbon monoxide and xylene, a solvent used in the leather, rubber and printing industries, according to Mother Nature Network. It’s also a safe houseplant for people with pets.

Peace lily

The peace lily is one of few houseplants that will bloom indoors, according to Organic Gardening, and it’s one of the best plants for removing formaldehyde. It also removes benzene and certain volatile organic compounds (chemicals emitted by an array of products, like paints, cleaning supplies and building materials), Organic Gardening’s website states.

It has a high transpiration rate, which will humidify your air. But be careful. The peace lily’s leaves can be poisonous to pets and children.