BIO OF MINCY POLLOCK

CANDIDATE FOR CITY COUNCIL AT LARGE, GROUP 3

Mincy Pollock’s love for Jacksonville stems back to class field trips, historic stories from his grandmother, weekend discovery excursions with parents, and lessons from caring teachers. They all provided vibrant images and memories that became embedded in his heart. Mincy and his wife, Sonte’, have been married for 12 years. They have four children: Genesis, Matthew, Kaylen and Kache’. When he’s not working, Mincy enjoys spending time with his family, serving at The Church of Jacksonville, and working out at the gym.

Mincy is a small business owner, former youth minister and a member of the Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity, Inc. of the University of North Florida, Sigma Upsilon Chapter. Mincy also completed studies through the School of Ministerial Education and Training. He currently holds a 215 Life, Health, & Variable Annuities license along with a 220 General Lines Insurance License, both issued by the Florida Department of Financial Services.

Mincy believes in the value of education. He received his education from the private school of St. Pius Catholic and the public high school of Jean Ribault. He obtained his degree from the local state college, and was a student at the National Labor College endorsed by the AFL-CIO, where he studied Political Economy and Labor. He wants to work with leaders and the community to enhance our school system, making it attractive to our citizens and those considering Jacksonville as their future home.

Mincy is no stranger to hard work. He currently serves as the General Manager and Founding Partner of First Coast Multi-Lines Agency, a company that educates and assists individuals and companies across the state with their insurance needs. He has been a member of the International Longshoremen’s Association (Local 1408) for over 12 years. During that time, he saw first-hand how important the port is to Jacksonville, and how vital it is for progress and job-growth.

Many know Mincy Pollock as “Praya,” from his days as an on-air radio personality. Years ago, he was hired as the only employee of Gospel 1400 “The Light” WZAZ-AM Radio. The satellite station was unprofitable and the listenership was low. Under his leadership, it became a community-oriented voice of the city, resulting in the station’s rise to #13 in the general market ranking, and becoming profitable enough to later be purchased by Clear Channel Broadcasting.

Mincy’s partnership with faith-based organizations, non-profits and small businesses are innovative. It’s this creativity and freshness that’s key to unlocking resources that will improve opportunities for all of Jacksonville’s citizens. Mincy has worked with various outreach urban initiatives such as The Bridge of NE Florida, Young Life, Communities in Schools/Team-Up, YMCA, The Juvenile Justice Department, and The J-100. He was recently appointed a Board Member for the Jacksonville Job Corp., and is a member of M.A.V.A.W. (Men against violence against Women), an auxiliary of Hubbard House.

Mincy understands the importance of capital investment in our youth, young adults and their significant role and correlation to safer communities and Jacksonville’s future. His years of public service are a source of motivation for him to work closely with the Jacksonville Sheriff’s Office and other public and private institutions to ensure necessary operating funds are allocated for the department to combat crime sufficiently. Strong and healthy neighborhoods make for a strong and health city!

QUESTIONNAIRE OF MINCY POLLOCK

1. What is your major accomplishment in public life?

Most recently, participating in the leadership of a coalition of non-profits that over the last 2 years have assisted over 75,000 Jacksonville residents in getting covered under the Affordable Care Act many of whom never had health care. No one ever thought it would be possible because there was setbacks of the marketplace website, a negative climate and digital divide of those without access or even emails. I was honored to have received national recognition from U.S. Secretary Sylvia Burwell of Health and Human Services and Congresswomen Corrine Brown. I believe when you find Healthy Citizens, there lives a Healthy City.

2. Have you ever been sued, arrested or declared bankruptcy?

Unfortunately I must admit to having had filed bankruptcy, however I’m ecstatic to report that it has also been discharged. I like many Duval residents was affected by the economic recession which lingered in hard-hit Florida. Duval has been in the top 5 counties for filings. In 2013 we saw a 53% increase and was number 2 in the state. The increased filings of both bankruptcy and foreclosures were a reflection of the unemployment rate and housing market decline. I don’t count this a misfortune instead I see it as an experience that’s full of rich Solutions. Because of my background as a realtor and involvement with organizations like Wealth Watchers, a non-profit organization that counsels on recovery and provides assistants to residents facing these obstacles, I can both relate and connect residents to these services. Out of this resurrection is the fire that fuels my passion to insure that our economic stability and growth exist and that everyone has the access to the same Quality of Life.

3. Please List your endorsements

The International Longshoreman’s Association Local 1408, American Postal Workers Union Northeast Florida Area Local, Coalition of Black Trade Unionist, Councilman Reginald Brown, House Representative Reggie Fullwood, Dr. Chid Uche’ of Jacksonville Total Care, Doctor and Attorney Robert Gibson, The Law Offices of Regginal Estell, Jr., and the Florida Ministers Conference.

4. Do you think LGBT people should be included among the groups covered in the city’s Human Rights Ordinance?

Yes, I believe there shouldn’t be discrimination on any level related to our City. Inclusivity is paramount to making our City attractive for others desiring to call this home and it will foster safety and Quality of Life to those who often feel alienated and already reside in the Bold City.

5. What is your top priority for reviving downtown?

The priority for downtown Jacksonville should be to attract new businesses, entertainment, and organizations to occupy vacant properties. Continue to offer incentives such as the Downtown Jacksonville Retail Enhancement grants to ensure businesses are secured for a period of time and assisting in improving the city’s economic development vision. Downtown must become the place we Work, Eat, Live and Play outside special events.

6. What can Jacksonville city government do to address the needs of the mentally ill?

The Jacksonville City Government can address the needs of the mentally ill by working with the existing agencies which serve these populations. Any effort will have to be a collaborative one -- the City of Jacksonville’s Social Service Division has a Mental Health Services Department which helps to fund a number of different agencies which offer services to the citizens of our city that suffer from some sort of mental illness. By working directly with them, making an effort to understand their needs and issues we can begin to address some of the issues the mentally ill population as a whole are facing.

7. Do you support a carve-out of the city budget for the library system? If not, what is your alternative for a system with no consistent funds for capital, maintenance and materials?

I support being good stewards of the city funds for the library system. With improvement to media systems at our local schools, universities and increased access to the web we have seen fewer traffic through the doors. We can’t continue to pour dollars into buckets with holes in them. We have to be innovative in our design of the facilities and insert best use practices. Downtown is the perfect model and example of a facility that is multi-purpose in nature. The traditional services exist coupled with commerce, rental space, meeting and training rooms. We have to explore ways to allow some of our public facilities to also be revenue generators. Instead of closure, I’m more in favor of conversions.

8. What should Jacksonville be doing about race relations to make sure we don’t become another Ferguson, Mo.?

While Ferguson is an unfortunate situation, cities across the nation can learn valuable lesson from it. Real life conversations and training needs to take place in our city. We need to provide resources and training for officers that would assist with better decision making while in critical situations. We need to have conversations with all citizens about what to do and how to behave when approached by officers.

9. What is your solution to the current Police and Fire pension issue?

To work closely with both departments to ensure necessary funds are allocated for the department to operate sufficiently. The goal has to be to keep the promises of those that have already served and are currently serving. A step system can be put into place for new officers. Public Safety is correlational to all other areas that fuel our economy. A tax increase may be the only solution.

10. Do you support dredging the St. Johns River? Do you support breaching the Rodman dam?

Yes, I do support the dredging of the St. Johns River and the breaching of the Rodman Dam, but not at the expense of our environmental resources. Deepening the harbor is essential for economic growth and jobs for Jacksonville. In the Jacksonville area, 24,340 people are employed in port-dependent positions--direct, indirect and induced jobs relying on the port. The latest research concludes that direct jobs created by the port pay an average annual salary of $51,600, well above the average wage of $38,629. It’s crucial that we find a balance between the two instead of choosing one over the other.

11. Should the Jacksonville Journey be brought back and funded appropriately? If so, where would you find the funds?

The Jacksonville Journey should be brought back and funded appropriately. The funding could be generated in a few different ways, but we will have to be creative about it. The bottom line is - our city functions better when crime rates are lower. Every citizen, small business, and large corporation based in Jacksonville has a vested interest in funding programs that keep our streets safe. I would engage businesses and corporations to help supplement the funding provided by the city.