If they already came for the Little Sisters of the Poor, the big, bad boys and girls of President Barack Obama could someday certainly come for the little school beside Mossy Creek in Jefferson City. Carson-Newman University prudently and pre-emptively moved before the P.C. police knocked on the door.

Some background: In 1839, Sister Jeanne Jugan saw a blind, paralytic, elderly woman alone on the street on a cold night in France. Moved by compassion, the Catholic nun went to the woman, brought her to her room and gave the woman her bed.

Others joined her work and within a few years hundreds of Little Sisters of the Poor cared for the elderly, infirm poor, giving dignity to the castoffs of society. The movement spread, the Little Sisters of the Poor landing in America in 1868. They now have 30 U.S. houses where they love the living and care for the dying.

The Little Sisters, given their love for life from womb to tomb, do not support contraception, sterilization or abortion, including pharmacological abortion via Plan B, aka the "morning-after" pill. Passage of the Affordable Care Act and the Little Sisters' refusal to offer health insurance to its workers that paid for, to them, immoral medical procedures caused Obama's people to knock on the Little Sisters' door.

Last month, the U.S. Supreme Court agreed to hear the Little Sisters' case against the Obama administration. Think of that: To protect their deeply held, compassionately practiced religious beliefs, the Little Sisters have had to fight to the highest court in the land.

Carson-Newman University, founded in 1851 as a Baptist school to promote Christian ministry, applied for and received a waiver of certain provisions of Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972 related to the Civil Rights Act. Title IX, essentially, prohibits discrimination based on sex and/or sexual practices at educational institutions that receive federal funding. Carson-Newman, like the Little Sisters of the Poor, receives federal funds.

In his letter to the Department of Education, President Randall O'Brien asked for the exemption to protect Carson-Newman "to the extent application of those (Title IX) provisions would not be consistent with the (Tennessee Baptist) Convention's religious tenets regarding marriage, sex outside marriage, sexual orientation, gender identity, pregnancy and abortion."

In other words, Carson-Newman acted before the feds could force the school to, for instance, hire gay faculty, perform gay marriages, pay for abortions and/or open locker rooms and restrooms to transgendered students in violation of its deeply, sincerely held beliefs. The waiver should keep the politically correct police at bay. For now.

The irony is Obama and his minions, in the aftermath of radical Islamic extremists killing in California, fervently preached religious tolerance — for Islam. Yet a little Christian school in East Tennessee so feared our ferocious federal government it felt forced to move first, before the feds came to march them away from their faith and into the gulag of modern amorality.

For if the feds will come for the Little Sisters of the Poor, they'll come for anyone.