By Liz Freeman of the Naples Daily News

Many Lee County residents in commercial insurance plans through Florida Blue Cross may get more case management help in the near future.

The physician group affiliated with the Lee Memorial Health System signed a contract Nov. 1 with Florida Blue to take part in an accountable care program, where greater emphasis is placed on case management for better care coordination.

The goal is to improve patients' overall health by making sure they get the care they need and are not subject to unnecessary or duplicative services they don't need — which drives up costs, according to Lee Memorial.

The contract applies to about 25,000 Lee County residents who have commercial Florida Blue coverage with doctors who are part of the Lee Physician Group and some independent physicians who are on Lee Memorial's medical staff.

The contract does not apply to Medicare patients who have Florida Blue coverage.

Through accountable care plans, the hospital and physician network agree to move away from the traditional payment model that focuses on payment for each procedure or visit, instead putting the emphasis on managing all of the patient's needs.

That approach requires medical providers to collaborate and share responsibility for the patient's health, instead of relying on the fragmented system that exists now and can result in treatment gaps, said Anne Rose, vice president of the physician/hospital network.

Patients won't see any change to their relationship with their physicians, but they can expect to have access to more case management services to help them manage chronic conditions, like asthma or diabetes, Rose said.

"It really should be transparent to them," she said. "What we hope the patient will see is greater collaboration with the care they receive."

There are 131 primary care physicians and 612 specialists in the Lee Memorial physician/hospital network.

On average in any commercial insurance pool, 1 to 3 percent of the population has multiple medical issues and could benefit from case management, but may not be receiving it, she said.

A key incentive for Florida Blue in beefing up patient management and preventive care is to save money on reimbursements to doctors and hospitals, and some of the savings at the end of each contract year will be shared with the physician and hospital group as their incentive for participating.

"Both organizations realize the importance of honing their population health management capabilities for improved outcomes," Dr. Brian Kiss, vice president of health care transformation for Florida Blue, said in a statement.

Florida Blue has 21 similar contracts with physician and hospital networks throughout the state, Rose said.

In 2012, the NCH Healthcare System signed an accountable care program contract with Florida Blue, which took effect in 2013. At the time, about 4,200 Collier residents were insured through Florida Blue commercial plans.

Accountable care programs were developed as part of the 2010 health insurance reform law, also called Obamacare, to restructure how medical care is delivered and paid for, to move toward a value-based system that rewards for efficiency and improving patient outcomes using measurable standards.

The federal government entered into contracts with insurers for Medicare beneficiaries, using the term accountable care organization, ACO, when Medicare beneficiaries are involved.

In August, the U.S. Centers for Medicare & Medicaid reported 350 ACO's nationwide saved $411 million to Medicare in 2014 and achieved improved in most quality measures.