Water tap (Photo: Getty Images/iStockphoto)

Indiana American Water has alerted 31,000 Indiana households and businesses in New Albany, Clarksville and Jeffersonville -- all of its customers in the two counties -- to restrict non-essential water use and to boil any water used for consumption until further notice.

The advisory affecting 90,000 people was prompted by a water main break on a 36-inch transmission line early Saturday near Stenger Lane and Charlestown Pike in Jeffersonville. The large-diameter water line connects areas located on both sides of Silver Creek between Jeffersonville and New Albany.

Because of concerns, the company activated its system to contact customers via phone to alert them. Several received calls on home landlines on Saturday afternoon.

Floyds Knobs Water customers also have been placed under the advisory because the utility purchases water from Indiana American.

Silver Creek Water Corp. was not placed under the advisory, but issued a request through Indiana American for its customers to restrict non-essential water usage, spokesman Joe Loughmiller said.

The advisory does not affect customers who are served by other water utilities, such as Sellersburg, which has customers in the city of Jeffersonville. Ramsey, which buys water from Indiana American, had “valved off” from the larger utility’s supply lines and didn’t need to participate in the precaution, Dave Seacat said.

“Because we have already had many calls about low or no-water pressure throughout the system, we’re asking customers to boil any water used for consumption as a precaution until we are able to repair the main and conduct water tests to ensure no contamination has entered the water system,” said Bill Reedy, Southern Indiana operations manager.

“Because of the size of the main and the amount of water being lost, we are also asking our customers to temporarily restrict their non-essential water use” by turning off irrigation systems and lawn sprinklers, Reedy said.

More information will be provided as crews access the break. Expect the boil water and restrictions to remainn in place until at least late Sunday because of the size of the break, Loughmiller said.

Reporter Grace Schneider can be reached at 502-582-4082. Follow her on Twitter @gesinfk.

More information on tap

In addition to suspending lawn and garden irrigation temporarily, customers are being asked to tighten up their water practices. Among the tips:

· Avoid use of water for non-essential uses like washing vehicles, driveways, sidewalks and buildings.

· Avoid any use of water that results in flooding or run-off in waterways or hard surfaces like driveways or streets.

· Repair any plumbing leaks quickly and utilize water-saving shower heads, toilets, faucet aerators and other water-conserving appliances. Report any suspected leaks in company-owned facilities immediately to the customer service center at 1-800-492-8373.

· Avoid using water for decorative fountains or the filling or topping off of decorative lakes or ponds.

· Turn off the tap while brushing teeth or washing dishes.

Additional tips can be found on “wise water use” under the Learning Center tab at www.indianaamwater.com.

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1S1i0aD