Veteran Capitol Hill staffer Amy Rosenbaum will join the White House's legislative affairs team next week, according to a White House source.

Rosenbaum, whose experience includes a stint as policy director for then-Speaker Nancy Pelosi (D-Calif.), will serve as a deputy to the newly minted legislative affairs director Katie Beirne Fallon.

ADVERTISEMENT

Fallon, a former top aide to Sen. Charles Schumer (D-N.Y.), is expected to spend most of her time on Capitol Hill, while Rosenbaum will "be helping manage the leg affairs operation from inside the White House," the source said.

Rosenbaum will "help make sure that members’ views on legislation" like minimum wage, ObamaCare implementation, education and climate action are communicated to White House and agency officials, the source added.

She comes to the position from a job consulting for the Scholarly Publishing and Academic Resources Coalition. She'll fill a role vacated in the president's first term by Lisa Konwinski, who went to work in the legislative affairs department of the fledgling Consumer Financial Protection Bureau in 2011.

In a statement, Pelosi said her former staffer would "prove to be a tremendous asset to the president's legislative team."

"Amy was at the center of our efforts in the Majority to pass the Affordable Care Act, the Lilly Ledbetter Fair Pay Act, our efforts to increase energy independence and combat climate change, and address the needs of working families," the Democratic leader said. "Both on my staff as policy director or during her work with George Miller on the Education and Workforce Committee, she demonstrated that she knows policy inside and out, and simply knows how to get things done."

Minority Whip Steny Hoyer (D-Md.) said he was "pleased" by the selection.

"Amy’s experience as a senior staffer in the House Democratic leadership and her extensive relationships throughout our Caucus make her a great asset to the White House and to House Democrats, especially as we work together to advance our shared agenda of creating jobs and growing the middle class," Hoyer said in a statement.

Her appointment comes amid an overhaul of top White House staff in the new year. In 2013, Obama's approval rating cratered as he grappled with the implementation of his signature healthcare law, among other issues.

Lawmakers on Capitol Hill complained about the White House's outreach effort, and former legislative affairs director Miguel Rodriguez was a relative unknown. In addition to Rosenbaum and Beirne Fallon, longtime Democratic aides Phil Schiliro and John Podesta joined the president's team.