A makeshift memorial still stands for Joey Howlett, the former owner of the Jamestown Mercantile who died when a massive debris slide cascading down from the 2003 Overland Fire burn area crushed his home in the September flood. ( Mark Leffingwell / Daily Camera )

JAMESTOWN — The scars in this town from the September flood are easy to see. So are the open wounds.

Rain started to fall here, and across much of the Front Range, six months ago Sunday. By the time it was over seven days later, this community of 300 people was reduced to about 20.

Twenty-six homes were destroyed by the raging floodwaters of the Little James Creek and James Creek, according to the Boulder County Assessor's Office. Another 37 were damaged. Most of the town's residents left by airlift and took up temporary residence elsewhere in the area.

One prominent "Jimtowner" did not make it through. Joey Howlett, 72, the former owner of the Jamestown Mercantile who was widely seen as the town patriarch, died when a massive debris slide cascading down from the 2003 Overland Fire burn area crushed his home. It killed him in the bed where he slept. He was one of four Boulder County residents to die in the flood that ranks among the worst to strike the area in a century.

Six months later, while repair and rebuilding carries on throughout the town, the wreckage of the Howlett home remains virtually untouched, its stark ruins a daily testimony to its owner's violent demise.

A makeshift roadside memorial, anchored by the "We Love You Joey" sign, a golf club and a tie-dyed Cornell T-shirt, has not moved.

Advertisement

"It's very difficult to see what remains of Joe's house," said Nancy Farmer, who lived across the street — until her home, too, was destroyed. Living for now in a Lafayette rental, she hasn't decided yet whether she will be rebuilding in Jamestown. "That's the hardest part of going up there for me now."

Erika Archer, assistant to the town's mayor, agreed.

"It's a daily reminder," she said. "It's heartbreaking. It's going to be hard, emotionally, to tear that down."

Howlett land unsafe for rebuilding

But that day is drawing closer, as the town develops a plan to buy the property from a mortgage company and convert it into a debris catchment area. The fatal landslide, roaring down from what is known as Howlett's Gulch, is a disaster waiting to happen again, due to the denuded landscape that is the Overland Fire burn scar.

"It's really not safe" to rebuild on that property, Archer said. "It took out the back of that house and killed a very beloved member of the community. It is not safe to build there."

In an email, 38-year-old Zach Howlett said he and town officials are "on the same page" as it relates to plans for his father's property.

"The lot needs to be used for flood remediation, to protect our neighbors and friends and to keep the rebuilt Jamestown safe," wrote Howlett, who lives in Ithaca, N.Y. "People in town and I are working together with the relevant government authorities and financial institutions to make this happen."

Jamestown Mayor Tara Schoedinger said the goal is to cover 75 percent of the roughly $200,000 appraised value of the Howlett property through a Federal Emergency Management Agency hazard mitigation grant program, with the balance coming through state and local cost-sharing.

Calling such a development "a win for everybody," Zach Howlett said, "It would be great if the lot could also contain a memorial to the many victims of this flood — not just my father — and to the great community spirit of Jamestown and Colorado."

A memorial — somewhere — is definitely in the cards.

"We don't have any specifics yet, but we certainly have been talking about it," Schoedinger said. "Whether it would be there, or in our town square, is yet to be determined. But there will most certainly will be a memorial to Joe Howlett, as well as the entire event itself."

'We want our community back'

Deciding the future of the Howlett property is just one item — albeit a big one — on a long list of tasks that need to be addressed before this town can consider itself recovered.

"Morale wise, I think we are in a trough, frankly," Archer said. "Our concern is we want our community back. That's No. 1. We're afraid the community won't come home."

But progress has been made. Working with the AMEC engineering firm, the town has created a stream corridor master plan to identify the new floodplain. The flood severely crippled the town's water system, destroying about 50 percent of its distribution network. But with about $40,000 in contributions from multiple sources, the town was able to buy 30 cisterns to supply water to homeowners, and now about 25 to 30 of the town's 137 homes are again occupied.

FEMA on Friday reported that it and the U.S. Small Business Administration have together poured more than $5 million in federal money into Jamestown's rebuilding.

That included almost $1.1 million to 211 residents through FEMA's Individuals and Households Program, and more than $2.5 million in low-interest SBA loans.

The post office finally reopened Feb. 8, and the Environmental Protection Agency has repaired damage to the stream corridor alongside Elysian Park. But in a tiny community that lost $30 million in public infrastructure, recovery can still feel like an uphill battle.

Postmaster Denise Straus said, "It is coming back slowly, but it is coming back. Having the post office back in Jamestown is a big deal. ... But it's been a hard winter up here — cistern living, and all that."

A familiar routine — that isn't the same

Farmer, who has returned to handle a local postal motor delivery route three days a week, commuting from her current residence in Lafayette, is reminded of what she lost every time she returns. The house she lost — along with most of her belongings including her father's prized 1939 Steinway baby grand piano — had stood adjacent to the post office.

"On one hand, it's good to be home, but then on the other hand, it isn't home and the view out the post office window is where my house used to be. And I have to drive through all the destruction to get to my job and parts of my delivery route," she said. "It's reassuring to have the routine and see people I know. But ... not much is happening right now in terms of really seeing progress. It's just not that time yet.

"We are in no way, shape or form bounced back from the flood yet."

So it is a matter of trying to take heart from the incremental steps, working with myriad local, state and federal agencies to achieve the long-term goals.

"I think, from an infrastructure standpoint, I think we have a really solid recovery plan," Schoedinger said. "We're finalizing the budget pieces with the passage of Senate Bill 121 and with the grants that we have received for cisterns.

"We're trying very hard to help people who are ready and want to return home to be able to do so, with the idea that this will help people in their own recovery process, as well as being able to help the town in its recovery process."

The 'Merc' a morale booster

Another benchmark in the town's comeback came with the recent expansion of hours for the Jamestown Mercantile; it will now be open Fridays, Saturdays and Monday evenings, with the return of live music, as well, featuring artists such as Kristina Murray, who performed there Thursday night.

"The place is packed on those nights," Archer said. "It has been an amazing morale booster."

The 'Merc,' as it is known locally, was once owned by Joey Howlett, so some see its revival as one more way that his memory is being honored and his legacy preserved.

His son is rooting for this mountain community from afar.

"The greatest tribute my father could have is the way that this community is pulling together to make a rapid recovery," Zach Howlett wrote.

"He loved this community with all of his heart, and he would be very proud of everyone. I am personally extremely grateful to the whole town and friends all over Colorado for the great support that they have given me in getting through this hard time."

Contact Camera Staff Writer Charlie Brennan at 303-473-1327 or brennanc@dailycamera.com.