A more active than normal flu season is in full swing in Southwest Florida, and area doctors say they are seeing new influenza infections daily.

Regionally, flu infections spiked during the final week of 2014 and in the first weeks of this month, in part because this season’s vaccine has proven less effective than in previous years.

“We’re seeing more cases than we’ve seen in previous years and we’re seeing them a little earlier as well. This season is absolutely above average,” said Dr. Scott Fell, medical director for the emergency department at Venice Regional Bayfront Health.

Fell considers this flu season to be the most severe since the 2009 swine flu pandemic.

At Sarasota Memorial Hospital, doctors on Tuesday were caring for seven patients hospitalized with the flu and about five new cases have been confirmed each day this past week, hospital spokeswoman Kim Savage said.

In December, emergency room doctors at the region’s largest hospital diagnosed 89 cases and admitted two patients with complications from being infected, Savage said.

That was a marked increase over the same month in 2013, when the hospital diagnosed 61 patients with cases of flu — none of which were admitted, Savage said.

At Doctors Hospital in Sarasota, emergency room staff has diagnosed 125 cases since October, said Cindy Stutler, an infection control preventionist there.

That is more than were diagnosed during last year’s flu season, but fewer than the 2009 swine flu outbreak, the most recent large-scale flu pandemic, Stutler said.

Emergency departments are strongly suggesting anyone who comes to the hospital with a cough or respiratory problems wear a protective mask and isolate themselves, said Kevin Forsythe, director of the emergency department at Bradenton’s Blake Medical Center, which also has experienced a spike in admissions of patients with flu complications.

At Venice Regional Bayfront Health, people with potential flu infections are isolated, and anyone who interacts when them is directed to wear a mask, said Bob Hite, its director of marketing.

The sickest flu patients are typically patients over age 65 and under age 5, because they have the weakest immune systems.

Locally, an 11-year old Bradenton boy, Tony Garcia, died of complications of the flu in early December.

Adult deaths from flu are not reported to public health agencies.

Outbreeaks at nursing homes

Public health officials in both Sarasota and Manatee counties reported flu activity for the week ended Jan. 10 was “mild,” according to the Florida Department of Health.

Those determinations are based algorithms that consider the number of outbreaks in each county, laboratory data and reports from local public health partners such as county health departments, schools, hospitals and urgent care clinics.

Locally, there have been two separate outbreaks in nursing homes in the last month, the department.

From Dec. 21 through Dec. 27, four residents of an undisclosed nursing home tested positive for Influenza A, and nine others reported flulike symptoms. Two of those residents were hospitalized. The department is still investigating the outbreak.

That same week, a Manatee County nursing home reported 10 people experienced flu-like symptoms, but none tested positive for influenza. As in Sarasota County, health officials have not released the name of the center and the department is still investigating the outbreak.

So far this year, there have been 62 reported outbreaks in Florida, the Department of Health reported.

Nationally, the flu reached the “epidemic” threshold during the week ended Jan. 10, the most recent week tracked.

In that period of time, 8.5 percent of all deaths reported in the U.S. were the result of pneumonia and influenza, according to the federal Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.

The flu is considered to be at “epidemic” levels when more than 7 percent of all deaths in the U.S. in a particular week stem from pneumonia and influenza, according to CDC guidelines.

Vaccine only 23 percent effective

Experts say this year’s flu season is more severe than in previous years because the most dominant flu strain, H3N2, is not covered by this year’s flu vaccine.

When health officials designed the flu vaccine’s formulation in early 2014, they did so based on expected strains that would be most dominant in the 2014-2015 flu season.

But by the time the infection reached the U.S. this past fall, the dominant H3N2 infection had mutated from the strain the experts predicted, leaving the current vaccine less effective. This kind of mutating, which is also known as “drifting,” is very common and it is the reason vaccines are reformulated annually.

As a result of the mutation, the CDC found this year’s vaccine is only 23 percent effective in preventing a flu infection. Normally, the vaccine is about 60 percent effective, CDC officials said.

Still, public health experts continue to urge people to get vaccinated, even at this point in the flu season.

“Even though the flu vaccine isn’t the best match for the flu this year, it is the best tool we have to prevent illness and we still encourage vaccination,” said Michael Drennon, an epidemiologist with the Florida Department of Health in Sarasota County.

EARLIER: A more active than normal flu season is in full swing in Southwest Florida, and area doctors say they are seeing new influenza infections daily.

Regionally, flu infections spiked during the final week of 2014 and in the first weeks of this month.

“We’re seeing more cases than we’ve seen in previous years and we’re seeing them a little earlier as well. This season is absolutely above average,” said Dr. Scott Fell, medical director for the emergency department at Venice Regional Bayfront Health.

Fell considers this flu season to be the most severe since the 2009 swine flu pandemic.

At Sarasota Memorial Hospital, seven cases of flu were diagnosed on Tuesday alone, and about five new cases have been confirmed each day this past week, said hospital spokeswoman Kim Savage.

In December, emergency room doctors at the region’s largest hospital diagnosed 89 cases of the flu and admitted two patients with complications from being infected, Savage said.

That was a marked increase over the same month in 2013, when the hospital diagnosed 61 patients with cases of flu — none of which were admitted, Savage said.

At Doctors Hospital in Sarasota, emergency room staff has diagnosed 125 cases of influenza since October, said Cindy Stutler, an infection control preventionist there.

That’s more cases than were diagnosed during last year’s flu season, but fewer than the 2009 swine flu outbreak, the most recent large-scale flu pandemic, Stutler said.

Emergency departments are strongly suggesting anyone who comes to the hospital with a cough or respiratory problems wear a protective mask and isolate themselves, said Kevin Forsythe, director of the emergency department at Blake Medical Center in Bradenton, which has experienced a spike in admissions of patients with flu complications.

At Venice Regional Bayfront Health, people with potential flu infections are isolated, and anyone who interacts with them is directed to wear a mask, said Bob Hite, its director of marketing.

The sickest flu patients are typically patients over age 65 and under age 5, since they have the weakest immune systems. Locally, an 11-year old Bradenton boy, Tony Garcia, died of complications of the flu in early December. Adult deaths from flu are not reported to public health agencies.

More information

For tips for staying healthy and directions about when to seek treatment, call the Flu Information Line at the Department of Health in Sarasota County at (941) 861-2800 or visit sarasotahealth.org.