Topics: Donald Trump, Editor's Picks, Elections 2016, GOP primary, History, News, Politics News

Long before Donald Trump was upending the Republican Party’s presidential primary with his black-and-white worldview, he had a more nuanced foreign policy as a global deal maker.

No stranger to the Muslim world, Trump has closed multimillion-dollar deals for golf courses, office towers, and hotels in Turkey, the United Arab Emirates, Indonesia and Azerbaijan. No doubt “he loves” these Muslims.

In the case of Azerbaijan, the savvy Trump appears to have shown no hesitation. The country has a reputation as an oppressive kleptocracy whose ruling family was described by a U.S. State Department official in a Wikileaks cable as the Caspian Sea’s version of the Corleone family of “Godfather” infamy. However, as Trump knows well, when it comes to real estate, it is all about location. And Azerbaijan’s critical geo-political location, and it’s vast oil reserves, ensures that the U.S. and the rest of the West will ignore whatever that nation does that might get in the way of doing business. The predominately Shiite Muslim nation is also Israel’s top oil supplier.

To the north, the country is bordered by Russia, to the south by Iran and to the west by its arch-nemesis, Armenia. Long simmering tensions between Armenia, a predominately Christian nation, and Azerbaijan, a secular Muslim country, broke out into a shooting war in the late 1980’s that still flares up since a 1994 truce.

For Trump, in such a geo-political pivot point, finding the right partner was critical. Promotional material produced in 2014 predicted that his signature hotel would be 33 floors high and would provide the “highest level of luxury and refinement” in the heart of Baku, the nation’s capital on the shores of the Caspian Sea. So Trump turned to the well connected, locally based Garant Holding. Garant is run by Anar Mammadov, whose father, Ziya Mammadov, is the national government’s Transport Minister and top advisor to the nation’s leader, Ilham Aliyev, who took over ruling this former Soviet republic from his father in 2003.

(Ilham’s father Heydar’s hold on power extended from 1969 through the early 1980s. Only two years after Azerbaijan’s independence from the dissolving Soviet Union in 1991, Heydar was back on top until 2003 when he stepped down and Ilham took over.)

According to an October 2015 report from Human Rights Watch the Azerbaijan regime plays real Soviet styled hardball with political dissidents:

“Torture and ill-treatment are well-documented, persistent problems in Azerbaijan, and are perpetrated with near impunity,” according to a report by Human Rights Watch. “In the cases documented by Human Rights Watch, the detainees complained to their lawyers, family members or in court that they have been beaten or abusively harassed to force them to sign incriminating confessions or letters of repentance, suffered physical or psychological pressure in prison, or been denied appropriate medical treatment. “The government has been locking up human rights defenders one after another and then denying their reports of ill treatment,” said Rachel Denber, deputy Europe and Central Asia director of Human Rights Watch. “The UN Committee Against Torture made clear that the government needs to free the human rights defenders and stop turning a blind eye to their ill treatment in prison.”

Complaints about how elections are run in Azerbaijan are longstanding. Despite years of U.S. State Department handwringing, American officials still write statements like the one they did last month, lamenting the country’s decision to block outside election monitors. The language is carefully crafted, calling for an end to the country’s “restrictive political environment” and urging the dictatorship to “respect the freedom to assembly” and of a free press to operate.