The location of a new regional medical center is once again up in the air, and the board that will make the decisions about that new facility could soon change.

Ballots go out Monday to registered voters in ZIP codes 81435, 81426 and 81430 for the Telluride Hospital District election, in which three current board members are up for reelection and two local residents are challenging them. Ballots must be returned by May 3, either in person to the Telluride Medical Center (by 5 p.m.) or the San Miguel County Courthouse (by 7 p.m.). They can also be returned by mail.

Current board president Larry Mallard, vice president Davis Fansler and board member Richard Betts are running for reelection, and Jennifer Fox and Dr. Robert Pinkert are also vying for a spot on the board. Mallard, Fansler and Fox are running for two four-year terms, and Pinkert and Betts are up for a single two-year term.

Betts is the president and founder of ASAP Accounting and was a founding board member of Connect For Health Colorado (the Affordable Care Act marketplace for the state). Fansler works in healthcare management and consulting, and is a current member of the Connect For Health board. Mallard works in real estate and lodging, and was a medic in the U.S. Air Force. Pinkert, an optometrist, founded and ran an optometry practice in Arizona and previously served on the Arizona State Board of Examiners in Optometry, and as a faculty member at several colleges of optometry. Fox is a practicing attorney and the appointed Telluride Marijuana Licensing Authority Hearing Officer.

The Daily Planet sent each of the candidates a questionnaire about the future of the medical center, the proposed Amendment 69 universal healthcare system and more.

Mallard said the next THD board will have to react to the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers’ decision on a wetlands mitigation permit for the preferred site for the new medical center in Mountain Village.

“This topic may or may not be decided by the time the polls close on this election, but it will be one of the immediate priorities for whomever is on the THD Board of Directors,” Mallard wrote. “Should the Army Corps of Engineers decline this permit application then the priorities of the board would need to shift immediately (to) finding an alternative site for the new facility.”

Fox was the only one of the five candidates to oppose constructing a new medical center.

“A new medical center is unnecessary and would impose an undue financial burden on THD’s taxpayers,” Fox wrote. “Construction of an expensive new medical center in Mountain Village is neither urgent nor prudent.”

Pinkert said several challenges face the hospital district beyond the construction of a new facility. He cited “maintaining and attracting an adequate level of professional and administrative staff to guarantee high quality of care; through appropriate review processes, constantly monitoring and improving the level of care while maintaining a cost effective approach; and (ensuring) timely access to care with corresponding efficiencies.”

The candidates are split on Amendment 69, which would create ColoradoCare, a universal, taxpayer-funded healthcare system for the state. Betts is fully in support of Amendment 69, while Fansler and Fox are opposed to the amendment. Mallard and Pinkert espoused support for the intention of the proposal, but raised questions about how effective it might be.

“Colorado has always been a leader dealing with social issues and this would send a signal to the country at large that Colorado believes that access to healthcare should be a right to every citizen and not be the responsibility of employers,” Betts wrote.

“I believe (Amendment 69) will make Colorado an excessively expensive place to live and do business,” Fansler wrote. “Fundamentally, I am not in favor of a government sponsored, funded and managed single payer solution. I simply believe there are other mechanisms that can be deployed by the state, the feds as well as the private sector to both assure access to affordable health insurance coverage and create greater accountability and reduced variation among the providers who deliver the care.”

---

Full questionnaire responses

1. What are the most important challenges that come with the construction of a new medical center?

Richard Betts: The exemplary medical care that is currently being delivered by the medical center staff is being strained by lack of space and infrastructure. Medical technology advances, expansion of the number of patients through changes in social policy towards the way that health care is financed, and an aging demographic all have implications that require the design and construction of a medical center that can adapt and expand to meet both the present needs as well as those future needs of the next 30 years in a sustainable manner.

Davis Fansler: First and foremost, in my view, is to secure a site on which we have the green light to actually build a new facility. While it was before my time on the board, I thought the RFI site selection process was well done, well communicated and transparent. The board continues to be fully committed to the Mountain Village site. We expect a decision on the wetlands permit within the next two weeks and we’ll go from there.

Assuming we are able to proceed with a site, the next challenge will be to fund its construction, which most likely would include a combination of public financing and philanthropy. The timing and success of both of those efforts will obviously impact the timeline for ultimate completion.

The final and no less formidable challenge is to manage the existing operation to continue to assure reasonable access to the high quality care TMC and its providers deliver. There is absolutely no question in my mind that the current facility is busting at the seams and that the longer it takes to complete a new facility the greater the risk of being able to provide that reasonable access to local care.

Larry Mallard: The obvious and most urgent challenge is gaining the approval of the wetlands permit for our Mountain Village building site. This topic may or may not be decided by the time the polls close on this election but it will be one of the immediate priorities for whomever is on the THD Board of Directors. Should the Army Corps of Engineers decline this permit application then the priorities of the board would need to shift immediately into finding an alternative site for the new facility.

Robert Pinkert: Once the site for the new medical center has been established (and this apparently remains an ongoing process dependent on the answer from the Army Corp of Engineers) it is imperative that the new facility fulfills the needs of the community for decades to come. Construction costs must be balanced with future growth projections and potential service expansion. The funding process must be open, transparent and involve all citizens to be served.

Jennifer Fox: I oppose construction of a new medical center at this time. A new medical center is unnecessary and would impose an undue financial burden on THD’s taxpayers.

With the existing TMC’s recent expansions, neither the Emergency Care nor Primary Care departments are functioning anywhere near capacity. Based upon documents recently released by THD, with the addition of Primary Care staff, extended treatment hours, and an additional 3,000 sf. converted into patient exam rooms, in 2015 TMC’s Primary Care department operated at only 63 percent of its capacity for patient visits. Primary Care has the capacity for 19,469 annual patient visits, but only logged 12,255 patient visits in 2015.

According to THD’s 2015 Approved Budget, total patient demand, being PC and EC combined, is forecast at only 18,253 visits in 2024. As a result, construction of an expensive new medical center in Mountain Village is neither urgent nor prudent.

2. What should the priorities of the hospital district and the medical center be going forward?

Richard Betts: We have a vibrant and athletic local population. It is the medical center’s goal to have this population be the healthiest community in Colorado. In order to achieve this goal, the medical center must provide expanded diagnostic services that patients are now having to travel as far away as Grand Junction to obtain merely because of lack of space locally. Because of this cost and inconvenience many in our community are bypassing these diagnostic tools and thus exposing them to great and unneeded risk.

Davis Fansler: To get a new facility built as soon as possible and to assure the public’s reasonable access to TMC and its providers in the meantime.

Larry Mallard: Our priorities need to continue focusing on the quality of patient care given to our residents and visitors. Additionally, we need to remain focused on the wonderful staff we have at THD to ensure they are compensated fairly and provided with the most positive work culture possible.

Robert Pinkert: After completion of the new facility a number of challenges remain evident. These include:

-maintaining and attracting an adequate level of professional and administrative staff to guarantee high quality of care

-through appropriate review processes, constantly monitoring and improving the level of care while maintaining a cost effective approach

-ensuring timely access to care with corresponding efficiencies

Jennifer Fox: It does not appear that THD ever commissioned a treatment cost comparison study for the proposed new medical center in Mountain Village, which compares anticipated and existing treatment costs. For example, how much will an annual exam or a visit to the ER cost at the new facility?

If elected, I would strongly advocate that THD first commission a professional, third party, Public Health Needs and Costs Assessment before it spends any more funds on a new medical center.

3. Do you support Amendment 69/Colorado Care? Why or why not?

Richard Betts: In my professional life I come in contact with some 600 employers and thousands of employees. In my discussions with them I have not found that there is one single employee nor one single employer who feels that an employer should be the one making health care decisions for employees. Passage of Amendment 69 would break this dysfunctional relationship and every Colorado resident would then have access to health care and the ability to make their own health care decisions. Employers would benefit through not having to manage this responsibility as well as through reduced workers’ compensation insurance costs. Colorado has always been a leader dealing with social issues and this would send a signal to the country at large that Colorado believes that access to health care should be a right to every citizen and not be the responsibility of employers.

Davis Fansler: I don’t. I believe it will make Colorado an excessively expensive place to live and do business. Fundamentally, I am not in favor of a government sponsored, funded and managed single payer solution. I simply believe there are other mechanisms that can be deployed by the state, the feds as well as the private sector to both assure access to affordable health insurance coverage and create greater accountability and reduced variation among the providers who deliver the care.

Larry Mallard: I’m strongly in favor of the intended results of Amendment 69/ColoradoCare. Anytime you can remove a government entity from the decision making process, it normally results in a better and more competitive product. This would be a resident owned and non-governmental program that would leave the majority of payer based decisions in the hands of state residents who probably have a better grasp on the needs of Coloradoans. With that said, there are some parts of this particular amendment that I don’t believe have been thoroughly vetted and we need to ensure that’s done before something is passed into law. Most important to me is that we fully investigate the impact this will have on our providers in the state, and in particular Telluride. If an amendment is passed that would risk us losing the quality providers we currently have, then we should continue to work on that language until everyone is somewhat comfortable.

Robert Pinkert: I strongly support the concept of a single payer system. (Medicare is one successful example.) Unfortunately, the way the ColoradoCare legislation is written, I see potential red flags. The devil is in the details. My concerns center on the initial and subsequent costs to be borne by taxpayers (including Medicare recipients), the services to be covered (as yet unspecified), and program administration (which lacks meaningful oversight). One provision relating to the autonomous 21 member administrative board actually creates the potential for political bias in determining benefit coverage for everyone. Nevertheless, our need to address healthcare for all citizens is important. I will, however, continue to evaluate the legislation before committing to a final decision.

Jennifer Fox: Although I would support expanding Medicare, the USA’s current, very successful, single-payer health insurance for Americans over 65, I cannot support Amendment 69/ColoradoCare.

In short I believe that a single-payer health insurance system is not feasible for a single state in isolation because: (1) the best doctors are likely to move to other states with higher compensations rates; (2) the sickest patients flock to the state for treatment; and (3) a single state the size of Colorado would not have the number of patients to generate the negotiating power necessary to obtain significantly lower prices from health care providers. For stationary medical facilities like the TMC, passage of Amendment 69 could be financially crippling and lead to increased mill levies.

4. Why are you running for the hospital district board?

Richard Betts: I used to be young and bullet proof but as the years caught up with me, I became much more interested in quality health care services and how I might volunteer my time to assist in making them better. I was appointed to fill the seat of a retiring former board member and would like to continue the outstanding efforts that were put in by him as well as all of the board in trying to plan and build for the future.

Davis Fansler: The need for a new facility is truly urgent given the timeline, even under the best of circumstances, to get one built. The trajectory of growth in volume within both the ER and community clinic, based on last five years, indicate that access to care is increasingly being threatened during the summer and winter seasons. Having witnessed the many starts and stops over the last decade, I felt it was time for me to step up and offer to come onto the board to hopefully get this thing done once and for all.

Larry Mallard: Telluride is a truly special place that I’ve been allowed to call home for the past 20 years. We’ve raised our children here and have been fortunate enough to have grown our business here. I’ve tried to give back to the community as much as I can and I believe I can help with the decisions that are going to be made over the next several years. I can’t imagine a more important topic facing our community today than our future health care delivery system and it can’t be diluted by individual agendas. I’ve tried to stay above the fray as it relates to politics and the medical center and I think it’s important that whoever is on this board has the ability to do that.

Robert Pinkert: I have spent my entire professional career in health care. In addition to serving patients and the public for decades, I have hands on experience in planning and constructing medical facilities. Specifically, I spent 35 years in clinical practice and am a founder and managing partner of one of the largest ophthalmic practices in the country. As a manager, I have overseen the expansion and construction of existing and new medical facilities in both rural and urban communities. I also have experience in medical compliance. As a gubernatorial appointee , I served on the Arizona board of Optometry for 8 years, including 2 years as President. I am a democrat who served under both democratic and republican governors. I mention this for one reason – health care should not be political. It’s all about the people and that’s why I’m running. I believe my collective experiences will provide a strong foundation for the THD board at this critical juncture.

I am running because I believe my collective experiences will provide a strong foundation for the THD board at this critical juncture. Jennifer Fox: As a result of my 23 years of experience as a practicing attorney in Colorado and aptitude for interpreting complex statutes, regulations, and contracts, I believe that the THD Board would benefit from my particular skill set as it grapples with issues of land acquisition, facility expansion, continuity of patient service and fees, and public funding. Being elected to the THD Board would not only fit well with my skill set, it would allow me to further serve my community, which has always been a personal priority of mine.

5. Could you provide a brief biography-current employment, any experience in medical field, time spent in area, etc.?

Richard Betts: Telluride has been my residence for the past 30 years and during that time I have served on volunteer boards including the Telluride Foundation, the Telluride Medical Foundation, and the Telluride Historical Museum. In July of 2011 I was appointed by Governor John Hickenlooper to be a member of the founding board of the Colorado Health Exchange or Connect for Health Colorado. During my three-years term of office I served as the Chair of the Personnel and Finance Committees. I am President and CEO of ASAP Accounting and Payroll, a company I founded in Telluride in 1990.

Davis Fansler: We have lived in Telluride for more than 20 years and have pretty much raised our five children here. I have a history of commitment to the community including stints as a councilmember and mayor of Mountain Village, a volunteer firefighter with Station 2 in Mountain Village, board and executive committee member and grants committee chair of the Telluride Foundation; R-1 School District board member and high school hockey coach for both the girls’ and boy’s hockey teams. I also was appointed by the governor in 2014 to serve on the board of the state’s health exchange marketplace, Connect For Health Colorado.

I have spent virtually my entire professional career of over 35 years in the business of health care including banking, ambulatory care management, venture capital and consulting, each with offices based out of Minneapolis where I grew up. I am currently a Co-Founder and Managing Director of Castling Partners, LLC a Minneapolis-based firm that provides advisory services focused again on the healthcare space, including its providers, insurers, medical product and device companies and related investor groups. The goal of the firm is to assist clients as they optimize the performance of their organizational strategies while effectively understanding and managing inherent integrative risks. Specifically, as the healthcare industry continues to consolidate, pressure is increased to implement complex and often unfamiliar strategies. These efforts frequently expose organizations, their Boards and senior leadership to a range of unexpected consequences. We strive to be at the intersection of needed strategic performance and attendant risk to assist in the management of these challenges.

Larry Mallard: We’ve been part-time residents of Telluride since 1991 and here full-time since 1997. I’ve been married to my high school sweetheart, Mitzi Mallard, for almost 29 years and we have two wonderful daughters, Katie and Retta. I am one of the owners of Telluride Lodging, LLC with three great business partners. Under that umbrella we operate Sea to Ski Properties, Alpine Lodging and Telluride.com with locations in Telluride, Park City, UT and Sun Valley, ID. My medical experience was very limited prior to joining the board originally. I was a firefighter/medic in the US Air Force and had some basic emergency medical knowledge but nothing in terms of administration, insurance, licensure, etc. The past five years have been a very educational period for me and I now have an even deeper respect for the people who’ve chosen this field for their careers.

Robert Pinkert: See answer to Question 4.

Jennifer Fox: I am a 16-year concerned Telluride local and a practicing Colorado attorney.

I am a self-employed solo-practitioner with extensive litigation and regulatory experience representing clients in the Colorado state and federal courts, before administrative agencies and regulatory agencies, including the NASD.

I currently serve as the Town of Telluride Marijuana Licensing Authority Hearing Officer, an appointed position I have held continuously since 2011.