Why 'Skinny' Plans Hurt Employees, Employers

AB 248 would close a loophole in the Affordable Care Act that allows employers in the large-group market to offer “minimum essential coverage” health insurance with substantially fewer benefits than the “essential health benefits” required in the individual and small-group markets.

This loophole exists largely because of the politics surrounding the enactment of the ACA; because the law was intended to fill-in coverage gaps, it imposed fewer new requirements on the large group market, which was viewed as functioning relatively well and having less need for fundamental reform. As such, the emergence of skinny plans is best viewed as one of the more significant unintended consequences of the ACA.

So, why is AB 248 necessary? Without this law, employers will be able to avoid the “failure to offer” penalty because the skinny plans are considered minimum essential coverage, even though they fail to meet the 60% minimum value requirement of the ACA. So, employers offering a skinny plan may still be subject to penalties, but only for those employees who turn down the skinny plan and who qualify for a subsidy in Covered California.

These skinny plans hurt employees because they open the door to an erosion of benefits among large employers who currently offer health insurance — clearly not an intention of the ACA. And for employers who previously did not offer health insurance benefits, skinny plans provide a mechanism for avoiding or reducing tax penalties, while shifting most of the real costs of health insurance onto employees and taxpayers. Skinny plans may also offset some or all of the benefits of recent successful efforts to raise the minimum wage in cities throughout California, including Los Angeles. These plans may increase the likelihood that employers in low-wage industries simply pay for these recent hard-fought wage gains by dramatically reducing health benefits.

Skinny plans hurt California employees by rewarding employers for doing less for their workers, and allowing those costs to continue to be borne (mostly) by others. These plans also create an incentive for employers to pressure their employees not to seek more comprehensive insurance in Covered California, because every employee who receives a subsidy triggers an additional cost to the employer. It’s not difficult to imagine how this “choice” might create hostility in the workplace, and place employees in an untenable situation where they are viewed as directly responsible for fining their employer.

The ACA was intended to stabilize health insurance benefits in the large group market and extend similar benefits to those in the small group and individual markets. Congress is gridlocked and, thus unable to fix the unintended consequences caused by skinny plans, but California can and should close this loophole.