As the result of computer problems – thank you Verizon – we’re a little late to the party today. Still, it’s important to say a few words about the late Thursday evening announcement that Secretary of Health and Human Services Kathleen Sebelius had resigned.

If there was ever an example of what happens when you get your second choice (Or was it third?) for an important job, she was it. An almost accidental governor of Kansas, she was even more so an accidental cabinet member, put into a job no one else seemed to want because it meant riding point on President Barack Obama’s effort to have Washington take over the federal health care system.

Thanks in large part to her skill and natural ability, it almost didn’t happen. She was an ineffective advocate for a piece of legislation that finally passed by the narrowest of margins and only after the president and a group of pro-life Democrats in the House of Representatives agreed (wink wink, nod nod) that the resulting law would not expropriate federal funds for abortion coverage.

[See a collection of political cartoons on Obamacare.]

From backroom deals with insurance companies to failed web sites, Sebelius’ work on behalf of the design and implementation of Obamacare has only contributed to its being the colossal embarrassment it has proven to be. South Dakota Sen. John Thune captured things accurately when he said, “Unfortunately for the American people, Secretary Sebelius’ resignation will do nothing to protect them from ObamaCare’s canceled coverage, skyrocketing costs, and fewer choices.”

“ObamaCare is fundamentally flawed and a personnel change at HHS won’t change that ugly reality,” the Senate's number three Republican said in a release. “The only way to protect American families, workers, and small businesses from ObamaCare’s consequences is to scrap this law and start over with common-sense reforms that actually reduce health care costs.”

If anyone thought for a moment it was a case of “failure by design” then we might have a reason to thank her for her efforts since, in more capable hands, the whole process might have gone much more smoothly. Unfortunately for her, the way the whole business has unfolded – and will continue to unfold – was the only possible path forward. What few people are willing to admit but is nevertheless true is that Obamacare is a “half-measure” whose malfunctions are deliberate in order to pave the way for the liberal left's actual dream: a single-payer health care system on the Canadian model. And if you think you had to wait a long time to get on the healthcare.gov website, wait until that system goes into effect and you have to see a doctor. You could be dead from whatever you have before a doctor is available to see you and make a diagnosis.

[ Check out our editorial cartoons on President Obama.]

It’s not just a problem of policy affecting the American people; it’s a problem of politics affecting the Democrats. The polling shows the health care law is dragging down Senate and House candidates who should be having an easier time of it than they are. "The next HHS Secretary will inherit a mess — Americans facing rising costs, families losing their doctors, and an economy weighed down by intrusive regulations,” Republican National Chairman Reince Priebus said in a statement. “No matter who is in charge of HHS, ObamaCare will continue to be a disaster and will continue to hurt hardworking Americans. It's time for President Obama to admit that Democrats' signature law is a failure and heed Republican calls for patient-centered healthcare reform."

Most folks leave the president’s cabinet with a hearty handshake and a reassuring “job well done” from the president. Even Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld – whom I like personally and whom I believe was made a scapegoat for the failure of others to effectively manage things in Iraq after the fall of Saddam Hussein – got that from George W. Bush, albeit too late to do any good electorally. The best anyone can say of Sebelius, whose official portrait should someday hang in the darkest corner of the hallway outside the secretary’s office, is that she should take care to “make sure the door don’t hit you where the good Lord split you” on her way out.