Barack Obama shoots the ball while playing basketball with Aaron Villicana, bottom left, after talking to the family members of Villicana in Union Mills, Ind. (AP photo/Jae C. Hong)

Chris Rock, who sat down with New York Magazine's Frank Rich, has a pithy basketball- and music-themed take on the liberal expectations about President Obama:

Rich: What do you think of how he’s done? Here we are in the last two years of his presidency, and there’s a sense among his supporters of disappointment, that he’s disengaged. Rock: I’m trying to figure out the right analogy. Everybody wanted Michael Jordan, right? We got Shaq. That’s not a disappointment. You know what I mean? We got Charles Barkley. It’s still a Hall of Fame career. The president should be graded on jobs and peace, and the other stuff is debatable. Do more people have jobs, and is there more peace? I guess there’s a little more peace. Not as much peace as we’d like, but I mean, that’s kind of the gig. I don’t recall anybody leaving on an up. It’s just that kind of job. I mean, the liberals that are against him feel let down because he’s not Bush. And the thing about George Bush is that the kid revolutionized the presidency. How? He was the first president who only served the people who voted for him. He literally operated like a cable network. You know what I mean?

Rock also said this: "Obama started as a genius. It’s like, What? I've got to keep doing that? That’s hard to do! So it’s not that Obama’s disappointing. It’s just his best album might have been his first album."

Rock is right. Remember the post-Obama victory euphoria among progressives and liberals? The general feeling back then was that Obama had ushered in a transformative era in American politics and culture -- that essentially there would be a pre-Obama and post-Obama landscape. He would do for politics, policy, and race relations, what Jordan did for basketball. And that he would become a Jordan-like measuring stick for everyone that followed. That hasn't happened -- at least not yet.

(Worth noting: Obama has likened himself to another big-time NBA star, LeBron James. In 2004, as he was about to make his national debut at the Democratic National Convention in Boston, Obama said of the just-out-of-high-school phenom: "I'm LeBron, baby. I can play on this level. I got some game.")

Rock rightfully makes the point that presidents tend not to go out on a high note. But given that he has two years left, it might be too early to tell whether Obama will be viewed by progressives and liberals as more Shaq-like -- not transcendent, but still a very significant figure in a more workman-like way. In addition, history tends to have a softening effect for some presidents. Witness Bill Clinton, both Bushes and Lyndon B. Johnson.

But what about Obama's progressive highlight reel so far: Affordable Care Act, two big executive actions on illegal immigration, winning reelection in a landslide, transforming get-out-the-vote efforts, expanding the Democratic coalition, killing Osama Bin Laden and collapsing the boundaries between popular culture and presidential politics. Does that amount to GOAT (Greatest Of All Time) status? Few would argue that it does -- especially in a liberal community that is pining for someone more like Sen. Elizabeth Warren (D-Mass.) -- but that doesn't mean it's been a bust either.

A better comparison than the Jordan vs. Shaq one is Ronald Reagan, who has gained totemic status among Republicans. In 2008, Obama (somewhat controversially. given he was in a Democratic primary) seemed to compare himself to Reagan:

I don't want to present myself as some sort of singular figure. I think part of what is different is the times. I do think that, for example, the 1980 election was different. I think Ronald Reagan changed the trajectory of America in a way that Richard Nixon did not and in a way that Bill Clinton did not. He put us on a fundamentally different path because the country was ready for it. They felt like with all the excesses of the 60s and the 70s and government had grown and grown but there wasn't much sense of accountability in terms of how it was operating. I think he tapped into what people were already feeling. Which is we want clarity, we want optimism, we want a return to that sense of dynamism and entrepreneurship that had been missing.

Polls and the midterm elections suggest that Americans still want all those things that Obama says Reagan helped usher in. As for changing the trajectory America in fundamental ways, it's way too early to know what the Obama effect will ultimately be.

The earliest clue will be 2016 and how candidates from both parties will name-drop Obama and what he evokes in the minds of most voters. It's not going to be Jordan-esque, but Democrats and liberals would probably settle for Shaq.