Topics: 9/11, Editor's Picks, john mueller, War on Terror, Politics News

A major part of the American condition is fear. Paranoia in America stretches from fright of drugs to panic over Islamic invaders seeking to transform Las Vegas into Kabul. It seems that America cannot psychologically function without believing that it is under constant threat; teetering on the edge of destruction from the comic book menace of apocalyptic villains. The escapist plots of “Mission Impossible” movies are now equal to mainstream American political discourse in their unrealistic depiction of geopolitics and international affairs.

For several decades, America was able to fulfill its psychic need for a gigantic evil with the Cold War. The Pentagon, along with successive presidents, was able to take advantage of the everlasting red scare by continually transferring wealth from the taxpayer to the defense contractor and military; increasing “defense” budgets, and building the national security state.

The fall of the Berlin Wall made the 1990s something of a lost decade, but the horror of 9/11 changed all of that by giving Americans a new enemy – an enemy that is seemingly everywhere and nowhere at the same time. Islamic terrorists now pose the existential threat to America that can justify perpetual war, bloated military budgets, and violation of constitutional liberties.

In the immediate aftermath of the Sept. 11 attacks, it was impossible to find a politician or pundit not repeating the mindless cliché, “It is not a matter of if, but when they will attack again.” Years later, and the follow-up attack has still not happened. Yet, the rhetoric remains the same, as do the policies and budgets it reflects. Al-Qaida is yesterday’s news. Now, Americans are told they have ISIS to fear – an even worse mutation of the group responsible for the 9/11 attacks.

Few voices of reason are audible over the cacophony of madness. John Mueller, a political scientist at Ohio State University, is one of them. In his 2006 book, “Overblown,” he convincingly argued that the terrorist threat is exactly that, and now he and Mark Stewart indict the irresponsibility of public officials who play on popular fears to misspend money and misdirect resources in “Chasing Ghosts: The Policing of Terrorism.”

Using evidence, reason and logic – strange concepts in American culture, but perhaps, still marginally useful – Mueller demonstrates that the terrorist threat is wildly exaggerated, and that public policy should reflect that reality, rather than chase the ghosts of American fantasy.

I recently spoke to Mueller over the phone.

Since it seems that the average American is pretty frightened of a terrorist attack within our own borders, what should the average American know about terrorism?

Well, the primary fact is that their chance of being killed in a terrorist attack on any given year is about 1 in 4 million. Their chance of being killed in an automobile accident, for example, is about 1 in 6- or 7,000. If we talk about the period since 9/11, your chance of being killed is 1 in 90 million per year. So, that is where the discussion should start. It isn’t where it should end, but certainly the basis should be there. Instead of constantly talking about, “Are we safer?” The beginning question should be, “How safe are we?” And these statistics and odds are an indication of how safe we are.

The United States government and the media do not begin with that question, and never, according to my assessment, acknowledge those statistics. So, this not only leads to fear and hysteria among the public, but also bad policy. What are some of the bad policies that are cost-ineffective, and how much money has America misspent on this phantom threat?

You could make a good case for more than a trillion dollars has been misspent. You’d have to look at every aspect of it, obviously, and some of the money might have been spent well, even if only by sheer luck. The more we look at it, however, the more we question whether the enhanced security measures since 9/11 have been cost-effective, meaning that they reduce the threat sufficiently to justify their costs.

To go back to your starting premise, I think it is not so much that people are being scared by the media or politicians, but rather that people are scared period, and because they are scared, public officials and the media are playing to those fears, and exacerbating them. I consider that politically understandable, but also terribly irresponsible. We are talking about public safety, not the bridge to nowhere, or some other budgetary screw-up. It is important that tax money be spent in a way that maximizes the safety of the public. With counterterrorism spending, that is clearly not the case.

9/11 was such a traumatic and impactful atrocity. The images were so horrific that they are forever tattooed in the memory of most Americans. Do you believe that is why the public is so afraid, and that politicians can so easily take advantage of those fears?

Yes, the shock of 9/11 was obviously strong. But the main reason people are afraid is that the terrorism is connected to this spooky international conspiracy. There was a terrorist attack in 1995 when Timothy McVeigh blew up a federal building in Oklahoma City. It was dramatic and horrible. It was the worst terrorist attack on American soil before 9/11. People were very concerned that it could happen anywhere, but fears dissipated once it became clear that it was a one-off attack. That hasn’t happened after 9/11. Even before the rise of ISIS, polls indicated that people were as afraid of terrorism as they were at then end of 2001.

The two comparisons we use in “Chasing Ghosts” are communists during the Cold War when there were supposedly mysterious people around planning bad things, and I quote J. Edgar Hoover as talking about communists trying to take over the government who are “invisible to the non-communist eye.” Even though domestic communists were doing hardly anything in terms of subversion or espionage, fears continued perpetually. That’s the fear of people you can’t see who are moving around the country, planning evil things, and connected to a foreign source.

The other one is fear of witches, and that has a lot of parallels, because it is people who think people are working with the most massive foreign conspiracy – that is the devil. If you believe that, you think they are everywhere, that they are copulating with the devil, and riding broomsticks. The fear of witches was big-time in Europe. It lasted about 200 years. The parallel is there: Internal people that you can’t set apart from other people who are linked to an outside, spooky force – communism, terrorism, the devil.

Right now that international force is ISIS. According to your research and analysis, is ISIS a significant threat to American life?

Tragedies can happen like in Paris or San Bernadino. So, there is a threat. There is a problem. But the likelihood that they could do major damage is extremely low. My book is called “Overblown.” It isn’t called “Non-Existent.” It isn’t that there is nothing there, but it is that the threat level is low.

How would you counter the argument that the major government expenditures on preventing terrorism are precisely the reason why we haven’t suffered more attacks on the scale of 9/11? It is impossible to prove that counterfactual proposition, but I’m sure you face that question pretty consistently.

Terrorism outside of war zones, especially in the United States, is historically pretty limited. Secondly, when I give you the numbers – 1 in 4 million and 1 in 90 million – the logic is that we are remarkably safe. So, maybe some of the expenditures help keep those numbers low, but shouldn’t we investigate which expenditures we could cut profitably?