Ports chief Jim Newsome isn’t buying into the hype about shippers moving their goods en masse to the East Coast.

J.E. Oswalt & Sons, an 88-year-old Midlands company that got its start moving homes by rolling them atop logs out of the way of road construction, is embracing a new technology — drones — to entice customers to its heavy-duty cargo hauling business.

Online To see the drone videos of J.E. Oswalt & Sons moving oversized cargo, go to: tinyurl.com/of7s7pc tinyurl.com/k7d9bj7

David Oswalt, owner of the Batesburg company, which moves cargo for customers to and from the Port of Charleston, decided on a whim in January to let friend James Player use a drone to film one of his company’s trucks moving an oversized transformer along Lake Murray and through the town of Lexington. The roughly two-minute video was posted online in February and promoted in Oswalt’s company newsletter.

It turned out to be a hit, at least in the trucking business. The video had more than 2,000 views in the first three weeks on the Truckers News website and is still drawing traffic. Oswalt has since posted another video of a truck moving a large tire manufacturing part, and plans more.

“This is definitely giving us a lot more exposure than we ever dreamed,” said Oswalt, the grandson of company founder Junior Earl Oswalt. “It has turned out to be a great advertising tool.”

Oswalt said he has sent links to the video to customers, including utilities and manufacturers. “They’re just blown away,” he said. “They say, ‘If you can do that move, ours will be a piece of cake’.”

Nike Kern, who handles public relations for Oswalt’s firm, said Oswalt filmed the moves “to illustrate to his clientele how a move is instrumented, the difficulty involved, safety standards that are used and the professionalism needed to take on such a move.”

One of Oswalt’s top customers is General Electric, which makes gas turbine generators at its Greenville plant. Oswalt said he moved 102 generators last year, and the product is one of the top exports at the Charleston port with $1.7 billion in export sales last year.

Call him skeptical

Jim Newsome, president and CEO of the State Ports Authority, isn’t buying the news that shipping companies plan to switch en masse to East Coast ports because of the labor strife that, until recently, shut down their West Coast counterparts.

“If you believe what you read, there’s going to be a lot of changes,” Newsome said last week during the SPA’s monthly board of directors meeting. “My sense tells me that there’ll be some changes, but those changes were going to occur anyway.”

Newsome said some shippers from Asia already have plans to dock along the East Coast once expansion of the Panama Canal is finished next year and larger vessels can maneuver the waterway. “When big ships can come by the Panama Canal, it makes more sense economically to bring cargo to the East Coast closer to where most people need it,” he said.

However, much of the talk in recent weeks about labor problems causing a shift is simply an “emotional, angry reaction to a bad situation.”

“I don’t believe all the hype about everybody’s going to change,” Newsome said. “People have distribution systems worked out that aren’t changeable overnight.”

Seat setback

Ongoing problems with the France-based manufacturer of seats for the Boeing Co.’s 787 Dreamliner could force new delays in deliveries of the twin-aisle commercial airplane to customers, according to a report by Reuters.

Zodiac Aerospace says it continues to miss deadlines for seat production, and a Boeing executive told Reuters the supplier “overcommitted” on its ability to build seats fast enough.

“You can’t just point to one thing: the business took off on (them) and (they) didn’t have the capability,” said Pat Shanahan, Boeing’s senior vice president of airplane programs.

The delays forced Boeing to move the delivery date for American Airlines’ first Dreamliner from November to earlier this year. Boeing builds the Dreamliners at its campus in North Charleston and in Everett. Wash.

Zodiac’s troubles — blamed in part on a strike last fall at the company’s Texas plant — also are affecting Boeing competitor Airbus. Both manufacturers have held what one source described as “tough” meetings with Zodiac’s leadership, Reuters reported.

Zodiac reported last week that the seat problems will have a significant impact on its operating income for the first half of this fiscal year.

Reach David Wren at 937-5550 or on Twitter at @David_Wren_