LONDON (AP) - Leicester and its striker Jamie Vardy led the way in Tuesday’s Associated Press Global Football 10 after the club moved closer to the English Premier League title with a 2-0 win over Sunderland at the weekend.

Vardy scored two second-half goals in a victory that also guaranteed the surprise English leader a place in next season’s Champions League. He takes player of the week for his performance.

“Four years ago he was a stranger, but Jamie Vardy is now the face of the day in the Premier League,” Manos Staramopoulos of Dimocratia in Greece said. “The forward, 28, scored twice against Sunderland and essentially takes Leicester to touching distance of the miracle of winning the title.”

Tottenham had to settle for runner up to Leicester, despite beating Manchester United 3-0 on Sunday with three goals in six minutes against Louis van Gaal’s side.

Real Sociedad takes third after its surprise 1-0 victory at home against Barcelona in the Spanish league. The result allowed Atletico Madrid to move three points behind Luis Enrique’s side, which still tops the standings in Spain.

“Real Sociedad proved that it’s not just the likes of Real Madrid that can beat Barcelona with a victory that has kept the race for the La Liga title well and truly alive,” Marco Monteverde of News Corp. Australia said.

Juventus is fourth after coming from a goal down to defeat AC Milan 2-1 at San Siro, maintaining its position atop Serie A.

Bayern Munich takes fifth after following up its 1-0 Champions League quarterfinal first leg victory against Benfica with a 3-1 triumph at Stuttgart.

Atletico, Wolfsburg, Real Madrid, Paris Saint-Germain and Liverpool complete the top 10 teams of the week.

Vardy takes the player honors for spearheading Leicester’s attack, while Andy Carroll of West Ham enters the poll for the first time this season in second, after a hat trick for in his team’s 3-3 draw against Arsenal.

Divock Origi of Liverpool is third for scoring three goals over two games. He netted once in the 1-1 Europa League quarterfinal draw in Germany against Borussia Dortmund, and then twice in the emphatic 4-1 Premier League win against Stoke.

“It was a fantastic week for Liverpool’s Divock Origi,” Jonathan Johnson of beIN Sports USA in France said. “Having failed to score since mid-February before that, could this be take off for the 20-year-old’s Anfield career?”

Cristiano Ronaldo of Real Madrid is fourth after scoring in his side’s 4-0 victory over Eibar.

Hatem Ben Arfa polls fifth for his hat trick in Nice’s 3-0 home win over Rennes in France’s Ligue 1.

Paul Pogba, Geronimo Rulli, Luis Suarez, Miroslav Klose and Fernando Torres round out the top 10 players of the week.

Associated Press Global Football 10

Players:

1. Jamie Vardy, 84 points.

2. Andy Carroll, 77.

3. Divock Origi, 60.

4. Cristiano Ronaldo, 58.

5. Hatem Ben Arfa, 46.

6. Paul Pogba, 44.

7. Geronimo Rulli, 40.

8. Luis Suarez, 35.

9. Miroslav Klose, 29.

10. Fernando Torres, 25.

Teams:

1. Leicester, 85.

2. Tottenham, 81.

3. Real Sociedad, 74.

4. Juventus, 65.

5. Bayern Munich, 55.

6. Atletico Madrid, 49.

7. Wolfsburg, 40.

8. Real Madrid, 30.

9. Paris Saint-Germain, 28.

10. Liverpool, 23.