BROOKLYN, Iowa - Ted Cruz has made a name for himself losing big political fights. Now, facing down his biggest battle yet as a candidate for president, Cruz is grappling with the new challenge of assuring voters that he can not only fight, but win.

That pressure on Cruz shone through Friday, as he presented himself for the small crowd at a town hall here as the only conservative in the Republican field who is also a viable candidate.

“There are sixteen Republican candidates. Of the sixteen, do you know which campaign raised the most hard money? We did,” Cruz boasted, to loud cheers. “Three months ago, if someone had suggested to you that Cruz was going to outraise Jeb Bush, you’d have told them, ‘Look, I think you need to lay off the bottle a little bit. That ain’t gonna happen.’”

Indeed, the latest round of campaign finance reports confirmed that Cruz raked in $14.3 million, not including an independent haul on the super PAC side. Although Jeb Bush brought in much more on the super PAC side, making him the undisputed GOP money leader, his campaign brought in $11.2 million - three million less than Cruz.

But the idea of the noted firebrand Cruz pushing political pragmatism can be jarring. He cemented his national reputation as a scorched-earth conservative in 2013, playing a leading role in shutting down the federal government over a quixotic bid to block funding for Obamacare.

In his campaign for president, Cruz isn't glossing over that and other bruising battles he has waged, even as he is being implicitly called out by other candidates for having consistently come up short.

“There are really two kinds of candidates,” Wisconsin Gov. Scott Walker told reporters in Davenport, Iowa, on Friday. “There are fighters in Washington who prefer fighting but have yet to win those fights largely, and then there are winners, people who have won elections but haven’t consistently been involved in the fights of the last few years that really matter.”

“What makes us unique is...we can do both,” Walker continued. “We can fight and win.”

When presented later Friday with these remarks, Cruz insisted: “Republican primary voters are going to ask of every candidate in the field: Show me where you’ve stood and led on the great battles of the day.” And he ticked off issues: Common Core, Obamacare, the Religious Freedom Act in Indiana, the president’s executive orders on immigration, the Iran deal, and more.

“There are many good people in this race who I like and respect. But there is a stark difference in the records of the candidates,” Cruz said. “There are campaign conservatives, who talk conservative when they’re on the campaign trail, and yet their record isn’t conservative. I am the candidate in this race who is the consistent conservative over and over again.”

Even Cruz’s steadfast, vocal conservatism is not without political calculation, of course. In a broad field of Republican candidates, he and his campaign team see a lane for a no-compromise conservative, in particular one who can harness grassroots support while cultivating larger donors.

Cruz’s model builds on what he sees as the mistakes of conservative candidates in 2012 to take advantage of deep misgivings about Mitt Romney during the Republican primary, which manifested in multiple candidates — Michele Bachmann, Herman Cain, Newt Gingrich, Rick Santorum — having their moments in the spotlight and at the top of the polls.

“But none of them were in positions to be able to raise substantial sums of money,” Cruz said in an interview prior to his town hall Friday. “So, every time one of them popped up to the polls, they’d get hit with $10 million in attack ads, and they’d be road kill.”

To supporters and the press, Cruz is making the case that establishment Republicans hope to win in the primary by “splintering” the conservative vote — and that he, with his robust campaign infrastructure, is the antidote to that.

“The Washington establishment’s plan is simple. They want to divide conservatives,” Cruz added in the interview. “That is the only way the moderate establishment candidate sneaks up the middle with 23 percent of the vote and runs away with the nomination. If conservatives unite, it’s game over.”