It sounds like a brilliant idea. Governments should take advantage of ultra-low interest rates to borrow money and invest in grand infrastructure projects. Pension schemes – seeking an alternative to expensive-looking equities and record low bond yields – should be encouraged to join in the fun and help fund big transport, technology and renewable energy projects.

On paper at least it looks like the perfect win-win-win situation: countries get lots of shiny new stuff, the projects will stimulate economic growth and investors get access to just the kind of steady, long-term, inflation-linked assets that best match their liabilities.

That’s certainly the view of the International Monetary Fund which last week encouraged governments to go on an infrastructure spending spree . In a chapter of its World Economic Outlook, the IMF said: “In advanced economies an increase in infrastructure investment could provide a much-needed fillip to demand. It is one of the few remaining policy levers available to support growth, given already accommodative monetary policy.”

The evidence, however, suggests that the reality can be a little more disappointing than the theory.

Some of the European countries that spent most on infrastructure prior to the credit crunch were among the worst hit by the sovereign debt crisis.

Athens spent billions on hosting the Olympics in 2004 and then yet more on a new airport with good links to the city. Spain also splurged plenty of taxpayer euros on transport, including a high-speed rail link between Madrid and Barcelona, while the quality of the roads in Cyprus is matched only by the island’s superb new airport at Larnaca.

These countries didn’t, of course, get into trouble because of the money they spent on infrastructure, but it certainly didn’t protect them either. On the contrary, the spending didn’t stimulate growth when it was needed and left government finances in a more precarious position when trouble struck. Equally, Japan’s countless “bridges to nowhere” prove that infrastructure alone cannot jump-start moribund economies.

The IMF, to its credit, does caution governments not to spend money blindly. It said countries have to choose the right projects, conduct rigorous cost-benefit analysis and invest efficiently.

That’s a good idea because, as this interactive graphic from Podio shows, these projects have a nasty habit of exceeding their budgets and their timetables.

(via Podio).

Work started on the Edinburgh trams system, for example, in 2003. It was due to be completed in 2009 and cost a shade over £600m. But it only carried its first passenger in May this year having cost £1.7bn, 167pc over budget.

The Obamacare website came in at triple the original budget and was plagued with so many technical issues that the Daily Show’s Jon Stewart bet the US health secretary he could download every movie ever made before she could sign up.

Then there is the most cautionary of infrastructure tales: the Montreal Olympic Stadium, which ended up costing 1,990pc more than was budgeted – work on its retractable roof wasn’t finished until after the closing ceremony.

None of this is to say that governments shouldn’t be spending money on infrastructure; of course they should. Modern economies need state-of-the-art transport links, high-speed internet and cutting-edge energy provision.

But projects need to be considered on their own merits rather than as some kind of economic panacea.

Infrastructure projects are already political enough. You only need look at the brouhaha kicked up by the question of airport expansion in the South-East of England to see that the decisions about vital long-term infrastructure projects can by stymied by short-term political considerations.

You can do all of the cost-benefit analysis you like, but politicians will still end up choosing projects for political, rather than economic, reasons.

That’s why institutional investors have been slow to embrace infrastructure investment. Their equity investments may be buffeted by macroeconomic forces and their bond yields squeezed by central banks, but they know that infrastructure investment is no shelter from political risk – indeed it might be the most political asset class of them all.

And if you looked at things through a purely economic lense, the evidence suggests that you get more productivity bang for every pound that goes towards tax cuts than you do from spending it on infrastructure.