Peter Reed, director of Sanford Center for Aging at the University of Nevada, Reno. (Photo: RGJ file )

Nevada is expected to have the nation's second fastest increase in people with Alzheimer's disease by 2025, according to a report released last month by the Alzheimer's Association.

This should be a call to the community do more to help people with Alzheimer's disease and also to help the people who care for them, said Peter Reed, director of the Sanford Center for Aging at the University of Nevada, Reno.

"We need to have a dialogue at the community level and state level to identify the best way we can support people living with Alzheimer's disease in maintaining a high quality of life," Reed said.

"If someone has lost the use of their legs, then we build a ramp to get into the building," Reed added. "But if someone loses their cognitive ability, we don't build them a cognitive ramp to the community."

The 2014 Alzheimer's Disease Facts released by the Alzheimer's Association projects that the number of Nevadans with Alzheimer's disease will increase from 37,000 this year to 64,000 by 2025, an increase of 73 percent. Only Alaska has a higher increase.

Both Reed and Elizabeth Edgerly, chief program officer for the Alzheimer's Association, attributed to the expected increase to Nevada's aging population plus an expected influx of retirees from out of state.

"Nevada is disproportionately affected because you have retirees who are choosing Nevada as an affordable place to live because of fewer taxes and lower cost of living than other places," Edgerly said.

A Sanford Center report showed Nevada had the second fastest growth of elderly population between 2000 and 2010, Reed noted.

"Essentially, the state of Nevada is aging faster than others and Alzheimer's disease is tied directly to aging," Reed said.

The report also indicates that Nevada has the nation's lowest mortality rate for people with Alzheimer's disease. Both Reed and Edgerly suspect that is caused by a flaw in the way deaths are recorded rather than something about Nevada's population. People with Alzheimer's disease might die because they can no longer swallow and get fluid in their lungs, for instance. The death will be recorded as pneumonia and not Alzheimer's disease.

Reed also noted that Nevada has a higher rates of death from other conditions will may killing people younger.

What are the solutions? The Alzheimer's Association report said more needs to be done to help the people who are taking care of people with Alzheimer's disease.

"At the current time there is no effective treatment for Alzheimer's disease and there is no understanding of what causes the disease," Reed said. "Despite the challenges that come along with Alzheimer's, we as a community can reduce the social impact by addressing the disease and keeping those with it as vibrant members of the community."

In his opinion, Reed said, thirty years from now people will see a major shift in the trend of how people live with the disease. In the last 30 years there has been a steady increase of people with Alzheimer's disease. In the next 30, as Baby Boomers age, he expects more people will be diagnosed early on — currently they are commonly diagnosed in the middle or later stages of the disease — and people can do more to help cope with the symptoms. Plus there might be breakthroughs in how to treat the disease.

Reed said there are several trials underway for treating the disease and there "isn't anything on immediate horizon that is going to change the course of he disease."

Alzheimer's Association offers support in Northern Nevada

Map and chart: Alzheimer's disease in Nevada

Read or Share this story: http://on.rgj.com/1gyJQSU