Stir frequently. Kiz, I have to believe somewhere in your job description it says “Stir the pot” or “Where there is no controversy, create one.” There is no quarterback controversy in Denver. Peyton Manning, when healthy, is the starting quarterback. The other guy is the backup. There is no denying Manning is aging, but Brock Osweiler can’t carry his jock.

J.H., backs No. 18

Kiz: Only flat-earthers and hopeless romantics think injuries are the main reason Manning has played poorly for more than a year. News flash: He’s old. Pittsburgh is the next stop on Osweiler’s job audition. With his rookie contract about to expire, how much is the Brockweiler worth? Here’s a fun stat: At 85.4, the quarterback rating of Osweiler and Tampa Bay quarterback Jameis Winston is exactly the same so far this season. The Bucs are paying Winston a $6.3 million salary. Do you think Osweiler is worth as much as Winston? Would a four-year, $25 million contract be a wise investment in Osweiler? To find the real quarterback controversy, follow the money.

Bank on flinching. Manning flinches in the pocket, just like John Elway did when he knew it was over. There’s no quarterback controversy. Manning will not start another game for the Broncos. Elway and Gary Kubiak are left with the task of finding out if Osweiler is the long-term solution at quarterback. You can take that to the bank.

Paul, backs No. 17

Kiz: Contrary to what some defensive players like to think, you don’t play quarterback in a rocking chair. It’s dangerous work. Unloading the football an instant before getting hit? It hurts. That involuntary flinch is an old body’s way of telling a brave QB it’s time to get out of the NFL in one piece. The telltale flinch was on full display when Manning played in St. Louis during November 2014. And that’s when I knew: He would never be PFM again.

Elway or highway. Kubiak is mediocrity defined as a coach. The evidence: his bland play-calling, and no adjustments in games. I love No. 7, but Elway is clearly all about his boys, and it’s either John’s way or the highway. He will hire coaches he can control.

Paul, Wantagh, N.Y.

Kiz: Here at Kickin’ It Headquarters we are guilty of laughing too loudly, often at inappropriate times. Know what makes us giggle? As a quarterback, Elway chafed at the harness put on him by Dan Reeves. But as a general manager, Elway has hired two coaches (Kubiak and John Fox) who seem every bit as conservative as Reeves ever was.

Arch madness. And today’s parting shot takes aim at Archie Manning’s claim that his son has been dealing with plantar fasciitis for months and suggests it sounds a little like the whining of a Little League parent.

Daddy had to write Peyton a school note for coming down with a case of 17 interceptions. Poor baby.

Rhett, Washington, D.C.