Player to embed in JSonline stories

By of the

Ripon — One more yard, one more first down and things might have been different.

Homestead was on the verge of reaching the WIAA Division 2 state championship game for the second time in three seasons Saturday. Its defense was pitching a shutout, its special teams was turning the field and the offense was trying to put away the game.

The unit was in the midst of an 8-minute drive in the fourth quarter and inside the 10-yard line when a fumble gave Menasha new life that eventually sent the Highlanders out of town with a painful 8-7 loss in a state semifinal at Ingalls Field.

The Bluejays drove 91 yards in nine plays for a 7-yard touchdown by Tyler Johnson with 31 seconds left that set the stage for the game-winning points on a two-point conversion by junior Jadin Sell.

"It came down to the wire. It could have gone either way," Homestead coach Dave Keel said. "Give Menasha credit for making a couple of plays on that last drive. They did a nice job. They definitely earned it at the end there."

Menasha (13-0) advanced to the championship game at 1 p.m. Friday at Camp Randall Stadium against Waukesha West.

For Homestead (11-2) it was a bitter end with a twist of irony. To advance to the semifinals, the team scored a touchdown in the final minute against Cedarburg and then won the game, 15-14, on a two-point conversion.

"There was never a doubt in my mind," Johnson said of the victory. "As long as there is time on the clock and we have a chance, we're going to go out there and do our best."

Homestead forced three second-half turnovers to put itself on the brink of victory. The last was a forced fumble on a Menasha punt return that gave the Highlanders a first down at the Menasha 42 with 8 minute 50 seconds to play.

They picked up two first downs and had a fourth and 1 at the 9 when senior Nick Allen and junior Patrick Minkin couldn't connect on a handoff. Menasha senior Zac Hawn recovered at the 9 with 3:05 to play.

"We contemplated a field goal and made the decision to go for it," Keel said. "It didn't work out the way we had anticipated."

There really was little reason to think Menasha would be able to move the ball the length of the field to reach the end zone. The Blue Jays went three and out their first two possessions and managed two first downs on their third before punting.

This time, however, Johnson, who rushed for 77 yards in 15 carries, found room to run. The 6-foot-3, 215-pound quartgerback who entered play with a team-high 1,311 rushing yards, broke loose for a 34-yard run that gave his team a first down near midfield.

Johnson followed that with back-to-back strikes of 6 and 19 yards to senior Emanuel Jenkins and then a 20-yard screen to Sell. Just like that Menasha had a first down at the Homestead 15 with about 2 minutes left.

Three plays later Johnson bulled his way into the end zone.

"They have a big defensive line that is very talented, but we came out in that last drive and our offensive line had the mentality that they weren't going to push us back anymore," Johnson said.

Otherwise it was a rough afternoon for Johnson. His interceptions on two straight possessions left Homestead with a short field (25 yards) for its only touchdown drive.

Junior running back Matt Winters had runs of 5 and 7 yards to move the ball to the Menasha 13. And after a Bluejays pass-interference penalty gave Homestead the ball at the 7, Allen scored the game's first touchdown on a quarterback sneak.

That play plus some stout defense and quality punting by Allen almost got Homestead back to the championship game. Almost.

"It was really a well-played defensive game by us," Keel said. "We couldn't finish it offensively. That's totally on my shoulders. We should have had them."