Contraceptive hormones delivered by remote control? Sound like a brave, new world? That frightful future is today thanks to Bill Gates.

Not content to control the education of children, the billionaire founder of Microsoft is funding the manufacture of a microchip that will control the conception of children, as well.

An MIT offshoot known as Microchips is the beneficiary of an endowment from the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation earmarked for the research and development of the contraceptive chip that will be implanted under the skin and will prevent impregnation for up to 16 years.

MIT, in an article announcing the chip, chronicles the genesis of the idea:

The idea for the device originated two years ago in a visit by Bill Gates and his colleagues to Robert Langer’s MIT lab. Gates and his colleagues asked Langer if it were feasible to create birth control that a woman could turn on and off and use for many years. Langer thought the controlled release microchip technology he invented with colleagues Michael Cima and John Santini in the 1990s and licensed to MicroCHIPS might offer a solution.

Women who are implanted with the device will daily receive 30mg of levonorgestrel, the primary hormone present in the so-called morning after pill. The World Health Organization includes the drug on its List of Essential Medicines, a list of medicines the United Nations believes is necessary to improve global health.

The “morning after pill” is not strictly speaking only a contraceptive. Several studies have shown that while the hormone present in the pill, and in Bill Gates's new microchip, could serve as a contraceptive, it could also serve as an abortifacient.

Such a fact should not be surprising, however, as population control is not a new interest of Bill Gates.

In May 2009, the Times of London online reported that a group of the world’s billionaires calling themselves “the Good Club” had met secretly, with an agenda of formulating a plan to control the growing global population. The article mentions the participation not only of Gates, but of Warren Buffett, David Rockefeller, and Oprah Winfrey, as well.

The New American’s senior editor William Jasper reported on the meeting, noting, with reference to the Jacobins of French history:

These are the folks who have been the leading private financiers of the global depopulation and de-Christianization campaigns, the promoters of abortion, homosexuality, and New Age environmentalism. And in Barack Hussein Obama they have found their Camille Desmoulins, a handsome young lawyer with oratorical skills to push their agenda — all the while declaiming against the rich and powerful.

One of the more frightening possibilities of the implantation of these contraceptive computers is the involuntary dispensing of the drug to women targeted by those holding the remote control.

In an article reporting on the Gates-funded microchip, the BBC makes glancing mention of the need “to ensure the absolute security of the device to prevent activation or deactivation by another person without the woman's knowledge.”

In a comment to the BBC, Dr. Robert Farra from MIT assures readers that “we have secure encryption. That prevents someone from” remotely activating the chip without the consent of the woman implanted with it.

Promises of “secure encryption” seems illusory in a world where government agencies routinely and remotely activate webcams and cellphone microphones of those individuals targeted for surreptitious surveillance.

Is it too incredible to believe that should some member of the “Good Club” or other global eugenicist determine that it was best for the planet for a woman or women implanted with the device to receive a timely dose of the contraceptive hormone that somehow a way could be found to hack the chip and make it happen?

The announcement of the development of the microchip published by MIT Technology Review takes an eerie tone, especially in light of the potential abortifacient properties of the hormone delivered by the device. The Technology Review reports:

The hunt for a perfect contraceptive has gone on for millennia. A new candidate is now on the horizon: a wireless implant that can be turned on and off with a remote control and that is designed to last up to 16 years. If it passes safety and efficacy tests, the device would be more convenient for many women because, unlike existing contraceptive implants, it can be deactivated without a trip to the clinic and an outpatient procedure, and it would last nearly half their reproductive life.

Striking that historical tone is a curious coincidence given a similar tack taken by William Jasper, albeit with an entirely different purpose. In the 2010 article referenced earlier, Jasper invokes images of history, as well. Writing about the terrors of the French Revolution, Jasper explained:

From the Duc d’Orleans’ Palais Royal these Orleaniste Jacobins unleashed their agents to terrorize, de-Christianize, and depopulate France, in the name of “reason” and the creation of a “Republic of Virtue” based on “Liberty, Equality, and Fraternity.” Christianity was outlawed and churches were closed and/or desecrated; crucifixes were trampled on; Catholic Mass was forbidden; priests and nuns were butchered, exiled, or forced to apostatize. More than 300,000 people, including many women and children, were slaughtered — by guillotine, mass drownings, “fusillades,” and other inventive means of extermination. But this was barely a start; the Jacobins had plans to kill between eight and eighteen million more (one-third to two-thirds of the nation’s human population) as part of their green plan to depopulate France and turn its people from the Christian worship of the Creator God to the pagan New Age worship of Creation. Thus were the orgies of bloodletting accompanied by appeals to the Jacobins’ new environmental theology: “Perish forever the memory of the priests! Perish forever Christian superstition! Long live the sublime religion of Nature!”

There is undoubtedly something of a gargantuan God-complex present in the mind of billionaires who believe they have the right to determine who does and does not receive their permission to become pregnant.

MIT Technology Review reports that the Bill Gates-funded contraception microchip will begin pre-clinical testing next year, and perhaps be available commercially in 2018.

Joe A. Wolverton, II, J.D. is a correspondent for The New American and travels nationwide speaking on nullification, the Second Amendment, the surveillance state, and other constitutional issues. Follow him on Twitter @TNAJoeWolverton and he can be reached at This email address is being protected from spambots. You need JavaScript enabled to view it. .