Former CU football captain died on March 9

When Ryan Johanningmeier was elected to the homecoming court at Centaurus High School in the mid-1990s, he didn't tell his family. They found out when he was named homecoming king.

Five years later, when he was elected a captain of the Colorado football team by more than 100 teammates, it took him a few days to deliver the news to mom and dad. He was never one to boast or make a big deal about his accomplishments.

Johanningmeier was remembered Saturday as a modest man, but a leader, compassionate but tough, kind and funny. He lived a long life in a short time, getting as much out of each day as he could.

"A great guy," said his friend and former CU teammate Adam Reed. "He left his mark."

Ryan Joseph Johanningmeier was born Jan. 22, 1977 in Fort Collins to Sandy Curfman and B.J. Johanningmeier, who played football for Colorado State and in the NFL. The former Colorado offensive lineman died at his suburban-Denver residence March 9 from an undetermined cause, though he did suffer from high blood pressure and an enlarged heart.

Former Colorado football coaches Rick Neuheisel and Gary Barnett joined dozens of former players, the Johanningmeier family and several hundred mourners Saturday on the club level at Folsom Field to pay their respects to Ryan Johanningmeier. He was 38.

Johanningmeier used to stand behind his uncle, Tom Henson, and put his large hand on Henson's shoulder and squeeze until he made his uncle say 'Uncle.' I will miss that, those big hands," Henson said during his eulogy to his nephew.

Advertisement

Neuheisel remembered Johanningmeier, an offensive lineman he recruited in 1995, demonstrating as a freshman the leadership qualities that would make him a captain as a senior.

"Johanningmeier was a winner," Neuheisel said. " Johanningmeier was always about team.

"...Right now up in heaven right now up in heaven there is a heck of a recruiting battle going on."

Former Centaurus football coach Phil Bravo, who now coaches at Monarch High School, remembered Johanningmeier as a boy with uncommon maturity for his age even as a freshman. By the time he was a senior, Johanningmeier was comforting his coach after a tough loss instead of the other way around.

"Ryan was about patience, kindness and love," Bravo said. "...Ryan always had a sense of poise and calmness to him."

Former CU strength and conditioning coach Doc Kreis, like others, traveled from out of state to attend the memorial service and share his memories of Johanningmeier. Kreis admitted he has purposely avoided funerals and memorials his entire life, but he felt he had to pay his respects to Johanningmeier.

Kreis said Johanningmeier used to stay after practice just to throw the football around with Kreis' son.

Barnett said when he took over as coach in Boulder in 1999, one of his assistant coaches at Northwestern, who had recruited Johanningmeier, told him he was 'going to get to coach Ryan Johanningmeier.' It wasn't long before Barnett understood what he meant.

Barnett said that summer he handed out a list to his players of the qualities of a leader. He said there were about 25 items on the list. With those characteristics in mind, he asked his team to vote for team captains for his first year as coach.

"It was automatic Ryan Johnanningmeier was going to be one of our captains," Barnett said.

Kyle Ringo: ringok@dailycamera.com, on Twitter: @kyleringo