According to a Nov. 21, 2013, Huffington Post article, Michelle Obama rises above controversy when it comes to her fashion choices. All controversies aren't equal; however, and some are more difficult to rise above.

While serving as vice-president for George W. Bush, Dick Cheney had a connection to Halliburton no-bid contracts that simply would not go away. It turns out that Michelle Obama has a connection to CGI, the Canadian company which is the lead firm in the disastrous design and roll-out of HealthCare.gov. Like Halliburton, CGI was awarded a lucrative job, a whopping $678 million no-bid contract under President Obama's administration of the federal government. That's not small change that was outsourced to a foreign country.

Accusations of cronyism connections between Michelle Obama regarding the Canadian company awarded the no-bid contract to build the healthcare are getting more controversial every day the site fails to serve. As more and more questions are asked about the debacle that became the health care site that Obama built, Michelle's face could become as infamous a poster girl for Obamacare as the face of Dick Cheney on a Halliburton ad.

Michelle Obama's links to CGI, the Canadian company which secured a $678 million no-bid contract to build the Obamacare exchange web portal include:

Toni Townes-Whitley, a college classmate of Michelle Obama, is a senior executive of the Obamacare website contractor, Canadian company, CGI Federal. According to Slate, CGI, the company behind the broken Obamacare healthsite is prospering as never before.

Townes-Whitley and Michelle Obama both belonged to a controversial organization which invited a pro-terrorist to speak on the Princeton campus.

They both now belong to the Association of Black Princeton Alumni.

White House logs reveal Townes-Whitley has visited the White House several times for both personal and professional reasons.

Townes-Whitely was an Obama campaign donator. Center for Responsive Politics (CRP).

Instead of falling seamlessly in place, President Obama's signature accomplishment health care reform appears to be falling apart. As a cheerleader for her husband, President Barack Obama, First Lady Michelle Obama's voice is unequaled. She can talk about his "swag" and she can talk about his relationship with their children. This week, Michelle even tackled the problem at the bottom of most of Obama's current troubles, healthcare.

“We don’t believe in handouts. We don’t think anyone should get a free ride,” Michelle Obama said in a speech at the Sheraton Hotel and Towers, adding “But we also understand one simple principle ... 'There but for the grace of God go I,' that in the blink of an eye, any of us, any of us,could be faced with a terrible diagnosis. Any of us could be injured in a horrible accident. Any of us could lose the job we count on to support our family, any of us.”

After the disappointing launch of the Obamacare site, Dr. Charles Krauthammer pointed out, "It is clear that one of the reasons that the roll-out was such a disaster is that the whole damn thing was done with no bid." His statement backs up another: "Federal officials considered only one firm to design the Obamacare health insurance exchange website that has performed abysmally since its Oct. 1 debut."

If this controversy continues to grow, it certainly may be easier for Michelle to change her dress than to remove her face from Obamacare's hen house. Dick Cheney was never successful at it when his tie to Halliburton was the issue; however, Halliburton was, at least, an American company.