Volunteer dentists and hygienists performed about 5,400 services at the LA Sports Arena. (Roger Smith/CHCF Center for Health Reporting)

This piece was originally published in the Los Angeles Daily News.

The promise, and the limits, of healthcare reform were on full display for four days ending Nov. 3 at the Los Angeles Sports Arena.

As they have for several years, hundreds of volunteer medical, dental and vision professionals set up shop in trailers or on phalanxes of tables on the floor of the cavernous hall just south of downtown. This year they treated almost 4,000 people, free. The patients had waited in long lines earlier in the week to receive wrist bands that guaranteed admission. Once inside, they explained their needs to counselors and headed off for treatments they had postponed for months, or years.

The patients also were pushed to sign up for insurance under Covered California, the state-run exchange, or for Medi-Cal, which next year will likely add 400,000 people to its rolls under the Affordable Care Act.

The free clinic organizer, Los Angeles-based nonprofit Care Harbor, and dozens of other sponsors, including L.A. Care Health Plan, UCLA, the Tzu Chi Medical Foundation, and Los Angeles County Supervisor Mark Ridley-Thomas, hope that healthcare reform will reduce the need for such massive volunteer efforts.

“If we do it right, you won’t see me here for the next five years,” said Dr. Patrick Dowling, chairman of the Dept. of Family Medicine at UCLA, at an opening press conference.

But as the clinic triage continued, the underlying truth became apparent.

“We will be here” next year, said Howard Kahn, chief executive of the public health plan L.A. Care, a main sponsor of the clinic.

Even with full implementation of Obamacare in California, the queues for free services will be unabated.

The reason: up to 4 million Californians, including 1 million in Los Angeles County, will still not be covered by 2019, according to a UC Berkeley study. About 1 million in the state will not be eligible because they are undocumented immigrants. The remainder will be eligible for Medi-Cal or Covered California subsidies but will be unaware of how to qualify, or will find the cost of private insurance in the exchanges prohibitive.

Perhaps more importantly, dental and vision insurance for adults are not included under Obamacare’s mandate. At present, dental services also are not available to adults under Medi-Cal, although legislation recently signed by Gov. Brown means that a variety of diagnostic, preventative and restorative dental treatments will be available under the program by next May.

Over half the patients on the floor of the Sports Arena were seeking dental help.

Mbai Ceesay, 46, who had obtained a wristband for the Thursday clinic, lined up outside the Sports Arena to see a counselor, and hopefully, a dentist.

“Dental is big,” he said. “You can’t get it compared to medical.” He said he had waited a year to get a cavity filled, and badly needed some bridge work as well.

Fortunately, Ceesay did not have a dental emergency. When a tooth goes bad the intense pain often results in a trip to the emergency room. Unless a dentist is present, doctors are usually limited to stabilizing the symptoms with antibiotics and painkillers.

The California Dental Assn. says that, on average, each dentist in California provides more than $15,000 in pro bono work each year. The CDA Foundation sponsors two free clinics a year in the state. The latest one in San Jose served 2,202 patients over two days.

But volunteer work “is not a substitute for a system of dental care in California,” said CDA manager of legislative affairs Nicette Short in a phone interview. In addition to pushing for the new adult Medi-Cal services, the CDA advocates for the establishment of a state dental director who could coordinate care and more efficiently tap federal resources.

In the meantime, adults flock to the clinics. Based on last year’s numbers, Care Harbor founder Don Manelli estimated that the Sports Arena volunteers would perform 6,000 medical services, 5,400 dental services, provide 1,300 new pairs of eyeglasses, and perhaps do a dozen eye surgeries. Many would get referrals for follow-ups, and preventive care guidance.

Overall, Manelli said, the services would be worth about $4 million. Care Harbor and its partners raised about $300,000 to put on the clinic, which relied on 3,500 volunteers.

As for Ceesay, he got his dental appointment Thursday morning. As he entered the Sports Arena floor, he waved his appointment card, and smiled.