By Lydia X. McCoy of the Knoxville News Sentinel

After Anita Beets retired from teaching with Knox County Schools in 2008, it didn’t take long for her to want to return to the classroom.

A year later, she returned to Sequoyah Elementary, the school where she had been a kindergarten teacher, as a substitute.

Beets said she subs at the school an average of two to three times per week.

“I missed the kids. I missed the community. I missed the classroom and decided that I would start back slowly,” she said. “So I started back slowly, subbing a little here and a little there, and then just found that I just love it.”

Beets is one of the district’s substitutes who could benefit from a differential pay structure being implemented by the school system beginning Feb. 1.

This week, school officials announced the system will be giving differential pay to substitutes who are licensed teachers and to teachers who have retired from the school system — which means a substitute could earn up to $164 per day with additional differential pay.

Substitutes currently are paid $68 per day for certified positions.

The school system has added five more schools to the list of “high needs” schools that are eligible for the differential pay and has increased the daily cost for instructional assistants at the district’s alternative schools. So effective Feb. 1, differential pay will be available at 33 schools.

“We want to really address the issue of making sure we have a great educator available to substitute when a teacher is absent,” said Schools Superintendent Jim McIntyre. “We’re creating some incentives within the financial structure of our substitute teacher pay program to encourage really highly qualified, expert educators to take advantage of the opportunities to be in our classrooms and teach with us.”

Beets said she was unaware of the differential, but she thought it was good that the district was looking at ways to increase the pool of qualified substitutes.

“I think it’s important that they keep looking at different strategies, yes, to pull more people in to help out. I know what it’s like when you’re sick ... You need to know you have a responsible person there,” she said. “The sub pool, from what I understand, is down quite a bit. Schools are having problems, and I think anything that they can try and come up with incentives to get more people in there — responsible people that want to be there — I think is a great idea.”

Beets said that while the extra dollars in her pocket wouldn’t be a pull for her, she knows the pay could help others.

“I love being in the classroom — that’s the reason I’m going back. That would be wonderful if they paid certified teachers a little more than other subs, but the other subs work as hard as we do,” she said.

The school system implemented its first set of strategies in November — differential pay of $25 for substitutes who work at schools with a rate of unfilled teacher absences of 15 percent or more and an additional $20 per day for substitutes who work on Mondays and Fridays at 28 — soon to be increased to 33 — of the district’s schools.

The changes have made a difference, according to school officials.

“It’s had a positive impact, and we’ve seen increases both in terms of fill rates at those schools and particularly the fill rates on Mondays and Fridays, which were the days where we had the lowest fill rates for substitute teachers covering teacher absences,” McIntyre said. “We’ve also seen a slight expansion of the overall pool of substitute teachers that are taking advantage of those opportunities. So we feel like those strategies are working.”

The financial strategies came as recommendations from a 14-member committee convened by Kathy Sims, the school system’s chief human resources officer, to look at the issues around increasing the district’s substitute teaching pool.

The committee was created after school officials did an analysis of teacher absences and substitutes. The study showed that 28 of the district’s schools had a 15 percent or higher rate of unfilled teacher absences.

Some of the factors for those absences going unfilled, according to findings from the committee, included required professional development days during the year on designated school days, last-minute calls from employees requesting a substitute and new federal guidelines based on the Affordable Care Act, which mandate health care benefits be provided if a substitute works more than a certain number of hours.

As a result of the Affordable Care Act requirement, the school system has restricted substitutes to working 120 hours per month.

Since implementing differential pay at those 28 schools and on Mondays and Fridays, school officials said they are seeing improvements.

According to school system data, the schools that received differential pay before Nov. 1 had only a 63 percent fill rate on Mondays and Fridays. Afterward, those numbers rose to 77.9 percent on Mondays and 78.3 percent on Fridays, according to officials.

At schools with no differential pay, the fill rates remained the same — about 84 percent on Mondays. That percentage decreased slightly on Fridays — from 82.6 percent before Nov. 1 to 79.3 percent after.

Susan Sprinkle has been a substitute teacher with the school system since 2010, retiring the year before from the University of Tennessee’s office of printing. She has subbed at several schools in the district and subs often at Carter Middle School — one of the schools where substitutes receive differential pay.

Sprinkle said she likes that the district is looking at ways to increase its substitute pool, but differential pay at only a few schools might not be the best route.

“I think it’s a good strategy, but you have more than these 28 schools that are suffering for substitutes,” Sprinkle said. “As far as Carter Middle School right now, they’re getting some subs that they do not know how they’re going to focus with the children, how they’re going to focus with the teaching staff.”

She said it’s been a different situation at the school since the district started the differential pay, and some substitutes have chosen the school because of the higher pay.

“If you don’t love the kids and want to help them learn, you shouldn’t be doing it, because it’s not a baby-sitting service,” she said. “I don’t consider it a baby-sitting job. I consider it a job to help them learn to further their education. Everybody doesn’t look at it that way.”