The president will spend five days in the Coachella Valley, having arrived Friday.

President Barack Obama waves while exiting Air Force One at Palm Springs International Airport on Feb. 12, 2016. Patch photo by Renee Schiavone.

--

PALM SPRINGS, CA- President Barack Obama landed in Palm Springs Friday to begin a five-day visit to the Coachella Valley, culminating with a summit of Asian leaders at Sunnylands resort.

Air Force One landed just after 11:30 a.m. at Palm Springs International Airport, after being diverted briefly to fly over mountainous terrain that the President newly designated as national monuments.

On hand to meet Obama were Palm Springs Mayor Robert Moon and Dana Hobart, mayor of Rancho Mirage.

The motorcade left the airport and encountered crowds of onlookers. At least one person held up a sign that read “the ACA is not Affordable,” a reference to the Affordable Care Act, also known as “Obamacare.”

The motorcade was seen entering Porcupine Creek Golf Club in Rancho Mirage, a property owned by Oracle CEO Larry Ellison.

Obama’s visit to the valley follows his busy Thursday agenda, which included two Los Angeles fundraisers and an appearance on “The Ellen DeGeneres Show.”

Obama will be joined by Secretary of State John Kerry at Sunnylands for the gathering on Monday and Tuesday of leaders from the Association of Southeast Asian Nations. The summit is aimed at strengthening the new U.S.- ASEAN strategic partnership, forged last November during a presidential trip to Malaysia.

“This unprecedented gathering -- the first hosted by the United States with the ASEAN leaders -- builds on the deeper partnership that the United States has forged with ASEAN since 2009 and will further advance the Administration’s rebalance to Asia and the Pacific,” according to a White House statement.

The presidential visit also is expected to draw scores of protesters expressing their views on a variety of issues.

Road closures scheduled through 4 p.m. Tuesday include:

-- Kirk Douglas Way, between Ramon and El Cielo roads,

-- Airport Center Drive at Kirk Douglas Way.

The public can access Palm Springs International Airport via the main entrance at the intersection of Tahquitz Canyon Way and El Cielo Road.

— City News Service.