'It was really just market momentum'

Since its founding in 2007, Pro1 has grown to become one of the largest manufacturers of thermostats in the nation.

And thanks to a coordinated effort of businesses in Boulder County, Pro1 is looking to expand that market share with an "Internet of Things" technology that would compete with the likes of new arrivals such as Nest.

Pro1, which is headquartered in Springfield, Mo., but bases its management office in Boulder, recently launched the T855i WiFi Thermostat, the first in a planned line of thermostats that can be controlled by a mobile device.

"(Communicating thermostats) are not a new technology," said Jeff Edgar, Pro1's chief executive officer. "Having WiFi as widespread as it is now, it was really just market momentum."

To develop the new thermostat Pro1 enlisted the assistance of Lafayette-based Cardinal Peak to apply its digital and mobile engineering services and Norcross, Ga.-based Comverge to apply its IntelliSource software platform for two-way communications and analytics.

"It seems to me this is a super-compelling market opportunity; there's a lot of tech press right now about the Internet of Things and, honestly, most of it is all hype and almost no substance," Howdy Pierce, co-CEO and founder of Cardinal Peak, said, referencing the classification of everyday objects that have network connectivity.

"And here's a case where it's almost the complete reverse, where there's a large opportunity to save energy in the country and make people's lives better."

The broader "smart thermostat" market is poised for significant growth in the next decade, according to a report released Dec. 19 by Boulder-based Navigant Research.

Annual global sales for communicating and smart thermostats and associated software and services are projected to be $2.3 billion in 2023, according to Navigant. The sector is expected to post $146.9 million in sales this year.

"It's not just end users that are interested in smart thermostat technologies," Lauren Callaway, research analyst with Navigant Research, said in a press release announcing the data. "Today, adoption is increasing in several different customer segments, as utilities, energy retailers, small businesses, and homeowners realize the value in using these devices to manage their energy use and save money."

The latter could be the sweet spot for Pro1, which sells to professional contractors in the heating and cooling trade, Edgar said.

About 80 percent of thermostats are professionally installed, he said.

That market focus is a distinguishing factor from new players such as the Google-owned Nest.

"The big picture is Nest has brought an extreme awareness to our product category, probably more so than any of the Internet of Things devices," Edgar said.

Pro1, however, doesn't consider Nest to be a core competitor, Edgar said, noting Nest is sold at retail and a comparably premium price.

Pro1's focus remains on continuing its growth trajectory — a pace that is about seven times that of the overall market, Edgar said.

Citing that the company is privately held, Edgar declined to provide financial information, including annual sales gains.

"We sell well over 1 million thermostats every year," he said.

Alicia Wallace: 303-473-1332, wallacea@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/dc_alicia