A Cañon City man was arrested Thursday on suspicion of leaving the scene of an accident that occurred Wednesday night in a residential neighborhood.

Travis Williams, 28, was arrested on suspicion of criminal mischief; leaving the scene of an accident involving injury; reckless driving; leaving the scene of an accident involving property damage; leaving the scene after striking unattended property; and reckless endangerment following a one-car accident at Seventh Street and Mystic Avenue.

According to an application for the arrest warrant, Cañon City police officers were dispatched on a report of a rollover accident at 11:22 p.m. Upon arrival, officers found a Red Chevrolet Silverado extended-cab truck that had rolled onto its driver side with a significant amount of front and rear damage. Inside the vehicle, officers observed a green rifle with a scope and a bi-pod located in the back seat, as well as what appeared to be a Glock pistol in the front driver's seat in a holster.

Officers found the truck abandoned, but later contacted Matt Garoutte, 25, Williams' roommate, who reportedly admitted that he was the passenger in the vehicle and Williams was the driver. Officers were unable to locate Williams that night.

Advertisement

Williams reportedly lost control of the vehicle, and the rear of the truck broke lose and drifted to the west. He reportedly overcorrected and turned to the east side of the street and drove head-on into a wooden street light pole. The light pole was severed from its base and the truck was spun around about 180 degrees, ending up facing south. As the truck spun around and jumped the curb it flipped onto the driver side. The truck came to rest immediately next to a large tree located on North Seventh Street. Damage was reported to a fence, mailbox and vehicle at a nearby property.

A receipt from a local bar documented that Williams and Garoutte shared eight beers and three shots of whiskey prior to the accident. Alcohol involvement is suspected as a contributing factor to the accident but was unable to be proven.