To the Editor:

Re “Panel Urges Screening for Maternal Depression” (front page, Jan. 27):

The United States Preventive Services Task Force recommendation for maternal depression screening is especially important for low-income families. One in nine poor infants has a mother with severe depression, and more than half live with a mother experiencing some level of depression.

Many low-income mothers with depression, including more than a third with a major depressive disorder, go untreated. Unfortunately, untreated maternal depression hurts children, particularly young children, placing their safety and development at risk.

We need more states to join the nine that, according to a recent study by the National Center for Children in Poverty, already allow a family’s trusted pediatrician to screen for maternal depression using the child’s Medicaid coverage.

Beyond screening, as noted in a recent Center for Law and Social Policy report, new provisions in the Affordable Care Act offer a large-scale opportunity to treat maternal depression so that mothers and children can escape poverty. The task force’s recommendation underlines the urgency of these reforms.

SHEILA SMITH

OLIVIA GOLDEN

New York

The writers are, respectively, director for early childhood at the National Center for Children in Poverty and executive director of the Center for Law and Social Policy.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

To the Editor:

As a mental health counselor providing in-home psychotherapy to pregnant and parenting women, I welcome the new recommendations for depression screening in pregnancy and postpartum issued by the United States Preventive Services Task Force.

They reflect a pressing need to identify the increasing number of mothers who struggle with mood disorders as well as infants and children affected by their mothers’ mental state. It is important to recognize, however, that screening alone is an insufficient response to the severity of the mental health problems many new mothers face.

Treatments tailored to the needs, schedules and limited energy of those recovering from birth and learning to care for a newborn are woefully lacking. Much is not reimbursed by insurance. The sizable work force of trained clinicians and peer counselors necessary to improve outcomes for women and children does not yet exist.

Until we combine screening with a commitment to provide essential, time-sensitive services, we run the risk of continuing to fail mothers and children.

LISA McELANEY

Newtonville, Mass.

The writer is a mental health clinician at the Center for Early Relationship Support, Jewish Family and Children’s Service of Greater Boston.