Topics: aol_on, Breitbart, Budget deal, Donald Trump, Election 2016, house budget deal, Republicans, Rush Limbaugh, Elections News, Media News, News, Politics News

If you want to truly understand why there’s a good chance that Donald Trump could win the Republican nomination, over the (metaphorical) dead bodies of many GOP establishment types that tried to get in his way, look no further than the right-wing media reaction to the budget agreement reached between by House Republicans. Even though Republicans got their most important item agenda accomplished — tax breaks, at the expense of inflating that deficit they only pretend to care about — right-wing media is acting like a bunch of quisling Republicans bowed to President Barack Obama’s demands to institute sharia law while passing single-payer health care.

Republicans caved on a bunch of right-wing nut agenda items that they were never going to get in the first place, especially the demand to ban Medicaid patients from going to Planned Parenthood or making the visa process unnecessarily lengthy for Syrians refugees. Nor did they go through the pointless government shutdown drama that has become nearly routine under the Obama administration.

The conservative base, which is swiftly abandoning any pretense of ideological motivation in favor of simply identifying as the asshole contingent, loves these shutdown dramas, possibly more than they love the idea of defunding Planned Parenthood or holding Syrian families in refugee camps indefinitely. The idea of blackmailing the president with this threat in an effort to bully him into submission is so appealing that it hardly matters that it doesn’t work. But, as is increasingly true on a number of fronts, throwing red meat to the conservative base means alienating the entire rest of the country, and so Republican congressmen, who probably just want to go home and enjoy Christmas with their families, took a pass this time.

So now the right wing media is exploding in rage. Check out, for instance, the dog pile of outrage pouring out of Breitbart’s “Big Government” vertical:

The Washington Times posted a photo of Obama laughing, a huge red button for their conservative leadership, with the headline, “White House declares total victory over GOP in budget battle.”

On Thursday, Rush Limbaugh went off on a huge rant denouncing congressional Republicans:

There was never a battle. None of this was opposed. The Republican Party didn’t stand up to any of it, and the die has been cast for a long time on this. I know many of you are dispirited, depressed, angry, combination of all of that. But, folks, there was no other way this could go. Because two years ago when the Republican Party declared they would never do anything that would shut down the government and they would not impeach Obama, there were no obstacles in Obama’s way and there were no obstacles in the way of the Democrat Party.

“The reason they did that is because for some inexplicable reason,” he continues, “they are literally paranoid and scared to death of even being accused of doing something that would shut down the government.”

He goes on to insinuate that the Republicans are somehow being paid off to sell the voter base down the river, which is, of course, full blown nonsense. You don’t need to be paid off by some shadowy figures in order to see that it’s a bad idea to shut down the federal government in an impotent attempt to cut some women off from their birth control, especially when the majority of Americans continue to support that birth control funding, even in the face of a full blown national hysteria over hoax videos making false allegations that Planned Parenthood sells “baby parts”.