Topics: From the Wires, Entertainment News, News

YANKTON, S.D. (AP) — A South Dakota city with fewer than 15,000 residents is continuing to establish itself as an international archery powerhouse.

Yankton, a Missouri River community in the state’s southeast corner, recently beat out Mexico City (population 8.8 million) in its bid to host the 2015 World Youth Championships. The weeklong event next June will draw some 600 competitors from more than 60 countries to the National Field Archery Association center.

Like many of the archery centers popping up around the U.S., the NFAA Easton Yankton Archery Complex is riding a wave of popularity boosted by a string of bow-friendly Hollywood movies. USA Archery has seen a flood of kids picking up bows and arrows looking to emulate their heroes from the “The Hunger Games,” ”Brave,” ”The Avengers” and “The Lord of the Rings” series.

“We’ve had some really good shots in the arm there, which is just great exposure,” said Bruce Cull, the association’s president and manager of the Yankton complex.

Individual memberships to USA Archery, the sport’s governing body in the country, have jumped from about 4,700 in 2011 to nearly 13,000 as of May 31. And participation at national events has nearly doubled from just shy of 2,400 in 2011 to more than 4,400 in 2013, and USA Archery expects the trend to continue when this year’s numbers are finalized.

Olympic medalist Khatuna Lorig, who is training in Chula Vista, California, for the 2016 Rio de Janeiro summer games, said archery is a terrific family activity.

“They can shoot and have fun without breaking bones,” she said. “It’s a safe sport, and it gives you mental strength, it gives you physical strength and keeps you in shape.”

In 2012, Lorig spent 15 days training actress Jennifer Lawrence for her role in the blockbuster movie “The Hunger Games.” The Olympian said she never expected the movie would become such a phenomenon, and the fictional bow-and-arrow-toting heroine Katniss Everdeen helped give archery a certain cachet with kids.