LOCAL

Elected leaders downplay proposal to take over local power franchise

by dennis darrow the pueblo chieftain

Black Hills Energy disputes a claim that Pueblo’s purchase of its local franchise would bring relief from high electricity rates and boost job recruitment.

The proposed takeover is part of the recently disclosed White Paper prepared by Pueblo County manager Greg Severance, who advises the area’s mostly Democratic state, county and local lawmakers on economic development and transportation initiatives.

The same document also calls for sweeping changes in Pueblo’s half-cent sales tax fund for job creation.

“From our perspective, municipalization is likely to be very expensive and complex and time consuming,” Black Hills spokesman Bret Jones said when asked about the White Paper proposal.

Current rates might be even higher if not for Black Hills’ expertise during a period when the community needed to build a non-coal power plant, add renewable energy and make other system upgrades, he said.

“In every case, we’ve worked through the process with the Public Utilities Commission to identify the least-cost option and the best interests of our customers,” Jones said. The three-member PUC oversees Black Hills and Xcel Energy’s local franchises.

Puebloans in 2010 gave Black Hills their vote of confidence, approving a 20-year franchise agreement by a 2-1 margin. Five years earlier in 2005, local voters rejected a municipalization proposal by a margin of 74 percent to 26 percent.

The new focus on municipalization stems in part from talks between Pueblo County Commissioner Terry Hart, Pueblo City Council member Chris Nicoll and Pueblo state Rep. Leroy Garcia, who are participants in the Pueblo Re-volt group that has spoken out against Black Hills.

Others in the group include Sister Nancy Crafton of El Centro De Los Pobres, Posada Director Anne Stattelman, solar advocate Paul Huber and Sierra Club representative Ross Vincent.

Hart said he has consulted with Severance about Black Hills and the task force’s work but that he was unaware of the White Paper’s existence until a couple of weeks ago.

Hart said he does not support the municipalization proposal without further study,

In the task force meetings, “the ‘m’ word (‘m’ for municipalization) has been used a few times but it’s one of those things none of us really understand,” Hart said. It could turn out that the move could hike customer costs, he said.

Nicoll said he’s far from ready to support municipalization.

“I think there is a lot of information we have to research to make that statement,” Nicoll said.

One early idea floated by some Black Hills critics is for the city to help finance any purchase by tapping the city’s $40 million in half-cent fund reserves, an idea he does not support, Nicoll said. The idea was not included in the White Paper.

In 2005, a consultant hired by the city estimated the value of the Pueblo franchise — then operated by Aquila and void of many of today’s improvements — at $140 million or more. Others termed the estimate too low.

The franchise also serves Canon City, Rocky Ford and several other cities. Leaders of those communities spoke out against the 2005 municipalization proposal.

Next month, the Re-volt group is set to travel to Boulder to learn more about that city’s efforts to purchase its Xcel Energy electricity franchise, Hart said. Boulder wants the franchise because it wants more green energy and it is willing to pay additional costs, if necessary

Earlier this summer, Pueblo state Sen. George Rivera, a Republican, accused Democrats of criticizing Black Hills as an election-year move to divert attention from their support of the anti-coal and renewable energy push started under former Gov. Bill Ritter, a Democrat.

The chain of events that followed led to today’s higher bills, Rivera said. Xcel stopped supplying power to Pueblo in part to save its coal plants for its customers. To fill the void, the state ordered the building of the Black Hills plant.

An additional rate hike looms as Black Hills seeks to recover costs of a wind farm in Huerfano County, Rivera said.

Other elected leaders critical of Black Hills but not part of the task force are Pueblo County Commissioner Liane “Buffie” McFadyen and former Pueblo City Council member Chris Kaufman, who has talked about possible municipalization.

Nicoll, who has criticized Kaufman for alleged secret talks with other council members on some of the half-cent fund changes proposed in the White Paper, said he is not aware of any secret talks or any open meetings violations surrounding the Black Hills proposal.

In the 2010 vote on the Black Hills franchise, Puebloans went into the election aware of the need for rate hikes to build the new power plant and add renewable energy power sources.

The power plant project was announced in 2008.

Renewal energy standards were approved by Colorado voters in 2004 by a 53 percent to 47 percent margin. Pueblo County voters opposed the standards by a 57 percent to 43 percent margin.