Supreme Court of the United States Getty Images

The U.S. Supreme Court just put its stamp of approval on the Obama administration’s health-care reform, and a Boston law professor thinks he knows what will happen next.

In his 2014 study, Northeastern University law professor Daniel Austin dug into personal bankruptcy filings to figure out what happened after Massachusetts lawmakers made health insurance mandatory in 2005.

His findings? Massachusetts residents who file for bankruptcy protection these days have way less medical debt compared to the rest of the country. The typical Massachusetts person or couple who filed in 2013 had $3,041 in medical debt, while people everywhere else had an average of $8,594 in medical debt.

In fact, he found that Massachusetts is the only state where medical debt isn’t the leading cause of personal bankruptcy. (A loss of income is the No. 1 reason, he found.)

So what does Prof. Austin think will happen with mandatory health care in all 50 states? Could the system designed to give people access to affordable health insurance make families more financially stable and keep them out of bankruptcy?

“It absolutely should show a reduction in bankruptcies [filed] due to medical debt,” Prof. Austin said in an interview Tuesday.

Plenty of studies have pinpointed medical debt as the No. 1 reason why people turn to bankruptcy for a fresh start. In rallying for health-care reform in his 2009 State of the Union address, President Barack Obama said that 62.1% of consumer bankruptcies are medical bankruptcies, citing a study Sen. Elizabeth Warren (D., Mass.) co-wrote as a Harvard law professor.

Prof. Austin’s study found the percentage of medical bankruptcies to be far smaller. Overall, 18% to 25% of personal bankruptcies filed in the U.S. were prompted by medical debt.

That is, except in Massachusetts. There, he found that 3% to 9% of bankruptcy cases were filed because of medical debt.

Based on his study, Prof. Austin said it wouldn’t be a stretch to say that Massachusetts health-care reform is why the number of Massachusetts residents who file for bankruptcy is falling faster than the rest of the country. (The number of people who file for bankruptcy has been falling for a couple of years now, thanks to an improving U.S. economy and other ivory tower theories.)

For his study, Prof. Austin evaluated 5,400 of bankruptcy cases filed between 2005 and 2013 to determine what kind of debt people have at the time of the filing. Bankruptcy law requires people to list all of the debt they owe—including how much they owe and to whom—when they file. He also relied on roughly 380 survey responses from lawyer and bankrupt individuals.

Write to Katy Stech at katy.stech@wsj.com. Follow her on Twitter at @KatyStech