Photo

When Republicans recaptured the Senate last fall, Orrin G. Hatch of Utah became chairman of the Finance Committee overseeing the federal tax code. As the chamber’s longest-serving Republican, Mr. Hatch, 80, is also Senate president pro tempore — third in the line of presidential succession after the vice president and the speaker of the House.

As Republicans struggled to pass a Homeland Security budget on Friday, Mr. Hatch sat down to discuss taxes, trade and the 2016 race for president. What follows is an edited transcript of the conversation.

Q: If something as vital as Homeland Security can’t get funded in an orderly manner, how could you ever dream to get something as difficult as tax reform through the Congress?

HATCH: I think it will get funded. But tax reform is very difficult. It took three years to do the ’86 bill. It’s much more difficult today than it was then. There’s much more bitterness and partisanship. We’ve got to overcome those things. I’m going to do everything I can to overcome them.

Q: Dave Camp, the former chairman of House Ways and Means, last year laid out a tax reform proposal. Does that look to you like a decent road map?

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

HATCH: There were some very good concepts in that bill — a revenue neutral bill that would’ve put us on a path towards balancing the budget. The consumption tax does appeal to me, because you determine how much you pay by what you buy. If you’re going to buy a Cadillac, you’re going to pay more in taxes. The problem with the consumption tax is that it leads to value-added taxes that can be easily added on by a profligate Congress.

It’s probably going to take longer than two years. The president said he’s interested in a business tax bill. That’s easy to say. I’ve suggested to them, “send us up a bill that you believe will solve that problem.” So far, nothing.

Q: The administration’s corporate tax proposal for mandatory repatriation of overseas profits with the taxes being used for infrastructure — is that dead?

HATCH: It’s pretty well dead. That’s a one-time shot. That’s not the way to try and solve our problems. He wants to tax the monies again that have already been taxed in the foreign countries in order to bring them back. The corporate world’s not stupid. They’re not going to do that. And neither are we.

Q: How close are you to a deal with Ron Wyden on trade promotion authority?

HATCH: We have given him transparency language and a number of other things. Some of the demands that are being made are demands that we can’t meet. What I’m not for is making trade promotion authority something that anybody can stop. If you start playing around with that, no country in the world’s going to want to deal with us.

Video

Q: Elizabeth Warren’s got a lot of clout in the Democratic caucus. Do you think she, and the populists on your side who don’t like trade, have enough juice to stop the Trans-Pacific deal?

HATCH: No, I don’t. If we have some reasonable Democrats who understand that we need to engage in free trade, we’ll have enough.

Q: If the Supreme Court in King v. Burwell strikes down those federal subsidies, what are you going to do for those residents of Utah who signed up for health coverage on the belief that they’re going to get federal subsidies?

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

HATCH: We’re going to have to have an approach that will take care of that. It’s not going to be some simple approach that just leads us into more spending, costs, taxes, bureaucratic ensnarlments. I’ve been in meetings all week on, “How do we resolve this problem?” The Democrats are going to just say, “Let’s just keep Obamacare going.” Obamacare is going to bankrupt the country. Once people get hooked on it, the only answer is to move this country to socialism. If anybody really believes that socialism’s a better system than our free market system, they’re nuts.

Q: As a former chairman of the Judiciary Committee, do you agree with Eric Holder that there should be a lower standard of proof in civil rights cases given how difficult it’s been to achieve prosecutions in cases like Trayvon Martin’s?

HATCH: No. Our laws are pretty tough. I don’t think you need to lower the bar. It’s not difficult to bring civil rights cases. But you have to have the facts on your side. They didn’t have any real facts on their side under the circumstances.

Q: You were one of the young hotheads in the Republican caucus. Now I read in National Review about the G.O.P.’s “Orrin Hatch Problem” — how you’ve become a go-along, get-along moderate. How did that happen?

HATCH: It’s funny, they come to me when they really get in trouble. I think a lot of it is being reasonable and not taking these positions that are really too far to the right. I don’t think anybody can sincerely say that Orrin Hatch has left the conservative cause. But we’ve got a small segment — they’re not really Republicans, they’re independents who are so far to the right that they don’t see anything good in working with the people on the left at all.

Q: At CPAC yesterday, Ted Cruz said, “the real divide is not between Democrats and Republicans. It’s between career politicians in Washington and the people who those career politicians ignore.” Is he right?

HATCH: That’s kind of a cliché. I don’t think anybody wants to be a career politician. I’ve never considered this a job. I didn’t need this. I think if you ask him directly, “Does that mean Orrin Hatch?” — if he says, “Yes,” I’d say, “Tough. Tough crap, buddy.”

Q: You have three Senate colleagues running for president — Marco Rubio, Rand Paul, Ted Cruz. Would all three be outstanding presidents who you’d be delighted to be your party’s nominee?

HATCH: I don’t think that senators have much chance of running for president. The reason is, if they’re doing their job, they can’t run. If they don’t do their job, then that’ll be used against them. We have at least five really outstanding governors. Any one of them would make a better president than what we have right now, or what the Democrats are likely to put up in 2016.