Funds on deposit in Lubbock banks increased by nearly $300 million between July 2012 and June 2013, according to figures compiled by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corp.

The growth in deposits was just one story amid several in a year that saw the Hub City gain a bank headquarters, a longtime market leader change names and a second Panhandle-based institution poke a toe in the market.

The Lubbock area’s 28 banks had combined deposits of nearly $6.77 billion, a 4.46 percent increase from $6.47 billion on June 30, 2012, according to the FDIC data, which includes banks in Crosby and Lynn counties.

Here are some of the industry highlights through the year:

■ American State Bank changed its name to Prosperity Bank in July 2012, as Lubbock’s third-largest bank merged with the Houston-based institution.

■ Centennial Bank arose from the January 2013 merger of Plainview-based HCSB and Slaton’s former Citizens Bank, and moved the bank’s headquarters from Plainview to Lubbock.

■ American National Bank, a branch of Amarillo National Bank, opened last year at 5905 82nd St. Before the branch opened, Amarillo National’s most visible presence was in an ATM network in Walgreens pharmacies.

Statistically, the city’s nine largest institutions remained in the same order they were in at the mid-2012 report. In 2012, Citizens Bank was the 10th-largest bank in the market.

PlainsCapital, City Bank and Prosperity held the first second and third spots for the seventh consecutive year. The three represent just over 49 percent of the market.

California-based Wells Fargo remains the fourth-largest bank in the market, followed by Lubbock National Bank and FirstBank & Trust.

Of the 25 banks that carried over from 2012’s list, 20 increased their funds on deposit, led by Happy State Bank’s 374 percent rise.

The Amarillo-based bank ranked 26th in the market in June 2012 with about $8.9 million after only five months in town. It grew by about $33 million in deposits over the next 12 months and now is ranked 20th of the 28 banks.

Nine other banks posted double-digit percentage increases in funds on deposit in the June 2013 report.

David Seim, Happy State’s Lubbock market chairman, said the bank, which will celebrate its second anniversary in the Hub City next month, is continuing to grow rapidly. In addition to the ongoing increase in funds on deposit, he said, the local operation’s loan volume has already passed the $200 million mark.

And, he said, he’s confident the growth will continue, especially with the early growth of the oil and gas sector locally.

“I’m seeing trucks carrying oil field equipment or material something related to the industry,” he said. “I don’t remember seeing that before.”

Even with 28 players in the market, Seim said, it’s hard to consider Lubbock “overbanked.”

“There are a lot of banks, but most of them are community banks — banks that lend in the community,” Seim said. “When banks generate loans, jobs are being created.”

Les Eubank, PlainsCapital Bank’s Lubbock president, says he sees an improving local economy with customers still cautious about the future.

And, he said, that should mean another strong year for bank deposits.

“People are still a little afraid of the markets,” Eubank said.

Eubank said he, like most Lubbock bankers, would like to see a stronger loan demand.

While lending is improving, he said, there’s still apprehension in the market about long-term uncertainties — such as taxes, Obamacare, and the health of the economy — that’s keeping businesses from incurring long-term debt.

“If people had a better feel for the economy as a whole, they would be going in and making capital investments. It will just take time for our borrowers to see that,” he said.

Expansion helped Peoples Bank, ranked as the seventh largest in the market, muster an increase in deposits of nearly 15 percent, said Larry Allen, the bank’s chairman of the board and chief executive officer.

“We opened a new branch in Slaton last year, and we opened a new branch in Post,” Allen said, adding that the bank was also fortunate “to hire some great people with good relationships in other institutions.”

“In the banking world, people bank with people, not institutions,” Allen explained.

Allen also noted the growing presence of “oil money” in the local economy coming from leases in the region.

At the same time, he said, the pace of borrowing has slowed, including in the agricultural sector, which Allen said makes up about half of Peoples’ loan portfolio.

“It was a good year for some, but not others,” Allen said. “It depended on where you were and how much rain you got.”

Barry Orr, chairman and chief executive officer of FirstBank & Trust, said his institution’s growth in the last year was about an aggressive approach to retail banking, buttressed by FirstBank’s new cashback checking product.

“It’s received widespread acceptance in the community,” Orr said.

FirstBank’s 15 percent boost in funds on deposit came from “a nice blend of new people moving into the community and people migrating from the money center banks,” Orr said.

In the coming year, Orr explained, FirstBank will reach toward the city’s north and northwest growth corridor with the construction of a new office at 19th Street and Milwaukee Avenue.

Greg Jones, Lubbock executive vice president at Prosperity Bank, said the local operation has experienced some runoff in deposits since the merger was finalized, but the shift is about to stabilize.

“We’re running the bank like we always have,” Jones said, noting that the loss of deposits is a mix of brokered deposits and some customers deciding to change banks.

Jones said some individuals are moving money out of banks and back into the stock market over disappointment with the low rates banks are having to pay in the current lending environment.

Home mortgages are still an active loan product, Jones said, noting that rates have climbed back from historic lows to interest rates at about 4.25 percent.

“We expect another good year in the housing sector,” Jones said.

Business borrowing remains cautious, he said, noting that he’s especially concerned about what may happen to agricultural support businesses if the drought continues.

While crop insurance will enable the farmers to come out OK with another relatively dry year, the owners of gins, farm implement stores and other supporting businesses don’t have a fall-back if the lack of rain continues.

walt.nett@lubbockonline.com

• 766-8744

Follow Walt on Twitter

@WaltNett_LAJ