Home Headlines Community Life Editorial Sports It Happened Search Contact Us ESPANOL Humble, TX Weather Advertise | Travel Stories | Calendar | Classifieds

Search: in Entire Site Headlines Community Life & Entertainment Editorial Sports It Happened COMMUNITY Houston's fastest-growing Pediatric Urgent Care opens new location Monday, October 12, 2015 NightLight Pediatric Urgent Care has announced it will open an after-hours pediatric urgent care clinic in Webster. Opening day was Tuesday, Sept. 29, making the Webster opening the fifth clinic in its network throughout the Houston area. “Adding the Webster clinic gives NightLight a footprint that covers each quadrant of the Houston metro area, giving parents and their family easy access to after-hours pediatric urgent care in or near where they live,” said Zawadi Bryant, chief operating officer and co-founder of NightLight Pediatric Urgent Care. “Webster and the surrounding communities of Clear Lake, League City, Pasadena, and others now have access to affordable and compassionate pediatric urgent care when their primary physician’s offices are closed.” NightLight is hiring additional pediatricians to support the company’s growth. NightLight also opened clinics in Pearland and Humble within the last 18 months. The company currently employs approximately 50 people and is actively hiring pediatricians and other positions in their five locations. Job announcements and applications can be found at nightlightpediatrics.com/join-the-team.html. The clinic is located at 19325 Gulf Freeway, Suite 170, Webster, Texas 77598, in the BayBrook Passage Shopping Center. Hours of operation are M–F 5-11 p.m., weekends 11a.m.-9 p.m., and holidays from noon-7 p.m. NightLight’s unique service delivery model underscores its partnership with local pediatricians and primary care physicians. Operating exclusively on an after-hours basis, NightLight treats children ages 0-18 with non-emergency illnesses after hours when their primary care physician’s office is closed. The NightLight clinics feature kid-friendly murals and vibrant colorful exam rooms designed specifically to help put kids at ease during their treatments. Services include on-site x-ray capabilities, cryo-treatment of warts; wedge removal of ingrown toenails, along with foreign body removals, and draining of abscesses. These services complement the range of medical illness treatments offered including flu symptoms, colds, fevers, insect bites, and rashes. Trauma care includes stitches, sprains, and splints for broken bones, burns, eye injuries, and animal bites. NightLight offers extended hours during the school year to accommodate increased demand during flu season. Recognized by Inc. Magazine as one of America’s fastest growing companies in 2015 and 2014, finalist for the 2015 Greater Houston Black Chamber of Commerce Pinnacle Award, a 2014 Lone Star Colleges Small Business of the Year finalist, and ranked as one of the 2013 Best Places to Work by the Business Journal of Houston; NightLight Pediatric Urgent Care is the only minority- and woman-owned business of its kind in the market. NightLight’s mission is to provide quality, affordable, compassionate service for infants, children and adolescents. For more information, visit nightlightpediatrics.com. NightLight Pediatric Urgent Care fact sheet NightLight Pediatric Urgent Care's mission is to provide quality, affordable, compassionate service for infants, children and adolescents. NightLight exists to be the first-choice provider for pediatric urgent care when the primary pediatrician is not available. NightLight improves quality of healthcare by coordinating with the primary care physician to care for their patients after-hours, reducing the cost of such health care through an emergency room or other forms of urgent care. Services NightLight is focused exclusively on pediatric care and services, directly with the child’s pediatrician, and is not a competitor or replacement, differentiating it from other urgent care practices. By intentionally not providing well-child checks or vaccinations and maintaining its4 commitment to hours of operation that do not overlap with primary physician offices, NightLight truly partners with the primary care provider in the community and strongly supports the medical home model. When parents visit NightLight, they know their child will be seen by a pediatric-trained practitioner. Always having a pediatric-trained physician on duty, and PCP call in priority are other important and key differences that make NightLight stand out from its competition. NightLight services are offered after hours, on weekends and evenings, when the primary care physician’s office is closed. Once the child is seen at NightLight, a summary report of the visit is provided to the pediatrician as part of the coordination of care with the primary care physician. Services include x-rays, wound care and repair, splinting, management of mild-to-moderate dehydration, fever management and education, breathing treatments, prescriptions plus treatment and education, detailed coordination of care, and wart removal. Locations With the opening of the Webster clinic in September 2015, NightLight now covers each quadrant of the Houston metro area giving families easy access to after-hours pediatric urgent care in or near where they live. Sugar Land - 15551 Southwest Freeway, Sugar Land, TX, 77478, 281-325-1010 Cy-Fair - 19708 Northwest Freeway, Suite 500, Houston, TX, 77065, 713-957-2020 Pearland - 2803 Business Center Drive, Suite 118, Pearland, TX 77584, 281-990-3030 Humble - 20440 Highway 59, Suite 500, Humble, TX 77338, 832-602-4040 Webster - 19325 Gulf Freeway, Suite 170, Webster, TX 77598, 832-992-5050 Fax for all locations: 281-325-1060 Hours of Operation Monday–Friday: 5-11 p.m. Weekends and holidays (September–May): 11 a.m.-9 p.m. Weekends and holidays (June-July): Noon-7 p.m. Awards and Recognition America’s Fastest Growing Companies, Inc. Magazine (2015, 2014) Greater Houston Black Chamber of Commerce Pinnacle Award Finalist (2015) Building Healthy Communities Award, Texas Black Expo (2014) Award for Excellence, Better Business Bureau (2014) Lone Star College System SBDC Small Business of the Year Finalist (2014) Best Place to Work, Houston Business Journal (2013) Goldman Sachs 10K Small Business Alumni (2012) Women in Business Campion of the Year, Houston District SBA (2009) Greater Houston Black Chamber of Commerce Upstart Award Winner (2007) Founders and Subject Matter Expertise Founders: NightLight Pediatric Urgent Care is the brainchild of three uniquely talented professionals: Anastasia Gentles, M.D., FAAP. Shed is the founder and medical director of the practice experienced in pediatric, diagnostic and ambulatory medicine. Zawadi Bryant, co-founder and chief operating officer, holds an MBA in Operations Management. Connie Cazares is co-founder and Certified Medical Assistant. The trio combined their backgrounds and skills to create an affordable and hassle-free alternative to the traditional busy emergency room. The NightLight Webster location is the fifth clinic the trio has opened since helping spur the after-hours pediatric urgent care market when they opened their first location in Sugar Land in 2007. NightLight is the only such business owned by minority women. Anastasia L. Gentles, M.D. FAAP, Co-Founder Subject Matter Expertise: Adolescent Medicine, Primary Care, Emergency Medicine, Pediatric Urgent Care, Affordable Care Act, Provider/Patient Relationship, Insurance Coverage Issues. Dr. Anastasia L. Gentles is the CEO, medical director and co-founder of NightLight Pediatric Urgent Care since 2006. She is a graduate of the University of California, San Diego School of Medicine and completed her residency in Pediatrics at the Children’s Hospital of Oakland in Oakland, CA in June 2000. She moved to Texas in 2001. Her work experience includes Adolescent medicine, primary care and emergency medicine. When not at NightLight, she enjoys reading, eating and running. Zawadi Bryant, MBA, Co-Founder Subject Matter Expertise: Business matters relating to Affordable Care Act, Corporate Expansion and Operations, Pediatric Urgent Care Competition, Business Model Development, Medical Billing. Zawadi Bryant is the COO and co-founder of NightLight Pediatric Urgent Care. She brings many years of business process and marketing experience to NightLight. Bryant received her B.S. and MEng in Operations Research & Industrial Engineering as well as an MBA in Operations Management from Cornell University. After graduation, she began her career at Hewlett- Packard as a Supply Chain Manger. While at HP, she was designated as one of the Top 30 Black Engineers under 30 by the Black Engineer Magazine. Bryant has traveled internationally managing global supply chain projects for Fortune 500 clients. Consuelo “Connie” Cazares, Co-Founder Subject Matter Expertise: Patient Care Relationship, Lab Specialist. Consuelo “Connie” Cazares is the Clinical Specialist and a co-founder of NightLight Pediatric Urgent Care. She is a Certified Medical Assistant with more than 15 years of experience. Cazares graduated from the Texas School of Business and quickly started working in the healthcare field which she realized was her calling. Connie has focused on the pediatric field since graduation. Prior to NightLight, she was a top-ranked Medical Assistant in Texas Children’s Pediatric Associates offices in the Greater Houston area.

© 2013 Ourtribune.com

Advertise with the Tribune and Reach Your Customers!