SIGN UP FOR OUR NEWSLETTER

The numbers of unaccompanied children crossing the Mexican border into the United States continues to spike. October numbers of families crossing the border represents a 150 percent increase over the same month in 2014.

The spike is in contrast to a normal decrease this time of year. “The numbers have started going the other way,” Raul L. Ortiz, acting chief of the Border Patrol for the Rio Grande Valley, told the News & Observer.

SIGN UP FOR OUR NEWSLETTER

The numbers of families crossing the border spiked to a 150 percent increase over last year while the numbers of unaccompanied children crossing spiked to nearly double the previous October numbers.

“We’re clearly seeing a significant uptick,” Marc Rosenblum, deputy director at the Migration Policy Institute in Washington D.C. told the Houston Chronicle, earlier this month. He confirmed that the slump of arrivals earlier this year may have been an anomaly, and that the recent numbers are in line with what trend lines predicted years ago.

The News & Observer reported the spike is being driven by women and children fleeing vicious gangs and rampant sexual violence. The women and children come to the U.S. to seek asylum.

The United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees said the situation in Central America is “a looming refugee crisis.”

Last week alone, the Border Patrol reported the capture of eleven illegal aliens who were being smuggled in a refrigerated truck at the Border Patrol checkpoint located in Falfurrias. Two other groups of illegal aliens were captured in other vehicles that same day. Falfurrias is located 80 miled from the border.

Cartel smugglers strategically push the unaccompanied children and women across the border during the hours of darkness to distract and tie up Border Patrol and other law enforcement officials to clear the way for smuggling operations to continue at other locations.

Bob Price serves as associate editor and senior political news contributor for Breitbart Texas and is a member of the original Breitbart Texas team. Follow him on Twitter @BobPriceBBTX.