Though the Affordable Care Act does institute many regulations for health care policy, states have options they can take to lower premium costs, according to an article on Governing.com.

Those options include changing rate review methods, expanding Medicaid, ending non-compliant plans and taking a hands-off approach to exchange regulation.

Thirty-five states use a "prior approval" method to evaluate premium costs when insurers file premium rates with state insurance commissions. The other 15 states, including Louisiana, use the "file and use" method, which gives states less control over the premiums.

The article also said Medicaid expansion might moderate prices, however, it admits conflicting data means it's too soon to tell how it will actually affect premiums. Louisiana has not expanded Medicaid and has no plans to do so.

Another method could complying with the ACA rather than granting extensions for non-compliant plans, as Louisiana has done. The article said some private insurers are saying rising costs are partly because the risk pool is incomplete as people hold onto their old plans.

The article also suggests taking a hands-off approach to a state-run exchange gives more flexibility to plans for design, networks and payment models. Colorado, for example, runs a state-wide exchange like a clearinghouse by following that model, and Colorado is seeing premium prices fall.

"By not having heavy price hand, because we have 10 different carriers on the individual exchange, then market forces really do apply," Marc Reece, the associate director of the Colorado Association of Health Plans told Governing.com. "I think in the long run that will keep prices down but also allow more innovation on the plan level because they don't have to meet the same box for every plan to be on the exchange."

Louisiana does not run a its own exchange and uses a federally-facilitated marketplace.

Some state leaders are exploring ways Louisiana can lower health care costs in the state.

Sen. Ben Nevers, D-Bogalousa, authored a bill last spring that became the "Louisiana First America Next Freedom and Empowerment Act." The law required the Department of Health and Hospitals to search for ways to lower health care costs and find ways to ensure people with low incomes or pre-existing conditions can still have access to health care.

DHH published the results of its study earlier this month. It said the ACA inhibits the state's ability to work toward the goals set forth in the law.

A statement from DHH said the America Next plan, from which Nevers' law draws its inspiration, is a national plan that would replace the ACA. America Next is a group headed by Gov. Bobby Jindal.

The DHH report said the state could grant a state tax deduction to provide tax equity on health insurance, improve price and quality transparency, enhance the scope of practice for midlevel providers, expand the number of entities who can band together to offer health insurance in Louisiana, and authorize interstate insurance purchasing.

"Many of [the report's] principles highlight health care reforms that DHH and the State are already implementing including wellness initiatives, fraud fighting efforts, Medicaid improvements, and protections for life. The report also outlined several areas of reform the State can explore, including state tax equity on health insurance or allowing the interstate purchasing of insurance. These changes require legislative action," DHH said in a statement.

Nevers was not satisfied with the report and said it "skirts the law." He said he was hoping for more solutions and ways to implement them, rather than a report against the president's health care reform law.

"It just seems to me they talked about this law based on the repeal of ACA," Nevers said. "I'd hope if the governor has a plan for America, he could have a plan for Louisiana."

* * * * * * *

Cole Avery is a legislative and state politics reporter based in Baton Rouge. You can reach him on Twitter @cole_avery1 or email ravery@nola.com.