UPPER GWYNEDD — For the first time in 23 years, Upper Gwynedd Township’s budget for 2014 shows a general purpose tax increase as well as a sewer rate increase.

“We believe that 23 years is an incredible record,” said Township Manager Len Perrone.

The township’s general purpose real estate taxes will increase from .874 mills to 1.874 mills, Perrone said, increasing the average taxpayer’s real estate tax by approximately $142. In a Nov. 25 press release, the township outlined a number of reasons for the increase, such as low real estate sales, the impact of the Affordable Care Act, an increase in general operating costs and the cost of the current level of public safety services. Forty percent of the General Fund Budget goes to the police department, Perrone said. “No other department consumes that much of the budget,” he said. “Clearly, in the General Fund, the police department is the driving force.”

Also playing a role in the increase are federal and state mandates for which the township is not given funding, such as the MS4 stormwater management requirements, the press release stated.

Advertisement

Perrone pointed out that Upper Gwynedd is one of only eight communities in Montgomery County that offers the Homestead Exemption, a statewide tax relief program that reduces the assessed value of all owner-occupied residential properties by $30,000 for tax purposes. The exemption was put into place in 2006.

“We believe that approximately 70 to 75 — maybe even 80 — percent of our taxpayers have enrolled in the program,” Perrone said. Anyone wishing to sign up can find an outline of the process on the township’s website, www.uppergwynedd.org.

Another increase comes in the form of the sewer rates, which will increase by 15 percent in 2014. According to the township’s press release, the increase will result in a residential increase of approximately $48.

The increase in the sewer rates has resulted partly from mandates imposed by the United States Environmental Protection Agency and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection, including an expansion of the township’s wastewater treatment plant. “We are frequently faced with improvements on our sewer system,” Perrone said. Also figuring into the equation are the additional operating costs associated with these mandates, such as manpower and chemicals.

The 2014 budget is available to the public at the township building, located at 1 Parkside Place, and a summary of the budget will be advertised within the next few days, Perrone said. The budget is expected to be approved at a Dec. 23 public meeting.

Follow Victoria Wolk on Twitter at @VictoriaWolk. For breaking news SMS alerts from The Reporter, text LANNEWS to 22700 from your mobile phone. *Msg & data rates may apply. For help, text HELP. To cancel, text STOP.