Traffic signs at Cleveland Avenue and Sixth Street divert eastbound traffic away from construction Thursday in downtown Loveland. ( Steve Stoner / Loveland Reporter-Herald )

Hard hats, orange cones and traffic barriers.

Loveland drivers can expect to see plenty of these and other signs of construction over the next few months.

Ad nauseam, perhaps.

That's because this traffic construction season — due to a perfect storm of grants, flood recovery, annual capital projects and an uptick in private development — is shaping up to be one of the most hectic in years for the city of Loveland.

"When you combine all the projects together, it's a busier year than we've had for a while," city engineer and acting public works director Dave Klockeman said. "It's more like it used to be seven or eight years ago when the economy was more robust."

Traffic Projects

Traffic cones and flaggers direct traffic around an area of road construction Thursday at the intersection of Cleveland Avenue and Eighth Street. (Steve Stoner / Loveland Reporter-Herald)

Dozens of projects are spread across various departments in the city and the private sector, but the city's traffic engineering and operations department — with its 12 employees and 8 seasonal workers — generally has a hand in it all.

The railroad crossings replacement project, for example, is a Burlington Northern Santa Fe job. But traffic employees were stationed in the traffic operations center this week to monitor congestion related to the closure of Cleveland Avenue, which about 12,000 people traverse each day, and make real-time traffic signal adjustments as needed.

"Sometimes it might not be our project, but we're the people behind the scenes," said Ro Jones, administrative technician in the traffic engineering and operations department.

Advertisement

The department has its own major projects this year, too. At the top of the list is the completion of fiber-optic cable installation to enhance communication to local traffic controllers. The city currently has 14 miles of fiber-optic cable, and the nearly $1 million federally-funded project will double the system.

Installation work is expected to start in June and run through late fall. The work will be widespread, mostly in central to west Loveland.

"A lot will be shoulder-type work on in the parking lane, so it shouldn't affect traffic too much, but it will sometimes," city traffic engineer Bill Hange said.

Another grant will allow for the installation this fall of new, permanent electronic message signs similar to the one on East Eisenhower Boulevard.

Annual traffic department work also continues — ongoing signal maintenance, continued replacement of signs through the city and the striping program.

Hange said crews will do night work for a month or more for the striping program.

"Striping work goes on all summer," Hange said. "We used (13,000) to 14,000 gallons of paint last year. It was a record year for us and it probably will be again."

The city is also working with the Colorado Department of Transportation on an expedited resurfacing project on U.S. 287, north of 29th Street to Carpenter Road.

"It's CDOT's project but we do the striping," Jones said of the project, which is expected to start in August.

Engineering Projects

In addition to annual work, project engineering staff have their hands full this year with development-related projects, according to Klockeman.

Some of those are whoppers. The recent closure of Sixth Street in downtown Loveland is related to The Gallery Flats apartment project, and there will also be work around the new 7-Eleven at Taft Avenue and 43rd Street.

But the biggest private project will start in early June and is expected to run through mid-September. As the Lakes at Centerra housing development goes up east of North Boyd Lake Avenue, there will be improvements to that road, including construction of two roundabouts.

The city is also coordinating with Larimer County, which will work on roads around Horseshoe Lake and have some closures in the area around the city's eastern limits.

"We're basically saying to the Lakes at Centerra that they need to keep Boyd Lake Avenue open to traffic during construction," Klockeman said.

One of the largest public works capital projects planned this season is the Madison Avenue bridge replacement at Chubbuck Ditch north of Seventh Street. A $1.5 million project partially funded by federal-aid grants, that project is expected to start in the fall.

Cars travel north on Lincoln Avenue at Sixth Street on Thursday, past an area closed to traffic due to construction in downtown Loveland. (Steve Stoner / Loveland Reporter-Herald)

And don't forget about the city's annual resurfacing program for streets and concrete repairs. That will kick off this week at Wilson Avenue and 43rd Street, city field engineering supervisor Dave DeBaere said.

DeBaere said the biggest impacts on traffic will probably be the hot-in-place resurfacing process called paving train in mid-June on sections of Madison Avenue, Eisenhower and Taft Avenue.

"People can refer to the city's website, and we'll get message boards out for major roads," DeBaere said. "In local neighborhoods, they'll have most of the information in the form of a door hanger."

Water Projects

Last year the City Council approved water rate increases as part of a $40 million package to upgrade Loveland's aging water system, and now corroded, leaky lines are being replaced.

The program started last year, and crews will continue this year to work down a list of prioritizing projects.

"That work is starting to unroll and hit the streets and it's coinciding with all the flood work that's been introduced in the past few months," Water Utilities Manager Chris Matkins said.

Crews are currently working at First Street and will be there for another two or three weeks, according to construction coordinator Craig Weinland.

A total of 6,000 feet of line is expected to be replaced through the fall, with most work occurring in residential areas. Impacted streets include Greeley Drive, Katie Drive, Jill Drive and a section of Butternut.

Coordination, Patience Required

To try and minimize impact on residents, Hange said that city departments and outside agencies coordinate as much as possible on projects. So when South Lincoln is excavated for the fiber optic project, for example, Loveland Water and Power will put in power conduit at the same time, he said.

Cooperation and patience from the community is also needed, Hange said. Residents can report traffic safety concerns to 970-962-2535.

For a full list of projects, visit 'Streets' on the city's website, cityofloveland.org.

Contact Reporter-Herald Staff Writer Jessica Maher at 970-669-5050 ext. 516 or maherj@reporter-herald.com. Follow her at twitter.com/JessicaMaherRH.