Many millennials are ceaselessly creative when it comes to new technology, but one east coast student has taken tech innovations to a whole new level.

Amos Dudley, 24, a college student at the New Jersey Institute of Technology, was self-conscious about his smile — and refused to remain that way. Without getting a dentist or orthodontist involved, he printed his own 3D braces to straighten his top teeth, and is currently on his last set of braces after 16 weeks of self-dentistry.

Here’s how he made this happen: He scanned and printed models of his own teeth, then molded a set of 12 clear braces from the tooth models, Fox13Now reported. Then, he determined how far he needed to move each top tooth to correct crookedness, and divided that by the maximum recommended distance a tooth should travel.

“It was very obvious which tooth [the tray] was putting pressure on,” Dudley told local media. “I was sort of worried about accumulated error, but that wasn’t the case so that was a pretty glorious moment.”

Dudley was clearly playing to his strengths when designing his own smile saver.

“It makes me feel sort of silly for not being able to figure out how to charge my cordless water flosser,” one young man about Dudley’s age from Boston told LifeZette.

"I guess that’s why I’m in finance — I’ll leave the dentistry to the professionals. Good for him, though. Braces are crazy expensive!"

Dudley was trying to avoid paying $8,000 for a set of clear braces from a name brand, Fox13Now noted. His homemade braces cost $60 total.

Braces cost about $5,000 per child, notes mykidshealth.org, and even if your family has insurance, that insurance may not cover much of the bill.

For children, dental insurance for braces may be required in some states, but this does not cover every need, notes ehealthinsurance.com. Braces may be covered, for example, if they are necessary to improve a child’s ability to chew food properly.

Related Content HealthZette Why the Eyes (and Teeth) Have It Researchers may be on the cusp of curing corneal vision loss

Obamacare — or the Affordable Care Act — does not require insurance companies to offer dental insurance for adults. Dental insurance plans may cover orthodontics for adults, but if the treatment is desired for purely cosmetic reasons it is usually not covered.

3D printing and dentistry are already aligned. Industrial-grade 3D printers and materials are being made to cater specifically to the dentistry market, and dental labs around the globe have already introduced these technologies into their workflow.

They use 3D printers to create teeth and gum models, as well as dental implants such as crowns, caps, bridges, and dentures. Surgical tools such as drill guides can also be 3D-printed, according to 3D Printing in Dentistry 2015: A Ten-Year Opportunity Forecast and Analysis by SmarTech, a technology innovation publisher.

Dudley told Fox13Now he’s already gotten requests from others to print braces for them — but he’s not going that route due to possible liability issues.

"I’m not interested in orthodontics," he told the station. "It was more of a hacker project than making a business out of this."