UNION CITY – The after effects of Christmas were evident yesterday, as both North Bergen (3-0) and Dwight-Englewood (1-2) did not appear mentally sharp for the 10 a.m. tip-off to the Soaring Eagles' Holiday Festival.

Players made careless passes, committed traveling violations, and missed wide open layups at both ends of the floor.

However, North Bergen was able to shake off the rust quicker and commit fewer errors, which ultimately led to a 42-27 victory.

"The good news is on a bad day we were still able to win, so that says something," said North Bergen head coach Dan Reardon. "Although I was a little disappointed in the overall performance."

North Bergen senior Icies Hammer was the most effective player on the court, scoring a game-high 21 points, and was dominant rebounding the ball.

When defenders began to focus on containing Hammer, North Bergen got other players involved in the offense. Kayla Johnson was a beneficiary of the extra attention Dwight-Englewood paid Hammer, finishing the game with nine points. Leslie Hernandez contributed six points.

"They were tripling Icies, so that was their game plan. Our game plan was to play man-to-man and try to distribute the ball," Reardon said. "We've seen triple teams before and that's probably why, as a credit to Icies, we're getting more balanced scoring."

North Bergen built a 10-4 lead in the first quarter and the Bruins' tenacious defense made sure the lead never dipped below seven points.

The Bruins' overall effort was the key ingredient to their success at both ends of the court. Daniella Balbuena set the tone in the first quarter when she drove to the basket but had the ball tipped away. She managed to recover her own loose ball and when defenders converged she quickly passed it to an open player for an open score.

At the start of the fourth quarter, Dwight-Englewood managed to cut North Bergen's lead to single digits. But just when Dwight-Englewood's momentum was at its highest a Bruins defender took a charge to force a turnover, taking the energy out of Dwight-Englewood's run.

While the Bruins managed to pick up a victory in the first round of the tournament, Reardon hopes that his team will take advantage of the opportunity and play more carefully in the second round today at 1 p.m.

"You want to survive and advance," Reardon said. "There's going to be days where you don't play your A-game and you still survive."