Buy Photo Paychex Chairman B. Thomas Golisano makes opening remarks at the Paychex annual shareholders meeting, held Wednesday at The Strong museum. (Photo: KATE MELTON)Buy Photo Story Highlights Paychex Inc. shares have averaged slightly more than $40 over the past month

Paychex revenues were up 4 percent from the year before, to $2.3 billion

No pointed questions. No visible signs of discontent. The election of board members and the annual "say on pay" vote on executive compensation both passed easily.

These apparently are the marks of content Paychex Inc. shareholders.



The Penfield-based payroll and business services giant held its annual shareholder meeting Wednesday. Before an audience of dozens of stockholders, CEO Martin Mucci and Chief Financial Officer Efrain Rivera gave an overview of the company's recent performance and goals and fielded questions on such issues as the competitive landscape and how federal health care reform is affecting clients and the company itself.

Paychex shareholders have plenty to be satisfied with. Shares have averaged slightly more than $40 over the past month, compared with slightly more than $33 over the same span in 2012, and $30.52 in 2008. The stock closed Wednesday at $41.17, up 45 cents or 1.1 percent.

Ten thousand dollars invested in 1983, when Paychex began trading on Nasdaq, would today be worth $2.3 million, Mucci said.

For its most-recent fiscal year, which ended in May, Paychex revenues were up 4 percent from the year before, to $2.3 billion, while profits were also up 4 percent, to $569 million.

The company is looking to new products — such as new capabilities for letting clients handle their company payrolls on their smartphones and tablets and services related to the Affordable Care Act — and new geographies to help drive growth, Mucci told the crowd meeting in The Strong museum's theater.

The company has hired eight staff in Sao Paulo, Brazil, as it ramps up for a push into that payroll marketplace and roughly 5 million small and mid-sized potential clients, Mucci said. And its purchase in September of German payroll firm Lohndata doubles its clients there, he said. Paychex last week announced it had invested in Vancouver accounting software firm Kashoo, which could be its entry into more work in Canada. "We continue to look at Canada," Mucci said. "That may be the next country we think is the best opportunity for us."

John Mueller, 73, of Penfield, has been a Paychex shareholder for a decade (when it was averaging roughly $36). He left the shareholder meeting Tuesday the way he walked in — pleased with his investment. "It pays a good dividend," Mueller said. "They're growing. There's no debt. What more could you ask for?"

MDANEMAN@DemocratandChronicle.com

Twitter.com/mdaneman

Paychex stock prices The price has risen nearly 32 percent since the beginning of the year.

Price Date

Read or Share this story: http://on.rocne.ws/1gkltOG