Phoenix Veterans Administration hospital (Photo: Nick Oza/The Republic) Story Highlights Metro Phoenix doctors and hospitals are ready to aid the Phoenix VA as it works through a backlog of veterans who have not received care in a timely manner. Bills passed by the House and Senate would extend funding and more authority for the VA to seek private-sector care.

TriWest, a contractor that connects the VA with private-sector community hospitals and doctors, anticipates a surge in veterans seeking care. The company now handles about 1,200 medical appointments each month in Arizona. It has the capacity to handle appointments for 300 to 400 veterans each day.

Four years ago, the Phoenix VA cut its budget for a program that intended to ease the system's overcrowded appointment calendars for specialty care. The VA has reversed course and will look to community hospitals and doctors to fill the health-care gap.

Doctors, hospitals and other private health-care providers say they are ready to absorb potentially thousands of Phoenix-area veterans who need health care outside the Veterans Affairs health system.

Major health-care systems in the metro area already are coordinating with the Phoenix VA and filling out appointment calendars.

A bill that passed the Senate on Wednesday would allow the embattled health system to send veterans to private-sector doctors and hospitals and spend $500 million to hire new health-care providers to meet the growing demand for services.

The VA system won't be able to hire enough doctors and nurses to swiftly ease the crowded waiting lists. More than 57,000 veterans nationwide have waited more than 90 days for their initial appointment and an additional 64,000 were left off the VA's electronic wait lists, according to data released by the Department of Veterans Affairs.

Bills that passed both the Senate and House would allow veterans to get primary care at non-VA clinics, doctors offices and hospital systems in the community.

The VA already has the authority to send veterans outside its health system for behavioral health or specialty care, but those out-of-VA programs have faced budget pressures in the past that prompted the Phoenix VA to limit their use.

The Phoenix VA, which four years ago cut its budget for a program intended to ease the system's overcrowded appointment calendars for specialty care, has reversed course and will look to community hospitals and doctors to fill the health-care gap.

Banner Health, the region's largest health-care system, will begin seeing veterans on Monday through appointments arranged by a third-party contractor and a non-profit veterans group.

Banner Health plans to arrange meetings that will match Banner-employed veterans with VA patients to make them feel comfortable and welcome, Banner Health CEO Peter Fine said Friday in a memo to employees.

Dignity Health, which owns St. Joseph's Hospital and Medical Center, is willing to provide care to veterans as needed, said Linda Hunt, CEO of Dignity Health in Arizona.

Maricopa Integrated Health System's top executive met with local VA administrators and discussed a potential hand-off of veterans who may need immediate care at the county health district's network of one dozen primary-care clinics, specialty practices or Maricopa Medical Center.

"We're ready, willing and able to provide whatever assistance they may need to help these veterans," MIHS CEO Steve Purves said. "There is going to be some fundamental reform of the VA health system. Veterans will be better served by better coordination between VA facilities and the private sector."

The timing may be helpful, too. Metro Phoenix hospitals and some doctors typically experience a summer lull with seasonal visitors out of town and more area residents vacationing to escape the heat.

Average occupancy rates at Maricopa County hospitals with at least 100 beds ranged from 53 percent to 77 percent in 2012, suggesting hospital capacity shouldn't be an issue to handle the veterans, Arizona Department of Health Services records show.

With more federal funds, the VA can accelerate use of its patient-centered community-care program that sends veterans to community clinics, doctors and hospitals for behavioral-health or specialty care.

In September, Phoenix-based TriWest Healthcare Alliance secured the VA contract to facilitate care at community hospitals and clinics. TriWest previously arranged care on behalf of active-duty and retired military families through the Department of Defense.

TriWest CEO David J. McIntyre said the Phoenix company is prepared for a spike in veterans seeking appointments. The company hired about 100 customer-service employees who began training on Monday to take calls from veterans and help arrange their care with non-VA providers.

McIntyre said the company has handled 1,200 appointments each month for Arizona veterans since January. With 4,200 doctors, hospitals and other providers under contract in Maricopa County, Tri­West is prepared to handle 300 to 400 veterans each day, McIntyre said.

The VA's data showed that 1,715 veterans in the Phoenix VA and 1,115 in the Northern Arizona VA Health Care System in Prescott have waited 90 days or more for their first appointment.

An additional 1,075 Phoenix-area and 139 Prescott-area veterans weren't even on a waiting list for an initial appointment. The VA's goal is to schedule appointments within 30 days for veterans.

"Most people were really surprised how much of a backlog existed and how broad it was," McIntyre said. "Our job is to come to their (veterans) aid."

While TriWest helps arrange specialty care, the VA nowhas limited ability to send veterans outside the VA system for basic appointments.

The legislation going through Congress would change that. The Phoenix VA is trying to add outside providers as well as add space and providers in its own system to keep up with demand, according to Phoenix VA spokeswoman Maureen Heard.

The VA is discussing plans to extend its primary-care footprint through organizations such as the Arizona Alliance for Community Health Centers, which represents health centers statewide, including centers in rural Arizona.

In trying to ensure better access to care, the Senate bill addresses both time and distance. Veterans who live more than 40 miles from a VA facility could get care at a community health center, clinic or hospital that is closer to their home. Another provision requires that they would get a Veterans Choice card to seek care at any medical clinic, office, lab or hospital that takes Medicare.

Purves, of MIHS, said the care coordination will be critical so veterans don't get duplicate tests, scans or medications. "It needs to be coordinated so medical records are shared appropriately," he said.

The Congressional Budget Office estimated that the Senate bill, introduced by Sens. John McCain, R-Ariz., and Bernie Sanders, I-Vt., would cost up to $50 billion each year to provide expanded health-care access for veterans, compared with the $44 billion the VA now spends annually. Those calculations assume more eligible veterans would sign up for VA health care.

Members of both houses of Congress say they are confident they can agree on a final bill to send to the president for approval.

The Phoenix VA previously has experienced budget troubles with its so-called fee-care program, which refers veterans to non-VA hospitals and outpatient facilities for specialty care.

In 2011, the VA's Office of Inspector General launched a review that found the Phoenix VA system spent more than $10 million over its budget for community fee care for veterans. The VA's internal review found a lack of checks and balances to ensure money was properly spent on specialty health care for veterans outside the VA system.

VA employees testified during a 2011 administrative investigative board hearing that community health-care providers were not paid in a timely fashion by the VA, dating to the mid-2000s.

The medical center in fiscal 2009 and 2010 ordered the staff to slash the budget by 25 percent. The plan was to handle more health care inside the VA instead of sending veterans to private-sector providers. But the Phoenix VA could not meet that goal, in part, because many staff positions remained vacant, according to testimony obtained by The Arizona Republic.

At the time, the VA Southwest Health Care Network concluded that the Phoenix VA's mismanagement of the program was "indicative of a major flaw in the level of managerial oversight at the Phoenix VA Health Care System."

Ken Alltucker covers health care for The Republic. He has written about the Affordable Care Act, consumer health, insurance, prescription drugs and hospitals.

Read or Share this story: http://azc.cc/1pVZZtj