SHARE CONTRIBUTED PHOTO Jane McCormick Tolmach

By Kathleen Wilson of the Ventura County Star

Jane McCormick Tolmach, a community activist and the first woman to serve as mayor of Oxnard, has died.

Tolmach, 93, died Sunday at her home in the city, family members said.

She was the first woman elected to the Oxnard City Council in 1970, becoming mayor in 1973 and 1974, and a well-known figure in Democratic Party politics. She was a leader who stood up for up the common man, officials and friends said.

“She got people to follow her because of her unassuming nature,” said John Flynn, who represented Oxnard for decades on the Ventura County Board of Supervisors. “She didn’t think she was better than anyone else, but she understood the issues better than most people and was able to communicate them.”

“She’s a legend,” said Oxnard Councilwoman Carmen Ramirez.

Tolmach was born in Havre, Montana, but moved to Ventura County at 2 after her parents vacationed in California with their young family and decided to stay. They settled in Santa Paula and later moved to Ventura, where she graduated from Ventura High School.

Tolmach, a graduate of UCLA and Smith College, became a social worker. She was employed by the American Red Cross in Baltimore and at Corona Naval Hospital where she met her future husband, Dr. Daniel Tolmach.

The couple married in Ventura and in 1948 settled in Oxnard, where he practiced pediatrics and she balanced the demands of raising five children with community work.

Tolmach was active in politics at the state and federal level, becoming friends with high-ranking politicians and winning a delegate’s spot at the Democratic National Convention in 1960. After the assassination of Sen. Robert Kennedy in 1968, she questioned whether progress at the federal level was possible and began working more intensely on local causes, family members said.

Tolmach sought to ease tensions between police and minority communities in Oxnard, successfully fought the placement of a liquefied natural gas port in the area, and battled for causes she considered critical to the community throughout her life.

She had a reputation for looking out for the “little guy,” Oxnard Councilman Bert Perello said.

Tolmach in 2013 accompanied Perello to his swearing-in ceremony after he won the special election that June. She also helped the city clerk administer his oath.

“She was very frail,” Perello said. “I considered it a tremendous honor to have her standing with me.”

A memorial Mass is scheduled at 10 a.m. Oct. 2 at Santa Clara Church in Oxnard. In lieu of flowers, individuals wishing to honor Tolmach may make contributions to their favorite political causes.

She is survived by sons James of Atlanta, Georgia; Richard, who lives in France; Adam of Oak View; Jonathan of Oak View; daughter Eve of Oakland; and four grandchildren. Her husband died in 2003.

— Staff writer Gretchen Wenner contributed to this report.

Fill out my online form