SHARE An anti-abortion supporter holds a poster and prayer beads as the group marches to the Texas Capitol during a Texas Rally for Life, Saturday, Jan. 24, 2015, in Austin, Texas. (AP Photo/Eric Gay)

New bills not likely to cause strife like 2013

By Matthew Waller

AUSTIN — Two years ago abortion dominated conversation toward the end of the Legislative session, culminating in a historic filibuster from then-state Sen. Wendy Davis, D-Fort Worth, against proposed regulations and restrictions on abortion.

The agenda for and against abortion rights and restrictions are quieter this time, possibly because opponents of abortion already obtained most of their goals.

“The pro-life movement obtained virtually its complete wish list on abortion-related legislation,” Rice University political science professor Mark Jones said. The legislation that became law, House Bill 2, included requirements for abortion doctors to have admitting privileges at nearby hospitals, for abortion providing facilities to have higher standards, that patients follow stricter guidelines for abortion inducing medication, and banned abortion after 20 weeks of pregnancy.

“There isn’t much more they can realistically push for that is plausibly constitutional,” Jones said.

Reeling back

A coalition of seven pro-abortion rights groups have gathered to “restore trust in Texans to make their own reproductive health care decisions, respect for health care professionals’ judgment, and access to the full range of reproductive health care,” according to the coalition’s announcement of formation.

“We’ve seen firsthand the devastating consequences of restrictive policies affecting reproductive health care, including contraception and abortion access,” said Fatimah Gifford, the director of marketing and public relations for abortion provider Whole Woman’s Health. “As a result, the state has shuttered dozens of clinics across the state, making access out of reach for thousands of Texans. Today we come together, as a unified coalition, to continue the momentum that emerged during the 2013 legislative session.”

The pro-abortion rights groups are promoting four bills.

House Bill 78 from state Rep. Mary González, D-Clint, would require human sexuality courses in public schools, and House Bill 468 would let a child 15 or older consent to examination or medical treatment related to contraception other than abortion or emergency contraception.

House Bill 1210 from state Rep. Donna Howard, D-Austin, would keep medical care information — such as advice about birth control, mammograms or cancer screenings — “between a woman and her doctor,” Howard wrote in a release.

House Bill 709 from state Rep. Jessica Farrar, D-Houston, would get rid of a mandatory waiting time in abortion cases.

Jones said it doesn’t look like such bills have much any chance at passing in the conservative House, even more conservative Senate, and self-described “pro-life” governor.

It’s “more of a PR campaign to remind Texans that the majority of Democrats don’t agree with HB 2 and the sonogram law,” Jones said, referring to a law in 2011 that added waiting requirements.

Keeping away the money

Proposed laws from groups against abortion include everything from not paying for abortion through insurance plans to stopping judges from surreptitiously allowing a minor to get an abortion without parents’ permission.

Conservative leadership already has efforts en route to keep government money out of the hands of Planned Parenthood.

Texas Right to Life sent out legislative priorities with several bills ready or in the works.

State Sen. Larry Taylor, R-Friendswood, has SB 575, which would “shield citizens from paying for insurance coverage for abortion both in private insurance plans and through” the Affordable Care Act marketplaces for insurance, a release states. HB 1435 from state Rep. John Smithee, R-Amarillo, is identical.

Planned legislation would remove “glaring loopholes” in letting minors undergo abortions without a parent’s permission — such as allowing an attorney to represent the minor rather than the parents — according to the Texas Right to Life release.

Another bill could come from state Sen. Lois Kolkhorst, R-Brenham, that would clarify that coercing or forcing a woman to have an abortion is a crime.

“This legislation will also establish several mechanisms to inform women about their full rights and protections against acts of coercion,” a release from Texas Right to Life states.

Joe Pojman, the executive director of the Texas Alliance for Life, said that there would be efforts to put signs in abortion facilities regarding sex trafficking or forced abortions and that his group would move to train abortion facility workers to recognize victims of sex trafficking.

His group is also planning to further defund Planned Parenthood as the Legislature has done in the past. This time, the aim is to exclude Planned Parenthood from the Medicaid program altogether. The group also plans to largely exclude Planned Parenthood from the Breast and Cervical Cancer Services program. The program has brought in $2.9 million per year in general revenue, according to an interim report. He said a rider in the Senate version of the budget shifts more money away from organizations like Planned Parenthood.

Pojman also wants to eliminate wrongful birth lawsuits. Such lawsuits let parents with a disability sue providers because they weren’t told of the disability in time for an abortion, Pojman said.

Reforms for judicial bypass, allowing for abortion without parental consent for a minor, may be a strong contender for becoming law.

Changing judicial bypass “is long overdue,” Pojman said. “We think that will have a very good chance. … We have the firepower in the House and the Senate.”

Matthew Waller covers state news as the Scripps Austin Bureau chief. Contact him at matthew.waller@caller.com or follow him on Twitter @waller_matthew.