Lehigh Valley Health Network boss calling it quits

'Time is right to move on,' Ronald Swinfard says, less than four years after taking the top job.

"Four 40 years, I've watched old farts like myself sit on jobs like this and ride it into the dust, and it's just not fair to an organization." The time has come, he said, to relinquish his position to someone "with more energy and new ideas."

Dr. Ronald Swinfard, CEO and president of Lehigh Valley Health Network, will retire on July 1, LVHN announced Thursday.

The top boss at the Lehigh Valley's biggest employer is stepping down.

He said his decision was precipitated by the recent, untimely deaths of a number of LVHN colleagues.

"You realize we're all mortal. There's no guarantee of tomorrow," he said, "I didn't want my tombstone to read, 'I wish I worked one more day.'"

Swinfard, 66, has led LVHN since November 2010, when he succeeded the sprawling health network's longtime president and CEO Dr. Elliot J. Sussman.

LVHN includes four hospital facilities: one in Allentown, one in Salisbury Township, one in Bethlehem, and one in Hazleton; 10 health centers in five counties; primary and specialty care physician practices; and pharmacy, imaging, home- health and lab services.

Swinfard was the second physician in a row to lead LVHN, an organization that, before Sussman, had been run by non-doctors for over a century. Though his tenure, at 3 1/2 years, has been short, it has marked a momentous time for LVHN and for health care in general.

He took over after the sudden departure of Sussman, who was at the helm for 17 years, and was thrust into the job of navigating a rapidly changing regulatory environment under the federal Affordable Care Act.

Asked if he liked the job, Swinfard replied, "No, I've loved it — the most exhilarating experience of my life."

The challenge for business leaders is to align their employees toward a common goal, he said. In health care, that is generally easier, because most health care professionals want to help people.

"To have 13,000 people aligned in that way," he said, referring to LVHN's expansive payroll, "is a really rewarding experience."

Swinfard informed LVHN's Board of Trustees of his decision to retire, and the board accepted it, according to a news release from LVHN.

"Dr. Swinfard has prepared our organization for the future of health care and leaves us in a good position to face this ever-changing landscape," William Hecht, the board's chairman, said in the release.

As part of LVHN's transition plan, the board named Brian A. Nester to serve as acting CEO and president. Nester works as LVHN's chief strategy officer and will assume his new role July 1.