LGBT Network Announces Major Queens Expansion

Elected officials and community leaders gathered at Queens Borough Hall on February 3 for a major announcement that will bring much-needed services to LGBT families throughout the borough. The Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual and Transgender Network’s (LGBT Network) will formally present The Queens LGBT Center’s Q Center and present plans for it that will transform the lives of thousands in the borough from Astoria to Bayside to the Rockaways.

The LGBT Network has been providing acclaimed and highly recognized services for more than 22 years for LGBT communities on Long Island and operates four LGBT Centers. Since July 2014, the LGBT Network has already grown strong roots in Queens and is providing programs and services to hundreds. The LGBT Network’s Q Center has been working with middle schools to establish gaystraight alliance (GSA) clubs and provide education and training for students, parents, and faculty in both middle and senior high schools. The Q Center has also enrolled dozens of families in the NYS Marketplace for health insurance under the Affordable Care Act.

The Q Center’s first location will be The Samuel Field YMCA in Little Neck. Longterm plans are to bring additional LGBT Centers to Astoria, Long Island City, Bayside and the Rockaways within the next three years.

Describing the need for the Q Center, Chief Executive Officer David Kilmnick, PhD cited the lack of services available to him as a gay teen growing up in Queens.

“Bringing The LGBT Network’s services into Queens, is very personal to me. As someone who grew up gay in Far Rockaway there were no services I could access or a safe community I could be a part of. The Queens LGBT community needs a strong voice and advocate throughout the entire borough and the Q Center will work with all to achieve that,” he said.

With the addition of the Q Center, The LGBT Network, which also includes Long Island Gay and Lesbian Youth (LIGALY), The Long Island LGBT Center and Services and Advocacy for LGBT Elders- Long Island (SAGE Long Island), will have a service region that includes more than six million people and stretches from the Midtown Tunnel to Montauk. The LGBT Network’s reach and population size will become the largest out of any LGBT Health and Human Service Organization in New York state and that will help bring much-needed resources to the borough of Queens to expand and provide new services and programs.