Aubrey Till during the Class 4A state cross country meet on Saturday at Norris Penrose Event Center in Colorado Springs. ( Brandon Hopper / Daily Record )

Aubrey Till during the Class 4A state cross country meet on Saturday at Norris Penrose Event Center in Colorado Springs. (Brandon Hopper / Daily Record)

Colorado Springs — Aubrey Till's emotional pre-race prayer proved tough to finish Saturday.

The race itself, well that wasn't as challenging.

Tigers senior Till ran a 20:31.2 for 10th place on Saturday, reclaiming a spot on the medal stand after a one-year hiatus.

It was Till's final race of her prep cross country career, and perhaps the last competitive one ever with her sister Katie Till. Before each race, the Tigers gather in a circle and have a pre-race prayer, and Saturday was Aubrey Till's turn to lead it.

"I couldn't even get through the whole thing because I started crying. And Katie started crying. It was just really emotional because it's my last one and Katie and I are really close," Aubrey Till said, crying after the race just thinking about the situation.

Ellie Enderle during the Class 4A state cross country meet on Saturday at Norris Penrose Event Center in Colorado Springs. (Brandon Hopper / Daily Record)

"I can't express how much I have enjoyed having Aubrey Till on our team and how she has helped our varsity girls improve each year," Tigers coach Marcy Epperson said. "It's awesome that she was able to end her senior year with a top 10 finish."

Ellie Enderle was next across the line for the Tigers. She finished 32nd with a 21:24.3, then Katie Till (78th, 22:18.4), Riley Valentine (159th, 24:38.2), Drew Moore (166th, 25:12.3), Anna Goodin (171st, 25:40.2) and Journey Short (172nd, 25:51.3). As a team, the girls finished 16th.

"I'm very proud of Ellie Enderle who placed 32nd as a sophomore," Epperson said. "I'm expecting great things in the future from this young lady. And, having Katie Till for another two years reassures me that our girls team will continue to stay solid and competitive in our region for quite some time."

Advertisement

The lone boys qualifier, Brandon Trujillo took 84th with an 18:49.6.

"Brandon Trujillo did a wonderful job and took 40 seconds off his time from the pre-state meet (in August)," Epperson said. "It has been a pleasure watching him progress throughout the program and achieve great results at the end of his high school career."

Katie Rainsberger from Air Academy won the girls race in a time of 18:50.3, and the top 4A boy was Palmer Ridge's Eric Hamer with a 16:17.7

The trip to the podium is Aubrey Till's third in four years. She finished fourth as a freshman at a different site, and at Norris Penrose she took eighth as a sophomore and 52nd as a junior after falling twice.

"My goal was to get on the medal stand. I knew that was going to be a really tough thing to do, but I had faith in my training and faith that God was going to let me run to my best ability," Aubrey Till said.

Last year, Katie Till finished 101st, Enderle 112th, Valentine 144th, Moore 178th and Short 180th. As a sophomore, Trujillo was on the boys team to qualify and he finished 148th.