The number of childcare educators operating out of family homes across the country has skyrocketed in the past year, as more parents struggle to find a place for their child in a traditional facility.

The number of services rose 40 per cent in the 12 months to June 30, 2014, with most operators having been running for three years or less.

However, only 31 per cent of operators have so far been awarded a quality rating by the Australian Children's Education and Care Quality Authority.

A lack of places in large childcare centres is pushing more parents to the family day-care sector, which is growing as a result, a recent Productivity Commission report said.

Advertisement

Although family day-care comprises just 4 per cent of the industry, between 2013 and 2014, the number of accredited services increased from 512 to 735 across the country.

"Anecdotal evidence suggests that families often turn to nannies or family day-care where they are unable to access a long-day-care place," the report said.

Family Day Care Australia, the national peak body for the sector, said that because the sector offered more flexibility and care outside of standard hours, it was becoming increasingly attractive to parents.

"Family day-care is provided in a nurturing, home-based setting with smaller group sizes, which research suggests is more beneficial to a child's emotional and cognitive development," a spokesperson for the organisation said. "The small group settings also mean children have more one-on-one time with the educator and children are able to form secure, ongoing bonds with their educator."

Victoria has the most family day-care centres in the country, with 190.

Of the 269 services that have a Children's Education and Care Quality Authority quality rating, only two were deemed "excellent" and 66 were exceeding standards.

Samantha Page, chief executive at Early Childhood Australia, said there were some unscrupulous operators that were only set up to take advantage of federal government funding.

"There has been a problem with new start-ups, some of which are not there for the right reasons," she said. "Government has been concerned with the level of fraud and the fact quality standards are unlikely to be met."

She said parents should seek out a service that is well-established and has at least half a dozen educators.

Family day-care takes place in the carer's own home. Up to seven children aged up to 12 years can be cared for at any one time. Carers must be assessed by the same agency that accredits mainstream childcare services.