Welcome to Evening MoneyBeat, WSJ’s closing-bell roundup of all the news and developments in the capital markets. To receive this newsletter, click here: http://on.wsj.com/MoneyBeatEveningSignup

HOW WE GOT HERE

Topping, as they say, is a process.

U.S. stocks fell on Thursday, with the Dow and S&P 500 continuing to face some resistance as they push higher. The Dow fell more than 100 points, and the S&P 500 lost 11 points. Those aren’t harrowing losses by any stretch of the imagination, but they do illustrate that the markets, after rocketing higher for the better part of two months, are finding it hard to keep the rally going.

The Dow was down 0.6%, and the S&P 500 lost 0.5%. The Nasdaq Composite was virtually flat, down just 0.05%, but the Dow Transports lost 1.2% on the session.

This morning’s data was mixed. Weekly jobless claims came in at a 43-year low, auguring well for the monthly payrolls report. But two reports on the economy from regional Fed banks highlighted just how recalcitrant the economy remains. The Philadelphia Fed’s business index fell back into negative territory – the seven time in the last six months it’s been there – and the Chicago Fed’s National Activity Index edged a bit deeper into negative territory.

First-quarter GDP gets released in one week. Another weak quarter is expected. The WSJ survey of economists projects a 1.3% growth rate. The New York Fed sees it at 0.7%, and the Atlanta Fed has it at 0.3%.

After the bell, both Alphabet and Microsoft reported earnings. Both missed consensus estimates, and both were down in late trading.

COMING UP

Data Front: PMI manufacturing index flash (9:45 a.m. ET), Baker-Hughes rig count (1:00 p.m.)

Earnings: Caterpillar, General Electric, Honeywell, Interpublic, Kimberly-Clark, McDonalds, SunTrust.

International: Japan, tertiary index (1:30 a.m. ET); France, PMI composite index flash (3:00); Germany, PMI composite flash (3:30); EMU, PMI composite flash (4:00); Italy, retail sales (5:00); Canada, consumer prices and retail sales (8:30).

MONEYBEAT PODCAST

Tribune Media CEO Peter Liguori sits down with Paul Vigna and Stephen Grocer to discuss the changing business of television media, transforming WGN America into a viable broadcasting network, its new show “Underground,” and the importance of banking on quality.

MUST READS

ECB Leaves Door Open for Further Interest-Rate Cuts The European Central Bank stands ready to use “all instruments available,” including further cuts in all its interest rates, to ensure the inflation rate returns to its target, ECB President Mario Draghi said Thursday.

SunEdison Files for Chapter 11 Bankruptcy Protection Solar-energy company SunEdison Inc. on Thursday said it filed for chapter 11 bankruptcy protection, a dramatic move for a company whose market value stood at nearly $10 billion in July.

Regulators Propose New Rules on Wall Street Pay U.S. regulators proposed requiring the nation’s largest banks and financial firms to hold back executives’ bonus pay for four years, extending by a year the common industry practice on Wall Street incentive payouts.

Volkswagen Reaches Deal Over Emissions Scandal U.S. owners of nearly 500,000 Volkswagen AG 2-liter diesel vehicles equipped with devices meant to trick emissions tests could see “substantial” payments and a buyback under a coming court settlement.

Musician Prince Dead at 57 Prince, the singer, songwriter and master performer who blazed an innovative and fiercely independent path through the music world, establishing himself as both a global star and a defiant outsider in his own industry, died Thursday.

Ackman’s Fund Jumps in April After a terrible start to the year, Bill Ackman’s Pershing Square is up big in April. The assets in his publicly-traded fund have risen 12% this month. The fund has now gained in three straight weeks, the best stretch since it went up three straight weeks in late July.

Cybersecurity Firm SecureWorks Set to Test Tech IPO Market SecureWorks is poised to end the longest drought in technology initial public offerings in seven years, but whether others will soon follow is an open question.

Blackstone Profit Sinks in a Brutal Quarter Blackstone Group’s first-quarter profit tumbled from a record-setting year-earlier period as choppy markets weighed on the value of its investments and hindered its ability to sell older holdings.

AmEx Hopes You Leave Home Without This Card American Express’s new Blue Cash Preferred card is aimed specifically at users who aren’t try to max out rewards or points programs.

International Lending Continues Its Decline Lending across international borders kept nosediving in the final quarter of last year, fresh data from the Bank for International Settlements showed Thursday, a testament of the hardships that weaker economic growth in emerging markets and stricter banking regulations have imposed on global finance.

CHART OF THE DAY