Blue Cross promotes executives as it reveals national expansion plans

Several top executives at Blue Cross Blue Shield of Michigan have been promoted to help the state’s largest health insurer as it expands into new markets and develops partnerships with Blues plans in other states, Crain’s has learned.

The moves are believed to be part of a larger “strategic business transformation” effort that began last November and is intended to reduce the Michigan Blues' administrative costs and increase revenue. Last year, Blue Cross reported it lost $68 million in net income on its overall operations in 2015 – its first loss in at least five years.

In an email Wednesday to Blue Cross employees, CEO Dan Loepp announced that six executives would assume the promotions and additional duties. Loepp also described Blue Cross’ strategy, which calls for “investing in opportunities to expand business into markets of significant growth potential – including Medicare Advantage – while we work to strengthen our core health business to improve our financial and market strength.”

The changes at the top include:

Mark Bartlett, CFO and executive vice president, will also become enterprise CFO. He will continue to lead the Blues’ merger and acquisition strategy and oversee its Medicaid joint venture business line with AmeriHealth Caritas for Blue Cross Complete , its Medicaid HMO.

for , its Medicaid HMO. Ken Dallafior, executive vice president for commercial business, will also become president of Blue Cross’ Core Health. This business line represents most of the Blues’ enterprise revenue, including Blue Care Network and LifeSecure Insurance Co .

and . Elizabeth Haar, CEO of the Accident Fund Group and senior vice president for subsidiary operations, will also become president of Emerging Markets. This business line is responsible for Blue Cross’s Medicare Advantage program, which has been targeted for growth nationally.

Crain's confirmed with Blue Cross that it now handles Medicare Advantage claims for Arkansas Blue Cross Blue Shield. Talks are underway with several other Blues plans about similar arrangements or joint ventures, said Helen Stojic, Blue Cross' director of corporate affairs.

Loepp said a search is underway for a president and COO of the Accident Fund Group.

Tricia Keith, senior vice president and corporate secretary and services, has been promoted to executive vice president, chief of staff and corporate secretary. Keith, who was one of Crain's 40 under 40 winners in 2010, will continue to serve the Blue Cross corporate board as secretary, but will also assume responsibilities in the office of the president.

Two other Blues’ executives — Julie Smith and Mary Smith who have been responsible for Medicare Advantage growth — will report to Haar.

Mary Smith has been promoted to senior vice president for quality and risk adjustment products and services.

Julie Smith has been promoted to senior vice president for senior health services.

In a statement, Blue Cross said the promotions are intended to improve the company’s core business “while expanding into emerging markets to help continue to diversify the company’s revenue sources beyond health insurance.”

In February, Crain’s learned that the Michigan Blues was one of at least 10 Blues plans to meet last December and January with the executives of Philadelphia-based Independence Health Group Inc. about a possible merger or expanded joint business opportunities.

In his employee email, Loepp explained that Blue Cross plans to "partner with other health plans — particularly Blue plans in other states — to assist them with offering high-quality Medicare Advantage products and services in their regions of the country."

However, Andy Hetzel, Blue Cross’ vice president of corporate communications, said Blue Cross isn’t interesting in merging with another Blues’ plan.

“We are constantly talking to other Blue plans about ways we can partner and work better together,” Hetzel said in a statement to Crain’s last week. “Independence is a good example of a strong partner with our joint ownership of AmeriHealth Caritas.”

In 2011, Blue Cross Michigan paid $215 million for a minority interest in AmeriHealth Caritas, a 15-state Medicaid HMO, which it now co-owns with Independence Health. Blue Cross Complete is now a for-profit member of AmeriHealth Caritas.

Over the past two decades, some formerly independent state-chartered Blue Cross plans have merged into larger entities. Some, like the Anthem Group Inc., which operates 14 Blues plans, have converted to for-profit health insurers.

In 2014, Blue Cross Michigan converted into a nonprofit mutual health insurer after being the state’s insurer of last resort for 34 years. But it requires permission of the state Legislature to sell or merge with another entity.

Cost cutting continues

Last November, Blue Cross embarked on a three-year, $300 million administrative cost reduction program that has so far resulted in more than 50 layoffs in the information technology and health care values divisions.

Blue Cross and its related subsidiaries employ about 7,900 total workers.

More layoffs or reductions from attrition are expected over the next several months as division department heads complete employee needs assessments and expense reduction reviews, Blue Cross officials have confirmed.

Documents Crain's has obtained show Blue Cross’ plan to reduce rising administrative costs — costs up to 30 percent higher than national insurers and other competing plans in Michigan, according to one Blue Cross report.

Sources tell Crain’s there are multiple factors forcing the Blues to cut costs. They include right-sizing the workforce after a huge expansion to prepare for changes and new customers from the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act of 2010.

Related Links