After catching only one fish during a competition that took him halfway round the world, Dave Jaskiewicz of Daniel Island says he would love an opportunity to do it again.

Jaskiewicz was one of 47 anglers who recently competed in the fifth annual Hobie Fishing World Championship, a three-day kayak competition held on Shang Lake in Changshu, China.

“It was an amazing event. The Chinese really put on a spectacular event, going above and beyond,” Jaskiewicz said.

The trip to China came with some airline issues. His planned flight was canceled a day before the scheduled departure, forcing him to scramble to find an alternate flight. That resulted in an additional $400 baggage charge when he had to switch airlines. And one of his favorite rods was broken during the trip. But from that point it was a memorable journey, even if the fishing was tough.

Jaskiewicz was able to spend a couple of days sightseeing in Shanghai before the competitors headed to the tournament venue, about 2½ hours from Shanghai. The opening ceremony included speeches by political dignitaries, dancers, singers and a fireworks display. There were festivities every evening. The hotel key cards were embossed with the tournament logo.

The fishing conditions were not as much fun. Eligible species were yellowcheek carp, topmouth culter or Chinese perch. Only three fish were caught on the practice day, but one was enough to get everyone excited. An angler from Denmark landed a huge yellowcheek carp, toothy species participants had seen crashing the water. Jaskiewicz estimated the fish at 60 inches and 60 pounds.

On the first day of competition, Jaskiewicz hooked a fish around 11 a.m., but after getting it to his kayak discovered he had caught a chub, not on the list of eligible species. Only one angler landed an eligible fish, a participant from the host country, leaving 46 fishermen in a tie for second. The second and third days weren’t much better. On the final day, Jaskiewicz parked himself in one likely-looking spot. An hour before the end of the event, he hooked a fish, but the hooks on his tiny crankbait pulled free.

“Only having two bites the whole tournament and one fish that wasn’t a legal fish was a little frustrating. But only five guys caught fish and one of them caught two fish. A lot of guys didn’t have a bite the whole time,” Jaskiewicz said.

“But it was one of those times where misery loves company. That helped me swallow how bad I was doing, knowing that everybody else was having just as hard a time.”

Chinese anglers took first, second and fourth. The Danish angler was third and a fisherman from Great Britain was fifth.

One bonus for Jaskiewicz was an opportunity on the return trip to fly in a Boeing 787 Dreamliner, an aircraft that is manufactured in North Charleston and Everett, Washington.

“What a better experience than the (Boeing) 777 I took over there,” he said. “The biggest difference between the two was how quiet it was. I couldn’t stop telling people how I impressed I was. I was able to sleep a good amount.”

Although the fishing didn’t live up to what Jaskiewicz and the other anglers hoped for, he said he is already looking to see where the next qualifying event will be held for the 2016 Hobie Fishing World Championship.

“I met a lot of great guys, hopefully some guys I can call friends,” he said. “There was a lot of camaraderie, but when the fishing began, the competitiveness was very apparent. Now I have fishing buddies across the world.”