Progress is being made in an effort to establish community gardens in each of the five wards in Meridian. The newest garden is in Ward Two. It's the Greater Allen Chapel Community Garden. It's located at 2222 on 17th Avenue. Members of the nearby church partnered with Go Green Meridian to start the organic garden.

"This neighborhood needed it bad," says Darryl Johnson, Sr., "and I didn't know how I was going to do it, and how it was going to come together."

Darryl Johnson is one of the members of Greater Allen Chapel Church.

"This is especially needed in this neighborhood," says Craig Wilkes with Go Green Meridian. "They just need some hope. They need something new in this neighborhood. It's been such an ignored neighborhood for so long that I think that anything positive is a huge step forward."

Wilkes says the goal for Go Green Meridian is for at least one community garden to be established in each of the city's five wards. So far, there are two. The first one is in Ward Five. It already supplies fresh produce for the soup kitchen, Love's Kitchen in Meridian.

Darryl Johnson, who's a former chef, and his 13-year-old son both say that the garden has already started to bring the community together, especially its young people.

"Most of them, they don't really come outside that much," says Darryl Johnson, Jr., "but when they saw the garden, they were happy that they had somebody caring about them."

"They were curious," says Darryl's dad,"and one little young lady, I was telling her that I was a chef, and she said, 'Uh, I'm gonna show you how to cook!', and I'm like, 'Yes, that's what we need!' Eventually, we're going to have tomatoes, and we can make spaghetti sauce. We will be able to jar it, and show them how to can and preserve; that's the plan. I just feel it in my bones that this is going to work!'

To get involved with Go Green Meridian call Craig Wilkes at (917) 664-7255. You can also find out more about Go Green Meridian's efforts at the upcoming Earth's Bounty Farmer's Market on July 4th. It will be held at Singing Brakeman Park in downtown Meridian from 8 AM until 1 PM.