“It hurts pretty bad,” 19-year-old John Harrington mumbled, Tuesday afternoon. His jaw was wired shut after being broken in two places. “It feels like these teeth are being pulled out of my gums.”

Police have identified one of the two suspects. They said the man in the black T-shirt with white writing on it in the surveillance video is a suspect.

A metro teen was walking to pick up a pizza and got beaten and robbed by two men last month. And they made off with seven dollars and some sunglasses. This happened in April and police said they haven't gotten any tips or made any arrests. They need your help identifying the suspects.

“It hurts pretty bad,” 19-year-old John Harrington mumbled, Tuesday afternoon. His jaw was wired shut after being broken in two places. “It feels like these teeth are being pulled out of my gums.”

Harrington's still healing after police said two men ran up to him from behind him while he was walking near N.W. 22nd Street and Blackwelder in Oklahoma City around 6 p.m. that evening.

“The first hit just completely separated my jaw. The first time it broke it in the first spot. I instantly felt that. And after I got kicked the second time, I felt it just shatter. It just cracked,” Harrington explained.

Witnesses said the suspects kicked him in the face roughly 18 times and ran off.

“I was just in shock. I was gushing blood and I took off down the street back to where I came from. I went inside and it was like my jaw was just hanging. I didn't know what to do,” he said.

Harrington said he did not know the guys who did this. It was just a random act of violence.

Police have identified one of the two suspects. They said the man in the black T-shirt with white writing on it in the surveillance video is a suspect. Witnesses saw him walk into a business nearby where he was caught on camera.

“It's infuriating,” said the victim's father, Patrick B. Harrington. He said he hopes someone will recognize the man in the video. “Which is why I called you guys. It's more important to catch somebody like that because if they're capable of doing something like that, what's next for them?”

Harrington will have his jaw wired shut for another month. His dad said the medical bills have started to come in. But they don't need money, they need justice.

Watch the surveillance video.