MARK LENNIHAN/ASSOCIATED PRESS

ELEANOR BLAYNEY: Woulda, shoulda, coulda. There is not an investor alive who has not said as much to him- or herself about certain investment decisions. Even Warren Buffett has probably wished on occasion for an investment “do-over.” Case in point: In 1993 Mr. Buffett gave up 1.6% of Berkshire Hathaway to buy a shoe company. Today those BRK-A shares would be worth approximately $5.2 billion, whereas the shoe company became practically worthless.

In my own case, I’ve made plenty of mistakes that have proved to be costly. It turns out that my 2005 investment in Apple was far too timid. If I could go back and do it again, I would leverage everything I then owned and pick up as many of those $60 (presplit) shares that my borrowed money could buy. Another timid investment proved to be way too aggressive. In 2000, I put a small sum in a dot.com fund and it promptly became much smaller. That money, too, should have gone into Apple.

Yet it’s a simple exercise of wishful thinking to get my former self on today’s Forbes billionaires list. Hindsight is all it takes, which the passage of time bestows in abundance.

The more thoughtful, important question is: What past investment decisions were just plain dumb at the time, and don’t need any additional time to prove them so? These are the kind of decisions where an investor ignores the evidence, goes against his or her better judgment, or violates a firmly held investment principle. By these criteria, I did not make a bad decision when I bought those few shares of Apple or took a small flier with the dot.com fund. My purchases were entirely prudent from a portfolio diversification and asset allocation perspective. I would likely make the same investments today given the same information I had then.

But there is one move I made in 2007 that was misguided from the get-go. That was the year I left the wealth management firm that I had built over the prior 17 years with three partners. For the next two years I was a solopreneur, building another business, and was no longer constantly surrounded and grounded by other financial planners and investments managers.

Thus I became my own financial adviser, just when the financial crisis of 2008 hit. The economic meltdown melted me down, too. All the investment head-sense I had acquired during my years of study and practice was no match for my fears about my own savings, which I now needed to live on. I made a few impulsive investment sales, before I came to and remembered the value of objective advice, especially at times of market turmoil. I called a financial-planning professional, who had been a former employee of mine, gave her all my financial information, and asked for her input. My fears evaporated as we developed a plan for my life going forward.

As a loyal disciple of Charles Ellis, author of the investment classic “Winning the Loser’s Game,” I managed to forget one of his 10 principles when I decided to go it alone: “Distrust your feelings.” This is just as relevant to a financial professional as it is to a novice investor. And I, of all people, should have known better.

Eleanor Blayney (@EleanorBlayney) is consumer advocate of the Certified Financial Planner Board of Standards.

Read the latest Investing in Funds & ETFs Report.