A State Attorney's office investigator arrested for a DUI early Wednesday morning is a suspect in a fatal hit and run crash on McGregor Boulevard, according to the Florida Highway Patrol.

A State Attorney's office investigator arrested for a DUI early Wednesday morning is a suspect in a fatal hit and run crash on McGregor Boulevard, according to the Florida Highway Patrol.

The Massachusetts family of a man killed by a hit and run driver on McGregor Boulevard early Christmas morning says they learned of his death as they were opening gifts on Wednesday morning.

The crash happened around 12 a.m. near Kasamada Drive, near the Tanglewood subdivision.

The Florida Highway Patrol says a northbound vehicle hit 48-year-old Michael J. Sasen and kept going.

Sasen, who was walking home from a Christmas party, died at the scene.

About 30 minutes later, troopers say a car with damage consistent with a collision with a pedestrian drove by the scene. The man driving the car was arrested for DUI.

The car and other evidence was collected and taken to the Florida Highway Patrol office.

An investigator with the State Attorney's Office, Charles Lawson, was arrested for DUI in the same area around the same time.

Troopers won't say if Lawson is connected to the hit and run. [UPDATE: FHP is now calling Lawson a suspect in the case]

Denise Sasen, the victim's sister, says her brother moved to Fort Myers earlier this year, after the death of his son.

"He moved there because he was taking the loss of his oldest son very hard and wanted to be closer to his dad," Denise Sasen said. "He wanted to go down and spend some time with my dad and just get away from the city and what happened with Josh."

Michael Sasen lived with his father in a home a few miles away from the crash scene.

The family thinks law enforcement knows who is responsible and they don't understand why no one has been arrested yet.

Denise Sasen said the family was opening Christmas gifts when they found out about the crash.

"We took a picture of [Sasen's son] Scott opening Michael's gift. We text it to Michael saying, 'Merry Christmas,' and then my dad called and told me," Denise Sasen said.

She said they want the person responsible to be held accountable for their actions.

"Just because of who he is, I want to make sure that if it's him, he's held accountable," she said, referring to the possibility Lawson is involved.