By Justin Katz | Watchdog Arena

As a state under annual threat of budget deficits that also has the country’s highest Medicaid cost per enrollee, Rhode Island can’t afford not to think about reforming the public health care program.

In the waning days of the presidency of George W. Bush and the governorship of Republican Donald Carcieri, the state experimented with a nation-leading “global waiver” to lower costs in exchange for flexibility.

Even though the experiment was largely successful, intervening governors and the federal Affordable Care Act (ACA; ObamaCare) appear to have blocked parts of the reform and let others peter out.

Now, progressive Democrat Gov. Gina Raimondo has convened a Working Group to Reinvent Medicaid, with a collection of reforms of her own, designed to save or raise $91.1 million in state money next year–a little less than 10 percent of the state’s total Medicaid spending.

The claim of “reinvention” notwithstanding, the two reform plans share many of the same strategies–such as streamlining services for difficult, expensive cases and addressing long-term care in the least comprehensive way that still addresses patients’ needs. Still, they have different emphases, tilting right and left with the politics of their respective administrations.

One action that the ACA prevented in the global waiver, for example, was an increase in premiums that beneficiaries would have paid for subsidized health insurance. By contrast, the Raimondo working group proposes to double the possible tax that commercial insurers pay on the assumption that children who receive Medicaid services would otherwise receive them through private insurance.

The most significant difference between the packages may be their presentation. The waiver was a policy proposal negotiated with the federal government. Raimondo’s working group is a budgetary mandate for which she accounted in her budget proposal for the next fiscal year, even before she’d convened her roomful of technocratic experts.

As noted in a brief analysis that this writer developed with Foundation for Government Accountability health policy expert Josh Archambault for the RI Center for Freedom & Prosperity, Raimondo’s approach could result in implementation of the plan with eyes closed. Fifty-three percent of the savings could wind up transferring costs to private insurers, providers, and employers.

In the context of the budget process, such steps run the risk of becoming hidden taxes, as the private sector picks up new bills in one area so the government can spend the liberated tax money on unrelated programs that shouldn’t be priorities.

Although the working group put specific dollar amounts on its proposals, another 27 percent of the savings should actually be considered speculative. For years after the global waiver, local journalists dogged its architects for overestimating the savings. But the waiver was an experiment; the Raimondo working group’s plans will affect whether the state is able to balance its expenditures and revenue next year.

A change in the working group’s final report from its previous draft illustrates the risk. “Bundled payment arrangements for maternity and childbirth” comes with a savings prediction of $1.9 million.

In the penultimate draft, however, that suggestion had been stuck in a table of “additional initiatives with savings in future years.” Before its final meeting, the working group may have come across evidence that the reform would be faster-acting than expected, but the appearance is not that the list consists of sure-things on which policymakers should bank.

Several of the reform initiatives would actually thwart their role as savings, to the extent that they are successful. Cutting the rate that the state pays for hospital visits for Medicaid patients gives the hospitals incentive to charge more to non-Medicaid customers. Turning around and offering those hospitals bonuses as incentive to meet reform goals, as the proposal also does, would simply eat into the savings.

Other proposals are not so much reforms as gimmicks to shift cost burdens to federal taxpayers. Making sure beneficiaries are billed in the categories that provide the greatest federal match isn’t really a savings to the system.

Meanwhile, an increase in the nursing home “bed tax” would trigger higher federal matching dollars, while another collection of incentive programs would simply shuffle the money back to the providers.

In a final analysis, Governor Raimondo’s Medicaid reforms might be an excellent symbol of the budget tendencies of a struggling big-government state. Policies that might save money, increase efficiencies, and boost the economy are speculative, while user fees and payment reductions create stealth taxes and new spending becomes part of the baseline for the next year.

At the same time, local elected officials, who are immediately accountable to the people–and see them every day as they go about their lives–move more responsibility to their governing peers in Washington, D.C.