In his job title, Jack Hooper calls himself the chief executive of takecommandhealth.com and “Victim of Overpriced Insurance.”

It’s the latter moniker that he hopes will propel his fledgling Dallas-based company to success as he seeks to make it easier for consumers to shop for health insurance.

Where consumers trip up when buying health insurance is when they get into the “details, the fine print, the weeds,” Hooper said.

“Close to 80 percent of individuals choose the wrong plan when they’re just looking at deductibles and co-pays,” he said. “What we can do, we’ll do the math and the heavy lifting for you, but you’ve got to look beyond just deductibles and co-pays.”

Hooper said he timed this week’s launch of Take Command to coincide with open enrollment for the health insurance marketplaces on Healthcare.gov, which runs through Feb. 15.

“Most people don’t know it’s open enrollment or they don’t know this is their chance to look at new health plans,” Hooper said. “In Texas alone this year, there are 2,000 or 3,000 new health plans that are being offered in open enrollment over last year, so even if you got a plan that you kind of liked, you shouldn’t just automatically renew it. It’s worth taking a look to see if there’s something better for you.”

Hooper said Take Command offers all the plans available on Healthcare.gov as well as many off-exchange plans. In addition, the company will help people see if they qualify for a federal tax credit.

Hooper, 31, runs the company with 22-year-old Matt McPhail, the chief technology officer and an electrical engineering major at the University of Pennsylvania.

Consumers can use Take Command’s free service by first entering their ZIP code, then entering information about themselves and their family. They’re then asked for their expected household income for next year.

Take Command will tell them whether they qualify for the premium tax credit under the Affordable Care Act.

“When shopping for health insurance, consumers should consider what plan covers them best for the care they know they need,” Hooper said. “In our research, we found that over 75 percent of a person’s health costs are completely predictable with a little thought. You know if you have a chronic condition, need to see a physical therapist, get seasonal allergies, etc. People panic worrying about major accidents and illness (which is why you get insurance), but they are rare events.”

The website will return three possible plans for the consumer:

The Best Value — “Best Value only considers cost factors such as plan premiums, estimates for care (prescriptions, doctor visits, etc.), tax credits and deductions,” Hooper said. “It ignores any doctor information.”

Most Doctors — “Most Doctors considers everything best value does and also looks to see if the doctors you requested in the interview are in-network,” Hooper said. “For example, if a person lists three doctors, we’ll look at all the plans that have all three of their doctors and then recommend the ‘best value’ from among those plans. If no plans have all their doctors, then we look at the plans that have 2 out of 3, and so on.”

The Least Risky — “You have the lowest out-of-pocket expenses if you have various accidents or health scenarios,” he said. “We usually recommend the Best Value one.”

Take Command is a health insurance broker and makes money from a commission it gets from selling insurance policies. Currently, it’s selling coverage from Blue Cross/Blue Shield, Aetna, Humana and Cigna, and is negotiating with UnitedHealthcare.

“We’d love to get into the group market, too,” Hooper said. “Right now, this is just for individuals.”

The idea for Take Command came from Hooper’s personal experience with health insurance.

“The genesis came when my wife and I moved to Philadelphia for grad school in 2011, starting an MBA program at Wharton [The Wharton School of the University of Pennsylvania],” he said. “We found out the day we were driving to Philadelphia that we were pregnant.

“We had to wait for the student health insurance to kick in, then found out it was twins, which was a double blessing and a double surprise.”

They ran into a brick wall when they tried to find out how much it was going to cost to have twins.

“I was on the student health plan at the University of Pennsylvania Hospital and I couldn’t find out how much twins were going to cost,” he said.

His experience spurred him to use his education to study the business aspects of health care.

“I spent the next two years at Wharton studying health insurance, health care transparency, collecting a bunch of data,” Hooper said. “That’s what led to Take Command Health.”

Follow Pamela Yip on Twitter

at @pamelayip.