LITTLE ROCK — A legislative task force heard Monday from a hospital CEO who spoke urgently about what is at stake for him as lawmakers consider the future of the state’s version of Medicaid expansion.

Paul Taylor, CEO of the for-profit Ozarks Community Hospital in Gravette, told the Health Reform Legislative Task Force that the Medicaid expansion program known as the private option has reduced uncompensated care costs and allowed the hospital to spend millions on expansion.

“I personally guaranteed every penny of that, and so for me, I’m betting on you guys,” Taylor said. “So please come through.”

Taylor was one of several representatives of Arkansas hospitals who addressed the task force in a meeting at the state Capitol Monday. The task force is charged with exploring alternatives to the private option and making recommendations by Dec. 31.

The private option, which uses federal Medicaid money to subsidize private health insurance for low-income Arkansans, is scheduled to end Dec. 31, 2016, under legislation enacted earlier this year. Gov. Asa Hutchinson has said he likely will call a special session next year so lawmakers can take up the task force’s recommendations.

The program, an alternative to the expansion of state Medicaid rolls that was envisioned in the federal Affordable Care Act, has provided coverage to 248,000 Arkansans. Another 66,000 Arkansans have obtained insurance through the Health Insurance Marketplace that was created under the federal health care law.

Nell Smith, an analyst with the state Bureau of Legislative Research, told the task force that in the first six months of 2014, a survey of 23 Arkansas hospitals found that the hospitals saw a collective $18.2 million decrease in uncompensated care costs, or costs to treat patients who could not pay for their treatment.

Bo Ryall, president and CEO of the Arkansas Hospital Association, told the task force that annual uncompensated costs for the state’s 104 hospitals were over $3oo million as recently as 2013.

He and others who addressed the panel noted that the Affordable Care Act mandates cuts in aid to hospitals for uncompensated care costs, in the expectation of decreases in the uninsured population.

Arkansas’ uninsured population decreased by 11 percent in 2014, the first year that the private option was in effect, according to a Gallup poll. It was the largest decrease in the nation.

Dr. Dan Rahn, chancellor of the University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, told the task force that “insurance expansion has certainly helped our operation.”

“In December of 2013 we had our highest rate of uninsurance — 13.7 percent of the patients seen were uninsured. This year we’re running in the range of 3 percent,” he said. “That’s been very important in terms of our ability to fund the entire mission.”

Taylor told the panel he runs two hospitals, one in Gravette and one in Springfield, Mo. Unlike Arkansas, Missouri chose not to implement any form of Medicaid expansion.

Since 2014 the Missouri hospital has seen about 100 layoffs and has been reduced from 45 beds to three, while the Arkansas hospital has expanded and added about 100 employees, Taylor said.

“The one change, folks, is really just the private option,” he said.

Rep. Kim Hammer, R-Benton, asked Taylor, “If it is such a good thing, in the position you’re sitting in, what are two or three things you see as a state we ought to do that would improve upon what we already have?”

“If you do nothing other than continue basically what you’re doing now, I’m in pretty good shape,” Taylor said. “If you do anything else that worsens it, then my entire system is just right on the edge. So I’m desperately hoping that you continue doing at least what you’re doing.”