Last week, a study was published in Health Affairs, a journal of health policy thought and research, that gave Crozer-Chester Medical Center in Upland the dubious distinction of being among the 50 United States hospitals with the highest charge-to-cost ratio for uninsured patients.

The study was executed by Gerard F. Anderson, a professor in the Department of Health Policy and Management and the Department of International Health at the Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health in Baltimore, Md., and Ge Bai an assistant professor in accounting at Washington and Lee University in Lexington, Va.

They analyzed data from the 2012 Medicare cost reports and found that the 50 hospitals that have the highest mark-up of all 5,000 hospitals in the United States, have mark-ups about 10 times their Medicare-allowable costs compared to a national average of 3.4 percent. Crozer had the 12th highest mark-up rate in the country at 1,010 percent and was the 17th United States hospital listed among the top 50 whose mark-up rates ranged from 920 to 1,260 percent.

Uninsured patients at these hospitals are charged, on the average, $1,000 for what costs the hospitals $100.

Advertisement

“There is no justification for these outrageous rates, but no one tells hospitals they can’t charge them,” said Anderson.

While West Virginia and Maryland officials set limits on hospital mark-ups, there is no federal regulation to protect all Americans.

Grant Gegwich, vice president of Public Relations and Marketing for Crozer-Keystone Health System, acknowledged that Crozer-Keystone Health System has had “a historically high charge structure.”

“It does not mean, however, that we are receiving high or unreasonable payments from consumers or insurers,” said Gegwich. “The report focuses on charges, not the more meaningful payment data. Unfortunately, payments from Medicare do not even cover the costs of caring for our patients.”

He noted that in fiscal year 2015, Crozer-Keystone provided more than $25 million in financial assistance and charity care.

According to the study abstract: “While most public and private health insurers do not use hospital charges to set their payment rates, uninsured patients are commonly asked to pay the full charges and out-of-network patients and casualty and workers’ compensation insurers are often expected to pay a large portion of the full charges.”

Nevertheless, noted Anderson and Bai, hospitals’ high mark-ups can mean higher premiums for privately insured, in-network patients because the hospitals’ high mark-ups are often used by hospitals as leverage to negotiate higher prices with private insurance companies.

The high hospital charge-to-cost ratio study comes less than a month after the release of a study by Families USA. It revealed that one out of three lower- to middle-income adults do not go for medical tests, treatments and follow-up care because they cannot afford the high out-of-pocket costs.

The report also noted, “Not getting follow-up care to treat an illness or not taking needed medications can result in people facing avoidable, more serious health problems and more expensive health care costs down the road.”

Utilizing data collected by the Urban Institute’s Health Reform Monitoring Survey in September 2013, September 2014 and December 2014, the Families USA report notes that more than half (50.6 percent) of adults had high deductibles of $1,500 or more, and 30 percent had exceedingly high deductibles of $3,000 or more.

The inflated hospital mark-ups and the exorbitant out-of-pocket costs health insurance companies now charge subscribers, are a vicious cycle that has been ongoing in the United States for decades, ever since the health care delivery system became big business. Hospital officials mark-up charges because they know insurers will only pay a portion of the costs. Insurance executives jack up premiums and out-of-pocket costs so they can still prove profitable after reimbursing subscribers for care. Now that they are required by the U.S. Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act to fully cover certain preventive services and that they cannot turn away patients with pre-existing conditions, they are burdening subscribers with such inventions as “co-insurance” when they actually become sick.

Ending this vicious cycle should be a priority of federal legislators instead of trying to repeal the Affordable Care Act. Health care will not truly be reformed until Americans are spared the cost of big business.