Kickstarter pledgers wait in line to receive their tickets to 'The Hunger Games: Catching Fire' for Skyline Theater's digital premier. (Christy Steadman / Daily Record)

A general consensus of the attendees at the digital premier Saturday night is that they are happy the theater on Main Street "made it."

Complete with a red carpet, DJ Rich Bosisio and complimentary hot cider and cookies, Skyline Theater showed "The Hunger Games: Catching Fire," as part of the reward package for Kickstarter pledgers of $100 or more.

"Most everybody is here because they are huge movie buffs," said Linda Epperson, co-owner of Skyline Theater.

Skyline launched its second Kickstarter campaign Sept. 12 with the goal to raise $35,000 in 45 days to fund a digital conversion, and they reached that goal near the end of October.

Mary Etter, of Cañon City, was the first to pledge to Skyline's Kickstarter campaign. She said she "loves movies," and she wanted the theater "to survive."

"It would not be correct for a town this size not to have a movie theater," she said.

Skyline opened its doors for a digital movie-going experience Nov. 21. With the conversion, movies at Skyline went from 35-millimeter films to digital projection and digital sound conversion with a new screen.

Epperson said the digital picture is a lot cleaner.

"It's a great picture whenever you see it," she said. "From the first time to the 200th time, it's going to be just as clear."

Epperson said people have commented on how "great the screen looks" and the quality of the sound.

Advertisement

"Now it's what it's supposed to be," Epperson said.

Skyline Theater is a family business, and the children of Kate Kelly-Voss, who died of breast cancer last year, "rallied together and decided as a family that we will do our best to save this theater and her legacy," stated Karen Nothdurft on Kickstarter's website.

"I see a lot of people I know, and a lot of people I don't know," said Nothdurft at the digital premier Saturday. "Without all of you, this would not have been possible. Thank you, Cañon City."