Kimm Carr

Kimm Carr, the new national executive director of Community Bible Study, will visit the two CBS classes in Estes Park Nov.4 and 5.

"We are thrilled that Kimm is coming to Estes Park," said Katie Soliday, teaching director of the Day Class. "She is living proof of a person led by Christ in all that she does. She is an inspiration to all of us and we are delighted she is driving here from Colorado Springs to spend time with our two classes."

Carr assumed the executive director's post at the CBS headquarters in Colorado Springs earlier this year. She had been the teaching director of a CBS class in Athens, Georgia. She prayed to God about whether she should continue in that role. "He said, 'You're done. You're not a TD anymore,'" Kimm related in a recent interview. "When you're called out, typically you're called to something new. But I had no idea what that would be." Four months later, she got a call from the executive search team picking a new national executive director for CBS.

"Like David, I was such a nonentity, says Carr. "I felt like a kid in the field shepherding sheep." But God called Carr to be the next Executive Director of CBS by a unanimous vote of the Succession Task Force and the Board of Trustees. And, because God's call was so very clear, she and husband Steve said yes. Her husband quit his high level position with Georgia Power Company and along with their 14-year old son they moved to Colorado Springs.

Advertisement

For almost 40 years Community Bible Study has taught the Word of God through in-depth, community-based Bible studies. With nearly 700 classes in the United States as well as classes in more than 70 countries, Community Bible Study purposes to be an "every-person's Bible study, available to all." Classes for men, women, youth, children, and even babies, are all designed to make members feel loved, cared for, and accepted—regardless of age, ethnicity, socio-economic status, education, or church membership. The Community Bible Study curriculum has been translated into more than 50 languages.

While in Estes Park, Carr will visit with both the CBS Evening Class, which meets Monday nights at Rocky Church at 7:00pm, and with the Day Class, which meets Tuesday mornings at 9:00am at Mountain View Bible Fellowship Church.

Participants are welcome year round in both classes. This year both classes are studying Isaiah. For more information, call Robbi Telfer at 970-586-5260 or Linda Wold at 970-577-8585. For the Tuesday morning class, please call Katie Soliday at 970-586-9576 or email her kt4cbs@yahoo.com.