Buy Photo Workers from Dobson Sheet Metal and Roofing make repairs to the gutters of the new Federal Courthouse on Palafox. According to the contractor, the repairs should be completed by mid-September. (Photo: Tony Giberson, Copyright 1999 Pensacola News Journal)Buy Photo

Welcome to Pensacola: Florida's capital city of irony! Where the same federal courthouse in which Obamacare was challenged is now making people sick — literally.

Our dutiful and vigilant newsmen, Will Isern and Rob Johnson, broke news last week that the downtown building that is supposed to house the hallowed halls of justice is actually a big, rotting tomb of mold, leaks and disrepair. After years of inaction, wasteful studies and shoddy patches, it's so bad that the ever honorable Judge Casey Rodgers fired off a scathing letter to Washington D.C. demanding a fix.

I'd say don't hold your breath, but how else to avoid the toxic mold?

The letter offers a damning glimpse of the General Services Administration, a federal bureaucracy so blob-like, that even a highly esteemed federal judge like Rodgers can't move it to action.

This is going to be a big, ongoing story with more troubling questions than a secret Clinton email account: The failure and negligence of a federal agency. The impact to downtown when the court must temporarily close and relocate. The health of humans who have been exposed to sickening conditions. And the sheer, nauseating amount of tax dollars that have been wasted over the last two decades.

Good thing they like to print money in Washington. They're going to need it.

But most of all, Rodgers, herself, really puts this mess into perspective.

I do not know Judge Rodgers personally. But since I have been part of this newspaper, I've observed her as being the classical paradigm of the honorable judge devoted to the ideals and philosophies of the law. She has been deeply interested in issues of juvenile justice, rehabilitation and the profound way law can affect humanity. Rodgers would probably never consider this notion, but she is a hugely symbolic figure of justice in our community.

And that she is a woman is compelling, because since ancient times, justice has been artistically personified as feminine. Ancient Egyptian depictions of Maat and Isis showed the goddesses bearing scales of justice in the realm of afterlife. Later the Ancient Greeks carved the Titaness, oracle and goddess of justice, Themis, into stone — a physical reminder of law, customs and right and wrong in the culture that invented Democracy. Themis morphed into the Roman figure Justitia (from the Latin, iustus) which prevails today as our modern icon of the stoic, blindfolded female bearing both sword and scales.

The point is that, whether it's leaders, art or architecture, the symbolic representations of justice in society have always mattered. They say something about us. Judge Rodgers stands as a powerful fulfillment of that. The courthouse she has been burdened with stands as the failure of it. That the Romans built things that are in better shape today than this 20-year-old structure is a grand cultural disgrace.

The image of justice should occupy a higher place in society, a place to which we lift our eyes. Judge Rodgers has faithfully served as that lofty figure in our community. That she has been forced into the position of worrying about toxic mold, water intrusion and struggling with an inept and wasteful government agency is shameful. To put it bluntly, the woman has damn more important things to worry about.

This must be fixed. Good for Rodgers for speaking up. Rep. Jeff Miller is working to light fires under the proper buttocks in Washington. Expect Senators Rubio and Nelson to join the effort. Because sadly — and I cringe as I type this — it is going to take an act of Congress to make this right.

But it must be. Because the federal courthouse should stand as strong, reliable and forthright as the good judge who presides inside it.

Read or Share this story: http://on.pnj.com/1bETdWJ