2900 S Harbor Blvd. Santa Ana, CA, 92704 “With the deadline of March 31, 2014 quickly approaching, we are doing everything in our power to help educate, assist, guide, and enroll as many individuals as possible before it’s too late.” Adam Tolin

Quote Selection Insurance Services, Inc has opened a walk-in Obamacare Enrollment Center to provide assistance, education and enrollment to anyone interested in signing up. The deadline for enrollment is March 31, 2014. The center is located at 2900 S. Harbor Blvd, Santa Ana, CA 92704. Quote Selection invites anyone who needs help enrolling to contact the center directly at (800) 707-8581 to explore the various options at no cost.

George Balteria, CEO of Quote Selection Insurance Services states, “It’s one thing to go to the Covered California website on your own and spend hours trying to learn and figure everything out, then being able to successfully navigate the site, and lastly but most importantly, enrolling correctly (with no mistakes) so there are no hold-ups or coverage denials. It’s another to use a licensed professional who has done this hundreds of times in a face-to-face environment, someone who can truly help people decide which options meet their needs, budget and lifestyle. In addition, having someone available who can assist with future questions or concerns is a huge benefit.”

The staff at the Enrollment Center are committed to making the somewhat stressful task of fully understanding and successfully enrolling with Covered California into a painless, easy, and fun experience. Individuals who are having trouble contacting California’s state exchange, navigating the Covered California website, or who need clarification or reassurance regarding The Affordable Care Act, should contact the center today.

Adam Tolin, CFO of Quote Selection Insurance Services insists, “With the deadline of March 31, 2014 quickly approaching, those of us at the Enrollment Center here in Santa Ana are doing everything in our power to help educate, assist, guide, and enroll as many individuals as possible before it’s too late.” Adam has been a health insurance professional for the 13 years and currently owns and operates an insurance brokerage in Orange County, CA.

About Quote Selection

Quote Selection Insurance Services, Inc is a business-to-consumer insurance agency that delivers various insurance products to individuals, families and small businesses. Quote Selection’s integrated suite of services facilitates a comprehensive search and review of leading insurance companies.

Quote Selection Insurance Services, Inc is not owned by any insurance company, therefore they provide objective information to consumers and small business owners to help them make informed decisions about their insurance needs.

For more information, please visit http://www.quoteselection.com.

Contact

Adam Tolin

(714) 545-2061

http://www.quoteselection.com

adamtolin(at)quoteselection(dot)com

The Enrollment Center

2900 S. Harbor Blvd,

Santa Ana, CA, 92704

(800) 707-8581