Resistance to the Earls Court project from local residents. Photograph: Dave Hill

The argument long made by Hammersmith and Fulham council (H&F) for the wholesale demolition of homes, businesses - including the famous Earls Court exhibition centre - and London Underground maintenance facilities in Earls Court and north Fulham is that doing so will clear a space in which a "decent neighbourhood" can be created.

The council began using the term "decent neighbourhoods" in public as long ago as June 2009, when an important planning policy document published for consultation listed neighbourhoods it intended to make decent. Part of the council's case was that the Labour government's "decent homes" programme had been a sticking plaster measure against social disadvantage in housing and that something much bolder was required. Five neighbourhoods were picked and they included the territory since encompassed by the Earls Court Project, one of London's largest redevelopment schemes.

Last Thursday, H&F approved the plans of its developer partner, the property giant Capital and Counties (Capco), for the construction of part of this promised new neighbourhood. The previous Tuesday H&F's borough neighbour Royal Kensington and Chelsea, approved Capco's plans for the small part of the Earls Court Project that lies within its boundaries.

These green lights consent to 1,276 residential units being built on the site of the Earls Court centre to form an Earls Court Village, a large proportion of the 7,500-odd promised for the project area as a whole. Capco is, of course, delighted as another part of its grand project jigsaw falls into place. Its investment director, Gary Yardley, has a special word for what is taking place - the area is being "re-imagined," he says. Others say it's being wrecked for private profit. Either way, if the scheme comes to fruition will it conform to H&F's view of what a "decent neighbourhood" is?

That important 2009 planning policy document - entitled Core Strategy Options - sets out the council's definition (it's in a highlighted section on page 32 and others). According to this, a decent neighbourhood should be clean and safe, and "located in an area rich in opportunity" where "most people of working age are in work rather than dependent on welfare". It should also include "a range of shops, local services, leisure and other facilities within walking distance that meet the needs of a mixed community at different stages of peoples' lives".

Good schools, health and street management are mentioned too, and some firm points are made about housing. A decent neighbourhood should, for example, contain "a housing mix by type, size and tenure to attract people on a range of incomes," and be one where "getting on in life does not mean moving out" and "where people can acquire a stake in their own homes". According to the council a "decent neighbourhood" should also feature good building design in "types of residential development that are predominantly low or medium rise (e.g. 3-6 storeys) consisting of houses, small scale developments of flats and maisonettes, modern forms of the traditional mansion block...in street based layouts."

Core Strategy Options also summarised in more detail (pages 50-52) the housing issues the council wanted to address as part of its decent neighbourhoods vision. It pointed out that "the most deprived areas are almost exclusively areas with high proportions of social rented housing," and said that the ways in which social housing had become allocated had resulted in "a marked lack of diversity in the range of housing and housing options available to those on low to middle incomes". It continued:

Where large monotenure estates dominate an area, exhibiting significant deprivation and lack of opportunity, we will consider how to transform these areas into decent neighbourhoods, comprising mixed and balanced communities.

A section devoted to the West Kensington, Earls Court and North Fulham "regeneration area" (from page 81) suggested how decent neighbourhood ideals could be implemented there:

There is a substantial opportunity for major regeneration based on a comprehensive approach to the area comprising the Earls Court exhibition complex, the TfL Lillie Bridge depot and adjacent housing estates. As an economic led scheme with a particular focus on establishing an international convention centre for London, this area has the potential to become a major employment hub for the borough and west London as whole as well as providing significant new housing.

The ensuing commentary enlarged on the international convention centre idea - initialised as ICC - stating a preference for it to be provided as "a refurbishment and/or redevelopment" of existing Earls Court conference facilities (including nearby Olympia). The option of an alternative approach was also discussed. This too was described as a "comprehensive approach" but one "based mainly on housing without an ICC or a significant commercial element". Yet it was felt this would produce fewer "regeneration benefits" than a "mixed use" one that included an ICC.

Fast forward to last Thursday night and the Capco plans that H&F approved. Fast forward too to the Capco plans approved the previous Tuesday by Royal Kensington and Chelsea. To read the relevant documents will take you a long time, and no matter how long you spend on the task you will find within no proposal to build an international convention centre - indeed, there has been no mention of that for some time. You will, though, find it confirmed that Capco wishes to destroy the existing exhibition space.

Where does this leave the council's core strategy preference for an "economy led" and "mixed use" approach to transforming the neighbourhood, one that would maximise "regeneration benefits"? What we have here is a high density housing scheme - characterised as a "village" - containing very little commercial space of any kind, let alone a landmark business drawing thousands of people from far and wide as an ICC might have done, and as the current Earls Court centre still does. The justification provided for consenting to the plans describes them as "residential led" (page 135). Is H&F's "decent neighbourhood" vision on its way to being fulfilled or is something quite different happening instead?

Let's look at the dwellings Capco has been told it can construct. Most of the Earls Court "village" site - about double the acreage - falls into K&C, yet 690 of the proposed dwellings - well over half - are in the H&F part. These would be contained within eight buildings. These buildings would be between six storeys and 21 storeys high, yet in 2009 the council said that decent neighbourhood housing should be predominantly between three storeys and six.

Of the 690 total, 287 units would be "single aspect" dwellings, meaning that light can only enter them from one side. Single aspect dwellings are controversial. As the council officers' report notes (see page 188), they are "generally discouraged by both local planning policy and the [Boris Johnson] London Plan". The report further records that the council's own planning rules state that single aspect units which face north are particularly frowned on - they "should be avoided wherever possible". Yet 103 of Capco's 287 single aspect units - 15% of the 690 total within H&F - would be north-facing.

Good reason to reject the plans? The officers' report thinks not. It assures us that north-facing single aspect units have been "avoided where possible". It says that most of the north-facers are within two of the eight buildings proposed and that, of these, "almost" all the ones that "infringe the council's standard" would only do so by a few degrees and, anyway, their windows are quite large. Does this conform to the "decent neighbourhoods" requirement for good design?

Another part of the council's "decent neighbourhoods" recipe was, as mentioned above, "a housing mix by type, size and tenure to attract people on a range of incomes," and "where people can acquire a stake in their own homes". Yet, as I've previously reported, not one brick of the Earls Court "village" will be classified as "affordable" - not even the type of affordable that enables people part-buy a home.

This 16 acre section of the wider Earls Court Project seems, then, very, very from exemplifying H&F's decent neighbourhoods criteria. But might the new neighbourhood as a whole, which would cover 77 acres? This too appears unlikely.

The council argues that "monotenure" estates should be broken up for their residents' own good, yet the two estates in the project area it has arranged for Capco to demolish are not "monotenure" - 22% of their 760 dwellings (171) are owner-occupied, numbering classical musicians, lawyers and medical and educational professionals among their inhabitants, and the rest are for social rent - the cheapest form of "affordable" home.

The council has pledged that replacement homes for all qualifying estate residents will be offered nearby, with home owners unable to meet the cost of the new property provided for them invited to enter into a share ownership arrangement with the council. Capco is required to supply a further 740 "affordable" homes, none of them for social rent.

This seems to mean that at the very most only 1500 of the roughly 7,500 residential units in any completed Earls Court Project are sure to be "affordable" of some kind. That would leave a minimum of 6,000 for (very unaffordable) market sale, way more expensive than most local people could afford. That's an overall maximum possible "affordable" percentage of around 20%, and only 11% of the net increase of homes in the project area - an exceptionally low figure, even by current London standards.

The degree of "tenure mix" between "affordable" and market homes on the estates with that planned for new housing in the project area as a whole and the latter would actually be smaller than it is now - the exact opposite of what "decent neighbourhoods" are meant to have, according to H&F. One difference would be the inclusion of non-social affordable homes. A bigger one would be that the vast majority of the flats and houses there would be privately-owned or rented at market rates whereas now the vast majority are not.

It's true that at least one residential section of the overall project will have a more even tenure, and therefore social, mix. The unbuilt Lillie Square development, launched recently for off-plan sale, will contain 25% affordable homes. Most, if not all, will probably be for social rent (although it's been left to me to draw this matter to potential investors' attention). I'm told these homes' designs will live up to a "decent neighbourhoods" goal of being difficult to distinguish from the outside. However, appearances can deceive - those poorer residents will be excluded from Lillie Square's "premium" features, such as its private swimming pool.

Finally, let's look at the employment implications of the Earls Court project. A "decent neighbourhood," should provide many job opportunities, the council says. It and Capco have claimed that at least 10,000 new jobs will be created over a 20 year period. Yet I'm aware of no published assessment of how many will be lost as a result of the demolition work that must take place. London Underground's Lillie Bridge depot employs people. A host of local hotels, restaurants and pubs depend on the Earls Court exhibition centre for trade, as do other businesses further away.

Can a figure be put on these? The Association of Event Organisers, which strongly opposes the exhibition centre's closure, says that Earls Court and the smaller Olympia nearby between them account for over 1,000 jobs in the two local boroughs and around 12,500 in London. These estimates originate from the website of the company that operates the two centres for Capco, although I'm told they disappeared from it a while ago. It's tempting to conclude that H&F's "decent neighbourhoods" ideals have disappeared too.

This article was last updated at at 19:50 to give fuller details of the combination of housing tenures envisaged for the scheme