Avalanche coach Patrick Roy is taking it slow with young third-line wingers Mikko Rantanen and Borna Rendulic, who have a combined 13 games of NHL experience.

Rantanen, a 18-year-old rookie, and Rendulic, 23, who is in his second year in North America, both played fewer than eight minutes in Thursday’s season-opener against Minnesota. The plan was to continue to limit their minutes heading into Saturday’s game against the visiting Dallas Stars.

“The more they earn my trust, the more comfortable I’ll be to put them on the ice,” Roy said at his Thursday morning news conference.

The Avs currently have a terrific fourth line in center John Mitchell and wingers Cody McLeod and Jack Skille, and Roy will continue to give them third-line minutes until Rantanen and Rendulic become more comfortable in their surroundings.

Mitchell plays on a power-play unit, and McLeod — Colorado’s most physical forward — was the extra forward in the waning minutes of a 6-on-5 attack against the Wild.

Carl Soderberg centers Rantanen and Rendulic but also played with Mitchell and McLeod against the Wild.

“We were chasing the puck too much, didn’t get much offense,” Rantanen said after his first NHL game and playing with Rendulic. “There’s little details I need to learn, like in the defensive zone. Of course, it was a tough loss because we led by three goals. I think the second game will be easier. Hopefully, (Saturday) I’ll feel a little better.”

Footnotes. The Stars were 0-3-2 last season against the Avalanche and entered Saturday’s game 1-6-3 against Colorado over the past two seasons. … Avs goalie Semyon Varlamov entered the game with a career record of 9-3-2 against Dallas. … Stars newcomer Antti Niemi, formerly of the San Jose Sharks, entered the game 8-1-3 in his career against Colorado. … In 24 previous games against the Stars, Avs center Matt Duchene had 26 points (10 goals). … The Avs have Sunday off before returning to practice Monday. They conclude their three-game homestand Wednesday against the Boston Bruins. … Saturday was the 600th Avalanche game at the Pepsi Center.