Tammarrian Rogers traveled more than 2,000 miles with her mother from Seattle, Washington to celebrate this Memorial Day in Newton, Mississippi. She's one of about 150 people who visited the Mississippi Veterans Memorial Cemetery to remember those who have sacrificed so much. It's a pain she's seen firsthand.

"My father was in the marines. He was a lieutenant colonel. He served for 33 years," Rogers says. "Unfortunately, on Feb. 23 of this year, he committed suicide. He shot himself in the heart. He had PTSD and depression."

Rogers isn't alone. Many of those who came to honor our fallen have fought their own battles, both in combat and in their hearts, or have seen their family go through those kinds of struggles.

"You've come across people and places who've experienced true loss. It's real easy for us to separate it as a distant event instead of the real life people that are involved with it," Major John Branning, brigade chaplain, explains. "So for the families here who have experienced that, for those of us who have been in combat theaters, it was just a time for us to pause and say hey, the message we want to have is that people have paid the price for our freedom."

Organizers went all out to show their support. Guest speakers shared their experiences, flags were set out to honor those buried in the cemetery and the L16 flyover brought tears to many eyes.

"To me, it's about educating the younger generations," cemetery director Henry Gruno says. "There's a lot of people in the younger generations who are not sure what these people have done to allow them to play their video games, go to school, choose the religion they want to choose."

Rogers says it means a lot to her to be able to share experiences with others who were at the memorial. It's a bittersweet emotion to pay tribute to every person who fought for our home.

"To have them missing now is a deep pain, but you're so proud of them for what they gave, what they did, for us and our freedom," she says.