Catherine Sullivan Rubinstein, Lynn Schnapp and Eric Bradshaw returned this week from running the Antarctica Marathon, which involved marathon flights and boat rides just to get to King George Island in the South Shetlands island chain. Provided

In a coincidence of sorts, three of the 188 people from 20 countries who completed the 16th annual Antarctica Marathon earlier this month hail from the Charleston area.

Nurse practitioner Catherine Sullivan Rubinstein, attorney Eric Bradshaw and pulmonologist Dr. Lynn Schnapp finished the marathon, which involves even greater marathons getting to and from the event itself.

Rubinstein, 46, of Charleston, says getting to the event involved 18 hours of flights to Argentina and then a days-long boat journey across the rough waters of the Drake Passage to King George Island at the tip of Antarctica. That journey took two days to get there and three days to return as the boat made its ways through seas with 10- to 25-foot swells.

“I still feel swimmy in my head,” admitted Rubinstein on Wednesday, two days after returning from the trip. “The ground still feels like it’s moving,”

Due to the extensive, often dangerous travel, the cost of the marathon adventure also is not for the faint of heart — $10,000 — according to Rubinstein.

Because international treaties limit the number of visitors on Antarctica to no more than 100 per day, the event — which features a marathon and half marathon — started races on two days, March 9 and March 10.

That limitation also means those who sign up have to wait two to three years to go.

Rubinstein and Bradshaw, who know each other by participating in physical fitness boot camps at the Medical University of South Carolina, thought they would be going in separate years but both were accepted for the 2015 event.

They didn’t find out about Schnapp going until two weeks before the trip. Both Rubinstein and Schnapp work at MUSC, the former in pediatric cardiac surgery and the latter as the division chief of pulmonary, critical care, allergy and sleep medicine.

Rubinstein and Bradshaw ran on March 9 when the course went from snow-covered to snow-melted, as temperatures that climbed to 39 degrees resulted in slush and mud. Schnapp and the other runners on March 10 were met with colder temps and wind gusts up to 32 miles per hour.

Subsequently, their finish times were relatively slow compared to standard marathons. Rubinstein, who qualified for the Boston Marathon with a 3:53:00 finish at last December’s Kiawah Marathon, finished in 5:17:02. Bradshaw completed it in 6:08:13 and Schnapp in 6:26:06.

Rubinstein described the terrain and scenery as if she were “on another planet.”

Besides the adventure of running in Antarctica, Rubinstein said a highlight for her was seeing an array of wildlife, including four species of whale, three species of penguin and two species of seal. She also gets to cross one more continent off her life goal of visiting all seven.

She said a quote she read on the boat summed up the adventure in the best way: “It’s the worst way to have the best time of your life.”