For some Topeka residents, Christmas came very early this year. On Saturday, more than 100 volunteers participated in Christmas in Action, formerly known as Christmas in April, an event which renovates the homes of elderly residents.

Christmas in Action is put on by teams of volunteers from local businesses and churches.

The Capitol Federal team spent Saturday morning fixing up a house in the 500 Block of S.E. Locust Street.

“Here we’re replacing broken windows, fixing plumbing leaks, redoing some doors, replacing a leak under the lavatory in the master building,” said Dick Bahr, a member of the Capitol Federal team.

All members of the team were employees of Capitol Federal, Bahr said.

The owner of the home, Lee Triplett, was selected through an application process that was done in the fall. To qualify, an applicant must be a senior, and must own the home and can’t be renting it. Triplett said he was very grateful for the opportunity to be a part of Christmas in Action.

“It’s very encouraging to know that you have the assistance, particularly when you become a senior it’s very important, because then at that point when your income is limited and you’re not able to do some things for a lot of different reasons — health reasons, economical reasons, social reasons,” Triplett said.

Jewell Welch, vice president of Christmas in Action, said that much of the money that goes into renovations comes from donations and that all of the labor is free, because it is all done by volunteers.

“One thing that makes this program so successful is that is it’s one day a year, or two (days) maybe,” Welch said. “It’s not every month, it’s not every week. I’d say it’s one weekend a year and a lot of people can get in to volunteer for this because it’s not a commitment on a weekly basis.”

The Blue Cross and Blue Shield of Kansas team fixed leaks and painted the walls inside a home in the 200 Block of N.E. Scotland Avenue.

Cathy Holmes was participating in Christmas in Action for her sixth year. She served as the team captain on Saturday.

“There’s nine of us, and the majority of us having been doing this for at least three years,” Holmes said. “We know how to work together and we know what each other’s strengths are, and it doesn’t take a lot of coordinating to make it all happen because we work together at work too. We just carry over that camaraderie from work to here.”

Christmas in Action is in its 17th year. A total of 225 houses were refurbished in the program’s first 16 years, according to Vern Failor, president of Christmas in Action.

About 15 houses were renovated Saturday.