"In some cases, there is as much variation from one part of a state to another as from one state to another." -- analyst Cynthia Cox

Guntersville resident Randy Lane went shopping this month on the Affordable Care Act marketplace and came away with health insurance for the first time since retiring as a sheriff’s deputy in Maryland in 2010.

A $555 subsidy allowed Lane to find a “silver” plan for himself and his wife from Blue Cross and Blue Shield of Alabama for $16 per month. Alabama’s Children’s Health Insurance Program covers his two dependent children.

Lucky for Lane, he lives in Marshall County, home to some of the state’s least expensive insurance policies. Had he lived in neighboring Madison County, which has some of the highest insurance prices, that same Blue Value Silver plan would have cost $50 per month even after applying a $593 subsidy.

“I don’t know why it would be like that. It doesn’t make any sense,” said Lane when told about the price disparity. “I’m glad I live in Marshall County, then.”

With the approaching March 31 deadline for obtaining health insurance without risk of penalty, more people like Lane are discovering one of the quirks of the health care exchanges: Where you live can make a big difference in selection, cost and available subsidies.

“In some cases, there is as much variation from one part of a state to another as from one state to another,” said Cynthia Cox, a Kaiser Family Foundation senior policy analyst.

Some of the difference in options can be attributed to state policies. For instance, Lane and his wife – and not just their children – would be eligible for Medicaid in about half of the states and would have no premiums or co-pays at all. But Alabama is one of the states that chose not to expand Medicaid to cover lower-income folks who come out above the poverty line.

Most of the variation, though, has to do with cost of health care, the prevalence of health care providers and other factors that state governments do not directly control.

Insurance companies determine rates by drawing up ratings areas, based on medical costs. Oftentimes, Cox said, rural areas have higher insurance premiums because of fewer doctors and insurers.

Alabama’s most, least expensive

Data from HealthCare.gov shows that the cost before subsidies of a Blue Saver Silver plan, which Blue Cross sells in all 67 counties, is highest in Madison, Limestone and Russell counties. For a single 30-year-old, the premium is $249. Lauderdale, Colbert, Hale, Greene and Tuscaloosa counties have the cheapest prices, $211 for a 30-year-old.

Blue Cross enjoys a virtual monopoly in the state. When Lane, 51, logged onto HealthCare.gov to shop for plans, he had a grand total of six options – all from Blue Cross. He was surprised to learn that he would have had 85 different options if he lived in Salt Lake City.

“That’s insane,” he said.

The prices for “silver” plans in the Utah capital, after applying the $465 subsidy that the Lane family would be eligible for there, range from zero to $202.

Fewer choices do not automatically translate into higher premiums, though. Health care providers might simply be forced to take less money.

“When you have a really dominant health insurance company, they might be able to negotiate more favorable (reimbursement) rates from doctors and hospitals, because they don’t really have a lot of other options,” Cox said.

Of course, Cox said, there is no guarantee that an insurance company with near-monopoly power will pass on the savings to customers, who also have fewer alternatives. But she added that with companies now barred by law from rejected customers with pre-existing conditions, they “want to price the plans so that healthy people want to buy those plans. So they still have incentives to keep costs low.”

Justin Roberts, a University of South Alabama graduate student living on a $15,000 annual stipend, got a taste of that principle when he signed up for health coverage earlier this year for the first time since he became too old to stay on his parents’ plan. Roberts, 27, qualified for a $190 subsidy from the federal government and used it to buy a “silver” plan for $13.

In Jefferson County, one of the few places in the state where Humana Inc. also sells policies on the exchange, the same Blue Value Silver plan that Roberts bought in Mobile costs $22 more per month. And the tax credit is $4 less generous, meaning that Roberts would have paid $26 instead of $13. Roberts would have paid even more money in Madison County, $39.

Even across Mobile Bay in Baldwin County, which offers the same seven plans available to Roberts in the city, the prices vary slightly. The base price is lower, but so is the subsidy. The Blue Value Silver plan would have cost Roberts $2 more after the credit.

More choices elsewhere

If Roberts lived in Philadelphia, he would have 27 plans to choose from. Silver premiums after the subsidy range from zero to $71. In Salt Lake City, he would have had a whopping 91 options. The prices generally are lower than in Alabama, but the $171 monthly subsidy also is less. Roberts could have chosen from a menu of silver plans with subsidized costs ranging from zero to $46.

“One the one hand, it makes it easier (shopping HealthCare.gov in Mobile), because you didn’t have a lot of choices. On the other hand, you should have as many choices as possible,” said Roberts, who studies genetics and volunteers with the health care advocacy group Bama Covered. “I think that’s definitely one of the drawbacks. I don’t know if the prices would be lower, but at least you’d have a choice.”

Even though he might have been able to get a better deal in marketplace in another states – and would have qualified for a Medicaid in many states – Roberts said he is happy with his plan so far.

He recalled getting into a fender-bender shortly after leaving his parents’ policy. The insurance company ended up paying after determining that it was within a grace period, he said. But the emergency room bill would have been $3,000 to $4,000.

“There were plenty of instances I didn’t go to the doctor where I would have if I had insurance,” he said.

Lane, too, said he is happy to have coverage for his family. He said his family lives off of his law enforcement pension, which is a little less than $30,000 a year. He said he could not afford insurance on the open market.

As for the geographical differences in prices and subsidies, experts said that might change in the coming years.

“As insurance companies gain more experience over time, you might see them pull in somewhat,” said Cox, the Kaiser analyst. “You might see less variation over time.”