Print Email Font Resize Font Resize Citizens' Climate Lobby: For Earth Day, pass a carbon tax

The first Earth Day in 1970 inspired Congress to enact laws that have been enormously successful in cleaning our air, water and land. In California, we celebrate Earth Day 2015 while enjoying balmy weather and green hills, and we drink a toast with water from the Sierra and our own local aquifer -- while it lasts. Past successes do not matter if we fail to effectively address global warming, whose impacts are evident in the intensity of the current drought. California's average annual temperatures have trended upward for four decades, and 2014 was the hottest year in California since measurements began in the late 1800s. The increased temperatures intensify the effects of the lack of rain. They reduce the Sierra snowpack and increase evaporation from reservoirs, cropland and forests. Recent studies provide evidence of the connection: Soil drying caused by higher temperatures is expected to increase drought severity in the Southwest (including California) and the Central Plains in this century, according to a study published this year by NASA, Columbia and Cornell researchers. Even an expected increase in precipitation in parts of California won't make up for the increased evaporation. There is an 80 percent chance that a decades-long megadrought will hit the Southwest and Central Plains before 2100 if the world stays on its current trajectory of greenhouse gas emissions. Advertisement Stanford scientists reviewed 120 years of California drought data and concluded that our state's worst droughts happened when it was both warm and dry, and that global warming increases the probability these conditions will occur at the same time. One author said these findings "provide very strong evidence that global warming is already making it much more likely that California experiences conditions that are similar to what we have experienced during the current severe drought." A study published in 2014 by Stanford scientists found that the conditions associated with the lack of precipitation in California (persistent high pressure over the Pacific Ocean that diverts storms) are "much more likely to occur today than prior to the human emission of greenhouse gases." Rising temperatures and increased evaporation are expected to boost the risk of fire, the National Research Council said in 2013. In Northern and Central California, the average area burned by wildfire per year is likely to be two to three times larger for each degree Centigrade of warming. Nearly 1 degree of warming has occurred, and at least 2 degrees is expected. Staying on the current path of world greenhouse gas emissions produces the highest risk that the most severe droughts will occur. To prevent the worst damage, Congress should enact carbon fee and dividend legislation. This would levy a fee on the production of fossil fuels and distribute all of the revenue to American households. The rising carbon fee would promote the transition from fossil fuels to clean energy. The payments to households would compensate them for the rise in fuel prices and stimulate economic growth. Assessments on imports would encourage other countries to adopt carbon prices, curbing climate-disrupting pollution worldwide. This proposal has bipartisan support, most notably including former U.S. Secretary of State George P. Shultz, now at the Hoover Institution. Increasing this bipartisan support is the mission of Citizens' Climate Lobby, whose website contains source material for the facts here. Wouldn't passage of this legislation this year be a great way to celebrate Earth Day 2016? Will B. Betchart, Cupertino, is a consulting water resources engineer; John Fioretta, San Jose, is an attorney and Tom Shaw, San Jose, is an editor for a technology research firm. All are volunteers for Citizens' Climate Lobby. They wrote this for this newspaper.