President Barack Obama signs into law the Gabriella Miller Kids First Research Act. Eric cantor is at right.

In public, the White House has greeted this week’s ouster of House Majority Leader Eric Cantor with no hint of lament, as President Barack Obama deemed the stunning defeat of a top Republican an “interesting election.”

But in private, Vice President Joe Biden reached out to Mr. Cantor the day after the primary, a White House official confirmed.

The response to the majority leader’s downfall – much like the White House’s relationship with the Virginia Republican – has been nuanced.

The president and Mr. Cantor have clashed frequently, concurring on little and offering dueling versions of their conversations that played out behind closed doors. But despite their intense disagreements, the two continued to talk. And for his part, Mr. Biden sometimes helped smooth interactions between the White House and the majority leader.

The complexities of the Obama-Cantor relationship were on display in April when the two stood together at the White House as the president signed a pediatric research bill that the majority leader had championed. Two weeks later, Messrs. Obama and Cantor were sparring over a phone call, providing conflicting accounts of who said what.

The president described it as a pleasant conversation that started with a wish for a happy Passover and segued to talk about immigration laws. Mr. Cantor put out a statement chiding Mr. Obama and saying that the president does not know how to work with Congress.

“You do not attack the very people you hope to engage in a serious dialogue,” Mr. Cantor said.

The incident was just one of several skirmishes that played out in public as the president and Mr. Cantor wrangled with a long list of issues. In 2010, Mr. Obama complained when Mr. Cantor brought a copy of the more than 2,000-page Democratic health care bill and sat behind the pile of paper during a bipartisan summit.

The president said health care is complicated and suggested that Mr. Cantor was using the lengthy document as a prop.

Although the president and the majority leader found little common ground over the years, Mr. Obama pledged early on to continue trying.

“I’m going to keep on talking to Eric Cantor,” Mr. Obama said in 2009. “Some day, sooner or later, he is going to say, ‘Boy, Obama had a good idea.’”

Their relationship hit a low point in 2011 during negotiations to raise the debt ceiling. Mr. Cantor said the president stormed out of a meeting at the White House – a characterization that Democrats disputed.

A few months later, signs of a thaw with the White House emerged as Mr. Biden and Jill Biden invited Mr. Cantor and his wife for a “personal” dinner at the Naval Observatory.

Last year, Mr. Cantor wrote an essay about the vice president for Time magazine’s list of the 100 most influential people.

“The best way to find solutions and common ground is to build personal relationships based on trust,” Mr. Cantor wrote. “No one in Washington understands this better than Joe Biden.”

While Messrs. Obama and Cantor had their ups and downs, their negotiations often were serious and substantive, said William Galston, a senior fellow at the Brookings Institution and a former policy adviser to President Bill Clinton.

“Constraints on both sides imposed severe limits on the extent to which these discussions could yield viable compromise,” he said. “As we now know, Cantor went further than the Tea Party was willing to stomach.”

Now, as many conservatives suggest that the lesson from Mr. Cantor’s defeat is that Republicans should stand even firmer against the White House, it’s not clear whether the lines of communication will remain open once a new majority leader is installed.

Still, the White House has betrayed no qualms about Mr. Cantor’s departure in public comments. A White House official declined to offer details of Mr. Biden’s phone conversation with the majority leader. And White House spokesman Josh Earnest repeated Friday that despite the Republican shake-up, there still should be a path forward for overhauling immigration laws.

Despite the show of confidence, though, some Democrats have noted that the president’s often strained relationship with Mr. Cantor might be better than the alternative.

The toppling of Mr. Cantor “will further reduce — perhaps to zero — the chances for compromise in the few areas where it might have been possible previously,” Mr. Galston said.

Jeffrey Sparshott contributed to this article.

Get more news from Washington, first thing in the morning, by signing up for the Capital Journal Daybreak newsletter: on.wsj.com/CapitalJournalSignup