There are only two still-running choices for Minnesotans taking part in the Democratic caucuses on Super Tuesday. Here’s a look at them:

Hillary Clinton

Experience: A practicing lawyer and law professor, who during an accomplished political career has been Secretary of State, a New York Senator and, of course, the First Lady of the United States.

Key policies: She has taken a stronger stance on gun control than candidates on either side, wants to reform campaign financing, has vowed to protect the Affordable Care Act, albeit with revisions, and wants 33 percent of America’s energy to be produced by renewables by 2027.

A full list of her policies can be found here.

Fun fact: She loves hot sauce. Slate.com reports she owns more than 100 bottles, kept Tabasco Sauce on Air Force One, and dribbles a spicy sauce on nearly all her food.

Campaign highlight: Although the margins of victory weren’t huge, Clinton won the Iowa and Nevada primaries, and has also won the backing of most Democratic politicians, among them Sens. Al Franken and Amy Klobuchar.

Campaign misstep: The Wrap reports that at an appearance in Iowa last month, she admitted she hadn’t seen “Making a Murderer,” but tried to use the show to make a point about racial injustice in the criminal justice system, even though the subjects of the Netflix series are white.

What her supporters say: “Hillary Clinton has convinced a majority of Americans that she has the intellect, stature, and temperament to do the job. She has faced up to — and successfully faced down — decades of right-wing assaults, many of them false,” a Boston Globe editorial said.

What her critics say: They have a tough time trusting her. A recent poll found one in five Americans consider her to be dishonest in some way, with her credibility taking a hit from the controversy over her use of her private email account while Secretary of State, according to the Washington Post.

Bernie Sanders

Experience: Elected Mayor of Burlington, the largest city in Vermont, in 1981. He then served as Vermont’s sole Congressman in the House of Representatives for 16 years, before being elected to the U.S. Senate in 2006.

Key policies: A Democratic Socialist, Sanders has made waves with his proposals to reduce income and wealth inequality by promising free college tuition, free healthcare, double the federal minimum wage to $15 an hour, and take on Wall Street speculators.

You can read more here.

Fun fact: He’s an accomplished folk musician, with the website Good reporting in 1987, while mayor of Burlington, he recorded an album alongside 30 Vermont-based musicians.

Campaign highlight: While the New York Times suggests Sanders getting 49.1 percent of the vote in Iowa to Clinton’s 49.6 percent wasn’t the victory it was initially pegged as, it was still the first legitimate indication that there’s a real fight for the Democratic ticket.

Campaign misstep: The Atlantic reports Sanders tweeted that any Supreme Court nominee of his would make reversing the Citizens United decision (allowing corporations and unions permission to spend unlimited sums on political ads) their first priority.

The problem? Justices can only review questions that come before the court, rather than revisiting old decisions on a whim.

What his supporters say: “He might be old, with the Larry David demeanor of a crotchety Jewish uncle, but he is a formidable speaker. He makes statements of fact that, together, add up to a case both morally indisputable and exhilarating for being so rarely voiced out loud,” an opinion piece in The Guardian says.

What his critics say: “My worry about Sanders, watching him in this campaign, is that he isn’t very interested in learning the weak points in his ideas, that he hasn’t surrounded himself with people who police the limits between what they wish were true and what the best evidence says is true,” a Vox piece on Sanders’ economic policies and his management style said.