Getty Images/iStockphoto (Photo: ayzek)

The head of Indiana's extensive community college system told a congressional panel Tuesday that the federal government should ease the Affordable Care Act's requirement that large employers offer health insurance to those who work at least 30 hours a week.

Ivy Tech President Tom Snyder said the law's requirement, which begins next year, has caused Ivy Tech to limit the classes taught by each adjunct professor so they don't qualify for health insurance. That, in turn, has required the hiring of additional adjuncts to fill the gaps, which can be particularly challenging in certain subject areas.

"Because of the unique role of the adjunct in the community college, the end result may be less access for the students and the inability of faculty to stay with one college," Snyder told the House Ways and Means Committee.

Rep. Todd Young, the Bloomington Republican who sits on the committee, has introduced legislation to change the Affordable Care Act's definition of full-time from 30 hours-a-week to 40 hours. Indiana Sen. Joe Donnelly, a Democrat, is part of a similar effort in the Senate.

But Helen Levy, a professor at the University of Michigan Institute for Social Research, told the panel that about three to five times as many workers would be in jeopardy of having their hours reduced by employers looking to avoid providing insurance if the definition of full time were raised to 40 hours a week. That's because there are more uninsured workers who work 40 hours a week than 30 hours.

Lanhee Chen, a fellow at the Hoover Institution, countered that reducing hours causes greater economic hardship on those working 30 hours a week than 40.

Rep. Lloyd Doggett, a Texas Democrat, said that no matter what cutoff Congress sets, employers would reduce hours for those they don't want to provide insurance.

Snyder said Ivy Tech supports ensuring Americans have access to health care, but can't afford the cost of $10,000 to $15,000 for each employee working at least 30 hours a week. Doing so, he said, would cost $10 million to $12 million a year for Ivy Tech, the nation's largest community college system.

Ivy Tech serves 200,000 students and has about 8,000 employees, Snyder said.

School districts throughout Indiana have likewise reduced the hours of classroom aides, school bus drivers and other part-time workers so the employees don't meet the law's definition of full time. And 39 Indiana school corporations are challenging the law in a suit pending in federal court.

"We need to restore this traditional definition of full time," Young said.

But before the ACA, employers already had varying policies on how many hours an employer must work to get health benefits. At Ivy Tech, for example, employees who are not adjuncts can get coverage if they work 32 hours a week. State employees get coverage at 37.5 hours a week. Purdue University doesn't offer benefits to adjuncts and student workers; but for those in a "benefits eligible position," full time is defined as working at least 20 hours a week.

Levy said that the best evidence of how the law will affect the labor market is what happened after Massachusetts and Hawaii required employers to offer coverage to workers. There was no negative effect on overall employment in those states, she said.

"I do not mean to dismiss either the economic or the emotional resonance of the stories of individuals that we are hearing," Levy said. "But, at the same time, I think it is important to look at the big picture."

Snyder said part of the problem is that colleges are required to factor in the time adjuncts spend outside of the classroom, doing preparatory and other work. There's no easy way to measure that, Snyder said, so community colleges have asked the federal government for guidance.

Michigan Rep. Sander Levin, the panel's top Democrat, claimed that what Snyder was really saying is that people should have insurance, as long as Ivy Tech doesn't have to pay for it. But Levin was sympathetic with the school's struggle with how to factor in the time adjuncts spend outside the classroom.

"That's an issue that has to be worked out," Levin said.

Contact Maureen Groppe at mgroppe@gannett.com or @mgroppe on Twitter.

Read or Share this story: http://indy.st/1b5FNw4