Amid a maddening government shutdown, the House of Representatives found reason for a rousing standing ovation on Thursday.

Republicans and Democrats alike cheered the Capitol police, who had just fired 17 shots and killed an unarmed female driving wackily with a baby in her back seat.

Finally, we’d broken partisan gridlock and found common cause.

But praising those who gunned down a perhaps confused dental hygienist is about all Congress can agree on these days. It thus offers us an exasperating window onto both American politics and the nation itself.

“It’s illustrative of a deeper problem in political culture that I have been reluctant to acknowledge,” said Vin Weber.

“I’ve lectured [at prominent universities] and said these are short-term problems with specific explanations involving polarization at a specific moment. Now I’ve concluded I’m wrong, and there is a deeper problem.”

There’s no more intriguing observer of the current tumult, which is essentially a Republican civil war, than Weber, 61. After all, he was once a revolutionary of indisputably conservative Republican stripe.

Elected to Congress from Minnesota in 1980 at age 28, he was a prime ally to future House Speaker Newt Gingrich. He exited voluntarily in 1992 but was a key strategist behind the historic Republican takeover of the House in 1994 and has advised numerous GOP presidential candidates.

He was part of a rabble-rousing party faction that felt betrayed. He knows what it feels like for the Tea Party diehards in Congress whose potency is reviled.

But when traveling, the contemplative onetime firebrand increasingly responds to the query, “What’s wrong with Washington?” by asking people how their state government is functioning.

Yes, they admit, it’s a mess, too, with polarization and good people retiring. Their own faith in virtually every basic institution, other than the military, is heading south. A bedrock optimism about the nation is just not there, he says, and is something he underestimated.

Even GOP leaders, with whom he is close, misunderstand the essence and motives of their Tea Party members, Weber suggests. They are not anarchists, as facile Democrats may think. But they possess a sincere and fundamentally different assessment of “where America is and where it’s going.”

Thinking back to his days shaking up the House, “We fought fiercely but, at the end of the day, shared a sense [with Democrats] of the U.S as a great nation headed in a great direction.”

“Talk to people today, especially Republicans, and they are apocalyptic about the course we’re on. It was different back then.”

For sure, we can mythologize the past. There was much less than some would now have it of the two sides sides bashing one another during the day but then kicking back together with bourbon and porterhouse steaks at night. We had huge, bitter fights over the scope of government (during Franklin Roosevelt’s time) and civil rights (during Lyndon Johnson’s) and more. The Reagan, Clinton and Bush years were no kumbaya-singing picnic.

Still, Long Island Democratic Rep. Steve Israel, who worked as a congressional staffer in the ’80s, recalls “people actually rooting for compromise. Now compromise is viewed as a betrayal.”

He swears that in the House gym when he asked a Tea Party congressman why he wouldn’t compromise, he was told, “I wasn’t elected to compromise.”

When Israel, who runs the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee, warned the Tea Partier that Democrats might kick his butt in the next election if he didn’t compromise, the response was: “I know. But I will take this government down with me.”

For sure, you need not be an Ivy League political scientist to discern some man-made structural factors among those at play.

Those include the proliferation of safe congressional districts as a result of redistricting, prompting politicians to play to their true-believer constituents rather than seek consensus.

There is also dramatic change in how campaigns are financed as a result of court decisions. Mayor Bloomberg can sit on Fifth Ave. and pour millions into a race on Chicago’s South Side, never having even met the candidate he’s backing.

Such trends accelerate the rise of interest groups and decline of parties. Throw in Republican outliers who scorn compromise, facts and science and, says political scientist Norman Ornstein, “We’re closer to disaster than I’ve ever seen before.”

Jim Jaffe, a longtime aide to the late and legendary House Ways and Means Chairman Dan Rostenkowski of Chicago, recalls President Ronald Reagan convincing another Chicago Democrat to vote for aid to the Nicaraguan Contras.

In return, Reagan gave him money needed to extend the city’s rail system into his district.

President Obama. (LARRY DOWNING/Reuters)

After the GOP took back the House in 2010, it banned “earmarks,” appropriations that specifically mandate where certain dollars must be spent, as an odious symbol of old school maneuvering. That was especially ironic since they arguably exploited them more than Democrats, according to some experts (“We abused the process,” concedes Weber).

One unintended consequence is that a leader like House Speaker John Boehner is, at legislative crunch time, left with fewer tools to persuade members to vote a certain way.

“In an era of intense polarization, leaders need every coalition-building tool at their disposal, and the ban on earmarks certainly doesn’t help,” says Eric Patashnik, a public policy professor at the University of Virginia.

“Boehner, who pushed for the ban, has acknowledged the ban makes his job harder. Earmarks provide the grease that lubricates deal-making.”

So what we’ve got now, says Jaffe, “is the faction in control [THE TEA PARTY]cares about a very small list of very big issues, like Obamacare, entitlements and deficits, and is willing to ignore the usual massive menu of constituent concerns, like a new highway interchange, post office, federal building or medical research facility.”

“Walking away from the old ‘go along to get along’ protocol, they’ve made it clear that the leadership works for them rather than vice versa,” he says.

For old capital hands, the last few decades have been rightly absorbing and provide needed context for today.

Reagan skillfully made government out to be problem. Egomaniacal, mudslinging Gingrich talked the talk about revolution and was briefly ascendant. A fragmented, ideologically driven media arose, led by Fox News Channel.

And, now, there’s the Tea Party, not just chiding government, but demonizing it.

Their clout is on vivid display since everybody here knows that if Boehner would put measures on reopening government and raising the debt ceiling measures up for a simple vote, unadorned with Tea Party-inspired provisions like the death of Obamacare, they would pass.

Things might be a bit different if history was our guide. But the Capitol Hill echo chamber now is light on history, heavy on tweets. As Israel notes, a congressman can actually believe that validation can come via how many people just retweeted a 140-character broadside.

So it’s instructive to listen to Al Hunt Jr., an esteemed Bloomberg News reporter-columnist who’s reported on the capital since 1969 and reminds one of acts of conscience, principle and mutually beneficial pragmatism.

In 1977, the quietly persuasive Senate Minority Leader Howard Baker (R-Tenn.) helped President Jimmy Carter push through the Panama Canal Treaty, which called for transfer of the canal to Panama. He did so amid great public unease and injury to his own future White House ambitions.

In a counterpoint to Nervous Nellie Boehner, in 1981 liberals derided Democratic House Speaker Tip O’Neill as he allowed a vote on huge tax and budget cuts proposed by newly elected President Ronald Reagan. The tax cuts passed, but defense spending that ballooned the deficit undermined the package.

Then there was 1990 and Rostenkowski, President George H.W. Bush and Bush budget chief Richard Darman heading to the officers’ club at Andrews Air Force Base.

There they climaxed a budget battle that had convulsed official Washington for a year and briefly prompted, yes, a government shutdown.

They cut a deal that helped balance the government’s books for more than a decade and prompted what’s known as pay-as-you-go budget rules that remain. But it also violated Bush’s 1988 “no new taxes” campaign pledge, which inspired a 1992 primary challenge to Bush from Pat Buchanan and was a reason for his loss to Bill Clinton.

It is hard to imagine such risk-taking these days for the purpose of agreeing on big, tough issues.

To Weber, the ’80s insurgent who has traveled the world and seen nations without democracy or political systems that just don’t work at all, that’s a shame.

In Egypt, it wasn’t parties that brought down President Mohamed Morsi, he says. “It was street mobs. That is how politics functions until you can get a system that structures people’s discontents and gives voice to them.”

So in a nation with little confidence in politics, media, organized religion or education, is it any real surprise, he says, that it sends to Congress people who themselves dismiss the institution to which they are elected?

It’s all rather deflating.

You watch a Capitol Hill mess that’s as loud and penetrating as Thursday’s gunshots and realize one thing: There are no heroes in this chamber.

jwarren@nydailynews.com