Thanksgiving is upon us, which often means fighting with friends and relatives over politics (and who gets the turkey leg).

In the past, I've found myself tangling with one gentleman who frequently declares that Obama's America is "No Country for Old Men."

He's not particularly interested in politics, but he fervently believes that Obamacare robs the rules-playing middle-class to help the unworthy poor (ignoring that my husband and I, two middle-class job creators, also benefit from using Obamacare).

He also thought former GE CEO Jack Welch made a fair point when he (erroneously) accused "these Chicago guys" of fixing economic indicators to help Obama get re-elected.

Basically, most conversations revolve around a common theme: The system is rigged against folks like me.

Turns out, he has good company.

The majority of Americans (56 percent) -- regardless of political persuasion -- believe the exact same thing, according to a new Wall Street Journal/NBC News poll:

"Among those saying the system is stacked against them are 58% of Democrats; 51% of Republicans; 55% of whites; 60% of blacks; 53% of Hispanics; as well as decent majorities of every age and professional cluster, including blue-collar workers, white-collar workers and retirees."

Of course, takes on how things are unfair vary widely. Not surprisingly, Republicans buying that premise say the government is doing too much, while even more Democrats say it's not doing enough.

In other words, people believe "The Man" is keeping them down. But their definition of "The Man" differs greatly.

Not everyone feels this way.

If you're well-off and educated, you're less likely to think things are inherently unfair. Just 38 percent of those with graduate degrees believe that and 44 percent of those earning $75,000+ a year do.

But that's still a sizable number of highly educated and financially successful people who believe everything is stacked against them. My Thanksgiving sparring partner even fits into that category.

The truth is, some folks just aren't that in touch with reality.

If you're one of the 10.6 million members of the working poor, you probably won't have the luxury of arguing with your crazy Uncle Bob over pumpkin pie. You'll be working, because your job doesn't give you flexibility or holidays off.

Finding affordable child care can impossible, which means you could lose your low-paying job(s). You often can't afford to live in neighborhoods that are safe and have good schools.

It makes sense if you feel things are hopeless sometimes and the system is rigged against you.

But many folks want to feel like they've made it against all odds. That's why they live in McMansions, while 600,000 Americans are homeless on any given night.

That's not to say that many of these folks haven't worked hard or deserve success.

But it's a lot easier to achieve that if your parents could send you to good public or private schools and then to college. And if you didn't have to worry about the lights being turned off or being able to afford groceries the last week of the month.

Nowadays, a lot of successful folks still feel powerless. The economy is shaky, as are their long-term job prospects and retirement.

And so they get worked up over welfare cheats and illegal immigrants getting "free stuff" -- a staple of Fox News -- because the system is stacked against hardworking folks like them.

This sense of alienation has been rising steadily since 2002, which probably helps explain why Americans were so jumpy about scary threats like Ebola and ISIS in the run-up to the midterm elections (with an opportunistic nudge from the media and politicians).

Fatalism plus politics is a powerful cocktail.

Susan J. Demas is Publisher and Editor of Inside Michigan Politics, a nationally acclaimed, biweekly political newsletter. She can be reached at susan@sjdemas.com. Follow her on Twitter here.