2015 marks the 70th anniversary of the end of World War II, a war that America entered following attacks on Pearl Harbor by the Japanese. Sunday afternoon, members of the Mississippi Legislature, World War II Veterans, and community members gathered at the Newton Veterans Cemetery, to remember those who dedicated to keeping this country free.

The sound of taps could be heard through most of the event, as onlookers listened to speakers applaud those who served during the war.

""Let me tell you, the veterans of any war and they come home, they should be able to come home and express themselves before the people," World War II Veteran Glenn Frazier said.

Frazier was just one of many veterans who were in attendance Sunday afternoon, at the Newton Veterans Cemetery. It was a day that reminded everyone just why we honor and remember our veterans.

"Mississippi is a very patriotic state," said US Representative Gregg Harper. "We've always been the first to step forward and serve to help others. You can see that gratitude here by so many that have served in the military. We are just excited about the future, to know that we can reflect on the past that was so honorable."

From the beaches of Normandy, France, to the battlefield in the Philippines. Every veteran has their reason for why they fought, and it's a story that is continually told to generation upon generation of Americans.

"I went to Japan and stayed there as a slave for 3 years," said Frazier. "At the end we were told they were going to shoot us, then they took us out to dig our own grave in the rice fields. If it hadn't of been for the two atomic bombs I wouldn't be here."

To honor those lives that were taken to fight for our freedom during World War II, a special flyover in the missing man formation took place.

Governor Phil Bryant spoke a heartfelt speech to those listening on just why you see so many veterans riding across country and here at home.

"We ride for the young man that were at Iwo Jima," said Bryant. "We ride for the young men at Omaha Beach, The Cliffs of Dover, and the bulge. Young men who never returned and now lie in foreign graves."

Foreign graves that Governor Bryant say many still visit to this day here at home and across the world. Graves that are filled with the remains of those who fought to preserve what many consider to be the greatest country in the world. Graves that are filled with those, who paid the ultimate sacrifice and never returned home.

World War II lasted from September of 1939 until 1945. The United States didn't become involved in the war until the bombing of Pearl Harbor, on December 7, 1941. As a result of the conflict, over 16 million troops served in the war, with nearly 300,000 who died during battle. August 14-15 marks the 70th anniversary of Japan's surrender, following the atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki.