Good morning and welcome to Wake-Up Call, your guidebook to and roundup of the latest in city, state, and national political news...

EXCLUSIVE: So much for transparency. Two top deputies of Mayor de Blasio, who campaigned on creating a new era of government openness, commonly use their personal Gmail accounts to discuss city-related issues, the Daily News has learned. First Deputy Mayor Anthony Shorris and director of intergovernmental affairs Emma Wolfe routinely communicate via their private email addresses, according to multiple government insiders. Good-government groups contend that’s a behind-the-scenes way to dodge oversight and contrary to the open government de Blasio vowed to run as he campaigned for mayor.

Embattled City Hall aide Rachel Noerdlinger stood by her ex-con man Sunday, appearing in public with him and her son — on their way to church. While Noerdlinger, 43, chief of staff for First Lady Chirlane McCray, and her cop-hating beau, Hassaun McFarlan, 36, remained silent on the controversy they’ve caused at City Hall, she did share some words of solace. “I pray for you,” Noerdlinger told a Daily News crew who photographed her, her son, Khari, 17, and McFarlan together outside their Edgewater, N.J., home.

EXCLUSIVE: Donald Trump, whose casinos crapped out in Atlantic City, says New York State is likely to roll snake eyes in its bet on four upstate gaming parlors. The former casino magnate told the Daily News that the planned casinos will generate excitement and revenue in the short term — but he predicted the state will take a loss on the risky gamble in the not-too-distant future. “Ultimately, there’s too much competition and they’ll all go down the tubes,” he said.

Our Ken Lovett's column: A Manhattan woman who last week admitted to committing fraud as part of the effort to get two Republican candidates on a new anti-Common Core ballot line may have done the same thing in at least two other races. Jenise Jett told the Daily News last week that she never witnessed people signing petitions to get gubernatorial candidate Rob Astorino and state Senate candidate Joe Dillon in Westchester County on the Astorino-created Stop Common Core ballot line this November.

It’s the noncampaign campaign. While underdog Republican Rob Astorino criss-crosses the state in a desperate hunt for votes, Gov. Cuomo is running out the clock until Election Day — a Rose Garden strategy on steroids.

TUCapCon: "Don’t expect the Astorinos to become the new neighbors in Albany’s Mansion Neighborhood. The Westchester County Executive told the crowd gathered at a town hall meeting at Ellms Family Farm in Ballston Spa Sunday that he, his wife and three children would remain in Mount Pleasant, Westchester County, if he is elected, instead of moving to the governor’s mansion."

WSJ: "In two well-financed statewide political campaigns, in 2006 for attorney general and in 2010 for governor, Andrew Cuomo emerged victorious virtually everywhere except for one place: western New York."

NYT: "Cuomo defended a New York State law that has made it easier to take guns away from people who have been deemed mentally unstable, saying on Sunday that the number of people banned from owning firearms since the law took effect over 18 months ago could be too low."

EXCLUSIVE: Some say this Rose smells like an ethical violation. Critics are ripping a technology contract the city handed to a former Education Department official’s nonprofit group in September. New Classrooms, started by Joel Rose, was granted a one-year contract for $420,750 in federal grant money to operate a learning program Rose created while working for the city. Critics charge the arrangement violates the ethics rules prohibiting workers from cashing in on their public service. They also say Rose promised the services for free in a previous deal.

EXCLUSIVE: City Hall is launching a major new ad campaign urging New Yorkers to roll up their sleeves and volunteer. The agency spearheading the campaign, NYC Service, wants to up the proportion of people who lend a hand with free labor to 50% from a paltry 18%. The ads, which start appearing on 1,000 subway cars Monday, target people who don’t do volunteer work by stressing that service has some selfish benefits, too.

Drivers may soon be able to feed pesky muni-meters up to an hour before parking restrictions set in each day, according to state Assemblyman Dov Hikind, who pushed for the change. “The current situation has been very frustrating for New Yorkers because the muni-meters are not currently set up to accept payments until they become active,” the Brooklyn lawmaker said.

jIM YOUNG/REUTERS

President Obama hit the campaign trail for two Democratic candidates Sunday — defying the notion that he’s political kryptonite. Obama stumped for Illinois Gov. Pat Quinn and Maryland gubernatorial candidate Anthony Brown as part of a belated push before upcoming elections in November. In Maryland, some voters walked out on Obama’s pitch, but in Chicago, the President was poised to speak as a returning favorite son.

Cap NY: "New York City's uninsured rate fell to historic lows during the past year thanks, in part, to the resources provided by the Affordable Care Act, and an unprecedented surge in Medicaid rolls in immigrant neighborhoods, based on an analysis of recently released state data."

Pols rip President Obama’s choice for Ebola ‘czar’ http://t.co/JP48YYzqZf — NYDN Politics (@NYDNPolitics) October 19, 2014

Sen. Chuck Schumer is proposing a bill to make it a federal crime to attach a GPS device to someone’s car.

“Anyone can put a tracking device on your car — perfectly legally,” said Schumer (D-N.Y.), adding that it amounts to “electronic stalking.”

Several ex-Naxis are living out their golden years in European countries — the last survivors of a group of Hitler henchmen who collected hundreds of thousands of dollars in Social Security funds from the United States, a shocking report shows.

Today's Bob Eckstein cartoon:

Leaders' Lineup:

President Obama is in Chicago and Washington

5:00 PM: Delivers remarks and answers questions at a DNC event, Private Residence, Chicago

Gov. Cuomo is in New York City

11:00 AM: Discusses infrastructure modernization with Vice President Biden, Vaughn College of Aeronautics and Technology, William Decota Hangar, 86-01 23rd Ave., Flushing

Mayor de Blasio is in New York City

11:00 AM: Greets Homeowners and Hosts Press Conference to Make an Announcement, 12-06 Cross Bay Boulevard, Queens

4:00 PM: Holds Public Hearing on Int. 466-A and Int. 295-A, Blue Room, City Hall

Tuning In:

"The Brian Lehrer Show,” WNYC 93.9 FM, 10 a.m.: "Shake Shack owner Danny Meyer and Blue Hill chef Dan Barber talk foodie-ism. Plus: the RNC in NYC; Facebook debuts and a particularly corrupt year for New Jersey politics."

"Inside City Hall," NY1, 7 p.m.: Lincoln Historian Harold Holzer; Consultants Corner.

"From the eye of the storm I am still with you in spirit!"

News tips, schedules or suggestions? Email ckatz@nydailynews.com.