Mayor Tony Greer reacts as Dee Stubbs runs and hits the button sending him into the dunk tank at the Elite Outdoorsman Expo at the Robison Mansion on Saturday. (Brandon Hopper / Daily Record)

Mayor Tony Greer is all about the restoration of the St. Cloud Hotel.

And now he's all wet for it, too.

Greer attracted people to the Elite Outdoorsman Expo on Saturday morning by sitting in the dunk tank and giving people the opportunity to soak him for $5.

"I think there are probably some people who want to dunk me and they like to see me get all wet because they're friends, and there some who would like to see me get all wet because they're not such good friends," he said.

The expo was put on by the Future of Yesterday Foundation, a non-profit that is working to raise money to restore the historic St. Cloud Hotel located downtown. All money raised over the weekend will go toward the restoration.

Check it Out The Elite Outdoorsman Expo will run from 10 a.m. to 5 p.m. Saturday with free admission. Then from 7 p.m. to midnight, it will cost $10 per person for live music by Applewood, full bar and food, hunters best dressed contest and a silent auction. From noon to 4 p.m. Sunday, there is no fee to attend. Event organizer Erin Tierney said there will be beer, wine, food vendors, casting demos, fly fishing seminars, archery, a dunk tank featuring city and county officials, live music, bobbing for apples, bounce houses, silent auction, vehicle cars show and more. For more information on the event, visit EliteOutdoorsmanExpo.com . — Sarah Rose

President Erin Tierney said the foundation is required to pay $750,000 of the $3 million it will take to get the hotel reopened. She said $60,000 already has been raised. An anonymous donor is matching donations dollar for dollar.

"Just as we did with the Robison Mansion, these are beautiful pieces of history that need to be restored and enjoyed and open to the public," Tierney said.

Erin Tierney (Brandon Hopper / Daily Record)

"It's a shame that it's fallen into ruin," Greer said, "and anything I can do to help — and I hope the other citizens feel the same way — I'm happy to do it."

Fire Inspector Tim Slaughenhaupt and Chamber of Commerce President Allen Tormohlen were also scheduled to enter the dunk tank later in the day.

Other attractions to the expo included: food vendors, beer, wine, casting demos, fly fishing seminars, archery, live music, bobbing for apples, bounce houses, silent auction, and a vehicle cars show.

Tierney said the goal is to have the hotel open and operating in three to five years, and that it'll feature prices that will make staying there affordable to everyone.

The St. Cloud Hotel, 631 Main St., and the entire downtown district are listed on the National Historic Register. HLC Enterprises, a property management and real estate company who focuses on property restoration, became owners of the hotel in 2008 because of a loan default. Since then, the company has invested more than $100,000 in maintaining the building.

In December 2012, dozens of community members and representatives from the state Office of Archaeology and Historic Preservation and Colorado Preservation, Inc., petitioned the City of Cañon City to help find a way to preserve the building when word got out that HLC may have had plans for demolition because of costly upkeep.

In February 2013, a $15,000 grant through the State Historic Preservation Fund was awarded for the hotel's historic structure assessment. The building was deemed structurally sound.

Tierney said the hotel was offered to other nonprofits, but the renovation cost was overwhelming. That is when the Future of Yesterday Foundation was formed to begin exploring ways to get the hotel operating, functioning and serving the community. The building was gifted to the foundation.