Facebook Roman Pirozek was killed while flying a remote-controlled model helicopter on Thursday.

A city councilman is calling for a temporary ban on remote-controlled helicopters around the city, including Brooklyn’s Calvert Vaux Park, where a 19-year-old hobbyist was killed on Thursday when a model helicopter he was flying crashed into his head.

Councilman Domenic Recchia, who represents the section of Gravesend where the accident happened, asked the Department of Parks and Recreation in a letter sent on Friday to “declare a moratorium on model helicopter activity in New York City parks until a thorough investigation is conducted and, if necessary, safeguards are put in place to mitigate the likelihood of similar accidents in the future.”

“I do not wish to restrict the activities of the Seaview Rotary Wings club. I’m not saying I want to do away with it,” Mr. Recchia said in an interview, referring to the model helicopter flying group that victim Roman Pirozek belonged to.

“I’m saying, lets put a moratorium for now, let’s do a thorough investigation to see what exactly transpired, and let’s see what… rules and regulations we should put in place,” Mr. Recchia said.

The councilman said he will leave it up to city officials to determine which agency would conduct the investigation — he suggested the park department or the New York Police Department.

“Was the cause the wind? The glare from the sun, was it a malfunction of the helicopter itself? Was it the remote control?” he said. “It gets windy out there.”

The end result could be restricting helicopters from flying beyond a certain height or in certain weather conditions, he said.

“I see these things flying but I never thought something like this could happen,” Mr. Recchia said.

On Thursday, a law-enforcement official said Mr. Pirozek “was known to be aggressive in his flying and often executed tricks. He was executing a trick when he was struck.” Mr. Pirozek’s suffered a severe injury to the head and was pronounced dead at the scene. His father was present at the park at the time of the incident.

Calvert Vaux Park is a sanctioned model helicopter flying area by both the city and the Academy of Model Aeronautics, a national model aviation organization. The park is currently undergoing a $30 million renovation, Mr. Recchia said.