How come when Arabs kill Arabs there isn’t a stream of “human rights activists” running to protect them? The bleeding hearts who are so active in the Middle East are nowhere to be found. Where is the International Solidarity Movement (ISM)? Where are all the flotillas? Where are the Rachel Corries of the world? Tens of thousands are being slaughtered in Syria and yet there is nary a movement or martyr for peace to be heard. The region is embroiled in civil war and there’s no scruffy, long-haired, unshaven liberals prancing through the streets and inciting people as they do in Israel. The simple question of "why not?" must be asked.

The constant double standard surrounding Israel is sickening. All these brave souls -- these young international people seeking “justice” -- haven’t gone to Syria or Egypt because they know what fate likely awaits them. They will be killed. People like Rachel Corrie, who went to a conflict zone, worked to protect the terrorist organization Hamas, stepped in front of an armored Israeli bulldozer and was crushed to death. My curiosity remains: Where are all the Rachel Corries today in the Middle East? Why aren’t they battling in the streets of Syria and Egypt?

I will tell you why – it’s because Israel is held to a higher standard and while that makes sense, it doesn’t make it fair. Unlike anywhere else in the Middle East, in Israel, these foolish liberals come and throw rocks, literally and figuratively, and largely escape justice. They come and make noise, wreak havoc and return to their pampered worlds – harming Israel along the way. While they unfairly label Israel with awful terms, in reality, you don’t see these people in Egypt or Syria today because they will be killed – quickly, away from cameras. And never heard from again – not like the democratic, lawful state of Israel where human rights are universally observed and applied, even for those who arrive with the sole purpose of demonizing the State.

Listen, Israel is far from perfect – but it’s a great country and is unequivocally a stabilizing force in a crisis-stricken, chaotic region. It’s a Western democracy surrounded by barbarians, yet, the double standard applied to Israel with regards to media coverage and public opinion is as long as it is rich. It is a double standard steeped in bias, misunderstanding, ignorance and hatred. These people harm Israel’s reputation via public relations campaigns immensely.

And yet, for those who will say I am wrong, they can very easily prove me wrong. If their motives are altruistic, as they would have everyone believe, I urge them to now – today – go en masse to Syria or Egypt and launch the same vitriol and take the same stand. Indeed, in Syria and Egypt there are slaughterings taking place and real violations taking place against innocent people. Where are these longhaired bandana-wearing freaks?

Ze’ev Jabotinsky, the Zionist prophet, wrote, “Who were the first to teach us to always interfere in matters that are not ours, to judge people and nations, even though we were never chosen for the position of judge? The work of the publicist is a legacy from the Prophets of Israel…Our passion is to speak, to proclaim - ‘Shouting’ is what the same audience calls it, ‘we have no need for words, give us actions.’ One thing that audience forgets is that speech is also an action – Perhaps the most authentic of all actions. Cities have been destroyed, and more will fall, but what was shouted in the wilderness thousands of years ago is alive and still relevant. The world was created by the Word. The world will be mended by the Article.”

These lying liberals harm Israel immensely. The good guys need to keep telling the real story. Israel remains the closest ally for America in the dangerous region called the Middle East. We should all pray, hope, and work towards helping the State of Israel in whatever ways we are able. We owe it to ourselves, to Israel and to the truth.

Freedom Center pamphlets now available on Kindle: Click here.