Plastic surgery has been part of the American medical scene for decades now. From celebrities to your next door neighbor, millions of people across the country have elected for cosmetic procedures at one point or another. While certain procedures are considered a staple in society — think of nose jobs and liposuction — a new report from the American Society of Plastic Surgeons (ASPS) reveals some unexpected procedures have risen in popularity over the years.

When analyzing statistics for 2015, the ASPS found a shift in the types of procedures patients ask for compared to the beginning of 2000. The overall volume of procedures has also increased by 2 percent since 2014, going up to 15.9 million surgical and minimally invasive cosmetic procedures. The top five cosmetic procedures were breast augmentation, liposuction, nose reshaping, eyelid surgery, and tummy tuck; while the top five minimally invasive procedures were Botox, soft tissue fillers, chemical peels, laser hair removal, and microdermabrasion.

Overall, cosmetic procedures have increased by 115 percent since 2000, though the popularity of different procedures has changed.

"While more traditional facial procedures and breast augmentations are still among the most popular, we're seeing much more diversity in the areas of the body patients are choosing to address," said Dr. David H. Song, ASPS president, in a press release. "Patients have more options than ever, and working closely with their surgeon, they’re able to focus on specific target areas of the body to achieve the look they desire."

One such change is the rapid rise in popularity of the buttock lift. Buttock lifts and implants are now the fastest-growing types of plastic surgery in the U.S, per ASPS data. Specifically, the rate of people undergoing lifts has risen by 252 percent between 2000 and 2015, from 1,356 to 4,767 procedures.

Another major change was not in which procedures were being done, but on whom: For the first time, men accounted for more than 40 percent of breast reduction surgeries, a total of 27,456 procedures. This is a five percent increase over the previous year and a 35 percent growth since 2000, the ASPS said.

"As plastic surgery is becoming more common and accepted in men, we’re seeing more of them undergo procedures to tighten and tone problem areas, like the breasts," Dr. Song added. "This procedure is often done in younger men who face genetic challenges with the size and shape of their breasts, and when appropriate, surgery can make a big difference in their lives."

Breast reconstruction for breast cancer patients has also seen a rise in popularity — there were more than 106,000 procedures performed in 2015, four percent more than in 2014 and 35 percent more than in 2000.

"That's encouraging, and we hope to continue to get the word out to all women who are facing breast cancer, so they will be well aware of their reconstructive options from the outset of diagnosis," Song said.

Source: 2015 Plastic Surgery Statistics Report. American Society of Plastic Surgeons. 2016.