Senate Majority Leader Thomas K. Norment Jr. handily beat back a challenge from Hugo E. Reyes, a U.S. Army veteran and cybersecurity consultant, winning his seventh straight term in the Virginia Senate.

With 76 of 77 precincts reporting, unofficial results from the State Board of Elections Tuesday show Norment with 35,498 votes, or 69.4 percent of the ballots cast, to Reyes' 15,481 votes, or 30.3 percent.

"I am grateful to the people of the 3rd Senatorial District for their resounding vote of confidence in today's election," Norment said in a written statement released by his spokesman, Jeff Ryer. "I look forward to continuing to serve them and the Commonwealth for the next four years."

Norment, 69 — a James City Republican, attorney with Kaufman and Canoles, and adjunct instructor at the College of William and Mary — is one of the most powerful lawmakers in Virginia.

Seen as a moderate in the Senate's GOP caucus, he often works behind the scenes, pushing to keep his party in line on legislation. He's often at the fore of deciding who becomes judges and frequently advocates on criminal justice and civil law matters, as well as tourism and higher education-related issues.

Photos from around the Peninsula on Election Day 2015. Follow our live coverage here: http://bit.ly/1NapG2u (Daily Press Photo Staff) (Daily Press Photo Staff)

With the Republican Party maintaining narrow control of the Senate, Norment is expected to keep his job as majority leader. He's also next in line to be chairman of the powerful Senate Finance Committee.

Reyes, 50, a James City County Democrat, was making his first bid for elected office, presenting himself as a fresh voice for the district.

During the recent campaign, Reyes advocated for mental health reform, more spending on early childhood education and doing more for veterans and working families. He also asserted that Norment had become complacent and "fallen out of touch the hard working citizens in our district, both Democrats and Republicans."

Reyes said that if Virginia opted to expand its Medicaid program by using funds from the federal Affordable Care Act, the state could get badly needed resources for Eastern State Hospital and for financially strapped community mental health services.

"Mental health is the top issue for me right now," Reyes said. "The problem is, the other side doesn't fund it."

Norment has opposed Gov. Terry McAuliffe's efforts to expand Medicaid by using Obamacare funds, saying he was concerned that rising enrollment would drain the state's budget.

The 3rd Senate District includes parts of James City, York County, Hampton, Isle of Wight, Suffolk and Surry. It also includes all of Poquoson, as well as Gloucester, King and Queen, King William and New Kent counties. The district no longer includes Williamsburg.

Dujardin can be reached at 757-247-4749

Virginia Senate, 3rd District

Thomas K. Norment, R: 69.4 percent

Hugo Reyes, D: 30.3 percent