Oklahoma County Sheriff's deputies are on the scene of a three-vehicle collision from on I-40 near Hudiburg Drive.

News 9 Storm Tracker Val Castor reports that a pickup truck rolled over on I-40 near Garth Brooks Blvd. in Yukon.

A car crashed in the eastbound lanes of I-40 at Kilpatrick Turnpike and is half way on the barrier.

A pickup truck rolled over in the northbound lanes of I-35 and Indian Hills Road in Norman.

Drivers across Oklahoma City and in surrounding areas are encouraged to prepare themselves for slick roads on Friday. News 9 Meteorologist Nick Bender says ice threat is increasing for I-44 corridor and Oklahoma City now through Friday evening. This will greatly impact travel and utilities.

11/22/2013 Related Story: Freezing Rain Making Roads Slick In Parts Of Oklahoma

Ice and freezing rain are causing metro roads to be slick and hazardous, especially bridges and overpasses. News 9 is getting reports of many accidents in Oklahoma City and the surrounding areas.

EMSA officials say they have responded to 40 accidents in the metro as of 4 p.m. Friday.

At about 3:30 p.m., News 9 Storm Tracker Marty Logan reports that traffic on eastbound I-40 at the Cherokee Trading Post is at a stand still, due to a semi crash.

A car crashed in the eastbound lanes of I-40 at Kilpatrick Turnpike and is half way on the barrier. Firefighters and paramedics had to get the driver out of the car. The driver's injuries didn't appear to be serious.



Oklahoma City police officers are on the scene of a crash involving a school bus at S.W. 29th and Walker. Two students were on board. No one was injured.



Oklahoma County Sheriff's deputies are on the scene of a three-vehicle collision on I-40 near Hudiburg Drive.



News 9 Weather Page



Emergency crews are responding to a ten-car collision on I-40 near Air Depot. Westbound lanes of I-40 have been shut down.



A pickup truck rolled over in the northbound lanes of I-35 and Indian Hills Road in Norman.

News 9 Storm Tracker Val Castor reports that a pickup truck rolled over on I-40 near Garth Brooks Blvd. in Yukon.



Emergency crews are also responding to multiple collisions on I-44 near Airport Road, as well as in the southbound lanes of I-44 between S.W. 59th and S.W. 44th streets.

Several accidents have also been reported on H.E. Bailey near Lawton.



News 9 Storm Tracker Alan Broerse reports traffic moving very slow on I-240 at Shields due to multiple accidents.

Here are some useful links to check road conditions in Oklahoma:

Oklahoma Department of Transportation

ODOT Traffic Cameras

Check Flight Status At Will Rogers Airport

Oklahoma Road Conditions

OKC Snow and Ice Route



You can send us your winter weather photos are pics@news9.net.

Stay with News 9 and News9.com for updates.