A California Federal Judge has refused to dismiss a liability suit against Monsanto Co., filed by a man claiming his cancer stems from longtime use of the carcinogen-laced weed killer Roundup. The Judge rejected arguments that the man’s claims are preempted by the Federal Insecticide Fungicide and Rodenticide Act (FIFRA).

Hardeman claims to have used Roundup regularly since the 1980s to control poison oak and weeds on his property, but the weed killer lacked proper warnings of the dangers it posed to human health and was generally “unfit and unsuitable to be marketed and sold in commerce,” according to his complaint.

Monsanto’s arguments for a dismissal of Edward Hardeman’s lawsuit looking to hold Monsanto responsible for his 2015 diagnosis of non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma failed. U.S. District Court Judge Vince Chhabria found Hardeman’s state failure-to-warn claims were valid and are not preempted by the act.

While Judge Chhabria admitted California law “can sometimes” allow a manufacturer to escape liability when a warning would be unreasonable, Hardeman’s claims arise out of FIFRA’s stricter provision requiring an “adequate” warning, without regard to reasonableness.

“In this light, it’s hard to see how Hardeman’s failure-to-warn claims could ‘be construed more broadly than’ FIFRA,” the Judge said. “Indeed, Hardeman’s complaint explicitly bases his California-law failure-to-warn claims on Monsanto’s alleged violation of FIFRA.”

Monsanto also argued that Hardeman’s failure-to-warn claims are again preempted because the Environmental Protection Agency has approved Roundup’s product labels. Judge Chhabria said that approval does not prohibit private litigation on FIFRA.

“The mere fact that the EPA has approved a product label does not prevent a jury from finding that the same label violates FIFRA,” the Judge said.

Judge Chhabria also rejected Monsanto’s claim that Hardeman cannot continue with his strict liability claim because Hardeman is claiming Roundup did not have the warning it should have, according to the order.

Moreover, Hardeman claims Monsanto knew of Roundup’s carcinogenic properties since shortly after it was first developed in 1974 and also cited the World Health Organization International Agency for Research on Cancer’s 2015 study designating glyphosate as an herbicide “probably carcinogenic to humans.”

Due to IARC’s findings, the California Environmental Protection Agency announced that it would officially list glyphosate as a known carcinogen under the state’s Safe Drinking Water and Toxic Enforcement Act of 1986.

Monsanto has since filed suit against the state agency, claiming its right to due process had been violated by the proposal.

The multinational company is facing a number of other suits over the allegedly cancer-causing nature of Roundup, mainly in California.

Enrique Rubio and Yolanda Mendoza allege that agricultural and residential use of Roundup caused Rubio to develop multiple myeloma and Mendoza to develop non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma, but Monsanto has also claimed the suit is preempted by FIFRA.

The company made similar arguments in December 2015 against former coffee grower Christine Sheppard’s liability suit over her non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma.

Source: Monsanto’s FIFRA Stance Can’t Nix Roundup Cancer Suit

Join the Discussion