Amy Van Dyken-Rouen wants to “rock out” her wheelchair. She wants it to have skulls and crossbones, and she wants it to be purple, with her hair to match. Then she wants to wheelchair race her father.

She’s “excited” about this new phase in her life. It’s a rebirth.

She will pose for photos from her hospital bed with a big smile and a thumbs-up.

She will joke on Twitter about missing her Keurig coffee but is looking forward to having good parking at Arizona Diamondbacks games in Phoenix.

She will have surgeries and spend days in the intensive care unit, and come out sounding as though life couldn’t be grander.

The six-time Olympic gold medalist swimmer, who suffered a severed spinal cord in an all-terrain vehicle accident in Show Low, Ariz., on June 6 and is paralyzed from the waist down, has amazed her fans and followers with her upbeat attitude.

But those who know her aren’t surprised.

“It’s typical Amy,” said Dara Torres, a 12-time Olympic medalist swimmer who competed with Van Dyken-Rouen at the 2000 Olympics. “She’s probably one of the toughest athletes that I’ve ever met, and I don’t just mean that with what she accomplished; she obviously overcame asthma and won all those medals in 1996, and she’s a tough girl.”

Torres won five gold medals in Sydney, one of which was won with Van Dyken-Rouen on the 4×100-meter freestyle relay team.

But it was their meeting in the pool about a month earlier, at the Olympic trials, that still serves as their most memorable time together — for Torres and perhaps many others.

” She spit in my lane,” Torres said. “I remember that like it was yesterday. Afterward, when we were warming down, I asked her, ‘Did you really just spit in my lane?’ And she was like, ‘Yep.’ So I said, ‘You do know that I’m older than you and it doesn’t really bother me, right?’ She just kind of laughed. She didn’t spit in my lane again after that.

“To me it was just funny. You’re so focused. You’re just about to get up at Olympic trials and try to make the Olympic team, and I heard this thing and I saw something flying in my lane, and I was like, ‘What was that?’ “

“Spitgate” brought them closer together, Torres said, and the Olympic sisterhood bond has been there since. When Torres heard about Van Dyken-Rouen’s injury, her heart sank.

“When anything major like this happens to someone, whether you know them or not, it definitely puts it into perspective,” Torres said. “It makes you not take life for granted. … But if anyone can overcome this, she can.”

Kenny Lofton agrees. He has seen it.

“I’m in awe, but I’m not surprised, because of her spirit,” said Lofton, a former baseball star who played in the major leagues from 1991-2007. “If you were to just read a text from her or hear her talk, you’d be like, ‘Did this lady just have an accident or not?’ because of how she’s acting. If anybody can go through this upbeat, it can be her.”

Lofton had known of Van Dyken-Rouen for years because of their University of Arizona ties — he attended the school from 1987-91 on a basketball scholarship, and she was there from 1992-94 before transferring to Colorado State — but they met for the first time at the Caddies 4 Cure charity golf event in Portland, Ore., this year. They instantly hit it off.

“She hit a hole-in-one,” Lofton said. “I was all over her about that, because when you hit a hole-in-one, you have to buy drinks for everybody.”

Vay Dyken-Rouen didn’t do so and Lofton gave her grief.

“So the next day we ended up going to Starbucks and I made her buy me a Chai tea,” he said. “So that was her hole-in-one drink.”