ATLANTIC CITY, N.J. (AP) — Atlantic City's main casino workers union said Tuesday it is giving billionaire Carl Icahn "one last chance" to avoid a strike at the Taj Mahal casino by reinstating employee health and pension benefits.

Marko Georgiev/staff photographer Taj Mahal in Atlantic City

Local 54 of the Unite-HERE union held a public strike preparation event, gathering materials it would need for a strike. It also trained workers to be "picket captains" in the event it makes good on its threat to strike.

Icahn is acquiring the casino from bankruptcy court, but the transfer has not yet become official. The union wants the restoration of health insurance and pension benefits that Trump Entertainment Resorts canceled last October after a judge allowed it to do so. Icahn has called the benefits unaffordable, adding he will close the casino if an appeals court reinstates them.

"We want to give the company one last chance to come to their senses," union spokesman Ben Begleiter said. "The workers at the Taj are fed up, and they're ready to go on strike."

The union has been battling with Icahn for more than a year over working conditions and benefits at the Taj Mahal, the lone remaining casino of Trump Entertainment resorts, which Icahn is taking over. The 1,000 union members who work at the Taj Mahal have had to find insurance on their own; the company gave them stipends to help buy coverage under the Affordable Care Act, the federal health care law.

But many workers say that still is not enough to replace the level of health care they need to support their families.

"We're not making it now as it is," said Marc Scittina, who works in a players' club at the Taj Mahal. "We're on the ACA with huge co-pays. It's costing some of us $700 a month, and some people are just going without health insurance."

Icahn did not immediately respond to a request for comment. But he has in the past accused Local 54 of operating an overpriced health plan as a profit-making endeavor, and has likened union leadership to mobsters running protection rackets.

Valerie McMorris, a member of the union negotiating committee and an employee at the Taj Mahal since the day it opened in 1990, said a strike could happen "at any time."