BEAVER CREEK — Americans made strong showings in Friday’s World Cup downhill on the Birds of Prey course, where the world alpine championships will be held in less than two months.

Steve Nyman of Sundance, Utah, was third and teammate Travis Ganong of Squaw Valley, Calif., was fifth in a race won by Kjetil Jansrud of Norway. Beat Feuz of Switzerland was second, 0.54 of a second behind. Nyman was 0.02 behind Feuz.

“It’s super encouraging,” said Nyman, 32. “Just the training this fall was super encouraging. I had some steps I had to make to get back in the (top) 30. Now I can start risking more. If I had DNF’d (not finished) today, I probably would have been out of the 30, but I had to risk it because I know I can ski well here.”

It was Nyman’s fifth career podium finish in a 13-year career with the U.S. Ski Team and his third here in “North America’s Downhill.” He was second in 2007 and third in 2006.

Nyman was fast on the flat section at the top of the course and attacked coming onto the first steep pitch, called The Brink.

“I got in the tightest tuck I could and tried cutting line off on that upper section,” Nyman said. “But then you get to The Brink and I just said, ‘Go! Throw your body down the hill and search for speed every single turn.’ Over all the terrain I just thought: project myself down the hill and stay over my skis. I thought I skied really, really well down through the bottom, super clean, super tight in the air.”

Nyman could tell he had a good run through a section of four jumps at the bottom of the course.

“It was so cool flying off those jumps because I saw all the other people, their landing tracks, I went by them,” Nyman said. “I was like, ‘I’m flying, so this is good.’ “

Ganong, 26, may be coming into his own as a downhiller just as the U.S. gets set to hold the world championships for the first time since 1999. He has only two career finishes that were better than Friday’s showing. He was third and fourth in back-to-back downhills last March in Kvitfjell, Norway.

“Skiing right now is just so fun for me,” Ganong said. “I feel really balanced on my skis, so I can just do whatever I want. It’s fun to attack and push hard and see what happens. It’s fun to be close.”

Jansrud has won all three races in the speed disciplines this season, having won a downhill and super-G last weekend in Lake Louise, Alberta. Austria’s Marcel Hirscher, who won the past three World Cup oerall titles, said Jansrud is now the favorite. Hirscher specializes in giant slalom and slalom.

“Marcel is a smart guy, because he’s moving all the pressure over to me,” Jansrud said. “I think he’s still the big favorite. Unless I get some really good GS results, I can win as many speed races as I want but come January with all the slalom and giant slalom races, Marcel is probably going to be there grabbing a lot of points.”

John Meyer: jmeyer@denverpost.com or twitter.com/johnmeyer