SITTING ON A ROOF terrace in East London, furniture designer Mathias Bengtsson is talking about seeds—but not the kind that turn into petunias.

"Imagine you have a little 'digital plant seed' that contains the DNA of a chair, and it grows in a virtual world inside a purpose-designed computer program," posits Mr. Bengtsson, as if he's sharing gardening tips. "In a biomimicry process, the digital seed simulates natural growth, emulating some of nature's rules and methods, so there is gravity, rain, sunshine, wind, age, time…and the cell will suck up water, feed off the energy of the sun, grow, and within a certain time frame create a structure that will be supportive of a human being at, say, 100 kilos."

Alien Forms—Mathias Bengtsson's Far-Out Furniture

Mathias Bengtsson

While the furniture's basic parameters have been embedded in the digital seed, Mr. Bengtsson explains, the form only emerges as a result of the growth process, meaning that each simulation will yield a different result.

This is the Danish designer's latest project: a series of 12 limited-edition "Growth Chairs" cast in bronze, each one unique and based on the 3-D digital structures generated by the process detailed above.

Combining cutting-edge technology and innovative materials with an approach that is at once artistic, meticulous and slightly mad-scientist, Mr. Bengtsson is pushing the boundaries of design.

"Mathias is one of the few of his generation of designers who is really looking at ways to use industrial materials and technology to reshape our definition of what great design is," says Craig Appelbaum, owner and director of Industry Gallery in Washington, D.C. and Los Angeles, which represents Mr. Bengtsson. "It is art, it is sculpture. It moves beyond the dimensional to occupy a unique place among contemporary work in that it defies definition…. He is a true innovator."

‘In terms of Danish designers, Bengtsson is probably the one who's most far out’

Born in Copenhagen in 1971, Mr. Bengtsson graduated from the Royal Danish Academy of Fine Arts' School of Design in 1997, with a degree in furniture design.

Already aware that his aesthetic was far from that of the Danish Modernist tradition, and wary of being pigeonholed as a Scandinavian designer, he went to London and enrolled in the product-design course at the Royal College of Art, then directed by Ron Arad.

"I'm proud to be Danish, in the sense that I think the old-guard Modernists were more groundbreaking than we give them credit for, in terms of their use of material and technology," says Mr. Bengtsson. "But I think being an experimenter, an icebreaker, a maverick, call it what you will, that's an international thing."

Even before completing his degree in 1999, Mr. Bengtsson was attracting international attention, exhibiting his early work at galleries in Helsinki, Paris and Milan.

But it was the "Slice" chair—a futuristic silhouette composed of horizontal cross-sections stacked together to form a functional piece of furniture—which Mr. Bengtsson developed while still at the RCA, that proved to be his breakthrough.

ENLARGE SLICE PAPER CHAIR | 2010heat-laminated paper Mathias Bengtsson

ENLARGE GROWTH CHAIR | 2012cast in bronze Mathias Bengtsson

ENLARGE CELLULAR CHAIR | 2011gold-plated epoxy Mathias Bengtsson

ENLARGE SLICE CHAIR | 1999laser-cut aluminum Mathias Bengtsson

ENLARGE SLICE CHAISE LONGUE | 2000laser-cut cast acrylic Mathias Bengtsson

"I couldn't afford to use a [3-D] printer, so I copied the process of additive manufacturing myself," he recalls. "I laser-cut plywood into 3mm-thick sheets and layered them on top of each other to reproduce the shapes of my dreams."

Today, the "Slice" chair is also made in aluminum and acrylic, and has a sister version, the elegant, tubular "Slice Chaise Longue."

After graduating from the RCA, Mr. Bengtsson co-founded several collaborative design studios before breaking out on his own in 2002. By then, his works had been on display at Sotheby's several times over, been included in the "Design by Aluminium" show at the Design Museum in London and exhibited in galleries from Amsterdam to Montreal.

These days, Mr. Bengtsson splits his time between Stockholm, where he lives with his family, and London, which he still considers his creative hub, and his work is in the permanent collections of the Museum of Fine Arts in Houston, Chicago Museum of Art, and MoMA in New York, to name a few.

Mr. Bengtsson's work has also found continuous success on the open market, often selling above its estimate at auction. "His work consistently attracts international attention and his appeal within the contemporary design market only continues to grow," says Alexander Payne, world-wide director of design at auctioneers Phillips.

A "Slice" armchair (circa 1999) in laser-cut aluminum sold for $43,750 at Phillips in New York in December 2011, well above an estimate of $20,000-$30,000.

There seems to be no denying that, despite Mr. Bengtsson's reluctance to be grouped in with the Danes, the Danes all want a piece of him.

Late last year, Mr. Bengtsson received the prestigious Finn Juhl Prize, an accolade given in honor of the late Danish Modernist master and awarded annually for excellence in the field of furniture design, with special emphasis on chairs.

At this year's Salone del Mobile, the annual furniture trade fair in Milan that brings together the who's who of the design world, Mr. Bengtsson was asked to show his "Growth" Chair as part of Mindcraft '13, an exhibition of Danish design talent. "In terms of Danish designers, Bengtsson is probably the one who's most far out, and I mean that in the good way," says Kasper Salto, one of the curators and one of Denmark's most highly regarded young designers.

"[Mr. Bengtsson] has altered forever our definition of what Danish design is," says Industry Gallery's Mr. Appelbaum. "His greatness lies in his ability to ground his work in the present while hinting at the possibilities of the future."

Mathias Bengtsson's work is available by commission through Industry Gallery, industrygallerydc.com