'We don't want to identify ourselves as flood victims anymore. We have to move on.'

Stroll through the Lyons riverside plot where the Foothills Mobile Home Park once stood, and look upon the wreckage.

Trailers are uprooted and tilted on their sides, with broken windows and front yards piled high with scrap metal, tree branches and lumber.

The paved road that ran through the 15-unit park is now a dirt path, peppered by rusted paint cans and propane tanks, smashed dressers and shelving units, and a chewed-out leather chair missing two legs.

A hot tub cut clean down the middle and flipped over sits feet from a refrigerator that leans against overgrowth, with the freezer door open.

The edge of the park brushes against the St. Vrain River, but the footbridge that once ran across it is no more.

It's all the product of eight days of sustained rain and a consequent flood along Colorado's Front Range unprecedented in scope, but there is almost nothing in the ruins of the mobile home park to indicate the disaster happened two years ago, as opposed to, say, yesterday.

"I'm so used to seeing it that I've grown to accept it," says Carrie Gonzales, who is renting a modest one-story house at the park entrance — one of the only area structures to survive the rains.

Advertisement

"But when people come back, friends and family that lived here or that want to help, they get hit like a brick wall. People I know that come here can't believe what they're seeing. They tell me, 'Wait, I thought Lyons was all better.'"

'It's not happening'

In general, the flood hit the artistic, craft beer-swigging, outdoorsy Boulder County mountain enclave harder than nearly anywhere else in the state, redirecting waterways and wiping out scores of homes, buildings and public parks.

Carrie Gonzales looks Thursday into a Lyons mobile home destroyed by the 2013 flood. Forty-three mobile homes in town were washed out by the storm, and many of those residents have "abandoned hope" of returning to Lyons. (Cliff Grassmick / Staff Photographer)

But, naturally, the town's working class, mainly found in mobile homes and at the confluence of the North and South St. Vrain creeks, was dealt the biggest blow.

Between Foothills and Riverbend — a 27-unit mobile home park about a mile away — 43 mobile homes were washed out of Lyons.

Zero have been replaced, and after two years searching for solutions, affordable housing advocates in Lyons are sending former Foothills and Riverbend residents a message that, pre-flood, would have been unimaginable in a town with a profound, palpable sense of community.

"We're not going to tell them, 'You're not coming back,' but we are telling them to look at the best lifestyle choice for you and your family at this point," says Emily Dusel, co-director of the Lyons Emergency Assistance Fund.

Dusel doesn't want to give up just yet, but the fight to bring back displaced families, most of whom expressed a strong initial interest in returning to town, is undeniably on its last legs: Riverbend has been redeveloped as an event space and because Foothills sits in what the Federal Emergency Management Agency has deemed a floodway, any development there would require a 4-foot leveling of the entire property.

Meredith White, left, Erin Frazier, Mandy Carter with Lillian Carter, Toby Carter and Megan White, enjoy the music from the St. Vrain River during the Rocky Mountain Folks Festival in Lyons on Aug. 16. Every public event in the town, from the Polar Plunge to the Folks Festival, is in large part a celebration of resiliency and a validation of the "We've Got Grit" motto. (Cliff Grassmick / Staff Photographer)

Most notably, the town's voters in March rejected a ballot measure that would have placed a 66-unit affordable housing project for flood victims on about six acres of Bohn Park downtown.

The Bohn Park vote — 614 against, 498 for — involved a proposal that most acknowledge was imperfect; many who opposed the measure said they did so out of reluctance to use public parkland or out of a fundamental distrust of Boulder County government, which had backed the plan.

Some opponents also doubted that, following approval, the Bohn Park process would guarantee permanently affordable housing, or ensure that those displaced from Lyons would actually get priority.

The Bohn Park plan, however, may have been the last legitimate stab at bringing the lower-income residents of Lyons back in any organized fashion. The town is landlocked by untouchable open space, and there aren't any existing plots big enough to be economically feasible, as concluded by a study the Emergency Assistance Fund authored earlier this year.

"Imagine if we could put 300 units on a property," Dusel says. "Then, it makes sense for a big developer of manufactured housing to come in because they can make a profit on the rents. But 15 units doesn't make sense, and that's why no one's done it.

"The only way to make it feasible for our community to bring back manufactured housing is to subsidize it. ... It would be awesome if something magically appeared, but it's not happening."

Loss of identity

The displaced and their advocates worked tirelessly leading up to the Bohn Park vote, organizing a housing committee and encouraging their friends and neighbors to support the cause. That energy has all but fizzled.

"After that vote, after the town had kind of gotten our hopes up of something maybe happening, I think we kind of abandoned hope," says Holly Robb, 32, whose family now lives in Longmont. "What we're focusing on now is moving forward to try to get that feeling of what we used to have. We lived in the trailer park, we miss our house, and we had the scenery and the good vibes of the town, and we just loved living on the river and that whole community feeling. ... It's not nearly the same."

Robb's family had been in Lyons for generations. Her grandfather was the mayor, and her husband's ancestors served on the town board.

"We have to start completely over now," she says.

Many of the lower-income folks displaced by the flood were not only old-timers, but were also woven deeply into the cultural fabric of a town that boasts a colorful and authentic identity.

Along Main Street, the clothing shops and eateries and bars have always been staffed and supported by the town's blue-collar types. Amanda Anderson, baker at the Barking Dog Cafe and former Riverbend resident, says the flood accelerated the process of gentrification in a town where the wealth divide is more pronounced than ever.

"We were wiped out. The confluence was wiped out. You look around you, and all the houses on the hill are safe. And all the poor people are wiped out of town. It's heartbreaking," says Anderson, 33. "The people who left, these were the artists and musicians and the restaurant workers."

Janaki Jane, the Emergency Assistance Fund's liaison and advisor to displaced residents, calls the demographic loss "a tragedy."

"Any community that becomes monocultural loses greatly, and losing our diversity is a real problem," she says. "And that doesn't even enter into economic considerations of who's going to wait tables and work in our stores."

'We have to move on'

Ubiquitous throughout Lyons are bumper stickers, plastered on cars and in storefronts, reading, "We've Got Grit." And in spite of the cultural divide provoked by the flood and amplified by the housing debate, it is true that in many respect Lyons has roared back to life.

Every public event, from the Polar Plunge to the Rocky Mountain Folks Festival, is in large part a celebration of resiliency and a validation of the "grit" motto.

Planet Bluegrass, the town's world-famous outdoor music venue, is once again fully operational, and the same goes for flood-damaged schools and parks. This month, Lyons will unveil a brand-new firehouse infinitely more capable than the station used pre-flood.

In fact, one would have to actively search out any sign of destruction, as most of the town is spruced up to the point of masking blemishes or even improving upon past appearance.

Foothills Mobile Home Park, the most striking remaining display of disaster, is hidden at the end of an anonymous driveway near the edge of town. Visitors and residents alike almost never have a reason to view it.

Gonzales maintains hope that the park will come back, like the rest of the town did. It's wishful thinking, but she says she's compelled by the responsibility that comes with being the last person guarding the land, and fighting to enable her former neighbors to finally return.

But with each passing month, that possibility dwindles, and more and more of what once comprised the town's working class are planting flags elsewhere in Boulder County, or in Loveland, or out of state. Many of those who exhausted FEMA stipends paying rent to stay in Lyons say that plan was only tenable for so long.

"It was such a hard decision, but we had to leave," says former Lyons resident Lois Mason-Gilbert, who now lives in Longmont. "It took us months and months to come to the decision. We had identified ourselves as part of the community, especially after the flood, because we all went through it together. To leave, it was a separation. We were no longer part of that Lyons family."

She describes the final drive out of town as utterly wrenching.

"The important thing was that, at a certain point, we don't want to identify ourselves as flood victims anymore. We have to move on."

Gonzales isn't blind to what's going on, even if she's more optimistic than most, or than perhaps might be advisable.

"I know that nobody gets to live in paradise forever," she says. "I know that people living in misery have to start new lives. It's hurtful for them to accept that, but it's true."

And, Gonzales admits, it hurts to see them go.

"I miss my friends," she says.

Alex Burness: 303-473-1389, burnessa@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/alex_burness