Stapleton is well known for its abundant open space, giving residents a chance to escape from the urban feel of Denver, but some residents are upset over another thing the neighborhood has a lot of: mosquitoes.

More than 1,100 people have signed a petition started by a Stapleton resident, urging the city and the Stapleton Master Community Association to find both immediate and long-terms solutions to the mosquito problem they says the neighborhood is having this summer.

“My intention was to sort of get the attention of the city of Denver and the MCA and let them know, as residents, we don’t see it as just a nuisance,” said Jessica Coppom, who started the petition on the website MoveOn.org.

Coppom said she doesn’t have a specific solution in mind and doesn’t consider herself a spokeswoman, but she decided to take action after seeing lots of posts about the issue on a forum.

She said the problem is at the point where she is hesitant to take her children outside.

“My thought was if we came together as one voice, the city and MCA might hear us better,” she said.

Areas most affected seem to be near parks and open space such as Westerly Creek and Bluff Lake in east Stapleton that have above-ground stormwater, which is good habitat for mosquitoes. Last year’s floods were a catalyst for a larger mosquito population this year, said Master Community Association executive director Kevin Burnett.

He said his group has heard the complaints and is active in using larvicide as a prevention tool.

“I think it’s a larger issue than just Stapleton. It’s a City of Denver issue,” he said.

Denver’s Department of Environmental Health is responsible for the city’s policy on dealing with the mosquito population.

Manager of the air, water and climate section, Gregg Thomas, said his group does weekly surveillance. If workers see high larvae population in an area, they drop a larvicide puck into the water, but the city does not spray to kill adult mosquitoes.

“We don’t spray because there are public and environmental impacts,” he said, adding that spraying is a temporary solution and the department would have to spray every week to keep up.

While some feel that this year is worse, Stapleton United Neighbors board president Mark Mehringer said the issue comes up every year. The organization is preparing a survey to try and get more feedback from residents.

One Stapleton resident said he was unaware of the petition and that he likely wouldn’t sign if asked because he doesn’t think it’s a big deal.

“I’ve been outside plenty and really haven’t noticed anything crazy. I think what the city is doing is fine,” Justin Blue said.

Another resident, Amanda Allshouse, said she thinks the problem is bad this year and understands the frustration of the residents.

“There’s frustration if you go outside and are attacked by 30 mosquitoes in 20 seconds,” she said. “I don’t know what the answer is, but people are working on it.”

Joe Vaccarelli: 303-954-2396, jvaccarelli@denverpost.com or twitter.com/joe_vacc