Amgen, Inc. (NASDAQ:AMGN) is teetering on the edge of a massive patent cliff, which puts at risk a large chunk of revenue in the next four to five years. The biotech giant is aggressively fighting lawsuits against nearly all the companies that are threatening its drugs with cheaper copies, in what might be called a protracted ‘patent dance.’

Four of Amgen’s drugs are currently threatened by biosimilars. Of these, the cancer drug Neupogen lost US patent protection in December 2013, after generating peak sales of more than $1.40 billion. After Amgen’s fierce court war with Novartis AG's (ADR) (NYSE:NVS) generic drug unit, Sandoz, the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) eventually approved Sandoz’s biosimilar to the drug called Zarxio on March 6. Zarxio became the first biosimilar to be cleared in the US, under the Patient Protection Affordable Care Act of 2010. The Act gave US regulators authority to approve biosimilar drugs, after close examination of their clinical similarity with reference biologics. Biosimilars are available in Europe, since as far back as 2006.

Since biologics are made out of living cells, their exact copies in the shape of generics cannot be developed. The development of biosimilars is a complex and time-consuming process. Not only do these drugs take longer to reach the market than generics, they are also priced comparatively higher. On Zarxio’s US launch in September, Neupogen’s fourth-quarter 2015 revenue declined 7.4% sequentially to $263 million. The drug’s sales are expected to fall nearly 15% year-over-year (YoY) to $895 million this year.

Epogen’s Future

Another one of Amgen’s biosimilar-threatened drugs is Epogen, an anemia drug that went off-patent in the US in 2013, yet managed to grab $2 billion in 2014 sales. Currently, Pfizer Inc.'s (NYSE:PFE) recently acquired generic unit Hospira, Apotex, and Sandoz are vying to fill in the shoes for the blockbuster drug with their cheaper copies. In October, the FDA delayed the launch of Pfizer’s proposed Epogen biosimilar until this year, saying it was not in a position to clear its biologic license application (BLA) at this time. In September, Amgen had already sued Hospira for allegedly infringing two of its patents protecting Epogen, and violating some provisions of the biosimilar statute (Biologics Price Competition and Innovation Act). These include alleged nondisclosure of Hospira’s manufacturing process for its iEpogen biosimilar erythropoietin, refusal to engage in required negotiations, and premature notice of marketing. The disputed patents cover erythropoietin isoforms and propriety host cells.

While Amgen’s patents in the suit have now expired, it wants the court to delay Hospira’s launch for 180 days after FDA approval of its Epogen biosimilar. The issue is under review in the Supreme Court. Meanwhile, Amgen has asked the District Court of Delaware for a declaratory judgment that Hospira violated the BPCI Act by allegedly refusing to provide a legally effective notice of commercial marketing. The court is expected to decide whether to grant Hospira the motion to dismiss in the second quarter of this year. Note that the case will continue even if Hospira wins since its asking for dismissal of only part of Amgen’s complaint.

If Hospira wins the suit, Amgen will face a faster sales decline of Epogen in the US. Note that while the drug’s sales have been falling since 2010, they were still over $1.8 billion in the US last year. Analysts’ consensus expects the drug to lose blockbuster status in 2019.

Enbrel’s Future

Amgen’s top-selling drug, Enbrel, faces similar court action against Novartis’ Sandoz. The anti-inflammatory drug accounts for nearly 25% of Amgen’s top-line and pulled in $5 billion in 2015 sales. Global sales from the drug amounted to over $9 billion, making it among world’s best-selling medicines. Pfizer sells Enbrel ex-US, whereas Amgen markets it in the US. The drug’s patents were set to expire in 2012, but a 2013 court ruling extended their term by 16 years.

In 2013, Sandoz had sued Amgen, claiming two of its patents protecting Enbrel were invalid, unenforceable, and cannot be infringed upon by a biosimilar. Since the suit was filed before Sandoz submitted a marketing application for its Enbrel copy with the FDA, the litigation did not fall under the BPCI act. District court dismissed the case, which was affirmed by the Federal Circuit. Last October the FDA accepted Sandoz’s regulatory application for Enbrel’s biosimilar, and last week Amgen filed a suit in district court of New Jersey, claiming the latter had infringed some of its Enbrel patents. Amgen is asserting five patents, of which two are compound patents that don’t expire until 2028, and three are method-of-treatment patents that expire in mid-2019.

Amgen also wants the court to grant an injunction that blocks Sandoz from selling its biosimilar on approval. Unlike generic lawsuits under the Hatch-Waxman Act, filing of the suit does not lead to any stay of FDA approval, so that timing of the case is important for Amgen. The court is expected to set a date for a scheduling conference in early 2Q, in which the two parties will discuss timing of the case. Sandoz must answer Amgen’s complaint by April. Sales for Amgen’s biggest-seller hangs in the balance with the litigation. Analysts, on average, expect peak sales of $5.8 billion from Enbrel in 2020, after which they will start declining slightly. Coherus BioSciences and Baxalta Inc are also developing biosimilar version of Enbrel. Last month, the European Commission granted approval to the first Enbrel biosimilar, so that the drug’s sales are already set for decline.

Neulasta’s Future

The last of Amgen’s threatened drugs for now is Neulasta. The cancer med lost US patent protection in October, and is due to lose European exclusivity in 2017. The drug generated $1.16 billion for the company last year. Currently, Apotex and Sandoz have submitted their Nuelasta copies with the FDA for approval. In December, a district court granted Amgen a preliminary injunction against Apotex, ruling that the latter will have to wait 180 days before launching its Neulasta biosimilar on approval. Amgen won a similar ruling in the case of Neupogen in March. This gives the biotech giant time to try for an injunction, on grounds of patent infringement.

Amgen’s Biosimilar Pipeline

Apart from being involved in one of the most elaborate patent dances in the industry, Amgen is also building up a biosimilar pipeline of its own, to soften impact of eventual competition. The pipeline is expected to bring in $3 billion in annual sales by 2019, with first launch planned for 2017. In December, the company filed its biosimilar version for Humira with the FDA, claiming comparable efficacy and safety with the megablockbuster arthritis medicine. AbbVie’s Humira is currently the world’s biggest-selling medicine, and pulled in over $13 billion in sales last year.