They've got a tentative budget deal, and it includes an Obamacare repeal

A BUDGET DEAL … AND AN OBAMACARE REPEAL — Congressional negotiators have managed to eke out a two-year agreement to suspend the debt limit until March 2017 and undo looming Medicare Part B premium spikes for some of the affected beneficiaries. The deal, which boosts defense and domestic spending $80 billion above sequestration levels, is partially paid for by repealing Obamacare’s requirement for large employers to automatically enroll employees in their health plans. It also extends the Medicare sequester for another year. Getting these pay-fors through Congress won’t be easy, though. More from our Seung Min Kim and Jennifer Haberkorn, here.

— Conservatives — who want to keep the strict spending caps from a 2011 budget agreement intact, are already skeptical. The POLITICO story, here. (GOP leaders are still operating under the assumption that despite the grumblings from the right, they should be able to draw enough votes from the center to comfortably pass the legislation in both chambers.)

Story Continued Below

— One who certainly isn't grumbling: Paul Ryan. If Congress passes this deal, Ryan will "start out as speaker with more running room than Boehner ever enjoyed," write Jake Sherman and John Bresnahan, here.

LATE BREAKING DETAILS: OFFSETS INCLUDE SITE-NEUTRAL REFORMS, MEDICAID DRUG REBATES —Provider groups and their lobbyists were abuzz Monday with news that the pending budget deal will include a pay-for related to so-called "site-neutral payments" — a wonky health care issue that concerns how Medicare pays doctors offices and other physician practices that are owned by a hospital (but not necessarily on that hospital's campus.) Final details published late last night showed that under the new policy, Medicare will stop paying the different outpatient rates for off-campus offices beginning in 2017. There's a carveout, though, for all those offices already billing under the outpatient system — all existing hospital-acquired practices, then, will be grandfathered in. There are exceptions and plenty other wonky details in the deal, here: http://1.usa.gov/1MfHAQr

— It's an idea that hospitals have not been fond of when similar proposals have come up in the past; both MedPAC and the White House have suggested it as an offset previously. This proposal is more narrow, but hospitals were already raising alarms even before they saw the details on Monday. "The budget shouldn't be balanced on the backs of hospitals and patients," said AHA's Erik Rasmussen, adding that such proposals can limit access to care and don't account for different operating and administrative costs hospitals incur. His group already called on its members to urge legislators not to back the deal.

— Another pay-for worth mentioning: the bill would apply the Medicaid additional rebate requirement to generic drugs. More on that program from Medicaid.gov: http://bit.ly/1MfHUi1

HAPPY TUESDAY and welcome to PULSE, where we heard quite a lot yesterday about just how much our colleagues love bacon. And sausage. And hot dogs. And coneys. And all the other processed meats we're all supposed to avoid now. If it wasn't enough for you, though: more on that from the meat lobbies, themselves, here. Your PULSEr is just praying the next report doesn't hone in on coffee or chocolate. Send all those newsy tips and comments to your caffeine-obsessed scribe, emershon@politico.com and behley@politico.com

“Spam! Spam! Spam! PULSE! Lovely Spam! Lovely Spam!”

CMS: RATE HIKES AVERAGE 7.5 PERCENT FOR BENCHMARK PLANS — Obamacare customers are facing an average 7.5 percent price increase for a key benchmark health plan next year, according to limited data the Obama administration released just days before the start of open enrollment. That’s lower than most experts have predicted, but the average rate hikes will vary dramatically across the 38 states relying on HealthCare.gov. In Alaska, Montana and Oklahoma, the cost of the second cheapest silver plan is skyrocketing by more than 30 percent on average, while dropping 12.6 percent in Indiana. CMS stressed that nearly 80 percent of exchange customers will be able to purchase a plan for $100 or less after factoring in premium subsidies, and that more than two thirds of counties will have at least three insurers competing for customers. Pro’s Paul Demko has more details: http://politi.co/1Ra3CbL

— MORE ON RATES — The agency said it's going to focus its outreach efforts on five metro areas during this challenging enrollment season: Chicago, Dallas, Houston, Northern New Jersey and Miami. The good news for those spots: average increases for the benchmark plan are below the national average. Those hikes are: 1.3 percent in Chicago; 3.9 percent in Dallas; 4.9 percent in Houston; 2 percent in Miami; and 5.1 percent in Northern New Jersey.

FIRST IN PULSE: BALDWIN BLASTS BURWELL OVER MARKETPLACE PROCESSING — It's a little unusual for a Democrat to criticize the administration on Obamacare, but Sen. Tammy Baldwin isn't pulling punches in a new letter expressing frustration that constituents are losing subsidies and marketplace coverage because of delays processing paperwork. In a letter to HHS Secretary Sylvia Mathews Burwell, Baldwin said her staff has dealt with 67 such cases this year and has had trouble coordinating with CMS to fix the issue. “It is unacceptable for individuals to be losing access to health coverage or premium tax credit assistance due to administrative mismanagement,” she wrote. She's asking for a plan that would ensure continuity of coverage for these individuals, as well as full reimbursement of their lost tax credits and a special enrollment period. Her letter: http://1.usa.gov/1LYmL0f

PARTIAL REPEAL OF CADILLAC TAX? — Supporters of tax-exempt health care accounts are trying a new tack in battling Obamacare’s controversial Cadillac tax: partial repeal. Specifically, the Employers Council on Flexible Compensation wants to exempt employee contributions to flexible spending accounts from the tax thresholds — $10,700 for individual plans and $27,500 for family plans when it takes effect in 2018. Health insurance experts have warned that the popular tax-exempt accounts are likely to be dropped by many employers if contributions count towards the Cadillac tax. ”We’re political realists,” Bill Sweetnam, ECFC’s legislative and technical director, told PULSE. “We understand that it’s very unlikely that the excise tax will be repealed.”

— The industry group will be hitting the Hill this week to drum up support for the change. But so far, Sweetnam acknowledged, potential allies are still bent on repeal. No legislation exempting the flexible spending account contributions has been introduced.

** A message from PhRMA: DYK? Medicine prices fall significantly over time because the biopharmaceutical marketplace is unlike any other part of the health care system. Innovator companies invest in research to develop new medicines, and over time they become available as lower-cost generic versions - typically up to 80% less. Learn more at http://onphr.ma/1MHJGNQ. **

BRING BACK THE RACS — That's the battle cry from the Council for Medicare Integrity, which is out with a new Avalere study today showing that Medicare spending will increase by $47 billion over the next decade if Medicare auditors — who have been put on hold by both CMS and Congress in recent years — stay on “pause.” The RACs, remember, are primarily in charge of overseeing hospital claims — and their persistence in denying claims for certain stays triggered huge outcry over the so-called "two midnights" issue, and earned them no fans in the hospital world.

— Even if the RAC program gets scaled back dramatically as CMS proposed in its “two midnights” rule, CMI argues that there’s still a big role for auditors to play. The full study: http://bit.ly/1LYp4jN

ASCO WANTS PHYSICIAN PAYMENT REFORM — The American Society of Clinical Oncology is calling for comprehensive physician payment reform to support the full scope of services required by patients with cancer. In a policy statement published in the Journal of Clinical Oncology, the group says that Medicare's traditional payment approach is flawed and outdated. “Alternative payment models that shift the emphasis away from face-to-face office visits and administration of intravenous anticancer drug regimens and toward providing patients with high-quality, high-value oncology care are needed in order to provide the full scope of oncology,” ASCO President Julie Vose said in a statement.

THE HARDEST PART OF MAKING MACRA HAPPEN … Is ensuring that providers who try to avoid MIPS by entering an alternative payment model like a Medicare ACO can still get their Medicare payments smoothly, even if they have to report for MIPS after all, according to CMMI'S Patrick Conway. (To review, MACRA sets out a new unified payment system for physicians known as MIPS, but physicians can opt out if a certain percent of their payments come from eligible alternative payment models.) Conway and other CMS officials talked a whole lot about APMs at Monday's LAN Summit — and what's most clear from those conversations is that there's still a lot that's hazy about MACRA implementation — like what counts as an eligible APM, for starters. One thing the agency is sure about — it needs more ideas for APMs. As for a timeline? The agency is planning to propose a MACRA rule in the spring, officials said.

— The folks at the Learning and Action Network put out a pretty comprehensive framework for thinking about these APMs. The presentation is here: http://bit.ly/1LYqhYq

WHAT WE'RE READING, by Jennifer Haberkorn

At least eight people who underwent open heart surgery at a York, Pa., hospital have developed an infection from a medical device, the New York Times reports. http://nyti.ms/1LyAJnY

Robert Pear writes that the newly remodeled HealthCare.gov on Monday "worked more or less as promised by the government." http://nyti.ms/1LyAJnY

In Jerusalem, a Jewish doctor saves Palestinian attackers and a Muslim doctor saves Jewish victims, the Washington Post writes in a feature story. http://wapo.st/1MfHgkO

The Army Green Berets who requested the airstrike on the Doctors without Borders hospital in Afghanistan say they believed it was under Taliban control, The Associated Press reports: http://bit.ly/1MnJbKd

Should mental health screenings be required to buy a gun? Floridians think so. A new survey released this week found 85 percent of Sunshine staters support mental health screenings as a requirement before being able to purchase a firearm. http://on.wtsp.com/1LTm2dd

Hobby Lobby, the company that became synonymous with the religious-based opposition to the Obamacare contraception coverage requirement, is under investigation for obtaining illicit Biblical artifacts. http://thebea.st/1MQ0xtG

** A message from PhRMA: Medicine prices fall significantly over time because the biopharmaceutical marketplace is unlike any other part of the health care system. Innovator companies invest in research to develop medicines, and over time they become available as lower-cost generics. For example, the average price for cholesterol-lowering Lipitor dropped from $85 a month to $4 — a 95% price drop. Savings created by generics free up resources to invest in new treatments - creating headroom for continued innovation. Learn more at http://onphr.ma/1MHJGNQ. **

** A message from National Community Pharmacists Association (NCPA): Many Medicare drug plans effectively require the use of “preferred” pharmacies that are inconvenient for patients. That means a long trip or higher copays to stick with the pharmacies that patients like. In urban areas, these plans often fail to meet the government’s standard for pharmacy access. In rural areas, “preferred” pharmacies are often 20+ miles away! Support H.R. 793 / S. 1190. This bipartisan legislation is supported by leading consumer advocates and would let patients use any pharmacy willing to accept the “preferred” pharmacy terms and conditions. Learn more at www.ncpanet.org/pharmacychoice. **