The failure of the nation to update the Constitution and the structure of government it originally bequeathed to us is at the root of our current political dysfunction. - Larry Sabato, “A More Perfect Constitution: 23 Proposals to Revitalize Our Constitution and Make America a Fairer Country.”

It’s a shame the deep-pocketed theocrats that run Hobby Lobby, Inc. don’t go in for a little gambling, because right now they’re damn near running the table. Or, is that the country?

Fresh off a landmark 5-4 victory, the Supreme Court exempted the closely held (small circle of ownership) corporation from most contraceptive-related Obamacare mandates.

Hobby Lobby’s hard-right brain trust must be ecstatic as other conservative entities join in the effort to neutralize the venerable Establishment Clause – arguably the last Constitutional bulwark between their theologically driven agenda and religious freedom as we know it.

The Establishment Clause: Then and Now

In case (like me) you nodded off the day erstwhile your high school government teacher broke it down, the Establishment Clause (1791) refers to that section of the First Amendment prohibiting the establishment of a state religion.

Modeled on a Virginia statute crafted by Jefferson some five years prior, the Clause was intended to curb European-style, government sponsored religious favoritism. While not every Framer shared the Virginia delegation’s theological hypervigilance, there was widespread sympathy for an Amendment-level firewall against religious tyranny within Congress.

But despite serving as the nation’s primary church-state legal baseline for more than 200 years, the Establishment Clause has been rendered all but silent by the Roberts Court. Just two months prior to its Burwell v. Hobby Lobby ruling, the Court, by an identical 5-4 majority, reversed a lower court decision and found Constitutional the use of explicitly Christian prayers to begin public meetings.

It’s the System, Stupid

Ponder this: The real problem here isn’t Hobby Lobby, the pro-prayer crowd, nor even the five oddly activist Supremes who are doing their level best to breach the Clause.

The problem is the system. The problem is we long ago became Constitutional autotrons, treating the document as our (mostly) secular bible, beyond reproach and in no way in need of major rethinking.

To put it theologically, the Constitution is our societal false idol; justifying per Burwell and scores of other portentous cases, a system of government in which nine individuals – elected by no one, serving at will, and accountable only to their own consciences – are routinely ceded power over such fundamental matters as political election outcomes, societal morays and personal freedoms.

Seen in the meta, the public prayer and Hobby Lobby rulings are but the latest indicators of systemic governing stagnation, and why it’s time for a grand-scale, long-term review of our foundational document; starting with how we think about it.

Been There, Done That

In a CNN World op-ed from June 20, 2011, reporter and author, Fareed Zakaria, points out that the Constitution is a unique and precious guardian of the good; but like any historical text, is subject to complexities unimaginable by those who created and signed it.

Zakaria reminds us that calling for a Constitutional review is hardly a new idea. Consider that Jefferson, et al, were themselves working off an existing, broadly revered document: “Such a plan is not unheard of in American history.

After all, the delegates in Philadelphia in 1787 initially meant not to create the Constitution as we now know it, but instead to revise the existing document, the Articles of Confederation. But the delegates saw a disconnect between the document that currently governed them and the needs of the nation, so their solution was to start anew.”

The First Step

We should not minimize the enormous damage done as the Establishment Clause is set aside in favor of exclusionary public prayer, and religion-based health care. With these two rulings alone, the Court’s five conservatives have exponentially added to the nation’s long-standing mistreatment of non-Christians and women.

But as the ideologically-driven decisions continue to amass, so, too, should appeals for an exploratory, three-branch commission tasked with asking tough questions about the Constitution’s presumed infallibility.

It’s a first step we can’t afford not to take.

Related articles