Waterbury Hispanics at milestone

More than half of city students are Hispanic





WATERBURY — In mid-September, newly hired Principal Delia I. Bello-Davila stood at the front door of Bucks Hill Elementary School, catching a chill as she greeted parents arriving for an evening open house.



Bello-Davila grew up in an educated, middle class family in Puerto Rico. In Waterbury, three-quarters of her students are Hispanic. She had expected to greet people at the door, then move inside. Instead, she spent the evening at the door, talking to parents who were excited about her background and ability to speak their language.



One woman walked past, hardly noticing her, then quickly ran back when she realized Bello-Davila's background. The woman gave her a hug.



"Finally we got someone," Bello-Davila recalled the woman saying.



This year, for the first time, more than half — 51.1 percent — of the students in Waterbury's public schools are Hispanic.



For many years, the percentage of Waterbury students identified as Hispanic has steadily increased, a percentage point or so per year. At the same time, the percentage of white students has been on a steady decline — falling from 33.7 percent in 2001 to 20 percent today.



City statistics show the other big demographic group, African-American students, grew slightly between 2001 and 2007, then held steady at around 28 percent of the student body until 2010, before beginning to decline. That might have something to do with changes in changes to state record-keeping in 2010, when the new category of "two or more races" was added to the annual school census form.



The shifting demographics make a difference in outcomes.



Connecticut's Hispanic students, on average, have far lower rates of academic success than white peers by various measures, including standardized tests, chronic absenteeism and others. Among Connecticut's class of 2012, 91.3 percent of whites graduated in four years, compared to 68.6 percent of Hispanics.



"It's concerning because if you look at the results we are having with our Hispanic students, they are not that great," said Jennifer Alexander, head of the academic reform group Connecticut Coalition for Achievement Now. "We are going to face an increasingly diverse workforce, which, if you look at the achievement data, will be increasingly unprepared for the jobs of the future."



Connecticut's big urban districts are all seeing big increases in Hispanic students over time, and Alexander said the population continues to suffer a large achievement gap. She said schools can help all minority and low-income students achieve through individualized instruction, longer school days, creative use of time, strong curriculum, quality professional development, early intervention for English learners and supports for families.



"None of this is rocket science," Alexander said.



Ruth Glasser, a University of Connecticut professor specializing in ethnic and Latino history, said while there might be similar language barriers and some cultural norms, it's important to realize that people from different Spanish-speaking countries have unique cultural identities and needs.



Hispanics have been in Waterbury for a long time, Glasser said. The biggest population boost came with a wave of Puerto Ricans who came to work in Waterbury factories and on surrounding farms around World War II.



Like prior waves of migrants, this newly energized ethnic enclave developed its own gravity, pulling in friends and relations and growing the population. Today, the Hispanic population has become far more diverse, with strong representation from many South and Central American countries, along with Caribbean islands.



Waterbury school and community leaders celebrate the increasing diversity of the city and its schools. But they also note challenges and a need to help this growing demographic achieve better academic results. They cite three big needs — more Hispanic staff, cultural training for staff and continuing to ramp up efforts at connecting families with the district.



Bucks Hill is one of Waterbury's three bi-lingual education centers — where English language learners receive instruction in two languages for up to the state-mandated minimum of 30 months.



Bello-Davila said she's working to strengthen instruction of core academic concepts and to encourage parental involvement. The 568-student school currently has six active parent members on the Parent-Teacher Organization. Bello-Davila hopes to push this to 16 by the end of the year. She's also working on less easily measured aspects of parent involvement, such as the ability for parents to help with homework.



Bello-Davila said the state's 30-month minimum for bilingual instruction is far from adequate. Studies show that children need five years at a minimum, she said. But, as unfair as the limit might be, Bello-Davila said she's telling staff to not allow it to become an excuse.



"Either those children learn to read now, or they will never make it," Bello Davila said.



The number of dedicated bilingual positions in the district hasn't changed much in the five years for which data was available this week. During the 2010-11 school year, the district had 71 bilingual jobs — teachers, social workers and other positions. This year the district budgeted for 68 — 13 of which are vacant.



Chief Academic Officer Anne Marie Cullinan said the number of Spanish speakers is actually far higher among the staff. It's not easy to obtain bilingual certification from the state Department of Education. Cullinan said she hires Spanish speakers at every opportunity. It's difficult to find qualified bilingual staff. All of the urban district's compete for a limited pool, she said.



"It's a challenge. It's a shortage area," Cullinan said. "The population is growing, but we also need professionals growing on the other side too, to match the needs in our district."



Waterbury Career Academy Principal Louis Padua — who grew up in Waterbury's South End — agrees it's important to find more Hispanic educators. They serve as role models for students, but also are crucial for helping parents connect with their children's education.



"Making the school system more user-friendly is an issue," Padua said.



In the 2012-13 school year, minorities represented 78.1 percent of the student body, but slightly less than 12 percent of Waterbury's professional education staff, according to the latest strategic school profile available online from the State Department of Education.



Only a relative fraction of the city's Hispanic students require bilingual education. It's still a challenge. Another challenge is that many parents still struggle with English, even if their children are proficient, educators say.



In addition to language barriers, there are also cultural hurdles blocking Hispanic parental involvement. They readily defer to academic authorities and are more easily put off when schools don't appear inviting, Padua said.



Board of Education member Felix Rodriguez, who is Puerto Rican, said the district needs to understand many of its families are poverty stricken and need support if students are to be successful.



"We need to think about better, effective, ways to support and provide resources to families so kids can succeed," Rodriguez said. "Sometimes the only healthy meal a kid may get is in school at lunch."



Waterbury has increasingly expanded supports far beyond the education realm. Dental hygienists visit its various elementary schools. The district is scheduled to open a dental/medical/psychological health clinic in the Wallace Middle School-Crosby High School complex this year. Family resource centers provide food and clothing assistance, along with connections to social services. This year the district began offering free lunch to all of its students.



Rubis Collado, a community activist and parent liaison at Waterbury Career Academy, agreed with the need for language supports and cultural understanding. But the Hispanic community also needs to meet the district halfway, by learning English, organizing politically and taking a more proactive role in schools.



"Now that I'm inside the system, I see the more they want help, it's impossible, because we have to help ourselves first," said Collado.

Related Links

Racial breakdown in Waterbury schools

Follow Us