The Arizona Legislature on Tuesday finally began debating a spending package for the state budget year that begins July 1 after a week of wrangling over additional funding for K-12 schools that wasn't included in the initial budget agreement.

With that issue apparently solved through the addition of more than $30 million to several school line items, members moved on to other major issues in the $9.58 billion in spending plan. Chief among them are a series of tax cuts that the Republican majority want to enact, and the restoration of a health insurance program for poor children that was closed to enrollment in 2010 amid a state funding crunch.

Minority Democrats complained that continuing to cut taxes every year creates a constant cycle of funding shortfalls that Republicans use as an excuse to cut more spending.

Arizona remains the only state that doesn't participate in the Children's Health Insurance Program, known in Arizona as KidsCare. A proposal to resume participating in KidsCare passed the House by a wide margin on in March. It stalled in the Senate after President Andy Biggs refused to hear it.

Biggs has blocked the proposal because he's opposed to the Affordable Care Act and is worried the federal government will cut payments and force Arizona to pick up more of the tab.

Advocates who want the program restarted rallied at the Capitol on Monday in a last-ditch effort. KidsCare once covered more than 63,000 children, but fewer than 1,000 now have the insurance.

Biggs previously said it isn't that easy to cut off insurance if federal funding drops once 30,000 or so children are insured.

The House has an amendment to a budget bill to add KidsCare, and one is also expected in the Senate. Debate on those items are expected later in the day.

Early Tuesday as the House debated the first in a series of bills tied to the budget, Democrats tried to amend a revenue bill to add a five-year freeze on the phase-in of corporate income tax cuts and to block a yearly, 20-percent increase in a private school tax credit program.

"As we continue these corporate tax cuts, we continue to cut funding for public schools," said Rep. Lisa Otondo, D-Yuma.

Republicans blocked the effort, with one saying there will never be enough revenue to meet all the needs that some people believe exist.

"The flavors of the day that I see are that a structurally balanced budget is evil and bad. Even though it's is a constitutional requirement for the state of Arizona," said rep. Bob Thorpe, R-Flagstaff. "Corporations are evil, even though they hire the families that need jobs."

© 2016 The Associated Press. All rights reserved. This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten or redistributed.