“It’s been a rough one,” said Krom, 64, of North Augusta.

On top of all that, his insurance company, Consumers Choice, is shutting down and will not offer coverage for next year under the Affordable Care Act. Fortunately for Krom, he was able to go to Christ Community Health Services on Thursday and get assistance from a new navigator, Monica Baldwin. She is one of the new faces that will be providing help during the third Open Enrollment for the ACA, which began Nov. 1 and runs through Jan. 31.

People who want coverage to begin on Jan. 1 need to enroll by Dec. 15. Health and Human Services Secretary Sylvia Burwell said Thursday in a blog post that more than 540,000 people had selected a plan the first week through healthcare.gov, the federally run Web site that Georgia and other states that did not want to run their own Marketplace Web site use. About 358,000 were people who had coverage last year, like Krom, and were re-enrolling.

Nearly 10 million people ended up with coverage last year, but it was only a fraction of those who could have enrolled with help from tax credits. The Urban Institute estimated that 24.1 million people could have qualified for tax credits but only 8.6 million did, a rate of about 35 percent, prompting the study authors to say that more outreach might be needed in some states.

That outreach and in-person help last year in Augusta came primarily from the community health centers, Christ Community and Medical Associates Plus@Belle Terrace. Baldwin was on hand to help Krom with his re-enrollment Thursday but also got assistance from experienced navigator Candace Lee. Medical Associates Plus is in the process of hiring a new navigator to replace its veteran navigator from last year, CEO J.R. Richards said.

Christ Community is encouraged by the early interest it has received, particularly in light of the fact people historically wait until the deadline is approaching to enroll, Executive Director Jeff Drake said.

“We see a larger number of people trying to access toward the end of the period than the beginning,” he said.

This year, Augusta will have more direct help. Community Health Works of Macon, Ga., got a $2.3 million grant to provide statewide help this enrollment period through its Insure Georgia initiative, about double what it received last year to try to cover most of the state, said CEO Fred Ammons.

Last time, it provided help to the Augusta area through a navigator based out of Athens, Ga., but this year will have one based in Augusta. That navigator has yet to receive her license but Ammons hoped that would happen next week.

Last enrollment period, “we were covering a larger area with fewer people,” he said. “This year we are able to allocate quite a few more resources in communities.”

But through its statewide toll-free line, virtual help is also available, he said. Through its virtual navigator center, they can answer anything from simple questions to helping people fill out their applications, Ammons said.

“Our folks can actually walk them through the entire process over the telephone,” he said. If in-person assistance is needed, they can either refer to their own people or to the other assisters as needed, Ammons said.

“We are absolutely committed to helping folks find the help that they need at the time that they need it, even if that help is not always us,” he said. “That is something that is paramount in our mind because we don’t need to ask folks to work around our schedules. We need to find the best resources to help people where they are.”

In Krom’s case, things got off to a little bit of a rocky start with confusion over passwords and having to create a new e-mail. But Baldwin was able to help him find coverage for virtually the same $240 monthly premium he was paying before, this time with Blue Cross Blue Shield of South Carolina. He only needs the coverage until he turns 65 in June and can qualify for Medicare, and he feels confident this company will be around for him until then.

“They aren’t going anywhere,” he said.