AUSTIN — Texas’ refusal to expand Medicaid will cause private health insurance premiums to rise by an average of 9.3 percent for people who buy their own coverage, a new study finds.

GOP lawmakers, strongly encouraged by Gov. Rick Perry, decided not to add poor adults to Medicaid’s rolls. That means about 1.3 million fewer Texans will have health coverage by 2016 than if the federal Affordable Care Act were fully implemented in the state, according to the study by the nonprofit research organization Rand Corp.

About 320,000 adult Texans just above the poverty line will take advantage of the Affordable Care Act’s federal subsidies and buy coverage in the individual insurance market, the researchers said. Those are people who would have been enrolled in Medicaid as the federal law was written and before that part of it was altered by a Supreme Court ruling.

The study said that because low-income people generally are not as healthy as wealthier people, their inclusion in private health insurance exchanges will increase costs. That will force a 9.3 percent increase in premiums for all 3 million Texans who will be enrolled in the individual market by 2016, the study said.

In Texas, the private health insurance exchange that will open next month will be run by the federal Health and Human Services Department because Perry threatened in 2011 to veto a Republican House lawmaker’s bill calling for a state-run exchange.

In this year’s legislative session, no Republican proposed a state-run exchange, and the Obamacare debate was mainly about Perry’s insistence that Texas shouldn’t enlarge Medicaid, even if it meant turning down about $100 billion more in federal matching money over the coming decade.

He and other Republicans have said the Medicaid expansion would be too costly. Although the federal government would pay nearly all the cost of the expansion, critics say the program is not sustainable.

Officials also have noted that the cost of caring for the uninsured falls largely to county taxpayers who support large public hospitals, such as Dallas’ Parkland hospital, rather than to the state itself.

The study suggests that the federal health care legislation will cause more than a tripling of the share of Texas’ nonelderly population that will be enrolled in the individual insurance market in 2016 — from 2.9 percent, if the legislation had not passed, to 11.3 percent.

Spurring that increase is the Affordable Care Act’s subsidies that the study says could go to 69 percent of people buying their own coverage.

If Texas expanded Medicaid, the percentage of the state’s nonelderly population that would be uninsured would drop in 2016 from 28.2 percent to 12.4 percent, the study said.

But even without the expansion, the number of uninsured Texans will decline from more than 6 million to just over 4.2 million, the study predicts. With full implementation of the Affordable Care Act, the number would have shrunk to 2.9 million.