On his show Monday, nationally syndicated radio show host Mark Levin explained why the American people do not need to take in "all these so-called refugees" from the Middle East and elsewhere.

“There’s nothing that requires America to take in all these so-called refugees – all these people from other parts of the world,” Levin said. “We get to decide who comes here, or at least we’re supposed to.”

The following is a transcript of Levin’s comments:

“Obama went on in his clip, as he spoke to the young folks there at Rutgers University, ‘Building walls won’t do that. It won’t boost our economy, and it won’t enhance our security, either. Isolating or disparaging Muslims – suggesting they should be treated differently when it comes to entering this country – that’s not just a betrayal of our values, that’s not just a betrayal of who we are. It would alienate the very communities at home and abroad,’ and he goes on. …

“There’s nothing that requires America to take in all these so-called refugees – all these people from other parts of the world.

“We get to decide who comes here, or at least we’re supposed to. And instead, the political ruling class in Washington D.C. has imposed its will, despite, time after time, the American people saying no. It’s just common sense.

“We’ve got a bureaucracy that can’t determine the good from the bad. And so, when you’re overwhelmed with people coming into a country, and you can’t keep up with the paperwork, and you can’t know who they are, and you’re bringing them in here from the Middle East – from Syria, from other parts of the Middle East – where there’s a civil war going on, where there’s terrorism spreading, and where the enemy has said they intend to secrete their terrorists within these groups of people.

“And then when you look at what’s going on in Europe – Europe is overrun. Europe’s been hit. Europe’s culture is collapsing. Why would you do that to your own country, and then turn around and say, ‘This isn’t who we are’?

“What isn’t who we are? What the hell is he talking about? First he trashes his own country, and then he says this isn’t who we are. Well, we’re not a bunch of left-wing kooks living in sanctuary cities. We’re not a bunch of left-wing kooks with tenure in law schools and undergraduate classes. We know what’s right.

“And when’s the last time Obama went to one of these events and spoke out in defense of Christians – Christians, who are being slaughtered in the Middle East by Muslims? When was the last time he did that? When’s the last time he directed his justice department to protect Christians rather than attack them legally through Obamacare and other devices and pretexts? When’s the last time? Never!

“When’s the last time he spoke out about Jews and what’s being done to Jews by Palestinian terrorists? When’s the last time he spoke out about Jews and the anti-Semitism being imported into this country, into our college and university campuses? Never! Never.”