Oregon’s governor and the head of the Interior Department were in Bend on Friday to herald recent agreements designed to keep sage grouse and ranchers on the range.

For Gov. Kate Brown, the trip was her first to Central Oregon since taking office Feb. 18 following the resignation of Gov. John Kitzhaber. For Interior Secretary Sally Jewell, former CEO of Seattle-based REI, the trip was a return to her native Northwest.

The state, federal agencies and soil and conservation districts covering eight Oregon counties have signed agreements intended to restore and protect sage grouse habitat. The first such deal was in Harney County last year and the five most recent deals, signed last week, cover all or parts of Deschutes, Crook, Baker, Grant, Lake, Malheur and Union counties.

“Together we have made a commitment to the economic viability of rural Oregon,” Brown said at a private event outside the U.S. Fish and Wildlife’s Bend office celebrating the sage grouse agreements . About 80 people attended Friday afternoon, including ranchers from around Central and Eastern Oregon, conservationists and local elected leaders.

“I want to thank Oregon for being a leader,” Jewell said, who wore a sage grouse pin for the event.

A chicken-sized bird found where there is sage brush, the sage grouse remains a candidate for protection under the federal Endangered Species Act. Jewell said the sage grouse is atop her agency’s list of priorities.

Improving sage brush habitat will not only help the bird, she said, but ranchers and the rural economies they fuel as well.

“It’s not just about the greater sage grouse,” she said.

Along with sage grouse, Brown said she sees water, transportation and affordable housing as issues she wants to address in Central and Eastern Oregon. Brown said a priority for her is “making sure that people can afford to live in the communities they work in.”

Last week she visited Pendleton and shortly after the Friday event she was set to see Central Oregon ranches where juniper has been cleared to make room for sage brush and sage grouse. Brown and Jewell planned to be up before sunrise today and out seeing a sage grouse lek, breeding grounds where the birds gather this time of year.

Sage grouse are known for their unique early-morning mating dance, which involves strutting and chest thumping by the males.

Brown said it will be the first time she visits a lek although she did see a sage grouse in the wild while backpacking on Steens Mountain in 2001.

The sage grouse agreements give ranchers an idea of what they can do now to help the sage grouse and avoid restrictions brought by a potential Endangered Species listing later.

Lake County rancher John O’Keefe, president-elect of the Oregon Cattlemen’s Association, thanked the state and federal government for giving ranchers the tools to tackle sage grouse protection now.

“The sage grouse is a landscape species so it has to be addressed on private and public land,” he said.

— Reporter: 541-617-7812,

ddarling@bendbulletin.com