Heavy equipment is ready to begin working on the new visitors center and restaurant on the north side of the Royal Gorge Bridge and Park. ( Brandon Hopper / Daily Record )

The majestic view at the Royal Gorge Bridge & Park will not change with the redevelopment of the park, but there will be some new and exciting features.

Blaine Heckart, food service director for the Royal Gorge Bridge & Park, said the new north-side visitors center will feature a restaurant that will offer concessions, as well as sit-down dining service.

"It will be able to do the fast concessions but also have that same kitchen and facility and venue be able to do banquets and evening dinners and weddings and retreats," he said. "The challenge is to be able to do both and be able to flip that switch in a matter of minutes."

Heckart said the plan moving forward is that anyone will be able to dine at the restaurant without going into the bridge and park itself.

"The view is going to be spectacular," he said. "There will be two stories of glass."

The indoor restaurant will be able to seat 212 patrons, and outdoor deck seating will be available, as well.

"It's a very special venue," Heckart said. "Having the ability to (offer fast food and sit-down dining) is what will make it unique."

Pizza, hamburgers, hot dogs, ice cream and funnel cakes will be available for visitors who are on the go, and more healthy food alternatives also will be available.

"Gluten-free stuff is big in food service now," Heckart said. "You've got to do salads, chicken wraps, all that kind of stuff."

He said since the June 2013 Royal Gorge Fire, he has been busy planning menus that can accommodate the diverse group of visitors to the park.

Advertisement

"You have the vegetarians, the people from India and from all over the world," he said. "You want to have something that they can all enjoy."

Heckart said he hopes to extend the typical May to September season that the restaurant is open.

"It will be a nice destination restaurant," he said.

The visitors center and restaurant is expected to be open for business in August.