On the streets, they call it Dwight's House.

But, of late, Dwight hasn't been home.

Earlier this month, for the first time in nearly two decades, Dwight Smith, 63, was gone from the downtown Santa Ana homeless shelter he runs with his wife, Leia.

The man who had spent half his adult life sheltering, listening to, praying with and fighting for Orange County's most vulnerable, was in the hospital.

• • •

Dwight Smith underwent surgeries at Hoag Hospital in Newport Beach to save his legs on Dec. 2 and 4. His legs had almost stopped working because of pinched nerves in his spine.

Suddenly, the Catholic Worker homeless shelter officially known as Isaiah House – a converted Craftsman-style mansion on Cypress Street that sleeps 40 homeless women each night and feeds an additional 200 homeless people three times a week at the Santa Ana Civic Center – had lost its moral, philosophical and spiritual heart.

“When you are going through one of the most horrific things in your life, and someone is there, that's the connection Dwight has with everyone,” said Beverly Cunningham, 58, who recently moved out of Isaiah House after living there for nearly four years.

“We were all really concerned,” said Bobbie Simonelli, 56, describing how she and other Isaiah House guests felt when Smith entered Hoag this month. “We all just love him”

As for Smith himself, the physical setbacks of hospitalization proved to be the least of his challenges.

“C.S. Lewis wrote about how people have all these vaunted spiritual ideas until they get a toothache,” he said. “This is a great leveler,” he said about how his spinal condition has changed him. “I'm willing to have people help pull my pants up.”

The Smiths, who are Catholic, turned their backs on corporate careers to lead Isaiah House, where they live alongside the homeless they serve and earn so little income – a $10 weekly stipend – they qualify for indigent medical care.

• • •

Leia Smith, 57, is the house manager. She coordinates volunteers, keeps accounts and attends to the myriad bureaucratic challenges that arise when caring for people on the margins of social institutions.

Dwight, Leia says, is the “sounding board,” the one who lingers at meals talking to guests “to hear what's on their hearts, what's hard for them.” He is the one who reminds people they are still “of value,” she says.

She recalls waiting impatiently for Dwight to finish an hourlong conversation with a homeless man who appeared incoherent.

Later, her husband told her “the guy was talking about his father's suicide.”

“That's why they call it ‘Dwight's House,'” she said. “They come here to talk to Dwight. They all do.”

The Catholic Worker movement prioritizes radical solidarity with the poor, a value Dwight Smith never tires of emphasizing to guests, visitors and volunteers.

He's also been overheard lecturing wealthy donors about their debt to the poor. Two months ago, a class action lawsuit he helped to file secured a landmark settlement with the county of Orange, which agreed to overhaul its homeless services in response to claims that officials were improperly denying benefits.

So in recent months, when worsening scoliosis forced Smith to hobble around with a cane, people in the shelter took notice. And when he left the shelter for his surgeries, word of his absence spread quickly.

“The people on the street don't have a person who's in their corner who's here, Leia Smith said. “And that scares people.”

The surgeries went well, and a few days later Dwight Smith was at a rehabilitation facility in Tustin. There, he underwent three therapy sessions a day and wasn't allowed to get up from bed by himself. “I might fall over,” he said.

Leia kept Isaiah House guests apprised of Dwight's condition. But she didn't encourage them to visit Dwight because many homeless people “don't feel comfortable going” to hospitals, where, she said, they're often stared at or asked to leave.

The guests, it turned out, had other ideas.

• • •

Beverly Cunningham and a man named Salim, who comes to Sunday brunch at Isaiah House, tracked Dwight Smith down in the hospital. They showed up at his room unannounced – and, in Salim's case, after a long bus trip – to bring him get-well wishes from the community.

Other homeless women pooled their money and time and bought Leia Smith a bouquet of flowers. They wrote messages in donated greeting cards.

Bobbie Simonelli, graced with an artistic streak, bought a 3-by-5-foot foam board at a 99-Cent Only store, cut the board into the shape of a Christmas tree and, with some help from other guests, decorated it with gold thread, shiny paper and plastic animal ornaments.

Cunningham took the card to Smith on Thursday. Simonelli said she made it because she was worried he “wouldn't have anything for Christmas.”

“It was hard not to cry to see him in the” rehabilitation center, Cunningham said. “I'm used to seeing him strong.”

Speaking last week from his bed, Smith said he more than shared Cunningham's feelings.

“It's a bizarre turnaround,” he said. “I'm thanking people and saying, ‘You don't have to do that for me.' Finally I had to say, ‘Just shut up, Dwight, and just be sick and let people do things for you for once.' ”

At the rehab facility, Smith learned to walk with a walker, navigate stairs, get in and out of bed, and prepare food without straining his spine, which is fused with bolts in places.

Over the next few months, bone will solidify around the bolts and he'll be able to walk unassisted.

Until then, one fall could snap his back.

• • •

On Saturday, Leia picked up Dwight from rehab and drove him to the house.

As their car pulled up, they were surrounded by a receiving line of homeless women.

“I got out of the car and they were all worried about me, and I sat down and talked to them,” Dwight said.

He's planning daily rehabilitative walks around the backyard and hopes to build up to a five-mile walk to Westfield MainPlace mall and back.

He probably won't make that trek alone.

“Everyone made a firm and solemn commitment to walk with me,” he said.

For now, days are spent mostly in bed, since even sitting is painful. But that doesn't mean inactivity.

On Sunday, Smith rattled off a reading list that included comedian David Sedaris (“very sick but very funny”) and a recently published theological study of the Gospel of Mark focusing on Jesus' political radicalism.

The day he returned from the hospital he was fielding questions from homeless women wondering whether they, too, should seek surgery for back conditions.

And he's been on the phone with potential new guests, advising them whether to come to the house or seek better services elsewhere.

“The poorest rich people on Earth are the ones who are sick,” he said Sunday, musing on the ties that bind rich and poor when they confront mortality.

But then he got practical, reflecting that his hospitalization will help him give better advice to homeless people navigating the new federal health care law.

“I used to sign people up with the county,” he said. “But now (we're) signing people up for CalOptima under the Affordable Care Act. It's a radical intervention to get poor people the care they need.”

Contact the writer: jhinch@ocregister.com