WATCH the Debreif interview.

The Supreme Court’s 2014 term ended in June on a controversial note, with Chief Justice John Roberts and Justice Anthony Kennedy siding with the Court’s four liberals to uphold Obamacare’s insurance subsidies and Kennedy providing the swing vote to legalize same-sex marriage. After a few months off, the Court returned to action on Monday with a docket full of consequential cases.

To preview the term, The Agenda’s Danny Vinik sat down with Neal Katyal, a Georgetown law professor who was acting solicitor general from May, 2010 to June, 2011. Court watchers have named Katyal as a potential future Democratic nominee. On Wednesday, he will argue before the Court in a death penalty case involving two brothers who blame each other for a murder.



In the interview, Katyal lays out the biggest cases of the term, including ones on affirmative action, public sector unions and redistricting rules. Katyal also suggests that the justices may be looking for the right case to litigate the constitutionality of capital punishment—“I think that's something really on the mind of the Court on both sides”—and explains what it’s like to argue before the Supreme Court.

Danny Vinik: What are the main themes that you expect to see in this term?

Neal Katyal: I don't think that the Supreme Court really takes cases with kind of a theme in mind. They get about 10,000 requests a year and what are called "petitions for certiorari," which are essentially 30‑page documents which say, "Hey, Court, hear my case." And they don't take very many of them. Last year, they took about 75 cases, and even of those 75, about 7 of them dropped out for various reasons, so they decided around 68 cases. … They really approach each case individually

DV: What are the main areas or issues before the Court?

NK: I wouldn't say there's much in the way of like a hot issue that straddles a bunch of cases, except for maybe the Eighth Amendment. The Court has taken a series of cases on the meaning of the Eighth Amendment. So what's that? The Eighth Amendment says that it forbids cruel and unusual punishments, and the Court has taken a bunch of stuff on this. … I would say that that's something that is an interest. It connects up with a larger theme that the court’s had, not over one term, but [over] many, many terms, and that is this Supreme Court is becoming increasingly concerned about the rights of criminal defendants.

For a while, I think particularly with the so‑called "law‑and‑order Republican nominees" to the U.S. Supreme Court, many of those cases were decided time and again in favor of the government and against the criminal defendant. Now things are starting to shift, as the very same justices who were painted as "law and order" are now routinely siding with criminal defendants to the point where last term, there were seven federal criminal cases, and the criminal defendants won in six of the seven. And it's interesting who the ringleader is of this, because I think most Americans would not guess that the person who's probably the justice who's ruled the most in favor of criminal defendants: Justice Scalia, appointed by President Reagan in 1988.

DV: Affirmative action is headed back to the Court. What’s at stake in that case?

NK: It's a case called Fisher v. University of Texas. This is actually Ms. Fisher's second trip up to the Supreme Court. She's been challenging the University of Texas' affirmative action policy for a number of years. … Ms. Fisher challenged that as unconstitutional [and] said it's impermissible because of the Fourteenth Amendment, which guarantees equal protection of the law to all persons. … It's already come to the Court once, and they kind of dodged the big issue, but now I think many people think this is the time for the Court to resolve this question: Can you have affirmative action under a Constitution that says equal protection of the law to all persons?

There's one other pretty interesting fact about the case. The one person who's probably got the most experience with administering university admission policies is Elena Kagan. She was the dean of the Harvard Law School before she became solicitor general, and then President Obama put her on the Supreme Court as our newest justice. She's recused from the case, which means only eight justices can hear the case.

DV: How about public sector unions, with the Friedrichs v. California Teachers Association case?

NK: I think many Americans are familiar with [the notion] that if you work for a union, sometimes the union can compel a certain amount of money out of your paycheck, and obviously, a lot of people have problems with that. And one problem people have is the money burden. Another burden people have with it is they say, "Hey, this union is doing stuff that I'm not really supportive of [through] political contributions. They're supporting Democrats and I'm a Republican," or, "They're supporting Republicans and I'm a Democrat.”

In 1977, the Supreme Court in a case called Abood said, "We can distinguish between these two types of objections. If you just don't like your money being spent, sorry." The Court said, "That's something the unions can force you to do. [It can] take some of your paycheck out in order to lobby and benefit workers more generally." But they said, "If you're taking money out that has to do with speech and political speech or something like that, that you have more protection against." And so that rule has been around for almost 40 years. Lots and lots of labor laws grown up around it. And the Court, starting a few years ago—and particularly Justice Alito—started to signal discomfort with Abood. And there's been a lot of academic criticism of Abood in the years since that 1977 decision. The case here is going to ask that big question: Should Abood be overruled?

DV: Redistricting is supposed to be a big issue as well.

NK: The case involves the question what does “One Person, One Vote” mean? The Supreme Court said in the 1960s in Baker v. Carr and other cases that, effectively, you can't dilute people's voting strength so much that they become weak and ineffectual compared to other districts. Now, you could ask, "Doesn't the Constitution already do that?" After all, [with] the U.S. Senate, if you're a citizen of, say, Delaware, you get a lot more power with your vote for the Senate than you do if you're a citizen of California. … That's not true at the state level, though. That reflects a unique federal compromise in 1787, and so the Supreme Court has said you should have “One Person, One Vote” at the state level and the local level, and the question in the case is, what's the denominator there? When we try and figure out what are equal amounts of voting power, do we look to all the voters or do we look to the total population in a relevant geographic district? And most particularly, given the 2016 election and something that Donald Trump is talking a lot about, do we look to whether or not, for example, illegal aliens are counted as part of that denominator?

DV: Does the 2016 race have any implications on the Supreme Court?

NK: I don't think that the politics of 2016 seep into the Court; that is to say, I really do think they're sitting there thinking, "What's the right decision to make? What cases should we hear?" and if the case is right to hear, in general, I think they're going to hear it.

The one exception: Some people say, "Well, abortion might be different." There are a couple of big cases coming, one out of Texas involving some abortion restrictions, and abortion ever since the Supreme Court decision in Roe v. Wade has been a very difficult issue for the Supreme Court. And really, their last big pronouncement on Roe v. Wade was in 1992, a long, long time ago. They did hear a partial birth abortion case in 2007, but we really haven't seen a big case yet.

DV: What is one other issue we should be watching?

NK: I suspect that this Supreme Court is thinking really hard about the death penalty and whether or not this is actually where America wants to be in the 21st century. We're almost standing alone at this point, and the countries we are standing with in terms of the number of executions that parallel the United States' are not countries that we really want to be associated with—North Korea, Iran, and the like. And so I think that's something really on the mind of the Court on both sides, the justices appointed by Republicans as well as those by Democrats.

DV: What’s it like to argue in front of the Court? Do you get nervous?

NK: You'd be insane not to get nervous. It’s such an amazing experience. It’s 30 minutes per side, so it's not very long. … And they're asking a lot of questions. So I usually have like two lines on a legal pad that I hope to get out first, before I get a question. I often don't even get that out. … You know what you want to say, but what you really want as the advocate is to learn what they are thinking and to be able to answer their questions. And the coolest thing about the Supreme Court right now is the nine of them up there, because they are everything you want in a government. They are really working hard. They know every footnote in your brief. They know every weakness, and, boy, they give it to you. Seventy questions on average per 30‑minute argument, I'm getting, and they're tough questions.

DV: I know you appeared on “House of Cards.” Which was more nerve-racking: appearing on the show or arguing before the Court?

NK: The nice thing about the "House of Cards" is they did 70 takes, so it was a little different. You only get one at the Supreme Court.

This Q&A has been edited for length and clarity.