JACKSON, MI - An endowment has been established with $1 million from a Jackson County health plan once used to provide low-income adults with medical coverage.

Officials dissolved the Jackson Health Plan, established 14 years ago, because enrollees are now eligible for fuller coverage through the federal Affordable Care Act and the expansion of Medicaid.

Such plans, in existence in most Michigan counties, are no longer necessary, requiring the board of the Jackson plan to decide what to do with the remaining assets, said Monica Moser, president and CEO of the Jackson Community Foundation.

With the Jackson County Health Plan Corp. Endowment Fund instead of a one-time gift, the board assures the money will have a "lasting legacy," Moser said.

"It's not often you have the chance to start an endowment fund that will have an impact on the health needs of our community forever," Randy Treacher, board president, said in a statement released by the community foundation.

For the first 10 years, a portion of the income from investments will be used to support the Center for Family Health's Dental Clinic, which is expanding, according to a statement. It also will go to the Health Community Solutions Team at the United Way of Jackson County for its awarding of grants.

After those 10 years, the community foundation will use the fund to give grants, by application, to local nonprofit groups for health-related projects, Moser said.

"There may be more creative ways to use it than we were able to with the Jackson Health Plan," said Molly Kaser, president and CEO of the Center for Family Health in Jackson.

Kaser has been with the board since the fund's inception. It was organized to provide coverage and oversee funds earmarked for medical services to the poor that came to the county from the state or a matching process through Medicaid. "We have managed our funds very well. We've made good decisions," she said.

"We covered a lot of people who otherwise would not have had coverage."

At the maximum, the fund provided insurance for 1,800 people in the county, she said.

Now, there are more than 10,000 who could or will be covered by the Healthy Michigan Plan, for which the state began accepting applications on April 1.

The program is expected to cover 320,000 Michigan residents in the first year.

It assures more people -individuals who make up to about $15,000 and a family of four with an income of up to about $34,000 - are eligible for the free or low-cost health coverage.

Medicaid expansion is a key part of the Affordable Care Act, the healthcare reform legislation signed by President Barack Obama in March 2010, and the act provides states with additional federal funding to enlarge their programs.