JACKSONVILLE, Fla. - Local police are warning people to stay vigilant while shopping this holiday season.

The Jacksonville Sheriff's Office said if you're shopping after daylight hours, park and walk in lit areas and bring a friend if possible.

Police also say it's best to use pockets rather than a purse and to try to stick with credit cards, because if they're stolen, they can be canceled within minutes.

Another mistake people make is putting shopping bags in their trunk, then going back to shop more, experts say.

“Even if your packages can’t be seen, and you’re going to stay at the mall, it’s best to move your car to a different location, in case someone was watching you load up your car and waiting for you to go back into the store," said News4Jax crime and safety analyst Gil Smith.

Smith said it's also a good idea if you have a remote trunk opener to pop your trunk open as you're walking up to your car, so you spend less time standing there with your packages.

“I think during the holiday people are more aware, but then again, they are excited about the great deals inside the mall, so they may just be looking to hurry up and get in to get that deal before someone else gets it or sells out, so sometimes you can be a little bit lax on your safety,” Smith said.

When it comes down to it, Smith says it’s simple: Always keep an eye out.

“Be aware of your surroundings, look around,” Smith said. “If someone is nearby, don’t do what you would normally do. Just slow down, take your time and wait for that person to pass.”

After you arrive home and unpack your items from their boxes, don't leave the boxes in your driveway for garbage pick-up, police say, because it shows everyone what you now have in your home.

The Jacksonville Sheriff's Office recommends breaking those boxes down and putting them in a dark garbage bag before trash pick-up.

You're also reminded to keep your vehicle doors locked at all times, even at home. There have been a string of auto break-ins across northeast Florida lately and many of the victims left their doors unlocked.

“I talked to several burglary detectives around the state and they said that if people would simply lock their doors, then they would not need auto burglary detectives in many of their police departments. It’s that simple," said Smith.

Copyright 2015 by WJXT News4Jax - All rights reserved.