U.S. Rep. Ann Kirkpatrick, D-Ariz., stands after testifying during an April 22 U.S. Senate field hearing looking into the August 2015 Gold King Mine Spill in Colorado. (Photo: David Wallace/The Republic)

The U.S. Chamber of Commerce, which has endorsed Sen. John McCain's re-election, is joining the attack on his Democratic rival Rep. Ann Kirkpatrick's 2010 vote for President Barack Obama's Affordable Care Act, or "Obamacare."

The national business organization is launching a new TV ad hitting Kirkpatrick, a three-term representative from Flagstaff running for Republican incumbent McCain's seat, for saying she is "most proud about" her 2010 vote for the health-care-reform law. The Chamber said the commercial is part of "a six-figure buy that will run in Tucson and Phoenix" and part of "an eight-figure buy in key Senate races" in Ohio, New Hampshire, Pennsylvania and Wisconsin.

"After thousands of votes, Kirkpatrick says Obamacare is 'the one I'm most proud about,'" the 30-second U.S. Chamber ad says.

The commercial is set to run on broadcast and cable television starting Thursday.

McCain's re-election campaign also has run a TV ad blasting Kirkpatrick over her Affordable Care Act vote.

"John McCain used to fight against special interests and outside groups cutting big checks to influence elections, but now that he's in the race of his life that's not politically convenient anymore," D.B. Mitchell, Kirkpatrick's campaign spokesman, said in an e-mailed statement to The Arizona Republic. "McCain should denounce this ad and let the people of Arizona decide this race, not his D.C. insiders or big business groups."

The Chamber in 2015 ran a TV ad in Arizona that touted McCain's "leadership."

Recent polls have reflected a close race between McCain and Kirkpatrick. McCain also must clear a contested Aug. 30 GOP Senate primary before proceeding to the Nov. 8 general election.

Nowicki is The Republic's national political reporter. Follow him on Twitter at @dannowicki and on his official Facebook page.

Read or Share this story: http://azc.cc/1ViOM7E