The Tonight Show Starring Jimmy Fallon is back! WOO-HOO! Congratulations to Jimmy and his wife on the birth of their baby daughter, last week! On tonight’s show, Fallon’s guests were Chris Rock (Top Five) and country singer Carrie Underwood, who was also the musical guest. Announcer Stave Higgins provided a lot of fun, as usual, and the Tonight Show house band, The Roots, were also great.

Jimmy Fallon began the Tonight Show by welcoming his guest. Then he began his nightly comedy monologue, joking about celebs, politicians, and other things in today’s headlines. Some of the jokes follow, in a somewhat paraphrased form.

“I live with three females now. Or, as Obama puts it, ‘Good luck now, funny man!’ My wife and I couldn’t be happier being parents for a second time while my dog, Gary, said ‘Wait — am I adopted?”

“President Obama went to the hospital this last weekend because of a sore throat, but it turned out to be acid reflux. It was a little awkward when he was asked ‘What insurance do you use?’ and he said ‘Blue Cro– ObamaCare.”

“The National Tree Lighting ceremony, Santa gave President Obama a hug and didn’t seem to want to let go,” Fallon said, showing a clip of Santa hugging President Obama.”

Time magazine’s Person of the Year list includes both Vladimir Putin and Taylor Swift. Putin said ‘Take my name off of the list — you don’t want to mess with that lady.'”

The Roots played Jimmy Fallon to his desk, where he showed a photo of Francis Cole, the newest addition to his family, born last week. Winnie is the name of their first daughter. As he showed the photos on his smartphone, the audience ooohed and aaahed. Jimmy Fallon then announced some of the guests that will be on later in the week, and then he said that Chris Rock, who wrote, directed, and starred in Top Five, will be on. Also, about to release her first Greatest Hits album, Carrie Underwood will be Fallon’s second guest.

“It’s time for 12 Days of Christmas Sweaters,” Jimmy Fallon said. He will be giving one lucky studio audience member a sweater each day. Fallon called the number of somebody from the audience, #308, and then he ran up the aisle to meet the woman who won. She tried on the sweater right then and there. It even had built-in mittens! Then, the Tonight Show Starring Jimmy Fallon went to the first commercial break of the night.

“Ladies and gentlemen, please welcome Chris Rock!” Jimmy Fallon said, when the Tonight Show returned from the break.

Chris Rock said “What’s happening, man? You got two babies!”

“That’s right; I joined the two daughters’ club. You have two daughters too, right?”

“That’s right!” Chris said. “First of all, two kids are easier than one. If oyu’re one, you have to be the show. If you have two, you’re just the usher. My daughter, Lola — she’s amazing. If Lola came home and told me a guy hit her, I would shoot the guy. I would put DNA all over the bullet, so everyone would know I did it. Now, if Zora was hit by a guy, I’d say ‘What happened?’ They’re two different girls. You hear that Ray Rice got reinstated? I’d put him and Solange in my Fantasy Elevator Team.”

Chris talked with Fallon about almost having had a 12 inch rap record come out.” keep doin’ my demos,” he said. Questlove is “the Executive Music Producer for Top Five,” Rock said. Jimmy Fallon then said they would talk more about the movie when they came back, and The Tonight Show Starring Jimmy Fallon went to another commercial break.

“Top Five is the movie!” Fallon said.

“What’s your Top Five rappers?” Chris Rock asked him.

“The Beastie Boys….Jay Z…Run DMC…Eminem…Rappn’ Duke…maybe LL Cool J…it changes all the time,” Fallon said. The movie, Top five, is one of the funniest movies ever!”

Chris Rock told Jimmy Fallon that he had a good time making other movies, but he wanted someone “to give me the ball.” He added “No one was calling,” so he decided to make his own movie. Tons of great actors and comedians are in the movie.

“You know why they agreed to be in your movie, right?” Fallon asked.

“Because I’m paying them?” Rock suggested.

“No, because they love you,” Jimmy told him. Jerry Seinfeld, Whoopi Goldberg, Tracy Morgan and Cedric the Entertainer are just some of the funny people in the flick. Both Rock and Fallon talked about how funny Cedric the Entertainer was, and how he liked to party.

“Basically, the movie is about you’re a funny comedian, but you’re having a new movie coming out, you’re starting a family, and the pressure is on to continue being funny,” Jimmy Fallon said. Then, he showed a clip with Chris Rock and Tracy Morgan in it. “He’s allergic to jobs,” Rock said about Morgan’s character. “When he feels a job coming on, he takes a job Benadryl.”

After another commercial break, the Tonight Show came back and Jimmy Fallon introduced the second guest of the night, country singer Carrie Underwood, a six-time Grammy Award winner.

“Carrie Underwood, welcome back to the show!” Fallon said, and asked her about the baby she has on the way.

“I have a lot of nieces and nephews who are happy, and my mother is happy about the baby,” Carrie said.”I feel I have to sing good all the time, even when I’m driving, because the baby is listening.”

She told Fallon about her husband “He doesn’t really know the lyrics of any song, except maybe Whomp There It Is.”

“Wow — look at this!” Fallon said. “Greatest Hits: Decade #1! Ten years ago you were on American Idol, little Carrie Underwood.” Her Greatest Hits: Decade #1 album comes out tomorrow, Fallon said.

“I kept a journal while I was on the show, so it’s all documented,” she told Fallon. She will be singing Something in the Water tonight, after another break on the Tonight Show.

After the commercial break, The Tonight Show Starring Jimmy Fallon came back and Carrie Underwood sang Something in the Water. It has been nominated for Best Country Music Solo Grammy. She was terrific, as usual, and she is showing no signs that being pregnant is slowing her down at all. Her voice soared to the rafters of 30 Rock, and she KILLED this song! The audience erupted in applause as she finished singing.

It is great that The Tonight Show Starring Jimmy Fallon is back, after only being on a couple of nights last week. Congratulations, again, to Fallon and his wife and the birth of their second daughter. The show this Monday was very entertaining, with Jimmy Fallon’s guests Chris Rock and Carrie Underwood starting the week off right.

Written By Douglas Cobb

Sources:

NBC Universal Media Village

Chris Rock Official Site

Carrie Underwood Official Site

Share this: Print

LinkedIn

Pinterest

Pocket

Reddit

Email

Twitter

Google

Facebook

Tumblr