Good Sunday Morning, Fellow Seekers.

Here's one that ought to seem fairly obvious: If people have health coverage, they tend to be healthier and tend not to ... well ... die from treatable conditions.



Axiomatic though this may be, a new study of Massachusetts' health insurance law (passed under noted Socialist Mitt Romney) which served as a the model for the federal healthcare law, contains some encouraging data on the connection between coverage and death rates.

According to our pals at Stateline, org, the mortality rate in Massachusetts declined substantially in the four years after the state enacted a law in 2006 mandating universal health care coverage, providing the model for the Affordable Care Act.

The study by Harvard School of Public Health professors Benjamin Sommers, Sharon Long and Katherine Baicker concludes that “health reform in Massachusetts was associated with a significant decrease in all-cause mortality.”

Now here's the cautionary part: The authors say their conclusions, which were published in the Annals of Internal Medicine, "may not apply to all states, and other studies have shown little correlation between having insurance and living longer. Nevertheless, the Harvard study adds to a growing body of evidence that having health insurance increases a person’s life expectancy," Stateline reported.

Mortality rates – in this case, the number of deaths per 100,000 adults between the ages of 20 and 64 that occur in a given year – vary widely among states, Stateline reported.

For instance, Mississippi, Alabama, West Virginia, Oklahoma, Kentucky and Louisiana have the highest age-adjusted rates (which recognize that some states have older or younger populations). Hawaii, California, Connecticut, Minnesota, New York and Massachusetts have the lowest mortality rates, Stateline reported, citing 2010 data (the most recent available) from the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.

Uninsured rates also vary widely. Between 2011 and 2012 Massachusetts had the lowest uninsured rate in the nation at 4 percent of its population, compared to a national average of 15 percent, according to a Kaiser Family Foundation analysis of U.S. Census data. Texas had the highest rate at 25 percent, followed by Nevada (24 percent) and New Mexico and Florida (both 22 percent), Stateline reported.

While it is "difficult to compare one state to another when it comes to mortality rates ... All the evidence points in the direction of health insurance increasing longevity. We just don’t know the magnitude of the effect," Alison Cuellar, a health economist at George Mason University, told Stateline.

The rest of the day's news starts now.

In a fantastic piece of reporting, our colleague Don Gilliland looks at what it'll take for The Other Three to catch Tom Wolfe on Tuesday.

A new controversy, as that woman says Sen. Lisa Boscola lied about apology over April bar incident, our Capitol colleague Jeff Frantz reports.

PoliticsPA gives us this week's list of the winners and losers in state politics.

Tom Wolf is the Dems "darling" to take on Tom Corbett, The Post-Gazette reports.

The Democrats are expected to break campaign spending records this primary season, The Tribune-Review reports.

Allentown's arena zone has reached $1 billion in proposed development, The Morning Call reports.

In the final poll of the campaign, Tom Wolf is up 23 points in The Morning Call/Muhlenberg poll, Keystone Politics notes.

Heavy Rotation.

Here's Scottish technopop trio CHVRCHES and "The Mother We Share," caught live.

And now you're up to date. Enjoy your Sunday. See you all back here on Monday.