Was open for Independence Day weekend

Belinda Apodaca of Rocky Ford shows her daughter, Mariposa, 2, a velvety dress from the Molly Brown era that is part of the Molly Brown exhibit at the Brush Museum. The museum was open on Independence Day, and Saturday and Sunday. ( Dan Barker/ Fort Morgan Times )

Brush Museum receptionist Carrie Gray talks with William Nitzel of Fort Morgan about the history of sugar beet display at the Brush Museum last week. Behind Gray is a history of Brush display. (Dan Barker/ Fort Morgan Times)

Those who visited the Brush Museum this weekend saw some new exhibits and expanions of the collection.

Eventually, everything in the museum will be new, said Carrie Gray, a member of the museum board of directors and the receptionist at the museum.

The Molly Brown exhibit has been expanded, with a beautiful velvety dress from her era, and photographs of the Titanic before it sank.

Those photos include a scene of the lavish dining room, the barber shop and a grand stairway.

That exhibit also has Victorian era furniture donated by Rozella Mae (Dilley) Blackburn.

The museum is in the former Knearl School building, and the front hallway has photographs of some of the classes that went to the school, plus a giant photo of William Knearl, and a photo of him driving an automobile in 1915.

An antique kitchen is one exhibit at the Brush Museum. (Dan Barker / Fort Morgan Times)

Inside the north classroom sits a display of the old sugar beet factory, which dominated the city of Brush in the early 20th century, and was in operation from 1906 to 1955.

A photo shows one of the large, mansion-like homes at the factory, which was later moved into town using logs to roll it, Gray said.

Another photo shows the first load of sugar beets in a horse-drawn wagon.

Nearby sits a history of Brush display, which includes wide-angle photos of the city at different eras, and models of the buildings of the early days.

Gray noted that the museum's collection of yearbooks has also expanded.

Gray put together a display of Native American artifacts in the basement, across the hall from the Honor Room that is a memorial to those who served in the armed forces.

The Honor Room contains information and photos both about locals who served, and famous people who lived in Colorado at some time.

Among local residents honored in the room are U.S. Air Force Major David Carlson, Staff Sgt. Duane Friehauf, Sgt. Harry Rieger (who served from August 1950 to August 1954), Harrie Chartier (who served from March 1943 to November 1945), Lawrence Christensen (who was inducted in 1932) and Felix Acosta (who enlisted in 1960).

John Nichols gave the museum a piece of Apollo 17 — that landed on the moom — which he had from when he helped recover the capsule in the ocean.

Gray said the museum board plans to create a display of the old Brush horse race track, which was a big part of the community for many years.

Board members have talked about bringing in big-screen TVs and having betting on horse races as a fundraiser, she said.

"We want more interaction with the exhibits," Gray said, which will include hands-on portions.

Board members are also talking about putting up displays of some of the early families that lived in Brush, Gray said.

Contact Times News Editor Dan Barker at business@fmtimes.com or follow twitter.com/DanBarkerFMTime