Buy Photo Substitute librarian Evelyn Phillips reads with Cherokee Park Elementary School students. While other state schools systems have chosen to avoid the costs and fines by cutting hours of part-time employees and increasing the use of substitute teachers, Caddo Parish schools has instead opted to pay some of the penalties associated with Affordable Care Act. (Photo: Henrietta Wildsmith/ The Times)Buy Photo

Louisiana public school superintendents are scrambling for substitute teachers or offer costly health insurance to part-time workers because of the Affordable Care Act.

The uproar in education circles, as well as other industries nationwide, stems from a part of the law that requires employers to offer health insurance coverage to part-time workers who are employed 30 hours or more per week, or face federal fines of up to $2,000 per person.

While other state schools systems have chosen to avoid the costs and fines by cutting hours of part-time employees and increasing the use of substitute teachers, Caddo Parish schools has instead opted to pay some of the penalties associated with ACA.

It was a move calculated to find the middle ground between reducing substitute teachers’ hours — the smartest business decision — and damaging the schools’ mission by reducing the number of teachers in classrooms, according to Randy Watson, director of insurance for Caddo schools.

The federal government is requiring health coverage, whether through an employer or the national health care exchange. Low-income people can apply for a subsidy on that exchange, and if they work for employers who aren’t offering coverage, that employer — in this case, the Caddo school system — will pay a $2,000 fine per person.

“It may not be the best for the sub because we don’t offer coverage, but it is good for them because we won’t cut their hours,” Watson said. “The other way, we’d have to cut the number of subs and maybe even cut their hours.”

It’s going to cost the school district, Watson said, but not nearly as much as it would if they failed to meet another qualification — covering at least 95 percent of employees.

Watson said the district covers 98 percent of its employees from bus drivers and lunch ladies to teachers and principals. There are about 1,450 active substitutes in the parish, but only about 100 of them work more than 30 hours a week.

If Caddo covered them all, it would cost between $12-25 million. If all 100 of the subs working more than 30 hours a week signed up for ACA coverage and received the subsidy, it could cost the district $200,000.

But many of those teachers have spouses with extensive coverage or otherwise have means of covering their own health care, Watson said, so the total cost is expected to be even less. The district has more than 900 employees who don’t participate in the school system coverage for their own reasons.

“The big fines, we’re avoiding,” Watson said. “We have made a financial decision that it’s cheaper to pay this if it happens.”

Patricia Pujol, superintendent of the Ascension Parish school system, said the ACA has forced officials in her parish to turn the hunt for substitute teachers to a staffing agency to track hours and avoid federal penalties.

Michael Faulk, superintendent of the Central school system, said his district is trying to find new substitutes and he plans to push for legislation next year to increase their ranks.

The Lincoln Parish school district in northeast Louisiana has trimmed weekly hours for 400 substitute teachers and other part-time workers to 28 — two below the cutoff number — and boosted the minimum wage by $2 per hour, to $10.50, because of the federal health insurance law. The change applies to 400 substitute teachers, maintenance workers, food service employees and paraprofessionals, George Murphy, business manager for the district, said in an email response to questions.

Superintendents said such coverage is a huge expense for school districts still reeling from five years of a near freeze in state aid for public schools.

“Given the cost of benefits, that would be an unbelievable drain on school systems,” Pujol said.

Finding top-flight substitute teachers is an age-old problem, and they are generally paid about $60 or $80 per day, depending on whether they have a college degree.

Pujol said her district opted to turn the issue over to Kelly Services, a staffing agency that has systems in place that track hours worked by temporary teachers.

The Associated Press contributed to this story.

Read or Share this story: http://www.shreveporttimes.com/story/news/education/2014/11/22/caddo-schools-pay-aca-fees-substitutes/19399223/