St. Thomas More Hospital expands services to offer urgent care

Rick Kamerzell, administrative director of the new Centura Health Urgent Care Ca単on City, speaks to St. Thomas More Hospital employees and board members Friday about the new urgent care center that is slated to open Oct. 7. (Carie Canterbury / Daily Record)

Helpful Information When to use urgent care: - minor injuries and lacerations - eye redness or discomfort - minor fractures, sprains and strains - urinary symptoms - coughs and colds - fever, flu or sore throat - skin rashes and infections When to use the emergency department: - difficulty breathing or shortness of breath - chest or upper abdominal pain or pressure - fainting, sudden dizziness, weakness - changes in vision - confusion or changes in mental status - any sudden or severe pain - uncontrolled bleeding - severe or persistent vomiting or diarrhea - coughing or vomiting blood - suicidal feelings - difficulty speaking

Beginning Oct. 7, families and individuals needing medical attention for minor injuries and illnesses, but not requiring emergency services, will have the option to visit Centura Health Urgent Care Ca単on City, managed by St. Thomas More Hospital.

Administrators made the announcement to hospital staff and board members Friday.

The new urgent care center will be located at 3245 E. U.S. 50, Suite E, near the Hampton Inn, and will aim to increase access to quality, timely health care services in the Fremont County region.

Hours of operation will be from 8 a.m. to 7 p.m. Monday through Friday and from 8 a.m. to 3 p.m., Saturday and Sunday. Appointments are not necessary, and walk-ins will be welcome.

The Medical Director over Centura Health Urgent Care Ca単on City is Dr. Richard Nanes, D.O., who has more than 20 years of emergency medicine experience and the core medical provider team will be led by Steve Quakenbush, P.A.-C., who has more than 35 years experience and currently practices with Centura Centers for Occupational Medicine.

The new Centura Health Urgent Care Ca単on City will be located at 3245 E. U.S. 50, Suite E, near the Hampton Inn, and will open to the public Oct. 7. (Carie Canterbury / Daily Record)

Other core medical providers will include Mary Ann Alessi-Richards and Rudy Wencl. The office will have administrative oversight by Administrative Director Rick Kamerzell and will be managed operationally by Noreen Willett and Lawrence Estrada. Other staff will include radiological technologists, medical assistants and patient access representatives.

"We will provide basic health care and encourage the community to use Urgent Care for conditions that require attention but do not suggest an immediate threat to your life or health," Kamerzell said. "We will not establish primary care for patients, nor will we manage patient health care long term."

Kamerzell said the Urgent Care will help alleviate overuse of the hospital's emergency room with minor patient needs, and provide patients with a lower cost option for urgent health needs.

"We will have X-ray services at the Urgent Care, and if it is determined that a patient needs emergency evaluation, we will recommend that they be taken to the emergency room," he said.

With a renewed focus on wellness and health management, St. Thomas More has found that long term wellness is where "value" lies for the health care consumer.

The hospital is pursuing a revolution called Colorado Health Neighborhoods, moving away from the current fee-for-service model that rewards volume instead of value, and encouraging consumers to play an active role in their health care. The goal of CHN is to create a system that promotes coordination among providers to improve health outcomes at an affordable cost in a convenient, service-oriented setting.

"With the Urgent Care, St. Thomas More Hospital, the St. Thomas More Physician Group and CHN network providers, CCOM services, and community outreach, I have no doubt we are well on our way to creating a successful CHN in Fremont County," said Sheri Trahern, Chief Administrative Officer.

For information, visit stmhospital.org/urgent-care.