LANSING, MI – More than 406,000 Michiganders have gotten health insurance coverage through the state’s Medicaid expansion, but free and need-based clinics says they’re stretched tight because of a perception that the Affordable Care Act (ACA) has fixed health care.

“I don’t think there’s any doubt about that,” said Dr. Barry Saltman of the Care Free Medical and Dental Clinic in Lansing.

The clinic serves more than 5,000 patients in the Ingham County area, and has locations in Lansing and Mason. It was among 53 clinics across the state awarded “Strengthening the Safety Net” grants by Blue Cross Blue Shield of Michigan last week.

“Safety net clinics provide access to care for tens of thousands of uninsured Michigan residents in need of medical treatment and without these clinics, patients would delay and even forego care at great cost to themselves, their families and the health care system,” said Kim Kratz, BCBSM senior health care analyst. “Blue Cross understands the need for free clinics isn’t going away and our partnerships help many in the state gain access to much needed care and, in some cases, life-saving services.”

The grants are worth $15,000 each, money free clinics say is still needed after expanded Medicaid and individual market coverage ushered in by the Affordable Care Act.

Saltman said that there is still a strong demand for the free and need-based services his clinic provides. Some people still haven’t signed up for Medicaid. Some still can’t afford the premiums on the federal health care exchange. People in the country illegally aren’t eligible for the exchange or Medicaid services. His clinic is still packed.

“We’re going to have to start getting a little more outspoken about the need to get support from other organizations,” Saltman said.

In Grand Rapids, Oasis of Hope Executive Director Barb Grinwis is also Vice President of the Free Clinics of Michigan Association. As far as a potential impact on funding, it’s an issue that’s on her radar.

“Not currently but I believe that we hear it from people, ‘well why would [we] have to give you money because there are no uninsured left.’ And that’s the general perception of the public … as a result we have to work harder for the dollars that we get,” Grinwis said.

She said across the state there’s been a slight drop in the number of clients free clinics serve, but expects that to be temporary.

One issue her clinic has struggled with is clients being afraid that going to a free clinic means they’ll be reported for not having insurance, subjecting them to a fine under the Affordable Care Act.

“We want people know that we’re here and we’re not judgmental and they won’t get reported,” Grinwis said.

Emily Lawler is a Capital/Lansing business reporter for MLive. You can reach her at elawler@mlive.com, subscribe to her on Facebook or follow her on Twitter: @emilyjanelawler.