Call Danilo Gallinari pleased with his first game in 18 months, but just don’t call him satisfied.

“I’m pretty critical of myself,” Gallinari said.

The Nuggets forward scored 17 points in 14 minutes against Phoenix in an exhibition game late Friday. He had missed the previous 18 months after tearing his ACL, undergoing surgery and then having two additional surgeries.

“Right after the game I was talking to the coaches about the bad things that I did,” he said. “I didn’t even focus on the good things that I did.”

But Gallinari certainly could have. There were a great many of those.

“Other than the points, what I liked was the fact that I didn’t see any hesitation or any timidness on his part at all,” Nuggets coach Brian Shaw said. “He jumped right in and he was game speed and he threw himself around. So at least initially it looked like he got over that mental block we were talking about.”

Shaw went with a Gallo-heavy game plan in the first half, running multiple actions designed to get his versatile scorer good looks. Gallinari also took a couple of opportunities to barrel down the lane, showing no fear of how his knee would react.

“Honestly, I thought I would think about my knee a lot more,” Gallinari said. “But I wasn’t. I thought about it a couple of times when I was running back on defense…but other than that I didn’t think about it.”

With the first hurdle cleared, Gallinari will now focus on settling into his role in Shaw’s offense. He had no soreness in his knee Saturday and said he’d be ready to play on Monday against the Bulls in Chicago. His participation will ultimately be a decision the Nuggets’ medical staff makes as they monitor his progress and look to bring him along gradually to be ready for a heavy workload when the regular season begins at month’s end. If Gallinari does play Monday, he’ll be on a similar 15-minute time limit as he was for the Phoenix game.

No matter what, Gallinari’s start was good news.

“I was feeling good,” Gallinari said. “I was trying to be aggressive in order to let it all out and to try to break the ice a little bit, have the right mentality. When you are coming back from a knee injury (you have to) be aggressive and try to not think about it too much and do the things that you’ve been working all summer on the things the coach tells us to do. I thought it was a good beginning.”

Footnote: Kenneth Faried participated in a full practice Sunday after sitting out the Nuggets’ game at Phoenix, partly for rest and partly to rest a sore ankle, which he twisted last week.

Christopher Dempsey: cdempsey@denverpost.com or twitter.com/dempseypost