BOSTON — The prosecution, hammering home the point that Dzhokhar Tsarnaev deserves to be executed for the marathon bombings, rested its case Thursday by showing horrific images of the chaotic, smoke-filled scene on Boylston Street, where bodies lay blown apart, maimed spectators tried to crawl away, blood ran in the street, and little Martin Richard, 8 years old, was still, his mother leaning over him, pleading with him to try to stay alive.

“I heard ‘please’ and ‘Martin’ being uttered by Denise Richard, many times,” said Steve Woolfenden, a young father who lay near Martin, one of his legs severed as he sought to protect his own son, Leo, 3, who was in a stroller. From Martin, Mr. Woolfenden said, “I didn’t see any response,” but he saw the boy’s face.

“I saw his hair had been singed,” Mr. Woolfenden told the jury, haltingly, as he choked back tears. “I saw that his eyes were rolled in the back of his head and his mouth was agape.” And he saw “an immense amount of blood.”

Closing its case in the penalty phase of the trial, the government left the jury an image that has come to define the heinousness of the bombings: the killing of a little boy. The jury convicted Mr. Tsarnaev on April 8 of all 30 counts against him in connection with the 2013 bombings, which killed three people and injured 264. It also convicted him of killing an M.I.T. police officer. Now the same jury, is weighing whether to sentence Mr. Tsarnaev, 21, to death or to life in prison.

Pushing for death, the government called 17 witnesses over three days as it sought to convey the magnitude of Mr. Tsarnaev’s crimes. Prosecutors called on wounded survivors and relatives of the dead as they painted portraits of lasting devastation and the pain at the center of so many lives.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

The survivors included Marc Fucarile, 36, who wheeled himself to the witness stand on Thursday. He has lost one leg and may still lose the other, which has not healed properly. His body remains riddled with BBs and shrapnel, a piece of which is lodged in the right atrium of his heart. He has endured more than 60 surgical procedures and takes more than 70 pills a day.

But amid all the havoc and the sorrow, the government has elevated the story of Martin Richard, the youngest victim. Mr. Tsarnaev placed the bomb three and a half feet from the boy, and it shattered his small body to pieces. At each important juncture in the trial, the government has put Martin’s death front and center; his father, Bill, testified during the first phase.

Once Mr. Tsarnaev was convicted, however, and the trial moved to the sentencing phase, Bill and Denise Richard wrote an open letter asking prosecutors to drop the death penalty. The Richards did not object to it per se, but they feared the endless appeals process would keep them from moving on with their lives.

The Richards’ stance complicated the government’s strategy. Having relied so thoroughly on them to make its case, the government clearly viewed them as their strongest argument for the death penalty and expected them to be part of their closing. But one question hovering over the government’s case was whether prosecutors could still use Martin’s death to advocate the death penalty even though the boy’s parents had disagreed so publicly with their goal and refused to take the stand to help them accomplish it. Prosecutors answered that question Thursday. But the Richards were absent.

The government used video, audio and photographs to set the scene. It put on a trauma surgeon, David King, who had reviewed Martin’s autopsy report. He testified that Martin did not die instantly but that his intestines were pulled and twisted and that he felt a “primal, very disturbing kind of pain.”

And it put on Mr. Woolfenden, one of 17 spectators at the marathon who lost at least one leg, as its final witness. He had his own harrowing story to tell, of his injury and his fear that his son would die. But, as the jury learned Thursday, he was also a witness to Martin’s death.

He told the jury that he locked eyes with Denise Richard as her son lay dying.

“I placed my hand on her back,” he said. “Denise turned to me for a moment and asked me if I was O.K. I said yes, I’m fine.” She then turned back to Martin.

The jurors, many looking drained, were left with the death of Martin Richard. On Monday, the defense is to begin telling them why they should spare Mr. Tsarnaev’s life.