Topics: From the Wires, News

WARSAW, Poland (AP) — Poland’s main left-wing party was once a major player. It helped bring Poland into the European Union, sent troops to Iraq and let the CIA operate a secret prison for terror suspects.

Today the Democratic Left Alliance — heir to the Cold War-era’s Communists — is fighting for its very existence. Corruption scandals and a failure to inspire young voters have eroded its standing, leaving Poland’s political scene without a viable center-left party.

With presidential and parliamentary elections coming up this year, the left-wing party’s leader, Leszek Miller, has gambled on an unknown and untested presidential candidate to reverse the party’s sharp decline: Magdalena Ogorek, a 36-year-old former bit-part actress and TV presenter with striking good looks — whom some Poles dub a “Barbie” candidate. While Ogorek has a doctorate in history, she has virtually no political experience.

The 68-year-old Miller says he is counting on her youth and energy to attract new voters to the party, whose ranks include many former communists like himself — a major factor in the party’s decline in this young, Western-looking democracy.

So far the tactic seems to be backfiring. Ogorek has attracted the praise of Playboy and other men’s magazines thanks to her looks, but many Poles, even the party’s traditional supporters, say Miller has made the party look foolish by choosing an unknown candidate without political experience to compete for the prestigious position, a job once held by Solidarity founder Lech Walesa.

“This is a disaster — it shows the party has no serious program,” said Stanislaw Mrowczynski, a physics professor who has supported the party in the past but won’t vote for Ogorek. “For me this is like a cabaret. She isn’t a serious candidate.”

He and many other left-leaning Poles are hugely frustrated because they would like a strong left-wing party to stand up for secular causes in this largely Roman Catholic country. They say a progressive force is needed to work for a better health care system, women’s rights, and other issues of social justice. Instead, the Democratic Left Alliance’s support (in coalition with a smaller left-wing party) has dropped from more than 41 percent in 2001 to less than 9 percent in local elections in November.

Conservatives have controlled the government and the presidency since 2005.

Today both the ruling party, Civic Platform, and the main opposition party, Law and Justice, are broadly conservative. Both have succeeded in siphoning off some of the left’s supporters, Civic Platform by embracing liberal positions on some issues, like in vitro fertilization; Law and Justice by advocating a stronger welfare state along with conservative pro-Catholic values.