The feds are cracking down on the bottom-feeding employment practices of McDonald’s — and we’re lovin’ it.

Dozens of the fast-food chain’s restaurants across the country, including several here in Manhattan, have been hit with formal charges of illegally intimidating and penalizing workers who protested for higher wages over the past two years.

Even more explosively, the general counsel of the National Labor Relations Board is holding the McDonald’s Corp. itself accountable — declaring that its management practices make it a “joint employer” along with its franchisees.

That move, if upheld by the courts, could make it easier for labor unions to organize McDonald’s workers — and win better pay and benefits for millions at the bottom of the economic food chain.

While judges will determine the reach of the NLRB’s power, McDonald’s and many other fast-food giants have only themselves to blame for becoming targets of government intervention.

Too many of the big chains pursue an economically corrosive business model of minimizing wages to maximize profits.

Front-line workers at McDonald’s make an average of just $8.24 an hour, according to PayScale research. Even assuming full-time hours, that works out to less than the federal poverty level for a family of three.

Contrary to myth, two-thirds of fast-food workers are not high schoolers or college students, but adults who have finished their education.

Shockingly, more than half depend on some form of public assistance. University of California at Berkeley researchers put the tab for those benefits at $7 billion in 2011, with McDonald’s alone accounting for $1.2 billion of that.

And that price tag is undoubtedly increasing with the advent of Obamacare, which provides government-subsidized health coverage for those denied insurance benefits at work.

In effect, some of the country’s largest employers are leaning on taxpayers to help compensate their workforce — leading Bloomberg View columnist Barry Ritholtz to dub McDonald’s and Walmart “the two biggest welfare queens in America today.”

Such stingy practices go a long way to explain why median family incomes declined 15% from 1990 to 2012, even as per capita economic output grew 60%, according to the Fiscal Policy Institute. They drive the rise of income inequality and the hollowing out of the middle class.

Yet these same companies lead the charge against hiking the minimum wage — even though the salary peg has less buying power today than it did in 1968, and even though an increase would put more spending money in their customers’ pockets, boosting the economy as a whole.

When McDonald’s employees organized to fight for better treatment, managers across the country responded with threats, cuts in hours and pink slips.

Union organizers filed dozens of complaints, 78 of which the NLRB counsel is now pursuing as actionable violations.

Normally, McDonald’s Corp. would disclaim responsibility for the actions of its franchises, which are theoretically independent businesses. But the NLRB’s general counsel says it has evidence of string-pulling from national headquarters — a hardball allegation that should throw a healthy scare into other fast-food chains.

Let this mark the end of an industry’s race to the bottom of the income ladder.