Velmer Buckingham, a finisher at Molded Dimensions, removes flashing from a urethane seal. Molded Dimensions, at 701 W. Sunset Road in Port Washington, employs about 90 people and makes parts for 30 different industries. Credit: Mike De Sisti

SHARE Jim Nett, a molder, works on molding a urethane seal at Molded Dimensions. Mike De Sisti Tito Ramirez, a rubber molder, works on demolding parts at Molded Dimensions. Mike De Sisti Cheryl Garza, a molder at Molded Dimensions, pulls strap used to secure weapons in moving military vehicles. Mike De Sisti Xiongpoa Noukhaiyangkongchee, a molder at Molded Dimensions in Port Washington, deflashes a molding grommet that’s used in the auto industry on brake cables. Mike De Sisti The Milwaukee Journal Sentinel's Top Workplaces section recognizes the best places to work in southeast Wisconsin. Go to the 2016 section

By of the

Step back a minute and block out the political rhetoric about the Affordable Care Act. Ignore whether it was a success or a catastrophe. Now ask how much it has affected employers who already provided health benefits.

"For us, it's been fairly minimal," said Molly Schissler, vice president of human resources at North Shore Bank, which employs about 480 people.

Without question, the law remade the market for insurance sold to individuals and small businesses, and one result was higher premiums for many of them. But most people — roughly 150 million — are covered by health plans from an employer.

The law was designed to limit changes, at least in the short term, on most of those health plans.

"I don't see many employers getting all worked up about the ACA," said Brian Jensen, a benefit consultant with NorthCoast Consultants. "For the vast majority of people, it didn't affect them one iota."

Employers are paying a small tax on their health plans. They no longer can have lifetime limits on benefits, and they have to offer coverage for employees' children up to the age of 26. And their plans have to cover a package of basic benefits.

But most of the requirements have minimal costs, and most employers already offered health plans that covered the required benefits.

"I don't think it has affected me positively or negatively," said Mike Katz, president of Molded Dimensions, which employs about 90 people in Port Washington.

For certain, complying with the law was a minor headache.

"I spent a lot of energy on this," said Katz, co-owner of the company with his wife, Linda, its chief executive officer. "I know too much. I know more than I want to know."

John Barlament, a partner in the employee benefits group at Quarles & Brady, refers to the "compliance burden" imposed on employers by the law.

"They just had a lot more to do," he said.

The thousands of pages of regulations spawned by the law also came out over several years, and at times the proposed rules would run hundreds of pages.

"Things have calmed down because we have final rules for most of the ACA provisions," Barlament said.

One potentially significant change — the so-called Cadillac tax on high-cost health benefits — has yet to take effect.

But Barlament has not seen any employers who stopped offering health benefits — a common prediction that proved wrong.

"There haven't been radical changes to employer-sponsored plans," he said.

Nor has the law led to a significant spike in part-time employees.

The fear was that employers would cut workers' hours to less than 30 hours a week, the cutoff to avoid the requirement that any employer with 50 or more employees offer health insurance or pay a penalty.

For certain, businesses with a large number of low-wage workers, such as restaurants and retailers, were affected by that requirement.

But an estimated 96% of employers with 100 or more employees offered health benefits in 2015, according to an annual survey by the Kaiser Family Foundation and the Health Research & Educational Trust.

The law did prompt about 21% of the employers to offer health benefits to employees previously not eligible, according to the survey.

None of this means the Affordable Care Act will be held up as model legislation.

Katz of Molded Dimensions criticizes the law for not doing more to address the underlying costs and misaligned incentives in the U.S. health care system.

The company's cost of providing health benefits has doubled in the past 15 years, he said, while deductibles increased tenfold to $2,000.

There also is the continuing uncertainty surrounding the law: At least two of the Republican presidential candidates have vowed to repeal it.

"The whole election definitely could change things," Barlament said.