Boris Berian, who two summers ago was serving fries at McDonald’s in Colorado Springs to make a living and training solo in his spare time, won the biggest race of his resurgent running career on Saturday night at the world indoor track and field championships.

Leading from the gun to the finish tape, Berian — who dropped out of Adams State in 2014 after struggling with academics — can call himself a world champion in the 800 meters.

“It was simple. Just take the lead right away and then hang on,” Berian told assembled reporters afterward at the Oregon Convention Center in Portland, Ore. “That’s how I feel most comfortable racing, and that’s exactly what I wanted to do. About 150 to go, I started feeling tightening up. Definitely the home crowd got me going.”

Berian, who was The Denver Post’s boys track and field athlete of the year in 2011, ran an indoor personal best of 1 minute, 45.83 seconds, after blasting to the lead of the six-man field from lane five to grab control of the race.

He whipped through the first 200 meters in just under 24 seconds, and then hit the second of four laps in 49.73, his strides smooth and the field sitting back, figuring he had gone out too hard and would return. Berian gradually extended his lead over the next lap and then some, but started laboring with about ¾ of a lap to go. It appeared the field would catch him.

But with Antoine Gakeme of Burundi stalking close behind, Berian held as the Portland crowd rose to its feet and roared. Gakeme finished second in 1:46.65, and Erik Sowinski of the United States was third in 1:47.22.

Asked by an NBC Sports reporter how he accomplished his remarkable turnaround during the last few months, Berian was succinct: “Working my (butt) off.”

That Berian, who is not signed to a shoe contract, even made it to the final is lucky. He did not grab an automatic qualifying spot by winning his heat in the preliminary rounds — in fact, he was the last runner to make it into finals based on time.

“It is an amazing story,” his agent, Merhawi Keflezighi, told The Post on Saturday night. “It’s like a script from a movie. But it’s real. Obviously Boris had a lot of talent, even when he was running at Adams State. He had run very well. So he had a lot of talent.”

He had raced only a few times this indoor season, competing in Boston at the New Balance Games on Feb. 14 to win a 600. He then won the U.S. Indoor Championships last week on the same track in Portland.

After graduating from Widefield High School in Colorado Springs, he went to Adams State and won the 800 at the NCAA Division II championships as a freshman. But he struggled in the classroom and dropped out by spring 2014. By the time he connected with coach Carlos Handler, he hadn’t raced in two years. He got an offer to join Handler’s Big Bear Track Club in Big Bear, Calif., and left for there in December 2014. In the span of a few months while there, he dropped his 800 best from 1:48 to 1:43, benefitting from structured training with fellow professional Brenda Martinez, who is married to Handler.

“Sometimes no matter how talented you are, you need to be in the right environment. That’s a proven training environment, and it’s worked very well for Boris,” Keflezighi said.

At the U.S. Outdoor Championships last year in Eugene, Ore., Berian had his worst race since returning to the track. He faded in the homestretch of the 800-meter semifinal and was clipped at the line for the last spot in the final, despite having run the No. 5 fastest time in the 800 in American history earlier that season.

His botched race meant that a promising turnaround story wouldn’t have its fairytale ending — a spot representing the U.S.on the world outdoor team. It was a setback from which he could have struggled to recover. Now, Berian will focus on the Olympic Trials in July in Eugene in the hopes of making it to the summer games in Rio.

“He learned that lesson,” Keflezighi said. “I think that’s probably what I respect about Boris. Sometimes certain experiences make you or break you, and I think it’s made him a smarter and more corageous runner.”

Daniel Petty: 303-954-1081, dpetty@denverpost.com or @danielpetty