A conservative primary challenger has rolled out an ad that ties Sen. Lindsey Graham (R-SC) to former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton, a likely contender for the Democratic presidential nomination.

The ad — a product of Bill Connor’s campaign — calls Graham’s purported conservative credentials into question with clips of the South Carolina senator saying that Clinton is “dedicated to her job” and “one of the most effective secretary of states, greatest ambassadors for the United States” that he’s ever seen:

“I was at the TEA Party debate when I first saw this footage of Graham praising and hugging Hillary. I thought it represented what’s most frustrating to South Carolina conservatives about Lindsey Graham–the inherent hypocrisy of calling himself a conservative when he campaigns, but acting like and voting like a moderate or liberal the rest of the time,” Connor said in a statement from his campaign. “My plan was always to get on TV first and to stay there.”

Connor blasted the ad Graham’s campaign began airing last week, which sought to reestablish his conservative credentials. The insurgent Tea Party candidate isn’t convinced, saying that Graham is trying to pull off an “election year conservative makeover.”

“ The Graham ad starts with his claim of always opposing Obamacare when the truth is he didn’t stand with the 19 true conservatives to stop the funding,” Connor said. “He touts siding with Jim DeMint, but the truth is on the two most important votes they both cast, Graham voted to confirm two liberal Supreme Court Justices (Kagan and Sotomayor) and DeMint voted against them.

“He rails on the administration about Benghazi, but in private has nothing but praise for Hillary. He evens claims to be pro-jobs, but the truth is he supported an internet tax that would cost jobs,” he added.

Connor is one of five primary challengers running against Graham. Though his job approval numbers among South Carolina Republicans have taken a hit in the last year, Graham still holds large leads over his primary opponents, though it’s unclear if he’ll have enough support to avoid a runoff.