If the members of Gov. Rick Scott's health care commission wanted a setup line, they got what might look like one last month.

During its examination of health care costs, the commission asked hospitals — especially those that get local taxpayer support — how much they pay their leaders. In June, the board of Jackson Health System in Miami-Dade County gave CEO Carlos Migoya a $140,000 raise, to $730,000 a year. This happened as the Legislature was debating how much public money to give hospitals for treating Medicaid patients and the uninsured.

The commission's sixth meeting takes place today, on the Miami Dade College Medical Campus. It's less than a mile from Jackson Memorial Hospital. Migoya will make a presentation. His case shows why Florida won't get from Scott's commission what the state might have received from a credible health care panel.

Commissioners might question why Jackson could be so generous to Migoya while receiving more than a quarter-million dollars to treat poor patients. At one meeting, however, commission member Marili Cancio-Johnson, who is from Miami, praised Migoya for bringing back Jackson from near-bankruptcy in 2011.

When Migoya, a former banker, took over, Jackson had lost $337 million in two years. Jackson now is profitable. It's even harder to use Migoya's raise to criticize hospital CEO pay because Migoya could have made $975,000 from the start. Instead, he accepted a lower salary than his predecessor and asked that the board of the Public Health Trust judge him on results.

For comparison, Broward Health CEO Nabil El Sanadi was hired in December at a salary of $675,000. In 2013, Kaiser Health News reported that Memorial Healthcare CEO Frank Sacco made about $825,000.

Even after the compromise in the Legislature on how much money hospitals would receive, Florida still faces major issues on health care that go far beyond CEO pay. A credible, broad-based commission might have provided the stalemated Legislature with options.

Instead, the governor gave the state a commission he created, with a Scott donor — Manatee County developer Carlos Beruff — as chairman. It began not as a reform tool but a political tool designed to shift attention from the debate in Tallahassee over the Low Income Pool program that included Senate Republicans calling out the governor for mismanagement.

Only one of the nine commission members works in health care. Scott's office and some commissioners claimed the panel thus would bring "fresh eyes" to the problem. In fact, they have brought uninformed eyes. At one meeting, Cancio Johnson asked why hospitals couldn't display price lists, as restaurants display menus.

Still, anyone who has read Steven Brill's book "America's Bitter Pill" can begin to understand why America spends too much on health care. Many hospitals have leveraged their power to force high prices on insurers. For its support of the Affordable Care Act, the pharmaceutical industry cut a deal that makes price control difficult. The 2003 law that created Medicare's prescription drug plan forbids the federal government from negotiating to get lower prescription prices.

Congress, not the Legislature, controls those issues. Florida, though, does control how the state spends federal money. As he falsely criticized the Obama administration of "walking away" from the program that helps hospitals pay to treat poor patients, Scott praised the state for its decade-long "reform" of Medicaid into a managed-care program. Medicaid insurers, though, are seeking double-digit increases. Again, the issue is cost of services.

Ironically, given Scott's opposition to the Affordable Care Act, the health care law carries incentives and penalties for hospitals that churn Medicare patients, rather than treat them properly the first time. The law also allows providers to create "accountable care organizations," which can receive higher Medicare reimbursements based on improving their quality of care.

Even Beruff wondered at a recent meeting how much health care spending is just "pushing the paper around." A single-payer system would cut out the insurance middle man, but Beruff's fellow Republicans would call that a "government takeover of health care."

Not until Wednesday afternoon was there was an agenda for the commission's Miami meeting. One meeting started without a quorum to approve the minutes.

At least the Stand Your Ground commission had a schedule, even if that panel also was stacked to get a certain result. The health care commission, for example, will not discuss Medicaid expansion, which Scott opposes. A Scott spokesman said this week that the Agency for Health Care Administration would decide if and when the commission meets after today.

At the last meeting, Vice Chairman Tom Kuntz asked, "What's the endgame?" Scott made that clear at the start.