"Being in the country without proper documentation is not a crime." - Christie quote that could finish him off

The most recent poll has Chris Christie at a mere 5 percent in his home state.

I don't mean New Jersey. He hasn't lived here for a year. I'm talking about New Hampshire, which has been his home for the past few months, with an occasional side trip to Iowa.

This poor showing in the polls was entirely predictable.

As I wrote in this column about his campaign kickoff last spring, Christie never seemed to notice that you can't campaign like you're the front-runner when you're far back in the pack.

His kickoff speech at Livingston High School in June was based on highlighting his ability to compromise with Democrats. That's fine if you're leading the pack.

But when you're in the back of the pack, you have a tough time talking about how much the Democrats like you.

Christie still doesn't seem to realize that sucking up to Democrats was his downfall. He spent that entire 2013 campaign collaring endorsements from Democrats rather than helping his fellow Republicans.

When the Democratic mayor of Fort Lee refused to go along, Christie's henchmen stopped traffic dead in his town. At that point he should have considered his options and bowed out of the 2016 race. By 2020, Bridgegate might have been forgotten.

Now he's stuck with a number of moderate-to-liberal positions he took back when he had dreams of leading the party to the White House.

You might have seen those recent ads that Marco Rubio put out attacking our governor.

"Chris Christie: One high-tax, Common Core, liberal-energy loving, Obamacare Medicaid-expanding president is enough," one states in a voice-over.

As this Politico article points out, some of that language represents a cheap shot. Christie inherited the high taxes here in New Jersey.

And that Medicaid expansion just forced the feds to pick up the cost for people who would otherwise have to be treated on the state's tab. In fact Christie rejected setting up an Obamacare exchange in New Jersey.

But he did indeed endorse the Common Core educational standards as well as President Obama's alternative-energy mandates.

And he still supports the enviros' misguided ethanol mandates - at least when he's in Iowa.

For some reason Rubio left out Christie's biggest weakness. That's his statement to a Latino group when he was U.S. Attorney that "being in the country without proper documentation is not a crime."

But then Rubio's not too strong on immigration either.

You're going to see a lot more of that sort of thing as the 2016 Republican presidential primary race heats up.

As I wrote in this column about his campaign kickoff last spring, Christie didn't seem to realize that the front-runner status he coveted after his 2013 re-election landslide disappeared because of Bridgegate:

"He was on his way to becoming the consensus front-runner among the Republican Party elite. That guy usually wins the nomination, even if he's as politically inept as Mitt Romney was in 2012.

"But Bridgegate soon relegated Christie to the ranks of the also-rans. Now he's stuck in the back of the pack, where the candidates try to outdo each other in firing up the base."

That task becomes increasingly difficult for him after New Hampshire. Bad as that 5 percent showing in the Fox poll is, Christie's numbers in the next primary are much worse.

Check the RealClearPolitics average of polls and you find him way down at 3.5 percent, a full five points behind Jeb Bush, the guy who supplanted him as the pick of the party establishment after Bridgegate.

Meanwhile Christie trails Donald Trump by more than 20 points in both states. And if Trump falls, Ted Cruz is also ahead of him by a big margin.

And then of course there's Rubio, running far ahead in the race to become the establishment darling and the anti-Trump.

There's still a chance that all of that campaigning could bring Christie to the top of the establishment list when the votes are counted in New Hampshire a month from now.

And then he could use that momentum to again beat Bush and Rubio in South Carolina.

But at that point he'd rise far enough on the radar for the others to dig into some of his really embarrassing positions. Easily the worst, at least from the perspective of New Jerseyans, was the way he reappointed liberal Democrat Jon Corzine's nominee to be chief justice of the state Supreme Court until 2029.

Carrie Severino at the National Review already noticed that.

Would any conservative reading that piece trust Christie to pick justices for the U.S. Supreme Court?

Christie has always ducked questions from New Jersey conservatives on those dreadful court picks.

But the national conservatives won't be so kind - assuming Christie ever rises to the point that it matters.

That's a big assumption.

THE LATEST POLLS: Since I posted this RealClearPolitcs has posted two more New Hampshire polls, both with better news for Christie. He scored a 12 in one and an 11 in the other. That puts him right in the middle of the establishment pack with Jeb Bush, who had a 12 and a 9. Both still trail Marco Rubio, who scored a 14 and a 9.

This good news for Christie but even better news to the anti-establishment leaders, Donald Trump and Ted Cruz. At the moment Christie are lumped together around the 10 percent mark. If that holds up through the election, all four will feel emboldened to continue in the race.

That's bad news for the party leaders. They're hoping to unite behind one guy against the Trump/Cruz onslaught.

Knowing Christie, he won't be the first of the four to bow out.

BELOW: Here's the ad by a PAC allied with Marco Rubio. Below that is a Lou Dobbs clip that could really sink Christie if he ever rose high enough in the polls for it to matter.

Paul Mulshine may be reached at Pmulshine@starledger.com. Follow him on Twitter @Mulshine. Find The Star-Ledger on Facebook.