BEIRUT — A cleric read the verdict before the truck came and dumped a large pile of stones near the municipal garden.

Jihadi fighters then brought in the woman, clad head to toe in black, and put her in a small hole in the ground. When residents gathered, the fighters told them to carry out the sentence: stoning to death for the alleged adulteress.

None in the crowd stepped forward, said a witness to the event in a northern Syrian city. So the jihadi fighters, mostly foreign extremists, did it themselves, pelting Faddah Ahmad with stones until her body was dragged away.

“Even when she was hit with stones, she did not scream or move,” said an opposition activist who said he witnessed the stoning near the football stadium and the Bajaa garden in the city of Raqqa, the main Syrian stronghold of the Islamic State group.

The July 18 stoning was the second in a span of 24 hours. A day earlier, 26-year-old Shamseh Abdullah was killed in a similar way in the nearby town of Tabqa by Islamic State fighters. Both were accused of having sex outside marriage.

The killings were the first of their kind in rebel-held northern Syria, where jihadis from the Islamic State group have seized large swaths of territory, terrorizing residents with their strict interpretation of Islamic law, including beheadings and cutting off the hands of thieves.

The jihadis recently tied a 14-year-old boy to a cross-like structure and left him for several hours in the scorching summer sun before bringing him down — punishment for not fasting during the Muslim holy month of Ramadan.

The stonings in Syria last month were not widely publicized at the time, but in the following days, three photographs appeared online that appeared to document the grisly spectacle and were consistent with other AP reporting.

The pictures posted on a newly created Twitter account showed dozens of people gathered in a square, a cleric reading a verdict through a loudspeaker and several bearded men with automatic rifles either carrying or collecting stones.

“A married woman being stoned in the presence of some believers,” read the caption of the photographs on the Twitter account, which since has been suspended.

Abu Ibrahim Raqqawi, the activist who witnessed Ahmad’s stoning, said locals where angry to see foreign fighters impose their will on the community.

“People were shocked and couldn’t understand what was going on,” he said in an interview via Skype. “Many were disturbed by the idea that Saudis and Tunisians were issuing (such) orders.”

Ahmad, he said, appeared unconscious, and he had overheard that she was earlier taken to a hospital, where she was given anesthesia.

The U.S. Embassy in Syria, in a statement posted on its Twitter account, condemned the “barbaric stoning” of a woman in Tabqa.

International human rights groups did not report the stoning, and Human Rights Watch said it had no independent confirmation.