Buy Photo Campers park at the DuBay Park campground earlier in 2013. (Photo: File/Stevens Point Journal)Buy Photo

EDITOR: It’s been a general pleasure to witness the budget negotiations of Portage County over the last several months. The supervisors, department heads and the employees are to be commended and thanked for their public service and sacrifices.

However, wouldn’t it be nice if all elected officials practiced what they preached? It was refreshing that a couple of supervisors recognized that we need to be putting property on the tax rolls, not taking it off; that we have a fiduciary responsibility to the taxpayers to spend every dollar wisely; and that we have more land than we have money.

Not less than one month later, why then did the same County Board members, members of Portage County’s Park Commission, appear to continue their pursuit of a substantial land acquisition for a proposed expansion of DuBay Park campground without having any detailed plan? More importantly, why do they want to spend tax dollars without first compiling a cost-benefit analysis? Why do they want to do either when any respective park expansion would appear to run contrary to a 30-year comprehensive plan that was compiled, in part, with the use of $500,000 in taxpayer grant money?

Spending $200,000 on a land acquisition without any documented need, plan or cost-benefit analysis appears fiscally irresponsible and appears to make no sense. Arguably, it is nothing more than speculation on the taxpayer’s dime, which is absolutely wrong and derelict of the public’s trust. The argument that “there is only so much land” holds no water, especially when there is only so much money taxpayer money.

It would be an absolute travesty if $200,000 in tax dollars were spent on a park expansion, with substantially more obligated for operations, while at the same time county library hours came under assault, available dollars for new books/material were diminished and the net wages of every dedicated public employee took a cut.

Bob Ryan,

town of Eau Pleine

To submit a letter to the editor, visit: http://static.stevenspointjournal.com/submit-letter/

Read or Share this story: http://spjour.nl/1QtWokc