A second San Jacinto County Commissioners Court meeting was held on Aug. 7, concluding an agenda item addressed on the previous week regarding health care benefits while taking care of two San Jacinto County employment positions.

A presentation was made at the last commissioners court meeting held last week by the Texas Association of Counties regarding employee health benefits.

The discussion involved not just the options available, but whether or not if employees would be able to afford the benefits.

“I’d just as soon leave the insurance like it is,” said County Judge Fritz Faulkner.

Pct. 3 Commissioner Thomas Bonds believed that none of the plans given to them would be any more beneficial than what the county currently had.

“Going over these other options, I don’t see an option that would benefit anybody anymore than the one that we’ve got already,” he said. “I wouldn’t be in favor of changing [the insurance].”

Pct. 1 Commissioner Ray McCoppin pointed out that the new health plans were designed to promote healthier lifestyles, something the old plan would not do necessarily.

“Our grandfathered plan doesn’t necessarily pay for 100 percent of somebody’s physical if they just go to the doctor for a physical,” he said. “The ungrandfathered plans because of the Affordable Health Care Act would.”

McCoppin also noted the court could go into a private exchange option, which would give the opportunity to control the costs.

County Treasurer Angela Beard emphasized this option, noting that this would give employees more choices for their insurance.

“Each employee can pick [their plan],” she said.

Some of the options reflected the fact that employees may not be able to afford the costs, as County Auditor Carole Martin pointed out regarding the 1100 plan, which would increase deductibles by $1000.

The 1100 plan is “really going to punish your employees because they’re going to have to come up with more money out of pocket,” said Martin.

McCoppin made the motion to stay where they were with the 700 plan and still offer spouse coverage. Pct. 2 Commissioner Donny Marrs seconded the motion, which was approved.

Following this decision, the court went into executive session regarding the employment positions of Indigent Health Care Director and 911 Addressing Coordinator.

Upon their return, the court announced their decision to appoint Barbara McGee as the newest Indigent Health Care Director. She will be replacing Sue Walker in light of her resignation last month.

The court then announced that Ashley Segovia will be the newest 911 Addressing Coordinator.