Having just written on this page last week about the alarming drop in entrepreneurship in the U.S., you can imagine my interest was piqued when I came across a New York Post article about the phenomenon of (and jealousy about) entrepreneurship in the millennial generation. Wow, I thought, maybe there’s hope! Maybe this next generation has the entrepreneurial fire in the belly!

How very optimistic of me. And how very wrong.

As it turns out, the piece was written by a millennial who shares feelings of envy and inadequacy with other millennials when they realize they aren’t running some cool tech startup. No, they are just working in some typical job. Sigh. Earning a living. What a bummer.

[GALLERY: Cartoons on the Economy]

Turns out, this generation – who claims to be “very entrepreneurial” (I’ve heard many, many of them say it, and the Internet is chock full of this assertion, if short on data, so it must be true!) suffers from something called the “entrepreneurial effect” – where one gets terribly caught up in the idea of running their own business, sometimes to the point of neglecting the job they actually have.

The data in the New York Post piece are interesting. The writer proudly proclaims that the entrepreneurial “grass is particularly green” among her generation – with 29 percent of entrepreneurs coming from the 20-34 year-old cohort!

Wow, right?

Oh, wait, that means that 71 percent of risk-taking, economy-building, community-leading, inspiring entrepreneurs are not of that generation.

In fact, according to the Kauffman Foundation (which has a relatively optimistic view on entrepreneurship that is actually backed up by research):





Most empirical studies find a peak age for business creation: entrepreneurs tend to be individuals in their thirties and forties. The general consensus of research findings is that “entrepreneurship is concentrated among individuals in mid­career, i.e. between thirty-five and forty-four years of age.” This differs from the conventional belief that entrepreneurship is mostly the province of the very young, who are presumably unfettered, willing to take risks, have low discount rates, and are undeterred from challenging established ways of doing things.