New wearable technology out of Hong Kong gives Google Glass an awesome competitor: the MAD Glass. This gadget will change the way people interact with navigation, games and international traveling.

The MAD Glass is Affordable and

The developers of the product indirectly called Google Glass a failure, and claim that the MAD Glass is a better option because it is more efficient and more affordable. The glass turns 2D graphics to 3D. It uses the most advanced technology available to make it accessible and easy to use.

The gadget runs on Android OS and works just like a smartphone would. It uses Augmented Reality technology to gather data about its surroundings to become interactive and digital. This leaves your hands free of devices, so you can take care of other things. Or better yet, interact with the world that MAD Glass brings to life.

MAD Glass Can Do Pretty Much Everything

The most exciting feature in the the Glass is probably it’s Instant Translation ability. If users happen to find themselves in a sticky translating situation from abroad, the MAD Glass can lend a hand. The device has an auto-translate app that can translate anything it can see onto the language of your choice. This makes it a pretty indispensable tool for traveling.

The Glass, like a smartphone, allows users to make calls, text, send MMS text to other contacts. It can act as your PDA, and also play any kind of media. This takes up a lot of the same features that your phone has, except you can be looking forward instead of down at a screen.

This Gadget Brings Us Entertainment and Navigation Straight to Our Eyes

In terms of entertainment, the Glass enables users to play their favorite games without looking down. In fact, it can use AR+ technology to turn the world around you into a game. This makes the device a step ahead of most other wearable technology.

Accessible GPS Navigation has become a part of our daily life. The MAD Glass features navigation directly on the glass, making it impossible to miss a turn. The hands-free map makes it safer to travel. It also makes it easier to do other things like driving, biking or hiking while keeping your eyes directly where they need to be.

MAD Glass is the Future

The MAD Glass can record video, take photos, browse the web using Wi-Fi and run some third party applications. The world of gadgets is changing for the better, and its future is in gadgets like the MAD Glass.

Comments

comments