Albert Bender of Nashville is a Cherokee, activist, journalist and author of the recently published "Native American Wisdom." Email him at column-albertbender07@yahoo.com. (Photo: Submitted) Story Highlights Horror movie depicts Natives as cannibals, while Aliança da Terra protects indigenous people.

The film “The Green Inferno," recently shown in Nashville, with its ultra racist depiction of Brazilian Indians as bloodthirsty cannibals is one side of a cultural/political coin — a step back in time, where I thought no filmmaker would dare go.

The other side of the coin is the Nashville-based, Brazil-missioned Aliança da Terra, dedicated to land rights for Amazon Indians and conservation-oriented, environmentally-minded farmers.

But first a description of “The Green Inferno” is demanded.

The filmmaker is the horror genre maven Eli Roth. The storyline of the movie is a group of well-meaning, idealistic college students embark on a trip to Brazil to conduct a public relations expose to aid an indigenous tribe whose lands are being invaded by money-hungry, land-logging developers.

To make a long story short, most of the students are fated to be cooked and eaten by those they so avidly sought to assist.

All that was missing from this cinematic walk back in time was the resurrection of Johnny Weissmuller from the grave to swing through the trees playing Tarzan.

Just replacing the mythical human flesh-eating Indians with African natives would have added the final touch.

But the true horror of Brazil is the ongoing, hideous, abominable genocide that has been committed against the native people of Brazil, from the 16th through the 21st centuries.

The 7,000-page Figueiredo Report of 1967 narrated shocking atrocities of mass murder, torture, rape, enslavement and bacteriological warfare conducted against the country’s native peoples throughout the 20th century.

Many tribes were completely wiped out.

There are still 250,000 indigenous people living in the Brazilian Amazon in 173 ethnic divisions in 414 recognized traditional areas. All are currently under extreme threat from so-called economic development.

Organized to help them and preserve the Amazon for the benefit of all peoples of the region is the other side of the coin, which is represented by the Nashville-headquartered Aliança da Terra (Alliance of the Land), headed by city resident John Carter.

He has spent two decades living in the Amazon.

Aliança, a conservation organization, is dedicated to environmental preservation, Indian land rights and sustainable agriculture.

Carter, who is also a pilot, works very closely with the native people, in particular the Xavante Indians of the Mato Grosso area where he lived, regularly flying to Brazil.

Aware of the precarious position of the indigenous people, he remarked, “The plight of the Indian in Brazil is dire.”

While the “Green Inferno” should rank as a movie to be consigned to the junk heap of film history, the rise of an organization such the Aliança da Terra, based in this city is destined to bring a breath of fresh air to all of Nashville.

Albert Bender of Nashville is a Cherokee, activist, journalist and author of the recently published "Native American Wisdom."

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/1QFP9Ws