David Kay organized evacuations and rescues as a U.S. Foreign Service officer during three assignments in Baghdad, most recently last summer, but now is embarking on a mission in Eastern Washington that puts him in harm’s way.

Kay, 59, is running against an entrenched member of the U.S. Congress. He announced on Tuesday that he will challenge U.S. Rep. Cathy McMorris Rodgers, R-Wash., a member of the House Republican leadership. He joins fellow Democratic challenger Joe Pakootas, who took 40 percent of the 5th District vote against McMorris Rodgers in 2014.

Kay is zeroing in on what he calls a “do nothing Congress” divorced from lives and stresses of ordinary Americans.

“For too many families here, the future is not what it used to be,” said Kay. “Parents who lie awake at night deciding whether to pay the child care bill or make the next car payment don’t have the luxury of saving for college tuition or retirement. That’s not how it’s supposed to be. Yet the Congress that our representative leads just makes things harder for us.”

The 5th District has been Republican turf since its last Democrat, House Speaker Tom Foley, was turfed by voters in 1994. McMorris Rodgers has not seen a tough race since she was challenged by Okanogan rancher (now State Land Commissioner) Peter Goldmark in 2006. She chairs the House Republican Conference. Tapped to give the Republican response to President Obama’s 2014 State of the Union address, McMorris Rodgers tore into the Affordable Care Act.

The Eastern Washington economy has lagged behind the “wet side” of the mountains, no place more than in the northeast counties of the state. McMorris Rodgers hails from Stevens County.

The county’s unemployment rate is higher than the national average. Its unemployment rate was 8.6 percent as of last April, much higher than both the national and state jobless rates. About 20 percent of its residents get food stamps.

As McMorris Rodgers gave her State of the Union response, New York Times columnist (and Spokane native) Timothy Egan had critical words for the “Gentle Lady from Washington”:

“Given that picture (of Stevens County), it would seem surprising that McMorris Rodgers voted to drastically cut food aid last year, and joined her party in resisting emergency benefits to the unemployed. She has been a leading strategist in the unrelenting Republican attempt to kill the Affordable Care Act.

“And yet, in her district, people are flocking to Obamacare — well beyond the national average. Though she has been screening town hall meetings to highlight only critics of the new law, her constituents are doing something entirely different in making their personal health decisions. In Spokane County, the most populous in the 5th District, with nearly half a million people, the rate of participation in the new health law is well above the state average.”

McMorris Rodgers begins the year with a huge fundraising advantage. She has raised $1.538 million in the 2015-16 cycle, according to the OpenSecrets.org website, has spent $1.33 million and ended 2015 with $390,000 in the bank. Pakootas, chief executive of the Colville Tribe, had raised $16,800, the Spokesman-Review of Spokane reported.

McMorris Rodgers has been an unyielding partisan. She was conspicuously absent from the Washington congressional delegation’s successful bipartisan effort to rescue the U.S. Export-Import Bank, marked for extinction by Washington, D.C.’s conservative lobbies.

She has been a trenchant critic of Planned Parenthood, attacking the health provider even after a Sept. 4 arson attack that destroyed a Planned Parenthood clinic in Pullman serving the Washington State University and University of Idaho communities.

David Kay — and Joe Pakootas — face an uphill challenge.