"I can't comment until we announce," said Sharstein, who confirmed that several Web brokers have applied for the pilot program with the Maryland Health Connection.

If consummated, the deals in Maryland and Oregon would represent a potentially dramatic change in the world of the 15 Obamacare exchanges run by individual states and the District of Columbia. To date, these exchanges have refused to partner with Web brokers to sell subsidized coverage.



The federal government, which operates the Obamacare site HealthCare.gov that sells insurance in the other 34 states, last year agreed to partner with eHealth, GetInsured, GoHealth and a number of other Web-based brokers to sell subsidized coverage under the Affordable Care Act. However, technical issues related to interfacing with the federal data hub have to date precluded the brokers from selling plans at the rate they had hoped to achieve this year.



(Read more: Oracle faces ouster from Oregon Obamacare website)



Brandon Cruz, co-founder of Web insurance broker GoHealth, said he had not heard that eHealth had been picked over his company for the pilot program, which Cruz's company had also applied for.

But Cruz said, "I think eHealth will represent the Web-based entities well."

And, Cruz added, "If they do a good job, it could be a big deal" and lead to other state-run Obamacare exchanges following suit with multiple Web brokers, including GoHealth, which have been asking for such deals.

A source familiar with the situation said, "things are so bad" in Maryland and Oregon "that they're open to new ideas."

"And people who were resistant to that have been fired," the source added.

Both Maryland and Oregon's original exchange directors resigned under fire for their marketplaces' botched rollouts. And both exchanges in the past two weeks have taken steps toward severing relationships with the primary IT contractors that built their sites.

This week, the Government Accountability Office announced it was auditing the problems at the Oregon, Maryland and other state-run exchanges.

Sharfstein disputed the idea that the pilot program with a Web broker was in reaction to Maryland's technical problems, saying "we were interested in this before our IT problems."