Japan quakes — The U.S. military prepared to join relief efforts today in disaster-stricken areas of southern Japan as authorities struggled to feed and care for tens of thousands of people who sought shelter after two powerful earthquakes that killed at least 42 people. Ten people remained missing, and rescuers were redoubling search efforts on the southern island of Kyushu, where many areas were cut off by landslides and road and bridge damage. Forecasts for heavy rains, which would make land and collapsed buildings even more unstable, added to the urgency of the searches. Toyota Motor Corp. said it would shut down most of its vehicle production in Japan over the course of this week because of parts shortages stemming from the earthquakes. Nissan Motor Co. also halted production at some facilities.

Affordable Care Act — The first full year of the Affordable Care Act brought historic increases in coverage for low-wage workers and others who have long been left out of the health care system, a New York Times analysis has found. Immigrants of all backgrounds — including more than 1 million legal residents who are not citizens — had the sharpest rise in coverage rates. The Times’ analysis shows that by the end of that first full year, 2014, so many low-income people gained coverage that it halted the decadeslong expansion of the gap between the haves and the have-nots in the American health insurance system.

Obama’s Saudi Arabia trip — Over the last seven decades, photographs of U.S. presidents with the kings of Saudi Arabia have provided visual evidence of an enduring, strategic alliance between the United States and the oil-rich kingdom. On Wednesday, President Barack Obama will add one more photo to the scrapbook when he arrives in the Saudi capital for a private meeting with King Salman. But the expected image of the two leaders will fail to convey the depth of the strain on the relationship between the two countries. During Obama’s tenure, there has been distrust and disagreement over how to contain Iran, the fight against the Islamic State, the future of Syria and clashes in Yemen.

Afghan conflict — With nearly 2,000 civilians killed or wounded and more than 80,000 people displaced this year already, the Afghan conflict continues to affect lives in record numbers, the United Nations said Sunday. The report came as fighting raged across several provinces of the country, with attention focused on the northeastern province of Kunduz. The U.N. mission in Afghanistan documented 600 civilian deaths and 1,343 wounded in the first three months of 2016. While the death toll fell 13 percent from the same period last year, the number of wounded increased 11 percent, the report said, with a high rise among children.

Supreme Court — Conservatives are nervous that Chief Justice John Roberts Jr. will disappoint them in a challenge to a major President Barack Obama initiative on immigration. The case, to be argued today at the Supreme Court, presents fundamental questions about executive power against the backdrop of a wrenching national debate over Obama’s plan to spare millions of immigrants from deportation. But Roberts’ record suggests he may avoid taking a position on such a partisan issue, focusing instead on the more technical question of whether the states challenging the Obama administration’s immigration plan have suffered the sort of direct and concrete injury that gives them standing to sue.

Sex abuse accusations — Phillips Exeter Academy, an elite New Hampshire boarding school, disclosed last month that it had forced out a popular teacher in 2011 because of sexual misconduct in the 1970s and ’80s. The school’s delayed announcement — officials said they had been protecting the victims’ privacy — brought forth allegations against other employees. And on Wednesday, Exeter announced it had fired a second teacher. The revelations at Exeter are the latest to rock the insular, privileged world of American prep schools. In the past decade, sex abuse allegations have tarnished top private schools, including Horace Mann in the Bronx and St. George’s School in Rhode Island.

Golan Heights — Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu of Israel led a Cabinet meeting in the Israeli-controlled portion of the Golan Heights on Sunday, calling on the world to recognize Israeli sovereignty over the conquered territory and vowing that Israel would never give it back to Syria. “The Golan is an integral part of the state of Israel,” Netanyahu said at the meeting. He said he had spoken with Secretary of State John Kerry on Saturday and told him that Israel would not oppose a diplomatic settlement in Syria, on the condition that it not come at the expense of his country’s security.