Matt Rivera is from tiny Echols County, population 4,400, in south Georgia on the state line with Florida.

“I come from one of the smallest of the small in Georgia,” said the second-year medical student at Medical College of Georgia at Augusta University.

The county has a migrant clinic but only a volunteer doctor who works at a hospital in a neighboring county and another volunteer physician in his 80s. Rivera is considering one day returning to the area when his four-year obligation to the National Health Service Corps after residency is up. He knows the county could use him but whoever goes there is likely to be “inundated” with the need, he said.

“I definitely think there would be enough patients to support them financially but how much can they do by themselves?” Rivera said.

Even as Georgia and other states strive to put more students like Rivera through medical school, and some are trying to add residency slots, there will likely not be enough of these future physicians like him to go around. The Association of American Medical Colleges predicts there will be a shortage of 46,000 to 90,000 physicians in 2025.

And even when there are physicians like Rivera, they are likely to be less interested in the exhausting hours their predecessors put in. The counties already struggling to attract physicians and underserved areas are likely to feel the pain first, experts said. Some specialties, such as psychiatrists and obstetricians, are already in short supply in many states now.

Recognizing there would be a looming shortage of doctors, the AAMC called on states and schools in 2006 to increase medical school enrollment by 30 percent, a goal the group announced earlier this year would nearly be achieved by the 2019-2020 first-year class.

The problem is that won’t keep up with the growth of the U.S. population and physicians are retiring at nearly the same rate as the increase, said Dr. Atul Grover, Chief Public Policy Officer for the AAMC. There are a lot of stories, but not yet a lot of hard data, on physicians deciding to retire earlier than expected after being fed up with increased regulation and a number of other issues — from having to install electronic health records to new payment models from the Affordable Care Act, he said.

“There’s a lot of those stories out there, which would suggest that there is going to be a flight of physicians over the age of 55 earlier than they would have expected from the workforce. We just haven’t seen any of that data yet,” Grover said. “It is certainly going to be a different environment and for older physicians it may be generational, that they don’t want to deal with it.”

According the 2013 American Medical Association Physician Masterfile, of the more than 767,000 active physicians in the U.S. under the age of 75, about 10 percent were 65 and older and 26 percent were between the ages of 55 and 64, which makes it likely those doctors could retire in the next 10 years, according to a report released earlier this year by the AAMC. That would be a loss of more than 276,000 physicians from practice.

About 29,000 physicians complete graduate medical education and presumably could enter practice each year, the report noted, with a loss ballooning each year to that deficit in 2025. There is already a deficit of 21,800 to 30,800 physicians this year, the AAMC estimated, which will increase to 26,900 to 39,300 next year and go up every year thereafter unless something is done.

The AAMC is backing two bills in Congress now that would add between 2,000 or 3,000 new federally funded residency slots a year over the currently frozen amount, or about a 10 percent increase in new physicians per year. But Grover concedes there are challenges to that, particularly for finding funding for any new initiatives.

Productivity is also likely to be an issue, AAMC acknowledged. Physicians under the age of 35 in 1980 worked more than five hours more a week compared to their most recent counterparts and that effect is likely to continue, the report found.

“This generation is probably not going to work as many hours as prior generations,” Grover said, noting that they have to satisfy higher debt burdens than previous generations. Rivera said he is already hearing it from young doctors he talks to who work with older physicians.

“It takes four people to cover (the older physicians) when they are on vacation but they can cover four different people when they are on,” Rivera said. “It’s a different attitude about what is expected with a work/life balance.”

The coming physician shortage, even in areas with higher levels of physicians, is likely to begin as difficulties getting appointments, particularly with specialists, Grover said.

“There is the demand issue of convenience where I’m not going to be able to see a physician as quickly as I may want or need to,” he said.

This is already a problem for certain populations, such as Medicaid patients or those being cared for by the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs, where there are simply not enough doctors. But it is already a problem in certain specialties, such as psychiatry, Grover said.

“Certainly, we’re already seeing it in mental health, psychiatry, we’re seeing it in neurology because of the growth in things like Parkinson’s and Alzheimer’s (diseases), we’re seeing it in oncology because of the growth in cancer rates,” he said.

Wait times already vary widely across the country and between specialties. A 2014 survey of wait times for five specialties in 15 cities by Merritt Hawkins found Boston had the highest average wait time at 45 days, despite Massachusetts having the highest number of physicians per 100,000 population, double the rate that Georgia and Texas have, while Dallas had the lowest average wait time of 10.2 days.

Even when there seems to be a good supply, the numbers can be deceiving. There are about 30 psychiatrists listed for the Augusta area but subtract those who work for the VA, the Department of Defense and those in state institutions or involved in research and teaching and there are maybe five who are in private practice, which could be a problem even for those with good insurance, said Dr. Vaughn McCall, chair of the Department of Psychiatry and Health Behavior at Augusta University.

“That’s not very many,” he said.

Lack of certain specialists is played out in different areas with different specialists across the country, Grover said.

“The hard thing is figuring out which specialties in which cities are going to be the hardest hit,” he said.

The most vulnerable areas, particularly rural counties, are already being hit, and that is coming at a cost to patients. A study recently published in the Journal of Clinical Oncology found that colon cancer patients who had to travel great distances for care were much less likely to receive chemotherapy after surgery than other patients, regardless of insurance, but those from areas with few oncologists were also much less likely to receive post-surgery chemotherapy, the standard of care. That probably means worse outcomes for those patients but eventually, as the shortage worsens, worse care for all.

“I think it is going to hit people who are already underserved and have problems with access but eventually, if the problem gets worse enough, then it is going to affect everybody,” Grover said.

A lack of physicians comes at a cost to the whole community, particularly in economic development, said Dr. William Custer, a health economist with Georgia State University.

“Areas without a physician at all are at an extreme disadvantage in attracting new businesses,” he said. “You don’t get national companies coming in and building plants where they don’t have access to health care.”

A continual lack of treatment over time in a community leads to poor overall health and that has an economic cost, too, Custer said. Poor health equals higher health care costs and because insurers use that in part to set premiums, it results in higher premiums with fewer people able to afford them, he said.

“It’s essentially a self-defeating cycle of poor health and poor economic return,” Custer said.