EDINBURG — The Board of Managers for Edinburg’s Doctors Hospital at Renaissance announced Thursday the shuffling of a few leadership positions as the institution prepares to transition from a hospital to a more wide-ranging healthcare system this year.

The new Doctors Hospital at Renaissance Healthcare System will be separated into three divisions: Business Operations, System Innovation Operations and Hospital and Clinical Operations. The senior management team will largely remain intact, although some members will be shifting to different positions. New positions will be filled with a combination of in-house promotions and outside hires.

“Today, I think a hospital is becoming an arcane term,” said Dr. Carlos Cardenas, the chairman of the Doctors Hospital board. “Health care as we used to see it is evolving.”

Cardenas, who worked as the interim CEO last year, will continue to serve as board chairman and a member of the Executive Management Committee. He said he also plans to increase his clinical responsibilities as a working gastroenterologist.

Israel Rocha, previously the hospital’s government, public and corporate affairs officer, took over as CEO last week. Sofia Hernandez will fill Rocha’s job, he said. Hernandez previously worked in the public affairs office, and before that as director of economic development and legislative affairs for Hidalgo County, according to a social media profile.

Susan Turley will become the first president of the healthcare system after serving as the hospital’s chief financial officer. She will also head the Business Operations division.

Her replacement as CFO has not been chosen.

In interviews Thursday, hospital leaders described the organizational restructuring as part of a strategy to provide more preventative care in addition to care for patients in urgent need. They also said the reorganization would make the facility more efficient, as workers on the business side would focus on business allowing doctors and nurses to focus on patients.

“The main reason we’re doing it is really to streamline and increase our efficiency and effectiveness and bringing new services in terms of patient care,” Turley said.

The move will also allow Doctors Hospital to partner with other providers to expand programs and access to care, officials said.

“We’ll be transitioning throughout the year and announcing different programs,” Rocha said.

Turley said the health care system’s priorities for 2014 will include applying for status as an accountable care organization, establishing a clinically integrated network with other local providers and further developing residency programs with slots for more than 100 students at the future University of Texas Rio Grande Valley medical school.

All three steps exemplify Doctors Hospital’s desire to work with outside partners to transform the hospital to a more expansive health system.

In addition to Turley’s new position, the hospital is also adding a deputy general counsel, a vice president of ambulatory clinics, head of research and development — Lisa Treviño, a Valley native who has been working in Houston in the genome field for several years, Turley said — and two other positions that are still being developed, Rocha said.

With 530 beds, Doctors Hospital is one of the largest physician-owned hospitals in the country. It was founded with 30 beds in 1997.

“We are a very different entity than we were when we started our business,” Rocha said.

With the development of residency programs for medical students at UT-RGV and further implementation of President Barack Obama’s Affordable Care Act, 2013 was a “transitional” year for the hospital, Cardenas said.

And with much of the effect of the federal overhaul of the nation’s healthcare laws still to be determined, the next 12 months ought to be similar.

“I think the entire country is going to be a transitional year” in 2014, Cardenas said, adding that only two things are certain about the Affordable Care Act: “It’s confusing and uncertain.”

jfischler@themonitor.com