INDIANAPOLIS — Grab some aspirin.

The most severe Super Bowl hangover strikes the loser.

The last time the losing team in the Super Bowl came back the next season to win the Big Game? The Miami Dolphins, NFL runners-up in 1971 and NFL champions in 1972.

And after getting destroyed by the Dallas Cowboys 24-3 in Super Bowl VI — is Bob Lilly still chasing Bob Griese? — all the Dolphins had to do was post a 17-0 record to reach the 1972 summit.

That was five or six football fads ago. It was before the Steel Curtain, a decade before Bill Walsh’s West Coast offense, before the Chicago Bears’ 46 defense, before quarterbacks all but made running backs such as Larry Csonka and Jim Kiick obsolete. A long, long time ago.

It won’t be easy for the Broncos to win it all in the 2014 season.

“We can get better,” coach John Fox said at the NFL scouting combine. “We will get better.”

The transient nature of the 21st- century NFL makes it difficult for any team to put together back-to-back super seasons. The New England Patriots were the last team to repeat as Super Bowl champions (2003 and 2004). The Broncos were NFL champions in the 1997 and 1998 seasons.

A Super Bowl loser returning to merely play in the Super Bowl, though, requires a longer memory.

“How far back you going with that?” said Seattle coach Pete Carroll, whose Seahawks are three weeks removed from crushing the Broncos 43-8 in Super Bowl XLVIII at the Meadowlands.

All the way back to the 1993 Buffalo Bills, who finished a string of four consecutive Super Bowl losses that season.

“It’s an awfully long season,” said Bill Polian, the general manager of those four Super Bowl-losing Bills teams and the GM for Peyton Manning’s Indianapolis Colts, who won the Super Bowl in the 2006 season and lost it in 2009. “You’ve got to be very careful about how you manage your team the following year. Recovery. Legs. The offseason goes very fast. That’s an issue.”

Carroll said the Seahawks are aware of the “Super Bowl hangover,” and he has a different theory about why it occurs.

“There’s a lot to it that we’re going to try to navigate so it doesn’t happen to us,” Carroll said. “I don’t think it has anything to do with the extended season. I think it has to do with roster changes.”

He pointed to the Super Bowl champion Baltimore Ravens of the 2012 season. They lost Ray Lewis, Ed Reed, Anquan Boldin and Paul Kruger, among others, after becoming the champs.

“I would say No. 1 it’s the parity,” said Broncos GM John Elway.

It can’t be a coincidence that NFL free agency began in 1993 — the last time a Super Bowl loser returned to the Big Game.

“I’m surprised. I didn’t realize the loser has had that much trouble as well,” Carroll said. “But I do think it has to do with how you are prepared to handle whatever you deal with — the good, the bad, the hard stuff — and how solid is your mentality, so that you can recreate it.”

Rich Gannon believes from personal experience that a negative mind-set is a huge reason the Super Bowl loser doesn’t rebound well.

The similarities between Gannon’s 2002 Oakland Raiders and Manning’s 2013 Broncos are staggering. Gannon, like Manning, was the league’s MVP. Gannon, like Manning, led his team to the league’s No. 1 offensive ranking.

The Raiders, like the Broncos, faced a Super Bowl opponent that was below average on offense (the Tampa Bay Buccaneers ranked No. 24 in 2002 and Seattle was No. 17 in 2013), but ranked No. 1 on defense. And Gannon’s Raiders, like Manning’s Broncos, got destroyed by the defensive-oriented team in the Super Bowl.

“It can be such a negative thing, a major disappointment,” Gannon said. “I’ve seen coaches who have actually been depressed into the following spring. Still talking about it, still dealing with it as a negative thing. Instead of moving past it and saying, ‘Hey, look, we did a lot of good things to even get there, let’s see if we can find a way to get back.”

The tricky part for the Broncos this offseason: Don’t chase Seattle at the expense of losing what got them the 15 victories to make it to the Super Bowl in the first place.

“I think everyone is going to look at Seattle and evaluate them, because everyone does that to every Super Bowl winner every year,” Elway said. “But we’re still going to have the same personnel for the most part that we’ve had offensively and defensively and obviously try to get better on both sides. But our personality is not going to change because of Seattle and the way they played and won the Super Bowl.”

A cure for Super Bowl hangover

Seven positions the Broncos should address if they are to become the first NFL team since the 1971-72 Miami Dolphins to lose the Super Bowl one season and win it the next season:

WIDE RECEIVER

If the Broncos don’t re-sign Eric Decker and/or Andre Caldwell, free agents who might be available on one-year deals include Jeremy Maclin, Jacoby Jones and Hakeem Nicks.

DEFENSIVE END

The Broncos hope to re-sign Shaun Phillips, but Robert Ayers might leave and there’s still some unknown with Derek Wolfe’s illness. Free agents would include Jared Allen and Lamarr Houston.

MIDDLE LINEBACKER

Jon Beason and Jonathan Vilma are among the free agents, but it would be nice if the Broncos could draft a starter such as Wisconsin’s Chris Borland.

CORNERBACK

Dominique Rodgers-Cromartie is a free agent, Champ Bailey may or may not accept a pay cut and Chris Harris is coming off an ACL injury. Aqib Talib is the best of the physical corners on the market.

SAFETY

T.J. Ward is a terrific strong safety if his body can hold up. He was drafted in 2010 by Browns GM Tom Heckert, now the Broncos’ director of pro personnel. Louis Delmas and Donte Whitner would also fit.

GUARD-CENTER

With Ryan Clady returning to left tackle, Chris Clark could move to right tackle and Orlando Franklin could move inside to replace free-agent left guard Zane Beadles. Or the Broncos could sign free-agent guard Travelle Wharton or center Alex Mack.

RUNNING BACK

Knowshon Moreno might leave. Wouldn’t Darren McFadden, who has had many of his best games against the Broncos, help alongside Montee Ball? James Starks, LeGarrette Blount, Maurice Jones-Drew and Donald Brown also are free agents.