A poor fourth-quarter earnings report from Community Health Systems has some analysts and researchers blaming high-deductible health care plans, saying that the plans’ projected prevalence could have larger implications for the sector.

Community Health CYH, -1.83% cited significant bad debt for its weak performance in the latest quarter, which included a 2.4% drop in revenue. The company also named a $169 million increase in its allowance for doubtful accounts—meaning unpaid patient copays or deductibles—which cut into the bottom line by as much.

Read: Community Health’s stock plunges after a weak earnings report

Some analysts connected it to the rise of the high-deductible plan, which offers smaller monthly premiums but higher out-of-pocket health expenses. Such plans are already prevalent on Affordable Care Act exchanges, and employers are expected to shift in that direction to cut costs.

Read: This is what your health insurance looks like this year

“While company management did not directly address the cause of this change in estimate, we believe strongly that the rise of high deductible plans is a root cause,” Height Securities researchers wrote.

Such plans’ emphasis on cost sharing will likely affect all companies in the sector and have future effects on volumes and utilization rates, they said.

Wedbush Securities Inc. analyst Sarah James also connected high-deductible plans, already 9% of the commercial market, to that increase in doubtful accounts.

“We see risk for allowances for doubtful accounts to increase as a percent of revenue across the industry as a percent of revenue across the industry as the insurance market moves more into high deductible plans and hospitals vertically integrate into urgent care and physician offices,” James wrote in a note out Wednesday.

An additional hit to health-care providers in this scenario is that they must pay bills for subsidy-eligible customers who go into 30-to-60 days of premium default, James said.

Providers may be receiving as little as 18 cents to 34 cents for every dollar billed to those with high-deductible health plans, according to data from the Advisory Board Company, which also shows that patients are unable to pay a doctor bill once it makes up more than 5% of household income.

Other analysts didn’t specifically cite high-deductible plans in their notes on the company, although many lowered their stock price targets.

Community Health Systems’ share price plunged 45% in the last three months, compared with a 6% decline in the S&P 500.

More from MarketWatch