Share This Story 107 Tweet Share Email

Hugo's grandfather would get lost in his own house.

His father would stuff his pockets with rocks, meticulously clean his shoes and scrub his face with toilet water.

They called it acting bobito. Stupid. But it was his destiny.

Aunts and uncles and cousins also succumbed to la bobera, a genetic curse that robs memory and ruins thinking in Hugo's family, beginning in middle age. Families in his region have known it for centuries, since long before medicine gave it the name Alzheimer's.

While striking a defiant tone, Hugo acknowledges he has coin-flip odds of dying from the mind-robbing disease, too.

"I forget stuff sometimes," says Hugo, taking a break for his duties at a hilltop stable in El Retiro. "I am going to feed a horse, and I end up feeding another horse."

But he doesn't dwell on whether routine forgetfulness is the beginning of a bigger problem. Will his memory abandon him, and will his two sons need to care for him as he and his siblings did for their father?

Instead of fretting about his fate, he's hoping for a new treatment from cutting-edge medical science — in an experiment that arrived at his own doorstep.

It was there that a Colombian neurologist and his research partner first came to call, nearly 30 years ago.

Hugo's family is the second clan the researchers identified here in Antioquia, the hilly region around Medellin, Colombia, in the mid-1980s.

Hugo's sister, Rubiola, also is participating in the medical study.

(Photo: Ken Alltucker/The Republic)

Ultimately they would determine that 26 families of more than 5,000 people with roots tracing back to Spanish colonialism all shared this fate, the curse of early-onset Alzheimer's disease.

The researchers had few answers then, little understanding of how or why the curse struck family members so early in life. They only knew that the pattern revealed an inherited trait.

But their early research, in small towns and villages such as Hugo's El Retiro, set into motion the events that would lead to potentially one of the most groundbreaking tests yet in the search for an answer for Alzheimer's.

Colombian neurologist Francisco Lopera and his research partner, Lucia Madrigal, a nurse and psychologist, identified and uncovered the connections. They spent years taking family histories, building records of many generations falling to the dementia-type illness.

With the help of a Harvard neurologist in the early days of human genome mapping, Lopera identified a rare genetic mutation responsible for cursing Hugo's family and 25 others in this violence-scarred region of Colombia.

Now the mutation named for the paisas, the people who live in this region, has turned into opportunity for these families through a medical trial brought to Colombia via Phoenix-based Banner Alzheimer's Institute.

While Hugo's nieces and nephews now learn about the science of the disease and how the paisa mutation can be passed down from one generation to the next, the disease was a mystery for older generations.

The paisas had long filled the void with their own theories on what caused memories to falter and thinking to fail – a hex from a witch or a wronged priest, or touching a tree.

When Hugo was a young boy and he saw his grandfather slip away, he thought it was just a normal part of aging.

“They could find a cure and that could help my kids and my grandkids and maybe for myself.” Rubiola, study participant

Hugo and his sister, Rubiola, are among the 300 people researchers have sought for a unique medical study that aims to answer whether the disease can be slowed or halted if people take an experimental drug before memory or thinking problems surface.

The drug being tested is designed to prevent amyloid beta protein buildup in their brains. The protein is one of the known markers of Alzheimer's — a biopsy to detect it and other brain changes after death is considered proof for a definitive diagnosis — though it's not certain whether the protein actually causes the disease.

If the drug works, if the paisas' Alzheimer's is stopped or delayed, the results would be a medical breakthrough.

But whether the drug succeeds or fails, its testing will have repercussions in the research world that reach far beyond the mountains of Medellin.

The paisas

Every other week, Hugo leaves the gentle, green hills of El Retiro for Medellin, about 45 minutes away, to undergo exams and get medicine at a clinic.

The University of Antioquia study administers the drug to some people who have the genetic guarantee of Alzheimer's, gives some a placebo, and uses a control group of people without the mutation. To maintain the integrity of the study, none of the participants knows who is in which group.

That means Hugo doesn't know whether he carries the paisa gene, whether la bobera is his destiny.

“We hope it can help us, but also our sons. And the sons of our sons, and so on. That we can get a cure for this.” Hugo, study participant

But the decision to join the medical trial wasn't a difficult one for Hugo and his older sister, Rubiola. They both saw how their grandfather, then their father, slipped away. They wanted to take some control of their future, if not for them, then for their children.

Hugo and Rubiola reviewed the study's rules and disclosures, including nausea and mild sickness that could come from taking the experimental drug. The study's ethics committee bars releasing participants' full names to protect their safety; The Republic agreed to identify Hugo and Rubiola by first name.

"They could find a cure and that could help my kids and my grandkids and maybe for myself," Rubiola says.

Not all family members feel the same as Hugo and Rubiola, who come from a not uncommonly large Antioquian family. They are among 16 brothers and sisters, 10 of whom are living.

The oldest, who is 54, doesn't want to talk about Alzheimer's disease. She recoils at the word and will immediately cut off any conversation about the disease.

Dr. Lopera's staff would call her about the medical study and support groups at the University of Antioquia, but she refused to take the calls. She didn't want to participate in the study or the support groups that teach caregivers and affected families the coping skills that can help them deal with the devastating disease.

Rubiola says that her oldest sister assisted her mother as primary caregivers for their dying father.

That meant putting up with his lighthearted side, like when he stared at himself in the mirror or stuffed rocks in his pocket. It also meant watching him deteriorate, having to bathe him by hand.

"If we are at a family gathering and we are joking about Alzheimer's, she doesn't like that. She doesn't like the word. Her reaction is don't talk to me about it. Don't tell me about it," Rubiola says.

While the family of Hugo and Rubiola stick together and try to support one another, some other families don't have such strong bonds.

The family bond is strong and humor is plentiful. And their optimism for a medical breakthrough is real.

"We hope it can help us, but also our sons," Hugo says. "And the sons of our sons, and so on. That we can get a cure for this."

Yaneth Milena lives in a barrio called Villatina, La Torre, in the hills ringing downtown Medellin.

Milena's brick, one-bedroom home has a corrugated metal roof. Sunlight peeks through a gap between the edge of the wall and ceiling.

Milena has one brother who is participating in the medical trial. She has two sons, ages 15 and 8. And she spends nearly every waking moment caring for her mother, Maria Nelly, who has advanced Alzheimer's disease.

“There is nothing we can do because it is genetic. It is just the medicine. That is the only hope we have.” Yaneth Milena, Colombian

Other relatives visit, but conversations about how Maria Nelly is faring with the family disease don't exist. They see she is cared for and they don't probe more deeply, don't volunteer to help and don't ask whether Milena could use a break from her 24/7 job as caregiver.

"Once someone has this disease, there is nothing you can do," Milena says. "It is like being dead while you are alive."

Milena's only respite is the workshop she attends through the University of Antioquia's neurosciences department.

The workshop allows her to meet other families who are grappling with the same disease. They learn about caregiving, take therapy classes and get tips on how to deal with an affected family member who becomes belligerent. They also do arts, crafts and dance.

Maria Nelly is pictured here with her daughter, Janeth Milena, and her grandson. Janeth Milena is the primary caregiver for Maria Nelly.

(Photo: provided photo)

Milena proudly displays a painting of the Virgin Mary that she completed during a recent workshop. It's the first time she smiles in the course of an hour.

Later, walking along a dirt road toward a bluff, she can display her neighborhood view of Medellin, in the valley below.

Downtown's glass and steel skyscrapers and modern economy are a world away from Milena's barrio, wedged on a hillside of dead-end roads and partially-built walkways.

Several young men mill about on Milena's dirt-covered street, some on small motorcycles that are a common way to navigate the congested streets of Medellin. Other neighbors staff tiendas where they sell plantains, eggs or seafood.

In Milena's neighborhood, a municipal improvement project means work to turn dirt into a concrete staircase up a small hillside, linking to an adjoining neighborhood. Such infrastructure-on-the-fly projects are common in these ramshackle neighborhoods, which have been sprung up to house those who migrate from small, mountainside towns of Antioquia for economic opportunity or to escape the guerrilla warfare that plagued those towns for decades.

Milena feels at home in her modest home. She also is trapped, not just by the burden of caring for her mother, but by the question of her family's fate. The test of an experimental drug developed a continent away may be her only way out.

"This test, this trial and the medicine," Milena explains. "This is the only hope we have to alleviate the disease. There is nothing we can do because it is genetic. It is just the medicine. That is the only hope we have."

A municipal worker in Villatina, La Torre carries corrugated metal for a neighborhood repair project. The small village is home to Janeth Milena and her mother, Maria Nelly, who has late-stage Alzheimer’s disease.



(Photo: Ken Alltucker/The Republic)

The disappointment

Lopera, to prepare for the study, has guided the development of gleaming new infrastructure at both the University of Antioquia's neurosciences clinic and at a hospital, Pablo Tobon Uribe. They have secured all the technology needed to conduct a modern scientific research project.

The hospital recently acquired an advanced imaging machine that allows researchers to peer inside the brains of patients and track the telltale signs of the amyloid beta plaque.

“They understand perfectly what they are getting — a placebo or a drug. It is hope for them. It is a way to do something and give back to their families. For them, this study is a source of hope. ” Lucia Madrigal, nurse

These machines support an imaging technology known as PET, or positron emission tomography, that use radioactive isotopes to measure brain activity. Those isotopes come from another new piece of medical technology that the University of Antioquia recently secured, called a cyclotron.

Beginning in the mid-1990s, the Medellin research team began collecting brains from deceased paisa-mutation patients whose families voluntarily donated the tissue to further research. Today, with more than 200 donated brains, this brain bank contains frozen chunks of tissue with the genetic material that researchers hope can help solve the disease's riddle.

Amid the giant, shining machines, the shantytowns of the hills outside the city feel very far away.

All this symphony of technology wasn't available even three years ago, when Banner Alzheimer's Institute flew family members from Medellin to Phoenix for imaging and other tests in preparation for the medical study.

Decades ago, families believed in the mythological causes of the disease, the curse, the bush or the tree. Now young adults, even children, some of whom have little formal education, freely discuss the scientific basis for the disease that they learned through the university workshops.

Scientists believe the paisa mutation leads to an accumulation of amyloid beta plaque in the brain, which researchers theorize causes the memory and thinking problems.

A researcher at Pablo Tobon Uribe Hospital in Medellin explains the use of a medical-imaging technology called PET imaging. The University of Antioquia acquired the technology to support a Alzheimer’s medical study.

(Photo: Ken Alltucker/The Republic)

Madrigal, who was raised in the same town where some of the afflicted families live, makes sure she explains the disease in terms that people can understand.

One example: she compares the paisa mutation to a broken lawnmower blade and amyloid beta plaque to grass. The grass grows slowly over time, but the broken blade cannot cut the grass.

To extend Madrigal's analogy, researchers seek to replace the function of the broken blade with crenezumab, an experimental, amyloid-clearing drug made by a San Francisco Bay Area biotechnology company, part of the Switzerland-based pharmaceutical giant Roche.

Trial participants such as Hugo, Rubiola and Milena's brother get either the drug — or a placebo — before any memory or thinking problems occur.

With the University of Antioquia's new collection of technology, researchers can track whether the drugs clear the amyloid and whether that can halt or delay memory and thinking problems that would inevitably occur in anyone who carries the so-called paisa mutation.

"These are real people who are not familiar with a neurologist's language, but they have common sense," Madrigal says. "I had to find a way that people could understand me, that this is not witchcraft or a spell. We needed to change the mythical part to science."

And she has succeeded at translating these scientific concepts to people in ways they understand. That has generated enthusiasm in the families and a willingness to participate.

Lucia Madrigal is a psychologist who played a pivotal role in the medical study. She works at the neurosciences division of the University of Antioquia in Medellin.

(Photo: Ken Alltucker/The Republic)

"They understand perfectly what they are getting — a placebo or a drug," Madrigal explains. "It is hope for them. It is a way to do something and give back to their families. For them, this study is a source of hope. It's the only thing they've got."

The University of Antioquia attempted to encourage more people to sign up for the medical study by conducting a press conference for Medellin-area media outlets late last year. One television station aired a report that suggested university researchers had discovered a vaccine for the mind-robbing disease. Within hours, visitors crowded the university clinic.

Clinic employees had to more fully explain that the university is conducting a medical study, not the promise of a cure.

About eight months after the first Colombian patient was injected with the experimental drug in Medellin, the company that owns crenezumab unveiled news.

Another study, a large, mid-stage test, had been under way, tested on people with mild to moderate Alzheimer's symptoms. The drug's target was the same — the test hoped to clear the amyloid beta protein from patients' brains.

The world's most brilliant Alzheimer's scientists convened at a meeting in Copenhagen, Denmark, last July and listened to the results. They heard numbers and results using different measurement scales — a 12-item Alzheimer's disease assessment scale and a clinical dementia rating.

The results weren't encouraging.

In scientific terms, crenezumab didn't show any statistically significant benefit compared with a placebo drug when it came to delaying cognitive and functional decline, the study's main goals.

In layman's terms, the drug worked no better than a fake drug. It was the latest in a long list of anti-amyloid drugs that have delivered disappointing results.

A University of Antioquia worker displays a cyclotron.



(Photo: Ken Alltucker/The Republic)

The hope

Milena had been caring for her mother. Hugo, tending to his horses.

Both were unaware of the medical trial results as they were revealed in Europe, the continent that first carried the paisa mutation to their corner of the world.

Lopera, however, was keenly aware of the study results. He had a different message for his families.

"We knew this already and we were not surprised," says Lopera, explaining how he informed families of the study results released last summer. "Please, don't tell me this fails. It is our failure when we use this in this late stage."

The studies tested the same drug, but there are key differences. The failed study tested crenezumab on people who already had Alzheimer's. The amyloid beta plaques already had filled the brains of those people.

The idea of Alzheimer's prevention, espoused by Banner's Dr. Eric Reiman and others, calls for using drugs to target amyloid before memory and thinking problems occur, not after the disease has already wrecked the brain.

So the Colombians are taking the drug before their genetic curse has taken effect.

“We knew this already and we were not surprised. Please, don't tell me this fails. It is our failure when we use this in this late stage.” Francisco Lopera, neurologist

Peel back the layers of the failed crenezumab study, backers of the drug say, and you'll find signs of hope.

In any medical study, the data can be interpreted many ways. There is the universe of test participants, and there are smaller subgroups. Different dosages are given to different people.

The results suggested the drug is safe and that higher doses are more effective, particularly in those who have a mild form of the disease.

"It strongly suggested that (disease) severity matters," said Dr. Pierre Tariot, co-director of the Banner Alzheimer's Institute and an organizer of the Colombian trial. "People with less severe symptoms of illness might be more likely to respond."

Safety is key. Bapineuzumab, a drug tested years before, had the potentially dangerous side effect of brain swelling in one in 10 patients.

But crenezumab didn't have such severe side effects. That means test subject could take higher dosages, and those higher dosages are more likely to work.

"One needs to consider but take with a grain of salt," Tariot said of the study's analysis of smaller groups.

Researchers also concluded that the medicine may be more effective when delivered through an IV. So Hugo and Rubiola will travel to Medellin to get their medicine through an IV line, not a syringe. The method of delivery changed, though not the drug itself.

Hugo, Rubiola and their Colombian kindred are pioneers in the first-ever study that aims to cut down Alzheimer's before it starts.

But they won't be the last.

Washington University in St. Louis is coordinating a study of family members in the United States, United Kingdom, Germany and Australia who are at risk for early-onset, familial Alzheimer's disease.

Banner Alzheimer's Institute also has embarked on a second prevention study with the pharmaceutical company Novartis. The second trial aims to recruit more than 1,300 healthy adults ages 60 to 75 who have inherited from both parents a gene known to be a sign of Alzheimer's risk, ApoE4.

Unlike the Colombian trial, the Banner-Novartis study will test two drugs, a vaccine and a second drug designed to inhibit growth of amyloid beta.

Some Alzheimer's researchers are beginning to suggest that the answer may be found in drug combination to halt the memory disease, similar to how doctors used cocktails of multiple drugs to slow the advance of HIV, the virus that causes AIDS.

Even Kenneth Kosik, the neurologist who helped identify the paisa mutation in the 1990s, sees a future of more complex treatments.

“For the first time, I've been able to offer concrete opportunity. I cannot guarantee that it will be successful.” Francisco Lopera, neurologist

For years, pharmaceutical companies have spent hundreds of millions of dollars to develop drugs that attack amyloid beta. Still, there's been no breakthrough, no medical miracle.

"A lot of the ways we currently think about the cause of Alzheimer's disease are a little bit simplistic," said Kosik, now with the University of California-Santa Barbara.

Simplistic, meaning the laser focus on targeting amyloid beta might not be the only answer. There are other potential culprits such as tau, which forms tangles in brains of Alzheimer's patients.

Perhaps the protein is the cause of Alzheimer's, and blocking it effectively enough and early enough will stop the disease. But perhaps amyloid beta is one large piece of a complex puzzle — not the sole cause.

For Lopera and his 30-year journey, he has developed deep ties to the afflicted families. He knows the small towns populated with families have been devastated and torn apart. He's braved guerrilla warfare that once raged in the countryside, all with the idea of advancing this single pursuit — facing down la bobera.

So he appreciates how far the effort has progressed, from identifying the families to pinpointing the genetic mutation to working with some of the world's top minds in Alzheimer's disease research.

"Now, for the first time, I've been able to offer concrete opportunity," Lopera says. "I cannot guarantee that it will be successful."

Lopera is convinced they are on the right path, and much of the scientific community still agrees.

If the drug to treat the paisas is successful, the question becomes how would it attack the more common form of Alzheimer's. The paisa mutation is unique to the Colombian families; the vast majority of sufferers develop symptoms much later in life. A drug that treats one type of case may not treat the others.

A member of a Colombian family afflicted with Alzheimer’s disease undergoes screening for a medical study at Pablo Tobon Uribe Hospital in Medellin.

(Photo: Ken Alltucker/The Republic)

And if the five-year test in Medellin isn't successful, will it mean more than just another failed drug test? Because the study is testing the concept of preventive treatment — stopping amyloid beta buildup before it starts — more questions could emerge if the drug clears these protein deposits but does not slow or halt memory and thinking problems.

Or there may be a middle ground. The study may uncover more important clues about the complex chain of events that lead to disease on the long path to an eventual, successful treatment.

For all the scientific progress they have made, the people of Medellin's hillsides are counting on the very idea that there's a way to escape their destiny. This study may be their first step toward a breakthrough, or they may be left with no more hope than they had generations ago — when they believed la bobera was caused by a witch's curse or touching a certain tree.

Lopera feels deep responsibility for the families that he has tracked for three decades. And those families have become more sophisticated in understanding the disease. They know and understand the scientific reasons for la bobera — the paisa mutation, the amyloid plaque the gradual descent into madness.

But Lopera says occasionally he encounters a family member who is skeptical of the science.

"I know a family member who argues with me, 'Doctor, this is a curse, not a disease," Lopera says.

Lopera does not try to convince his fellow countryman otherwise.

A barrio in Villatina, La Torre, a small community located on the outskirts of Medellin.



(Photo: Ken Alltucker/The Republic)

About this project

Solving the Alzheimer's mystery

The Arizona Republic and two other media organizations were invited to Medellin, Colombia, to observe a potentially groundbreaking medical study involving a large family that carries a rare genetic mutation that guarantees they will develop Alzheimer's disease early in life.

The study is being conducted by the University of Antioquia in Colombia and by Banner Alzheimer's Institute of Phoenix.

Republic reporter Ken Alltucker spent three days in Colombia touring research facilities, interviewing doctors and scientists, and talking with family members who are involved in the study.

Alltucker covers health care as a member of The Republic's watchdog team. He has written about the Affordable Care Act, consumer health, insurance, prescription drugs and hospitals.

How to reach him

ken.alltucker@arizonarepublic.com

Phone: 602-444-8285

Twitter: @kalltucker