Bernie who?

Mayor de Blasio on Sunday appeared to look past New York's pivotal April 19 primary, laying out a stark choice in a hypothetical general election between his choice for the Democratic nomination, Hillary Clinton, and GOP front-runner Donald Trump.

TRANSCRIPT: HILLARY CLINTON MEETS NEWS EDITORIAL BOARD

"One path is filled with division, negativity. That other path is taking that change that President Obama began. Maybe finally we have those clear lines," de Blasio said during a Sunday appearance at St. Luke AME Church in Harlem. "I'm supporting Hillary Rodham Clinton. We haven't had anyone more prepared."

BERNIE SANDERS WINS WYOMING PRIMARY WITH 56% OF VOTE

"The experience is combined with a vision. Hillary Clinton's platform is the most progressive," added de Blasio, who endorsed Clinton's presidential bid in October.

"Show up on Tuesday April 19," he told churchgoers, referring to the state's pivotal primary, when 291 Democratic delegates will be at stake. "Let's give a woman a chance to be a President of the United States. You can change history with your voice."

Clinton leads Sanders in the total delegate count 1,756 to 1,068. To secure the nomination, a candidate needs 2,383 delegates.

During a separate appearance on NBC's "Meet the Press" that aired Sunday, de Blasio plainly said Clinton was "going to win New York."

"I feel that more every day. She has a great operation on the ground, a great wellspring of good will from years representing New York.," he said.

During an appearance Sunday, Mayor de Blasio said that we “haven’t had anyone more prepared” to be President than Hillary Clinton. (Luiz C. Ribeiro/For The New York Daily News)

HILLARY CLINTON, BERNIE SANDERS FIGHT FOR UNION SUPPORT AHEAD OF NEW YORK PRIMARY

Clinton herself laid out her case for being the party's best candidate a day earlier during a meeting with the Daily News' editorial board, a belief she reiterated Sunday during stops at three African-American churches in Queens.

At the churches, Clinton emphasized her achievements and long-standing relationships she and former President Bill Clinton made with the black community during his time in office and during her time as a New York senator.

During her first stop, at stop Greater Allen AME Cathedral in Jamaica, she pushed the importance of creating jobs and spoke warmly of President Obama.

"I don't think President Obama gets the credit he deserves," she told the cheering congregation, listing accomplishments like the Affordable Care Act and improvement in the U.S. economy.

HILLARY CLINTON TELLS DAILY NEWS EDITORIAL BOARD TRUMP IS PAID MORE FOR BIG-BANK SPEECHES

"I want to build on that progress," she said. "I want to take it further."

Meanwhile, Sanders, who has won seven of the last eight Democratic contests, maintained Sunday he wasn't going away without a fight, ripping off a series of licks on his rival during his own slate of appearances in New York and on television.

"She may have the experience to be President of the United States. No one can argue that. But in terms of her judgment, something is clearly lacking," the Vermont senator said on NBC's "Meet the Press."

Hillary Clinton met with The New York Daily News editorial board on Saturday. (Robert Sabo/New York Daily News)

"When you vote for virtually every trade agreement that has cost the workers of this country millions of jobs, when you support and continue to support fracking, despite the crisis that we have in terms of clean water, and essentially, when you have a super PAC that is raising tens of millions of dollars from every special interest out there, including 15 million from Wall Street, the American people do not believe that that is the kind of President that we need to make the changes in America to protect the working families of this country," he added.

GET CLINTON, SANDERS TO ANSWER YOUR QUESTIONS IN NYC DEBATE

Sanders, however, again faced questions over not having yet released his tax returns.

"We've been busy. We are going to get all of our taxes out. Trust me, there is nothing that is going to surprise anybody," he said on NBC.

"We will do the best that we can," added Sanders, who so far, has only released the summary page of his 2014 tax returns.

Later in the day, the Brooklyn native returned to his stomping grounds, rallying his supporters at a chilly event at the Coney Island Boardwalk.

"It is beautiful to be back in a place where I used to be when I was a kid. We used to go swimming right here," Sanders said moments after being introduced by former REM singer Michael Stipe.

But he quickly set his sights on Clinton, bashing his rival for accepting campaign donations from Wall Street.

"When candidates receive money like that they say, 'hey it's not going to impact me' but the question we have to ask is why they make these contributions," he said. "They may be greedy but they're not dumb."