You may not have heard of it, but it’s Spouses Day on Monday, Jan. 26th. It's a day to celebrate and care for the person you married, whether you’ve been together three or 35 years.

Spouses Day isn’t a national holiday; it is similar to Valentine’s Day, without all the consumerism and emphasis on spending money. It’s a day to stop what you're doing and think about the value that your spouse brings to your life, and the best ways for you to show your gratitude and appreciation. Over time, it can be hard to let go of the little arguments you have, or even take time to go on dates or spend time in the bedroom. Remember, a happy marriage has been linked to better physical and mental health in various studies. So you’re investing not only in you and your spouses’ happiness, but your collective health as well. These five tips will assist you in making your Spouses Day — and overall marriage — special.

Be Their Best Friend

While being romantic is important, one of the most important aspects of a solid, long-term marriage is friendship. Friendship lasts after the fires of passion have died down, and helps keep people grounded and standing side by side through stressful situations, life transitions, and even mid-life crises.

In a recent study, researchers examined why people who were married managed to have greater life satisfaction and overall stability than people who were single. They found that friendship was a major factor in making married people happy. “We explore friendship as a mechanism which could help explain a causal relationship between marriage and life satisfaction, and find that wellbeing effects of marriage are about twice as large for those whose spouse is also their best friend,” the authors wrote.

Indeed, marrying your best friend — or focusing on improving your friendship over time — can have a positive impact on both of your lives. Treat your spouse not only as a piece of furniture in the house, but also as your best friend. You’d never lie to your best friend, or mistrust or hurt him or her, so remember that when dealing with your spouse as well.

Do Something Special That Reflects Their Favorite Things

On Spouses Day, take your husband or wife out to one of their favorite restaurants, to see a movie they've been interested in, or perhaps just let him or her watch a favorite TV show all night while you cook dinner. Do some chores to show you're thinking of them, and that you want to make their day a little easier. Or cook them their favorite breakfast in bed.

Go On A Date That Costs Little To No Money

Wining and dining your spouse can be fun, but sometimes it’s even better to do something simple. Take inspiration from some of your first dates, when it was all about getting to know each other without extravagance; when even just a walk in the park was exciting. Let go of the stresses you both experience in daily life and forget the arguments — and little blames — you hold over each other’s heads. Go for a walk, have a picnic (indoors or outdoors, depending on where in the world you live), share a $20 bottle of wine and go somewhere you've never been before to explore a new part of the world, and explore each other.

Cherish Their Value

Fighting with your spouse is normal, but too much fighting can put a strain on the relationship. One of the best ways to avoid this is to make a list of all their good qualities and values that made you fall in love with them in the first place. It’s often easy to overlook these things as time goes on and you begin gathering a checklist of their flaws; but focusing on the positives can always turn things around for the better. Make a list of 10 or more things that highlights your partner’s amazing qualities — from trustworthiness and honesty to sense of humor — and read over that list when you’re angry at them. It will put things in perspective and help you cherish their value every day.

Treat Them Like Your Girlfriend Or Boyfriend, Not A Spouse

Several years into marriage, it’s likely you might start feeling like your spouse is more like your roommate than your lover. You become so comfortable with one another that the “spark” is rarely there the way it was in the beginning of the relationship. While this is natural and not necessarily a bad thing, it’s important to keep some of that original excitement and lightheartedness alive in the relationship. As Jenny Perry wrote for the Huffington Post, it’s possible to keep things alive with a little bit of touching up and focus. “We’ve recreated our relationship, enhanced it, and made it even richer and more fulfilling,” she wrote. “It’s all about our intention and focus.”

And while lovey-dovey and overly romantic acts might seem to only be reserved for the honeymoon period, bringing them back could have a reigniting effect on your relationship. Perry, aiming at women — but not limited to them — wrote: “My tips: Text him both sexy and sweet messages. Own your beauty. There is nothing sexier than a happy, confident woman who can ask for what she wants in the bedroom. Make sex fun for you. Work on yourself. Be his girlfriend. Create your own magic, your love potion is you. Say ‘I love you,’ often.”

Spouses Day doesn't have to be a day of extravagance and spending money. It's the simple things that count and make life worthwhile: good friendships, positive thoughts, little acts of caring, and putting someone else's needs in front of your own.