Buy Photo The Iowa Legislature began passing budget bills, sending the session into the final stretch before adjournment. (Photo: The Register)Buy Photo

A disorganized collage of farms, homes and large-scale manufacturing plants should be the last thing anyone wants. But under a spot zoning proposal headed toward Scott County supervisors that's exactly what landowners might get.

Agricultural land could be rezoned to permit large industrial development if supervisors ratify the plan. It's a knee-jerk response to a failed application that would have sited a $1.3 billion fertilizer plant among the fields in Scott County's unincorporated area.

The county's desire for economic development is laudable. But the creation of industrial islands would undermine the very intent of zoning regulation. Zoning exists purely to protect the neighbors. It's a democratic balancing act, one that acknowledges the actions of one property owner affects the well-being and property values of nearby land owners. Suddenly, those community-wide protections — a shared, coherent vision — is tossed aside for a patchwork of industrial, residential and agricultural uses.

Massive, chemical laden trucks, hauling day and night, could replace the tractors that now traverse Scott County's rural roads. The beating of pivots could be swapped for the grinding and puffing soundtrack of industry. Rich farm ground would be lost under factories and parking lots. Homeowners might just find themselves living in an ad-hoc industrial zone, once individual tracts could be rezoned.

Quality of life has real, albeit intangible value. And spot zoning isn't worth the cost.

Don't take it from us. Courts throughout the country have scuttled spot zoning provisions.

Sure, there would be hearings before an individual parcel could be spot zoned. Notifications would go out to the neighbors. Planners and engineers would describe the new facility in extreme detail. Public comments — for and against — would be added to the record.

But few words have greater sway over an elected official than "jobs." Jobs win campaigns. Jobs bolster the tax base.

Too many communities have doled out millions in taxpayer-funded incentives for some vague promise of jobs. Too many governments have reshaped their entire communities — physically and culturally — for the promise of jobs. And, in too many cases, those jobs came and went in a matter of years. In others, they never even materialized.

There's a place for industry. It remains an important, necessary aspect of the U.S., state and local economy. Davenport officials realized that fact and moved quickly to salvage what they could of Kraft Heinz. And they did it right.

Davenport came to the table with a shovel-ready industrial site. Water and power won't be an issue at the Eastern Iowa Industrial Park. It's tailor-made for an operation such as Kraft Heinz. Scott County officials should be paying attention.

Read or Share this story: http://dmreg.co/1P4wM9l