Dr. Norm Ward, chief medical officer of OneCare Vermont discusses health care reform with the Burlington Free Press, Thursday, in Colchester. KEVIN HURLEY/for the FREE PRESS (Photo: Kevin Hurley)

Hinesburg physician Roger Giroux makes himself available 24 hours a day to his patients, who are largely his neighbors and other residents of the town of 4,400.

His accessibility makes it easy for patients to avoid expensive trips to the emergency room and to call to check they’re taking their medications properly.

The primary care doctor’s actions mimic goals of a federal pilot program that seeks to reduce medical spending and enhance health care quality through monetary incentives, coordinated care and best practices. Yet Giroux chose to opt out of the accountable care organization program because the program is laden with bureaucracy.

“I didn’t see any room for improvement and thus no way of getting money so why do all paperwork and data analysis?” Giroux said. “There was a lot of hassle and no reward. I already am stellar for saving money for the system.”

Giroux is not alone. A product of the Obama administration’s Affordable Care Act, accountable care organizations (ACOs) have helped to avoid millions of dollars in projected spending on Medicaid and Medicare in Vermont through data analysis and coordinating care to achieve more efficiency and better care. But the program’s lack of broad appeal raises questions about ACOs’ viability for reforming the health care system from a fee-for-service model to paying providers for health outcomes.

“The whole idea of measuring quality is in its infancy,” said family physician Norman Ward, who also works as chief medical officer for OneCare Vermont ACO. “It’s easier said than done. It’s often quite expensive to go and get the data from many, many different electronic records around the state to report on the progress of various aspects of care.”

Health care providers have no incentive to participate in the programs unless there are payouts and benefits for patients. Rules for financial incentives from the federal government can be complex and less rewarding for physicians who already are doing a good job of keeping costs low and quality high, Giroux said.

“Physicians in the state of Vermont have been providing excellent high quality care at very reasonable prices and cost to our population for a long time,” Ward said. “When you go to compare Vermont to many other states, our cost and quality are already superior.”

Still, ACOs in Vermont have shown that they can help health care providers improve quality and avoid costs associated with duplication of services, unnecessary tests and visits to the emergency room.

Gov. Peter Shumlin announced Sept. 8 that two Vermont ACOs – OneCare and Community Health Accountable Care – had helped avoid a combined $14.6 million in health care costs in 2014.

About half of that amount was paid out to the state and the ACOs as reward for their efforts.

The Medicare and commercial programs – the latter of which includes providers who serve patients who purchased health insurance on Vermont Health Connect – have yielded no incentive payouts from the federal government but have shown avoidance of costs compared with spending projections.

For instance, OneCare avoided $4 million in Medicare costs compared with spending projections. However, the ACE received no “shared savings” incentive payments from the federal government because the avoided costs were below the target set by Medicare, said Todd Moore, CEO of OneCare.

“The Medicare methodology is extremely flawed,” Moore said.

The Medicare ACO program rewards for improvement rather than for the greatest rate of low cost and high quality, he said. That means an ACO in another part of the country that performs worse than a Vermont ACO could receive an incentive payment from the federal government simply for improving its spending from the previous year.

Burlington family physician Chris Hebert joined Vermont’s first ACO - the Accountable Care Coalition of the Green Mountains in 2012. The ACO closed two years later after it failed to avoid enough costs to qualify for federal incentive payments and investors pulled out.

Hebert said participating in the ACO was time-consuming. On average, Hebert said he spent about four extra hours per work week working on paperwork and reports to the ACO. For his efforts, he received no incentive payouts from the federal government.

Hebert still thinks ACOs have value. While the extra time spent on the ACO took time away from patients, he also saw ways in which the ACO helped improve care. For example, the ACO provided a nurse to follow up with congestive heart failure patients released from the hospital to make sure they were avoiding high-sodium food and received and took medications properly.

“Ultimately, the goal was to avoid having the patient readmitted to the hospital, so you’re saving the system money, and it benefited the patient because the patient is not having to go back to the hospital,” Hebert said.

Another limitation of ACOs is that they serve 10 percent or less of Vermonters. People who receive health insurance through an employer are excluded. But even in their limited form, ACOs could make headway in making Medicare and Medicaid costs more sustainable, Ward said.

“Unless you measure things, you often are surprised about what the outcome might actually be, and so there is some rigor in the idea that although it may be painful at first, that starting to measure outcomes will help practices that may not have as successful outcomes as they might think they do,” Ward said.

No one knows what will happen to ACOs when federal funding expires in 2016. Vermont hopes to combine the state’s three remaining ACOs and incorporate the ACO structure into a Medicare all-payer waiver, said Richard Slusky, director of reform at the Green Mountain Care Board. The state hopes to receive approval of the waiver from the federal government by the end of the fall, Slusky said. If approved, the waiver would allow the state to develop an integrated health care delivery and payment system designed to avoid costs and improve care.

This story was first posted online on Sept. 26, 2015. Contact Paris Achen at 802-660-1874 and pachen@freepressmedia.com. Follow her at www.twitter.com/parisachen and https://www.facebook.com/ColTrends.

Read or Share this story: http://bfpne.ws/1FmiKBL