WASHINGTON — It’s generally believed that wrestling on the edge of a cliff is not a good idea. That’s why The Economist magazine noted last week that the important question in America’s latest fiscal crisis is not who’s to blame but “What the hell are you doing on the edge of a cliff?”

That question could be asked of rookie Republican Congressman Mark Meadows who has been credited with firing the starting pistol on this most recent example of extreme politics.

It wasn’t, of course, just him. Others had their fingers on the trigger, but not many. The overall tale of the tape reveals the astonishing ability of a handful of people, some of whom hold no public office, to lead the world’s largest economy to the brink of what many fear would be economic chaos should the U.S. ultimately fail to pay its debts on time.

On Aug. 21 Meadows sent a letter urging House Speaker John Boehner and House Majority leader Eric Cantor to make the defunding of Obamacare a prerequisite for the continued funding of the U.S. federal government.

Two budget deadlines were fast approaching. By Sept. 30, congress had to renew appropriations to pay for salaries and programs. By Oct. 17, Congress has to renew the Treasury Department’s authority to continue to pay U.S. debts. Meadows thought it was time to play some hardball with the U.S. economy.

At the urging of a prominent conservative lobbying group FreedomWorks, Republicans signed the letter with fellow Tea Party senators Ted Cruz and Rand Paul urging them on. The letter has since become known as the “suicide pact” with reference to the pending destruction of the Republican Party in the likelihood that the ploy would fail and/or the self-implosion of the U.S. economy.

Meadows is a small Florida developer and Sunday school teacher who once owned a restaurant in North Carolina. In 2011 he returned to that state to run in a district whose borders the Republican state government had just redrawn in an act of “redistricting.”

The new borders transformed a competitive district with a significant minority of African Americans and Latinos into a predominantly white suburban and rural district that heavily favoured Republicans.

Unwilling to bet on a sure loser, the incumbent Democrat retired. Last year Meadows, running on a Tea Party platform of Christian values and small government, easily took the seat.

Meadows came to Washington having signed the Tea Party’s 10-point “Contract from America” that includes the demand for the repeal of Obamacare. The contract was the result of a 2010 online request for suggestions for a Tea Party political platform that ultimately all lawmakers would be asked to sign. Texas Tea Party leader and lawyer Ryan Hecker, with the help of FreedomWorks, whose president is Tea Party member Matt Kibbe, created it.

Kibbe and Meadows both went to the conservative George Mason University, whose funders include the billionaire oil magnate and libertarian Koch Brothers. The Kochs, David and Charles, also fund FreedomWorks along with other wealthy conservatives such as Steve Forbes, who owns Forbes magazine.

FreedomWorks’ states that it “recruits, educates, trains and mobilizes millions of volunteer activists to fight for less government, lower taxes, and more freedom.”

It is generally considered among the most effective right-wing grassroots organizers in the country. Atlantic magazine once called it “one of the most influential groups in American politics today.” Repealing Obamacare is a main goal, according to its website.

To justify his daring tactics, Meadows’ five-paragraph letter cited the words of founding father James Madison: “The power over the purse may, in fact, be regarded as the most complete and effectual weapon . . . for obtaining a redress of every grievance.”

Meadow’s letter concluded, “We look forward to collaborating to defund one of the largest grievances in our time and to restore patient-centered healthcare in America.”

The shutdown has lasted 16 days and the 80 Tea Party Republicans who signed the letter are insistent that Boehner remain firm. The more serious issue of a national default comes to a head Thursday. Whatever the repercussions, it’s unlikely the gang of 80 will be affected. Like Meadows, they hold safe seats whose boundaries have been designed to capture strong Republican majorities and assure their re-election.

wmarsden@postmedia.com