Ben Carson has been very vocal against numerous medically controversial national issues since announcing his bid for the presidency in May.

Born in Detroit, Ben Carson is one of the most celebrated neurosurgeons in the world, with some of his main achievements, including being the first surgeon to successfully carry out a separation of twins conjoined at the head. Among Ben Carson’s accolades is the Presidential Medal of Freedom award, which he was given in 2008 by President George W. Bush. It is the highest honor an American civilian can be awarded.

That said, Ben Carson has attacked numerous programs, including Obamacare. He has also vehemently campaigned against the Planned Parenthood organization following the release of the first anti-Planned Parenthood videos by the Center for Medical Progress, an anti-abortion group. The videos implied that Planned Parenthood’s pro-abortion agenda was part of a scheme to exterminate America’s black population.

Ben Carson has even launched a petition against it on his site in consequence. Here is an excerpt.

“Congress must act NOW! Please sign my petition to Congress demanding that they stop all public funds to Planned Parenthood. I spent my whole life caring for children. What I see in this video is barbaric. Congress must ACT! We the undersigned insist that our tax dollars not be used in any way with Planned Parenthood in light of their Baby Organ Harvesting Programs. Please act immediately to stop the transfer of federal dollars to Planned Parenthood.”

Recently, Ben Carson sparked controversy with his comments on the American welfare system. This was during an interview on The View. He criticized the expansion of the system. Asked if the welfare system was racist by football player and actor Terry Crews, Ben Carson offered the following answer.

“When you rob someone of their incentive to go out there and improve themselves, you are not doing them any favors.”

According to according to Fox News, his argument was that intellectual empowerment was the way forward. He also added the following.

“After the great progress that we made after the struggles of the Civil Rights Movement, I think perhaps the worst thing that happened is a lot of, some well-meaning and some not so well-meaning folks came along and started patronizing these individuals, and saying, ‘you can’t really do anything and we’ll take care of you.”

Whoopi Goldberg, who was at the show, was skeptical about his view, saying most people are not on welfare by choice. The following was her response, according to Townhall.

“As a former welfare mother, very few people want to be on welfare. Very few want to walk with their kids and take food stamps. Most people would rather work. I don’t feel bad about being a welfare mother because I contribute as an American – that’s what we do. And because the welfare system is so bizarre, you can’t work, they don’t allow you to work because they take the money from you. So if we fix the system so that it doesn’t hurt the people, maybe it’ll get better.”

[Photo by Olivier Douliery/Getty Images]