Researchers at Georgetown University's Health Policy Institute Narrow networks were a popular health insurance option on the exchanges in the first enrollment period, with half of all plans for individuals offering limited groups of lower-cost providers, and new research shows consumers generally aren't griping about the products.Researchers at Georgetown University's Health Policy Institute studied narrow-network plans sold on the individual-market exchanges last year in six states: Colorado, Maryland, New York, Oregon, Rhode Island and Virginia. Health insurers have said the healthcare reform law is spurring them to offer more narrow networks , which they say save them money and lead to lower monthly premiums in exchange for a smaller number of in-network hospitals and physicians.





“Insurance companies calculated that consumers would be willing to trade greater provider access for lower premiums, and to a large extent, our research confirms that,” said Sabrina Corlette, the report's lead author, in a statement.



However, confusion still existed. Under the



Inadequate or misleading information on narrow networks is not uncommon. Indeed, After speaking with several state officials and insurers that offer exchange plans, researchers found that few consumer complaints have emerged to date about the networks' offerings.“Insurance companies calculated that consumers would be willing to trade greater provider access for lower premiums, and to a large extent, our research confirms that,” said Sabrina Corlette, the report's lead author, in a statement.However, confusion still existed. Under the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act , insurers that sell plans on the marketplaces must maintain an up-to-date directory that shows all in-network hospitals and doctors within a given network. Many consumers and providers said directories were inaccurate, obsolete or not consumer-friendly. But part of the problem was that half of the states studied had lax oversight, researchers said.Inadequate or misleading information on narrow networks is not uncommon. Indeed, some insurers in California face lawsuits over the issue.