Rising insurance costs may mean Obamacare plays a sizable role in the midterm elections. An Obamacare October surprise?

Obamacare premiums aren’t rising everywhere. They just have a way of finding the states with the biggest Senate races. And that could be very bad timing for Democrats in two of the party’s key contests.

Double-digit rate hikes for individual health insurance plans have become an issue in the Louisiana and Iowa Senate races over the past week, where the Republican candidates are hammering their Democratic opponents for the steep premium increases on the way next year for some customers under the Affordable Care Act.

Story Continued Below

In Louisiana, Rep. Bill Cassidy called the double-digit increases for some insurers — including Blue Cross Blue Shield of Louisiana — “another hurdle for families and businesses already struggling under the demands of Obamacare” and blamed Democrats for “false promises” that premiums would go down. In Iowa, Senate candidate Joni Ernst used the sharp rate increases for two insurers to blast the Democratic candidate, Rep. Bruce Braley, for supporting the law, charging that “thousands of Iowans are paying for it.”

( Also on POLITICO: New strategy: Underselling Obamacare for Year 2)

The attacks could easily give the impression that the health care law is causing premiums to go through the roof around the country. They’re not. In reality, in most states, premiums for coverage in the Obamacare health insurance exchanges for 2015 are rising at about the normal rate for health insurance throughout the country. In some places, they’re even going down.

But there are a few states that are facing more extreme premium increases from some insurers — and Louisiana and Iowa are two of them. Alaska, where Democratic Sen. Mark Begich is struggling to win a second term, is another one.

Even there, it’s not all insurers that are raising rates that much. Louisiana, for example, is only announcing rates for the insurers that are raising rates by 10 percent or more, so the picture that’s being made public is incomplete.

( Also on POLITICO Magazine: Obamacare's surprises)

But in an election year, a few states — and a few insurers — are all you need, particularly when they may serve to rekindle passions about a law that was already an Election Day concern for Democrats.

“In general, the premium increases have been pretty modest. But there are exceptions, and the exceptions happen to be in states with competitive races,” said Larry Levitt of the Kaiser Family Foundation, who has studied the premium trends around the country.

Republican strategists have been waiting for the big premium increases to show up as an Obamacare “October surprise.” They’ve been hearing for months through their GOP policy expert contacts that the rate hikes were a possibility, and that because of the timing of the next enrollment season — it starts on Nov. 15 — the increases would become final around now.

( Also on POLITICO: New messaging hurdles ahead for Obamacare)

Democrats aren’t too concerned. It’s not as if the issue is dominating the airwaves, after all. With the Louisiana and Iowa Republican Senate candidates, it’s been press statements and Twitter for now — although a conservative group did run a TV ad in Alaska that hit Begich over the increases there.

Obama administration officials point out that even in the states with the biggest hikes, most customers won’t see them. In Iowa, for example, premiums for the second-lowest-cost “silver” health insurance plans — the kind most Obamacare customers buy — will go down by an average of 7 percent in Des Moines.

They also note that the typical premiums for people who get Obamacare subsidies are pretty low to begin with. In Louisiana, for example, the average monthly premium was $68 this year for a “silver” plan.

But why would the biggest rate hikes single out some of the hottest Senate races in the first place? There’s no conspiracy — it’s just the way the electoral math worked out. The states with the biggest increases are usually the ones where the political leaders have resisted the Affordable Care Act and haven’t done well at enrollment. And some of those states just happen to have the most competitive Senate races.

( Full coverage of health care policy)

A study by PwC’s Health Research Institute, which researched premium data in 38 states and the District of Columbia, found that the average increase across states was just 6 percent. Only eight states had double-digit increases — but those states included Louisiana and Iowa, as well as Kansas, where Republican Sen. Pat Roberts is trying to head off a serious challenge from independent Greg Orman.

Follow @politico