WASHINGTON, D.C. – U.S. Sen. Rob Portman said today that he doesn't know much about P.G. Sittenfeld, the Cincinnati Democrat who just announced he is running against Portman in 2016.

Portman's purported ignorance is highly doubtful, but never mind. Other Republicans are already keeping book on Sittenfeld, a 30-year-old Cincinnati City Council member with national aspirations.

Welcome to the big leagues, Mr. Sittenfeld. And keep smiling. A Republican super PAC that operates as an opposition research outfit, gathering potentially damaging or embarrassing statements and video, has already assembled a bit of video and audio of Sittenfeld and sent out the links this afternoon.

Both the video and the audio clip are "from news sources and links that have been on social media for a while," said Jeff Bechdel, spokesman for the super PAC, called America Rising.

Neither the video nor the audio clip shows Sittenfeld in compromising or contradictory positions, although that judgment is best left to voters. The video clip shows Sittenfeld speaking in admiration of an "Occupy" rally in Cincinnati 2011.

"I'm very sympathetic to the sentiment that I think is at the core of that movement, and is obviously a national frustration with a seeming sort of disparity where the rich are getting richer and a lot of everybody else is left hurting," Sittenfeld said. He was speaking at a forum for Cincinnati City Council candidates. "I think they should probably be able to stay where they are and exercise their right to their opinion."

The audio clip is from a radio show called Talk of Ohio, in which Sittenfeld interviewed Rep. Debbie Wasserman Schultz, chair of the Democratic National Committee. Sittenfeld spoke favorably of the Affordable Care Act, saying that Republicans are "scared that people are going to like it as much as they know they are."

What's wrong with that? America Rising, the super PAC, says Sittenfeld's view is contrary to the opinions of voters in the state and the nation.

There is no current Ohio polling on the Affordable Care Act, also known as Obamacare. But an average of national polling, tracked by the Real Clear Politics website, shows opposition outweighing support by 11.6 percentage points.

"We essentially are highlighting positions he has taken in the past that seem out of step with the values of the state of Ohio and with the voters at large," Bechdel said.

America Rising is independent of the Republican Party but conducts opposition research and publicity of the sort that any political affiliate could love. It did this in competitive 2014 U.S. Senate races and says it will do so in 2016.

As for using its own video crews to follow Sittenfeld, who is making his first statewide run, Bechdel said the group does have its own set of trackers, but "I'm not sure we're at a place in this cycle where we would do that."

Not yet, at least.

America Rising is not just a group of GOP hobbyists. Slate, the online magazine, last year called it a "Republican-aligned opposition research factory," launched by Mitt Romney's 2012 campaign manager. Its job, Slate reported, was to do "nothing but post inappropriate Democrat utterances and act as a clearinghouse for information on Democrats."

For Sittenfeld, that's not all bad. Even though he's a newcomer to statewide politics and must prove himself in parts of the state that have never heard his name, it shows the Republicans are taking him seriously.

"The fact that Rob Portman's allies in Washington are attacking P.G. for understanding that there is a serious and growing income gap between the wealthiest 1 percent and the middle class shows just how out of touch Portman is with Ohio values," said Tim Burke, chairman of the Hamilton County Democratic Party.

Brad Woodhouse, of American Bridge, a group that supports Democrats with similar video and research, called the "hit" from America Rising "the weakest sauce I've ever seen."

"It's the same playbook Republicans ran against Obama in Ohio - and elsewhere - in 2012 and look how that worked out for them," Woodhouse said. Citing Portman's work in the Bush White House, where the senator was budget director and headed the trade office, and his membership in the recent, deeply unpopular session of Congress, Woodhouse said, "Portman is vulnerable - and this lame hit shows Republicans know it."