As Chicago's Pride Parade came to a close Sunday afternoon, Chicago's Archbishop Blase Cupich urged Roman Catholics to "extend support to all families, no matter their circumstances, recognizing that we are all relatives, journeying through life under the careful watch of a loving God."

Those words, issued in a statement from Rome where he will receive the symbol of his office as Chicago's archbishop on Monday, were the first reaction from Cupich since the Supreme Court ruled in favor of same-sex marriage last week. The rejoinder struck a remarkably different tone than that of some of his brother bishops.

In a statement Friday, Archbishop Joseph Kurtz of Louisville, Ky., president of the U.S. Conference of Catholic Bishops, called the Supreme Court ruling wrong, adding that "it is profoundly immoral and unjust for the government to declare that two people of the same sex can constitute a marriage."

Cupich immediately pointed out that the Supreme Court had redefined civil marriage, which has no bearing on the Catholic sacrament of matrimony, he said.

"The rapid social changes signaled by the Court ruling call us to mature and serene reflections as we move forward together," he said in the statement. "In that process, the Catholic Church will stand ready to offer a wisdom rooted in faith and a wide range of human experience."

He also cautioned against discrimination, pointing to the catechism of the Catholic Church as a guide for showing respect and compassion toward the LGBT community.

"This respect must be real, not rhetorical, and ever reflective of the Church's commitment to accompanying all people," he said.

Chicago's 46th annual Pride Parade Spectators react to Chicago's 46th annual Pride Parade and the U.S. Supreme Court's ruling to uphold gay marriage on June 28, 2015. (Armando L. Sanchez/Chicago Tribune) Spectators react to Chicago's 46th annual Pride Parade and the U.S. Supreme Court's ruling to uphold gay marriage on June 28, 2015. (Armando L. Sanchez/Chicago Tribune) See more videos

Cupich also commended the court for preserving the Affordable Care Act, despite certain provisions that, according to some, violate religious freedom.

"We have issues with provisions of that legislation and will continue to advocate to preserve our religious freedom," he said. "However, we understand that for millions of individuals and families, most of them the working poor, this decision preserves access to health care and the promise it offers of a healthier, longer life."

Cupich is one of 46 bishops in Rome this weekend to receive their palliums, symbols of their offices as bishops. He returns to the U.S. later this week.

mbrachear@tribpub.com

Twitter @TribSeeker