Mike Lucas for Dow Jones

From this morning’s LBO Wire: ParkerGale, a small tech focused private equity firm known partly for the private equity podcast hosted by two of its partners, Devin Mathews and Jim Milbery, has backed its second deal with an investment in OnePlus Corp., Lillian Rizzo reports for this morning’s LBO Wire.

OnePlus makes waste compactor automated monitoring systems used by commercial property owners, retailers and government agencies.

More stories available to LBO Wire subscribers: Chicago Pacific Founders has collected $184 million so far for its debut health-care fund…Pouchine Cook Capital Management and Yukon Partners have teamed up with shareholders of dermatology practice Walnut Creek Skin and Laser, to form Golden State Dermatology…and Marlin Equity Partners has bought LiveOps Cloud Platform LLC, a provider of cloud-based contact center software and outsourced customer services.

(LBO Wire is a daily newsletter with comprehensive analysis of all the investments, deals, fundraisings and personnel moves involving private equity firms. For a two-week trial, visit http://on.wsj.com/DJPEVCNews, scroll to the bottom and click “try for free.”)

Elsewhere on the Web:

Brazilian billionaire André Esteves has given up his controlling stake in troubled investment bank BTG Pactual, Rogerio Jelmayer and Luciana Magalhaes report for the Wall Street Journal, citing a regulatory filing. The news follows an earlier report that BTG had sold its remaining 12% stake in the local hospital operator Rede D’Or São Luiz for 2.38 billion reais ($616 million) to Singapore’s sovereign-wealth fund GIC Pte. Ltd. Earlier this year the bank sold a separate stake in Rede D’Or to The Carlyle Group, one of the earliest sales of a Brazilian hospital operator to a private equity investor, following regulation that opened up the nation’s hospital sector to foreign investment.

Also in the Journal, federal securities regulators are intensifying a broad investigation into trading of pre-IPO shares, zeroing in on companies that help technology-firm employees and others resell their shares, Susan Pulliam and Telis Demos report.

Outdoor sporting goods’ retailer Cabela’s said it has brought on Guggenheim Securities LLC to explore strategic alternatives after coming under pressure from activist investment firm Elliott Management Corp, Chelsea Delaney reports for the Journal.

CVC Capital Partners said it has purchased a stake in motoring company the RAC from Carlyle Group in what is the first deal from CVC’s longer life fund, Becky Pritchard reports for sister publication Private Equity News (subscription required).

Private equity firms KKR, Thoma Bravo and Vista Equity Partners are vying for some $4 billion worth of assets from Dell Inc. as the computer giant moves forward with its plans to acquire EMC, Reuters reports this morning. The firms are eyeing Dell’s Quest Software, which helps with information technology management, as well as e-mail encryption and data security unit SonicWall, according to Reuters.

Write to Laura Kreutzer at laura.kreutzer@wsj.com