Daniel Cox and Meghan Larson have launched Adistry, one of the first advertising agencies for the cannabis industry. ( Paul Aiken / Daily Camera )

Meghan Larson and Daniel Cox of Longmont looked at the growing cannabis industry in Colorado and realized it needed something.

An advertising agency.

This year the two entrepreneurs launched Adistry, billed as a full service advertising solution for the cannabis industry. The duo provides ad design and campaign management for companies looking to promote their cannabis and cannabis-related products.

"We're in almost every state where it's legal, depending on what the product is and whether the state will allow it," said CEO Meghan Larson from their small Boulder office. "Washington state is really big, and we have clients in Washington D.C., quite a few here in Colorado, California, a lot of states."

Recreational marijuana use is now legal in Colorado, Washington, Oregon, Alaska and the District of Columbia. It has been legalized for medicinal use in 23 states and the District of Columbia, and Adistry handles both recreational and medicinal advertising.

But unlike conventional advertising, say for a car or a jar of peanut butter, the world of cannabis can be difficult.

"Advertising is a challenge," said Patrick Rea, CEO and co-founder of CanopyBoulder, a mentorship-driven business accelerator for companies developing ancillary products and services for the legal cannabis industry.

"Facebook and Google don't allow the advertising of marijuana, they don't take the ads," he said. "And advertising is a critical component for any business."

Advertisement

Local clients say Adistry is helping fill a gap in the fledgling industry.

"Adistry is a great option for us in the cannabis space," said Sam Bradford of Agency420 in Denver. "It's is doing a great job in being innovative, offering elements like video, product listing ads and regular display."

Larson and Cox went through the CanopyBoulder program in the spring, which is similar to the Techstars program for entrepreneurs except the focus is cannabis.

"There have been some up and downs. We got into the CanopyBoulder program. Accelerator is an understatement," Daniel Cox said when discussing the program. "We were flooded with people from the industry, mentors, it was very overwhelming. But it helped us build our name in the industry."

Since then they have built a network of online publishers who accept cannabis advertising and as part of their work they bring the two together - publisher and advertiser.

Videos ads on the Adistry network use a CPCV (cost per completed view) pricing model, and range between $0.06 - $0.08 CPCV. Conventional banner ads on their network use a CPC (cost per click) pricing model and range from $0.60 - $0.75 CPC.

At present they have more than 60 clients purchasing advertising.

The pair isn't looking at print advertising as an offering.

"There is a lot of competition in print right now," Cox said. "There are a lot of magazines and newspapers offering it. We may look at it again in the future, but for the time being we're going to stick with digital because that's what we do best."

Conventional, existing ad agencies have been slow to move into the cannabis arena, however experts believe they will and that there will be an increase in firms like Adistry, said Harsha Gangadharbatla, chair of the Advertising, PR & Media Design department at the University of Colorado at Boulder.

"To expand, capitalism is amoral, so as and when opportunities arise and are perceived as such, I would expect businesses to crop up in and around the marijuana industry," Gangadharbatla said.

"The key though is the federal law and legality, which is probably why we haven't seen conventional agencies creating cannabis departments. If and when it becomes federally legal, we can expect to see a lot of similarities with the course tobacco advertising has taken in history. Then, regulation of these messages/ads becomes key," he said.

The cannabis industry sales of $2.66 billion in the U.S. in 2014, up 74 percent from $1.53 billion the year before, according to the ArcView Group, a cannabis industry investment network in Oakland, CA. It's the fastest-growing industry in the United States, according to ArcView.

"This industry is growing so fast," Adistry's Cox said. "Since 2014 it's been like a gold rush in cannabis around Colorado."

Despite the speed of the industry, there aren't many ad agencies focusing on cannabis - yet.

CanopyBoulder's Rea said that Adistry's only real competitor is California-based MANTIS, which describes itself as the largest cannabis-friendly ad network. They launched a year before Adistry.

"Not many businesses do this," Rea said.

"The industry will never be this small again," Rea added. "Adistry is a very good model."

Adistry has run lean since its founding said CEO Larson, avoiding investments by building out their website and technology on their own. However next year they will hit the investment circuit.

"What we need now are sales people, I need more of me" Larson said.

Vince Winkel: 303-684-5291, winkelv@times-call.com or twitter.com/vincewinkel