An ideal offering for employers in labor-intensive industries where staffing is mission critical to operations, the service includes 24/7 telephone and/or video access to teams of healthcare professio “With primeFORCE Healthline, help is just a call away, round the clock, from home, easing fears of lost pay and postponed care. Medications and treatments can start faster, reducing trips to the doctor and call-offs."

Prime Care Technologies, Inc., the nation’s leader in technology-powered business solutions for providers of long-term/post-acute care (LTPAC), today announced the launch of Healthline, the latest in the fast-growing primeFORCE portfolio of solutions and services.

An ideal offering for employers in labor-intensive industries where staffing is mission critical to operations, the service includes 24/7 telephone and/or video access to teams of healthcare professionals, without per-call consult fees. Calls are answered in an average of 16 minutes and can include getting a prescription, when appropriate, from a physician for a common ailment. Other benefits include advice from a nurse practitioner on how to ease pain, help from a billing expert with negotiating discounts to lower out-of-pocket costs, a referral from a vision professional on the right specialist, assistance from a health navigation expert on where to get an inexpensive MRI, and much more.

“Employees constantly face tough choices, like calling off of work to take sick kids to the doctor, spending hours in crowded urgent care centers, and absorbing high fees towards high deductibles,” explained Joe Stone, Executive Vice President for primeFORCE. “With primeFORCE Healthline, help is just a call away, round the clock, from home, easing fears of lost pay and postponed care. Medications and treatments can start faster, reducing trips to the doctor and call-offs,” explained Stone.

The benefits to employers are equally significant. On average, Americans visit a physician, hospital outpatient, or emergency department four times per year, at a cost of $104 per office visit and $1,318 per ER trip. “If employers can eliminate just of one of each per employee per year the savings on claims alone add up quickly,” said Stone. With primeFORCE Healthline, employers experience an average of 3.6X annual ROI, resulting from reduced call-offs, higher productivity, lower turnover, and lower expenses on claims. “Healthline is a pressure relief valve for busy families, and welcome relief for employers looking for creative ways to keep talent. Everyone wins,” summarized Stone.

About Prime Care Technologies, Inc.

Headquartered in Duluth, GA.; and with offices in Eustis, FL; and Brookfield, WI; Prime Care Technologies, Inc. is the nation’s leading provider of technology-powered business solutions for providers of long-term/post-acute care. Clients rely on these technologies and experts to optimize financial performance for procurement, claims, workforce, cloud-IT, connectivity, business intelligence, and more. Having the right information, to make the right decisions, right now—results in tens of thousands of dollars in dividends per location per year. For more information, visit http://www.PrimeCareTech.com.

primeFORCE Healthline is NOT insurance. The plan is not insurance coverage and does not meet the minimum creditable coverage requirements under the Affordable Care Act or Massachusetts M.G.L. c. 111M and 956 CMR 5.00. This discount card program contains a 30 day cancellation period. Discount Medical Plan Organization: New Benefits, Ltd., Attn: Compliance Department, PO Box 671309, Dallas, TX 75367-1309, 800-800-7616. Website to obtain participating providers: MyMemberPortal.com. Not available to WA, VT, KS, UT & FL residents. Telehealth operates subject to state regulation and may not be available in certain states. Consults are not available outside of the U.S.

# # #