Topics: From the Wires, Entertainment News, News

SEATTLE (AP) — Because of what the Seattle Seahawks formula for offensive success has been in the past, Russell Wilson and Doug Baldwin would be considered unlikely candidates to find their names in the NFL record book for passing and receiving proficiency.

And yet, the marks Baldwin and Wilson set on Sunday in Seattle’s 30-13 win over Cleveland overshadowed the Seahawks clinching a playoff berth for the fourth straight season and fifth time in six years under Pete Carroll.

Unlikely? Yes. Impressive? Especially so when compared to the names Baldwin and Wilson joined and surpassed with their performances.

“When I retire then maybe we’ll look back on it and see what happens, but right now I’m just focused on this season,” Baldwin said. “Focused on being the best I can and serve my team the best that I can.”

Wilson was 21 of 30 for 249 yards and three touchdowns, two of them going to Baldwin. Wilson’s other TD pass was to Tyler Lockett from 27 yards on the first play of the fourth quarter as Seattle won its fifth straight.

Wilson became the first quarterback to throw for three or more touchdowns and no interceptions in five straight games. Tom Brady, Peyton Manning, Dan Marino, Aaron Rodgers and Steve Young all had five straight games with three or more TD passes, but Wilson is the only one to do it without throwing an interception.

Right next to Wilson’s feat was what Baldwin accomplished. Baldwin joined Jerry Rice as the only wide receivers in NFL history with 10 TDs over a four-game span in a single season. Rice had 10 TD catches from a combo of Joe Montana and Steve Young during the 1987 season. Baldwin has grabbed all 10 from Wilson, and he became the third wide receiver since 1960 with four straight games with multiple TD catches, joining Calvin Johnson in 2011 and Cris Carter in 1995.

Johnny Manziel started with a 15-play touchdown drive, but he and the rest of the Browns faded from there. Cleveland twice settled for field goals after driving inside the Seattle 20, and Manziel was intercepted by Marcus Burley late in the fourth quarter having to force throws trying to rally.

Manziel was 19 of 32 for 161 yards and a 7-yard TD pass to Gary Barnidge.

“I think we had plenty of opportunities to make the game closer than it was,” Manziel said.