File Photo/WLFI

LAFAYETTE, Ind. (WLFI) — Trinity Life Ministry is a faith-based operation in Lafayette and for the past 20 years, it has been a helping hand in the community.

Just within the past decade, the ministry has focused on helping men struggling with addictions through their life-recovery program.

“Ripple effects of addiction affect every member of the family and every member of the household, so if we can get to the men first we have a much better success rate in seeing that family change,” said Trinity Life Ministry Executive Director Phil Gabriel.

Trinity hosts a 21-week residence program that helps the men overcome addiction.

Through the course of the program, the men are housed at a residence in Crawfordsville.

Once the program is completed, the men participate in a graduation ceremony.

“We’ve probably helped over 1,000 men get back to their families and become contributors to their community and to their families,” said Gabriel

Funding for the program comes from a variety of sources including churches, organizations and two thrift shops Trinity operates.

The thrift shops are located in Lafayette and Crawfordsville. They generate 25 percent of the funding for the program.

Recently, the Purdue Navy ROTC decided to give a hand as well.

“We had the idea of a clothing drive because it would be a good way to give back to the community,” said Purdue Navy ROTC member Ryan Barry.

Trinity Life Ministry Director of Community Partnerships and Ministries Joe Radzikowski said, “To get a phone call from Purdue and the Navy ROTC just out of the blue is really special.”

The clothing drive, known as the White Out, collected general clothing from the community for the men in the program.

Over the course of the four weeks clothing was collected, four large boxes were filled.

Along with donations from the community, the Navy ROTC purchased new white T-shirts and socks.

“Purdue, it’s a second home for most of us for about four years and while we’re here we want to make sure we leave a good foot print on there,” said Barry. “It’s all about giving back and serving and doing what we can to help out.”

It costs around $8,500 to put each man through the 21-week program.

For more information, you can visit their website.

Share this: Email

Print

Twitter

Facebook

Google

More

Pinterest

Like this: Like Loading...