By Tim Nesbitt

If what insurers call "covered lives" were the measure of success for the Affordable Care Act (ACA), Oregon would be vying for national honors in the health care playoffs.

Despite the disastrous launch of our health insurance exchange in 2013, we have managed to reduce our uninsured population by a greater proportion than any other state in the country. We trail only one other state (West Virginia) in the nominal reduction of our uninsured rate, and we are now in the top five (after Massachusetts, Rhode Island, the District of Columbia and Hawaii) for the percentage of our population with health coverage (93.6 percent). Go Oregon.

But it's not enough to put covered lives on the scoreboard when it comes to health care. The larger purpose of the ACA is to make and keep people healthy and control the cost of doing so. This is why the state-by-state coverage rankings don't tell the whole story and why real progress can be hard to discern. But early scouting reports suggest that Oregon has some promising prospects for game-changing reforms to our health care system.

One such prospect can be found in Oregon's largest health care group, the Oregon Health Plan, and its 16 coordinated care organizations (CCOs) that are managing care for 1.1 million Oregonians. This is the Medicaid market, in which the state negotiates rates with each of the CCOs on a per capita basis, passing through an average of roughly $450 a month from the federal government for each person enrolled. With those payments in hand, CCOs assume the responsibility of providing the full range of medical, dental and mental health care for their enrollees.

Oregon's CCOs served as the vehicle for former Gov. John Kitzhaber's deal with the feds, by which the state received an advance on future cost savings by committing to hold Medicaid cost increases to no more than 3.4 percent per year. That commitment looked to some like a Hail Mary pass for a governor eager to rebalance a recession-racked state budget in 2011. But the CCOs came through and have even managed to accumulate surpluses by keeping costs below the limit. As a result, the Oregon Health Authority recently called for a replay and proposed to take money back from some of the better-funded CCOs.

The CCOs' success in controlling costs appears to have come from both expected and unexpected sources. It was expected that coordinating and better managing care would prove to be more cost-effective, and it has. But the unexpected enrollment of a younger, healthier population helped as well. The ACA expanded eligibility for Medicaid coverage, which opened the door to more low-income adults. And, unlike other states, Oregon took full advantage of that opening, which is why one of every three Oregonians under the age of 65 is now in the CCOs.

But the greatest impact of the CCOs may yet come from how they have redefined the playing field for health care. We now have large and relatively stable populations served by organizations that will, over time, reap the benefits of getting and keeping their people healthy. This was not the case in smaller, fragmented groups, such as those sponsored by employers. Thus, we can expect the CCOs to pay more attention to environmental factors and lifestyle behaviors that are important determinants of health in local communities. For this reason, I recently advised an activist trying to raise the age for purchasing e-cigarettes to work with the CCOs – they will have every incentive to support legislation that can make their populations healthier over time.

We're already seeing CCOs take a more expansive role in promoting the health of their communities, most notably in Eastern Oregon, where the concentration of Medicaid eligibles is especially high. In one example, the Eastern Oregon CCO is paying for mental health specialists and social service "navigators" in K-12 schools in Umatilla County. Note to state administrators and legislators who are wrangling over how to deal with surpluses in CCO budgets: Ask the CCOs to do more to keep kids healthy in their regions' schools.

Large organizations like the CCOs can make big contributions to transformational change. But so can smaller, more nimble innovators like Zoom+, which is entering the insurance and small group market in Oregon for the first time this year. I'll provide a scouting report on this other new health care reform prospect in a future column.

Tim Nesbitt writes on public affairs, has served as an adviser to Governors Ted Kulongoski and John Kitzhaber, and is past president of the Oregon AFL-CIO. He writes every other week for oregonlive.com and The Oregonian. He can be reached at nesbitt.columns@gmail.com.