IU Maurer School of Law establishes scholarship and mentoring program with Vassar College

Vassar alumna to present lecture on Hobby Lobby decision in conjunction with admissions workshop

Oct. 9, 2014

FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE

BLOOMINGTON, Ind. -- The Indiana University Maurer School of Law has entered into a memorandum of understanding with Vassar College establishing a scholarship and mentoring program for students interested in pursuing legal education.

Each year the Vassar Law Scholars program will offer at least two graduates admitted to the Maurer School of Law scholarships amounting to approximately 50 percent of annual tuition, along with access to a formal mentoring program. The scholarship will reduce the cost of law school tuition over three years by $45,000 to $75,000, depending on the student’s residency and other factors.

“Vassar is an exceptional institution and a pioneer for liberal arts education in the United States,” said Austen L. Parrish, dean of the law school and James H. Rudy Professor of Law. “Its students are among some of the most talented in the nation, and the great majority of them plan to pursue advanced study. The long-held values cultivated in Vassar graduates -- a determination to excel, a willingness to experiment and a commitment to leadership -- well equips them for success in law school. The nation’s most talented have long come to Bloomington to study law, and we’re excited to welcome more Vassar students to our ranks through this program.”

“Vassar is excited to be a part of this endeavor,” said Stacy Bingham, assistant dean of studies and director of the career development office at the college. “We fully support our students in their post-graduation goals, and a strong liberal arts education is excellent preparation for a career in law.”

Each year, Vassar will nominate at least two students or alumni for admission to the Maurer School of Law, provided the applicants meet the law school’s admission criteria. Other indications of future success, such as prior academic performance, letters of recommendation, past professional and other experience, and desire to study at the law school, also will be considered. Applications will be accepted beginning with the law school’s 2015 entering class.

The IU Maurer School of Law will hold a workshop on law school applications, including information about the Vassar Law Scholars program, at 5:15 p.m. Wednesday, Oct. 15, in Rocky 200. Before the workshop, at 4 p.m., the law school’s executive associate dean for academic affairs and C. Ben Dutton Professor of Law Donna Nagy, Vassar ’86, will deliver a talk on the Supreme Court’s recent decision that corporations can choose not to comply with regulations issued under the Affordable Care Act. The title of her lecture, which is free and open to the public, is “What the Hobby Lobby Court Did and Didn’t Decide.”

Founded in 1861, Vassar College is a highly selective, residential, co-educational liberal arts college. Consistently ranked among the top liberal arts colleges in the country, Vassar is renowned for pioneering achievements in education, for its long history of curricular innovation, and for the beauty of its campus.

As one of oldest law schools in the country and one of the nation’s top public law schools, the IU Maurer School of Law has a history of developing deep relationships with other prestigious institutions in higher education, both in the United States and abroad. The Vassar program is the eighth program the Maurer School of Law has established this year with undergraduate institutions. As part of an initiative to recruit the best and brightest in Indiana, the law school has partnered with Rose-Hulman Institute of Technology in Terre Haute, Ind., and Wabash College in Crawfordsville, Ind. The law school’s other scholarship programs are with Georgia Institute of Technology, Grinnell College, Knox College, Georgia Institute of Technology and Princeton University.