"So I think the president saying you could stay with it and not being honest that a lot of these policies were going to get cancelled was grossly misleading to the American public and is causing added stress and added strife as we go through a really difficult time with health care."

"I think the president was grossly misleading to the American public. I know right away as a veterinarian, I have my own business, that my policies got cancelled even before the Affordable Care Act. I know that I would change policies on a regular basis, trying to find the best deal for myself and my employees. But a lot of Americans, a lot of Oregonians, have stayed with the same policy for a number of years and are shocked that their policy got cancelled.

"I think next year at the election time, people are going to want to know, was I able to sign up? And what is the shape of the benefit package I'm going to get and how much is it going to cost me, at the end of the day? I think this will, the sign-up period and problems and the horrendous problems that are going on right now will be way in the past.

The Weekly Standard http://assets.weeklystandard.com.s3.amazonaws.com/tws15/images/logo-large.png

The Weekly Standard

2013

Washington, DC

Politics

http://www.weeklystandard.com/dem.-rep.-i-think-the-president-was-grossly-misleading-to-the-american-public/article/766938

2013-11-12T09:02

2013-11-12T08:05

Dem. Rep.: 'I Think the President Was Grossly Misleading to the American Public'

Rep. Kurt Schrader, a Democrat from Oregon, said that President Obama was grossly misleading on Obamacare: Very misleading, the Democratic congressman says of Obama's promise that you can keep your health care plan, if you like it. I think next year at the election time, people are going to want to know, was I able to sign up? And what is the shape of the benefit package I'm going to get and how much is it going to cost me, at the end of the day? I think this will, the sign-up period and problems and the horrendous problems that are going on right now will be way in the past. I think the president was grossly misleading to the American public. I know right away as a veterinarian, I have my own business, that my policies got cancelled even before the Affordable Care Act. I know that I would change policies on a regular basis, trying to find the best deal for myself and my employees. But a lot of Americans, a lot of Oregonians, have stayed with the same policy for a number of years and are shocked that their policy got cancelled.

Barack Obama, Daniel Halper, Health Care, Oregon

http://cdn.weeklystandard.biz/cache/280x280-.jpg