Wichita women's health experts are weighing in on Kansas' recent F grade for reproductive health and rights.

The grade comes from an annual report from the Population Institute, an international organization that works toward achieving gender equality.

It says Kansas is failing women and girls because comprehensive sex education is not required in public schools, there are no laws regarding a patient's right to emergency contraception in an emergency room and access to abortion is limited.

"I'm delighted. From where it came from, that shows we're doing really well," David Gittrich said. "When the abortion industry gives us an F, that's really good."

Gittrich with Kansans for Life says the grade shows organizations like his, which encourages women not to terminate an unwanted pregnancy, are working. He gives Kansas an A+.

"The number of abortions has been declining from a high of 7,200 a year on Kansas women down to under 3,600 abortions a year on Kansas women. We've almost cut all of the abortions in half [and] have helped all of the women. There's over 50 crisis centers in the state. So there's lot of free help for women all across Kansas," Gittrich said.

The report finds 74 percent of women in Kansas live in a county without an abortion provider. For clinics that do offer the medical service, like South Wind Women's Center in Wichita, the legislature has passed laws regulating the procedure.

"Kansas has a 20-week ban on abortion services, so no later term abortion. Kansas also does not allow people to use private insurance to pay for their abortion procedure. Kansas mandates that every person receiving an abortion have an ultrasound," said Katie Knutter with South Wind.

Knutter says these restrictions ultimately prevent women from accessing information and resources vital to their well-being.

"It really sends women the message that their government does not care about them and does not view them as full citizens who deserve full rights and equality," she said.

According to the report, the only area Kansas excels in is effectiveness. Forty-five percent of pregnancies across the state are unintended--that's just one percentage point higher than the institute's goal of 44 percent.

_________________________________

Earlier this month, 19 states including Kansas were given a grade of "F" for reproductive health and rights.

The annual report, released by the Population Institute, rates each state and D.C. in four categories related to pregnancies, sex education, birth control and access to abortion.

"From everything I've seen, I think the state warrants an F. I think some local groups are doing good things. At the state level, no," said Sen. Laura Kelly, D-Topeka.

The failing grade was given because Kansas doesn't require sex education, doesn't have any laws regarding a woman's right to emergency contraception in an emergency room, hasn't expanded Medicare under the Affordable Care Act and has a number of laws regarding abortion. Some of those regulations include prohibition of abortion after 20 weeks, mandatory counseling, a waiting period of 24 hours between counseling and procedure and parental consent.

"I'm not concerned about the Population Institute's grade card," said Sen. Mary Pilcher-Cook, R-Shawnee. "I think they have their priorities in the wrong place."

On Friday, the Kansas Court of Appeals voted 7-7 on an abortion bill concerning the dilation and evacuation procedure - or so-called dismemberment abortion. The split vote diverted the decision to the lower court's original ruling which said a ban on the procedure, which is used in second-term abortions, would create an undue burden for women seeking abortions. The seven judges who decided in favor of the ban ruled the Kansas Constitution ensures the right to due process and therefore abortion. Opposing judges said the right to an abortion isn't stated in the Kansas Constitution and therefore isn't guaranteed.

Seventy-four percent of women in Kansas live in a county without an abortion provider, the Population Institute's report found.

"A woman's reproductive health should not depend on where she lives, but increasingly it does," said Robert Walker, president of the Population Institute. "Women in many areas are experiencing reduced access to reproductive health care services."

In Gov. Sam Brownback's State of the State Address delivered Jan. 16, he stated, "We must keep working to protect our most innocent Kansans, the unborn. We have become the shining city on the hill and the champions for life."

Brownback went on to say taxpayer money shouldn't be allotted to Planned Parenthood through the state's Medicaid program.

Such a declaration was an "ideological statement," said Laura McQuade, president and CEO of Planned Parenthood of Kansas and Mid-Missouri.

She said the state's failing grade "unfortunately reinforces what we already know - that Kansas is not a friendly environment for women."

The institute's report did give Kansas positive marks for its pregnancy rates. Across the state, 45 percent of pregnancies are unintended, with the institute's goal being 44 percent.

Kathy Ostrowski, legislative director for Kansans for Life, said the institute has a "political agenda" with no validity in the state.

Four states -- California, New Jersey, Oregon and Washington --received an "A." The overall score for the nation decreased from a "C" to a "D+."