Accountability: Two new audits reveal failures in ObamaCare on a scale even we didn’t think possible, with unresolved discrepancies, rules violations and technology problems that expose taxpayers to massive overpayments.

In the first of a series of ObamaCare audits, the Health and Human Services inspector general found 2.9 million “inconsistencies” in applications submitted to the federal HealthCare.gov exchange in the first five months of open enrollment.

In other words, the Social Security numbers, income, family size, citizenship or other information applicants provided didn’t match existing government data. Some 1.3 million of the problems involved citizenship, and an additional million involved income, the IG said.

Worse, the IG found HHS was unable to resolve 2.6 million of these discrepancies because the ObamaCare “eligibility system was not fully operational.” This means the government “cannot ensure that an applicant meets each of the eligibility requirements for enrollment” or that they’re getting the right tax subsidies.

How huge are these numbers? Consider that only 6 million had filled out applications by the end of February and just 2.6 million had enrolled. And of the 300,000 problems the HHS was capable of resolving, it had managed to do so for only 10,000.

Meanwhile, the 11 state-run exchanges had a total of 422,772 problems — equal to 34% of the applications they’d received. These states didn’t say how many of these had been resolved.

If that wasn’t bad enough, a separate IG report found the federal exchange and two state exchanges didn’t have adequate internal controls to make sure they were protecting taxpayers from fraud and abuse.

Looking at just 45 randomly selected applications, the analysis found cases where income data were wrong, Social Security numbers hadn’t been checked, citizenship or legal status hadn’t been verified and information was entered incorrectly.

The IG said that, as a result, the exchanges had limited ability “to prevent the use of inaccurate or fraudulent information.”

Oh, and the government apparently hasn’t been properly reconciling its enrollment numbers with insurance companies to account for dropouts and cancellations — casting more doubt on enrollment numbers.

If ObamaCare were a private company, you can bet its executives would be facing criminal charges. Instead, Obama and the press are cheering ObamaCare as a great success.