More than 2 million Californians have been covered by health insurance through Covered California since it opened for business on Jan. 1, 2014, the state’s Obamacare health exchange said Thursday.

Detailed demographic data released by Covered California showed 125,950 Orange County residents were enrolled in the exchange as of June. Among them, women outnumbered men, most policyholders were English speakers, and Asian enrollees outnumbered Latinos.

Of the 2 million state residents who have been covered by health insurance through Covered California since the opening, only 1.3 million are still enrolled. For those who left, 85percent reported gaining coverage elsewhere, most commonly through an employer.

“For many, Covered California is not an end point but rather it’s part of a lifetime journey to make sure people have coverage,” Executive Director Peter Lee said. “We’re a way station for many.”

Cynthia Cox, an associate director at the nonprofit health research group Kaiser Family Foundation, in Washington, D.C., highlighted the 15 percent who were uninsured after disenrolling.

“That can speak to affordability of the premium and the perceived value from the plan,” she said.

The exchange reported gains in ethnic diversity, although Latinos are still underrepresented. They are now nearly 30 percent of enrollees, but that falls short of the estimated 37 percent of Latinos statewide who would qualify for financial assistance.

“It will be something that they have to continue to work on for equity and to make sure people who are eligible know about it and are able to sign up,” Cox said.

Lee said 90 percent of enrollees are receiving subsidies and pay an average of $150 a month. He said that, as expected, the coverage pool has attracted more old than young, with 53.5 percent of enrollees ages 45 to 64.

“Even though we’re skewing older, we’re skewing way healthy,” Lee said, noting the modest 4 percent average premium increase for next year.

Contact the writer: 714-796-3686 or cperkes@ocregister.com