Participants turned out in record numbers at this year’s National Storm Chaser Convention in Denver to scientifically break down the widest tornado ever recorded and heal wounds left in May when it killed the well-known founder of the annual event.

Sixteen years ago, Tim Samaras hosted the first ChaserCon in his living room with pizza, beer, home videos of tornadoes and a few close friends.

On Saturday, 400 people in the business of collecting data from the scenes of natural disasters packed the DoubleTree by Hilton Hotel Denver in what has turned into the American Midwest’s source of storm-chasing camaraderie.

Tim Samaras, 55, his 24-year-old son, Paul, and colleague Carl Young, 45, were among the 21 people that the National Weather Service in Norman, Okla., said were killed in the record-breaking storm that hit the area of El Reno, Okla., on May 31.

Roger Hill, a co-founder of the organized ChaserCon event and a 20-year friend of Tim Samaras’, said the death of the veteran storm chaser “took everybody by surprise.”

“It was a tough loss for the chasing community,” Hill said, referring to the meteorologists, climatologists, engineers and other professionals who track inclement weather as it happens. “It touched every storm chaser in the plains.”

The group overflowed from the hotel’s largest ballroom, where the three-day event, which opened Friday, brought speakers to discuss new technology and atmospheric prediction methods.

On Saturday, presentations and conversations often circled back to El Reno. About a third of the attendees reportedly chased the 2.6-mile-wide storm, which reached wind speeds of 295 mph near the ground.

The University Corporation for Atmospheric Research said in an analysis released a week after the storm that the “rare beast” of a tornado was “exceptionally dangerous for chasers and residents alike.”

“This storm did weird things,” Hill said. “It spawned mini tornadoes and suddenly turned north to where Tim and his son were.”

Samaras saw the research possibilities in every storm, no matter the size, according to Tim Marshall, a regular ChaserCon keynote speaker over the years who often crossed paths with Samaras in the field.

Marshall, who dressed in a shark costume as part of his “Sharknado” presentation theme this year, told the audience that Samaras called the annual event his “Mecca” — the one weekend a year people in the storm-chasing industry make journeys to visit with one another in Denver.

Near the end of his presentation of the year’s biggest tornadoes, Marshall showed a photo of the pile of crumpled metal that was all that was left of Samaras’ car after being caught in the storm.

“Don’t bet your life on the radar, because it may not be where you think it is,” Marshall said.

A tribute to Samaras was planned for 7:30 p.m. Hill said he expected that every one of the registrants would be there.

“It’ll be an opportunity for closure for a lot of people, because when it happened, people were still chasing. And it happened so quickly,” Hill said.

Alison Noon: 303-954-1223, anoon@ denverpost.com or twitter.com/alisonnoon