Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell has focused on issues that have the potential for bipartisan agreement, though a tougher road looms ahead. Bill Clark/CQ Roll Call

Last November, right after securing a sweeping electoral victory and their first Senate majority in eight years, Republican leaders sounded an optimistic note about their goals for the new Congress. "There will be no government shutdowns, and no defaults on the national debt," Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell McConnell, R-Ky., said at a press conference in Louisville celebrating his own reelection victory and his assured ascension to majority leader.

While it's objectively true that the Senate (and Congress as a whole) is working more under McConnell and House Speaker John Boehner, all that activity has produced a relatively small number of tangible accomplishments.

McConnell and Boehner laid out their plans in a series of statements and op-eds in the days following the 2014 midterm elections: They honed in on several key policy areas and promised to return to regular order by reopening the amendment process in the Senate and breaking Congress' recent habit of governing by brinkmanship, lurching from deadline crisis to deadline crisis.

The incoming leadership vowed to reform the tax code, pass a budget and rein in spending, reduce regulations, pass a trade bill and repeal the Affordable Care Act.

Almost halfway through the year, they've made some headway. On some things, McConnell has kept his word, such as allowing senators from both parties to offer relevant amendments on every bill that has been considered on the floor. And while that has stimulated substantive debate on those issues, it's also slowed the already ponderous Senate process to a crawl.

That, in turn, has made it more difficult to avoid legislating at the last moment. Lawmakers have peered over legal and fiscal cliffs at the end of almost every month so far, with legislation on the Department of Homeland Security funding bill, the Patriot Act, the Highway Trust Fund and the "doc fix" all getting pushed to or beyond the deadline.

All told, Congress has sent 21 bills to the president for his signature in the 79 legislative days when either one or both chambers has been in session (another 105 days of work are scheduled for the rest of the year).

Eight of those bills could be considered major actions: reauthorizing the Terrorism Risk Insurance program, approving the Keystone pipeline (despite the president's veto), funding the Department of Homeland Security, permanently fixing Medicare repayments, preventing veteran suicides, establishing a police attack "blue alert" system, aiding victims of trafficking and instituting congressional review for an Iran nuclear deal.

"The Republicans have to show that they can govern," says James Thurber, a professor and director of the Center for Congressional and Presidential Studies at American University. "With the leadership of McConnell, they've reached out and found some commonality with the president and had a blossoming on some bipartisan issues."

Thurber says McConnell, widely credited as a shrewd legislative tactician, has played his cards well to that end, so far. The passage of big-ticket items like the trade bill in the Senate last week, plus forthcoming legislation that reworks No Child Left Behind, give the impression that Republicans are keeping their promise to manage Congress responsibly.

"It's low-hanging fruit," Thurber said, "but it's very heavy fruit."

By focusing first on issues that at least have the potential for bipartisan agreement, McConnell and Boehner have left themselves with a tougher road ahead. Most of the legislation going forward is more divisive in principle, and positions will only get more entrenched as the 2016 election gets closer.

More contentious issues, such as climate change and a significant overhaul of the tax code, are unlikely to get out of Congress, if lawmakers take them up at all. For those that have seen floor action this year, including bills that deal with cutting taxes, restricting immigration and abortion, and undermining Obamacare, it was business as usual.

"Almost every Republican is concerned about being primaried on immigration, on the Affordable Care Act," Thurber said. "They're walking a fine line … They're going to continue to try to demonstrate that they're pure to the constituencies that elect them."

Once Congress returns from recess the first week of June, Republican leaders hope they'll be able to cross off another major item on their checklist: the trade bill. The Senate already approved so-called fast track authority, which limits Congress to just an up-or-down vote on the trade deal currently being brokered by the Obama administration and 11 other Pacific nations.

The issue is a rare one in which Republicans are siding with the president over objections from most Democrats. Their opposition, along with skepticism from conservatives wary of granting Obama any additional power, could still derail the measure in the House.

Spinning the legislation as a check against the president's authority, Boehner was confident that the bill would ultimately succeed in the House.