Buy Photo The Senate this week could take up a bill that would make it easier for private companies to buy public water and sewer utilities. (Photo: File/USA TODAY NETWORK-Wisconsin)Buy Photo

The state Senate this week could vote on a bill that would make it easier to sell or lease public water and sewer utilities to private companies.

The Senate needs to defeat this bill.

The Assembly passed its version (Assembly Bill 554) by voice vote last month, while this past week a Senate committee approved it. So in just over two months from its introduction, a bill that would make it easier to sell public water and sewer utilities is poised to pass the Legislature.

The bill’s fast track must certainly indicate there’s a problem with these public utilities and residents’ welfare is at stake.

It doesn’t. No crisis here.

The quick action must be a result of the clamoring of municipalities and the public.

No, again. The League of Wisconsin Municipalities supports the bill because it says it would rather have elected officials make decisions instead of using referendums, however, it didn’t request the change, nor apparently did any of its members.

The reason this bill is in the Legislature is because a company, Aqua America, sought the change.

The publicly traded water and wastewater utility is based in Pennsylvania and serves about 3 million people in eight states, including Illinois.

It wants to enter Wisconsin, not because our municipal water and sewer utilities are so bad that they need help. No, it wants to make money, just like any publicly traded company wants to make money.

There’s nothing wrong with that, except when it deals with such critical services as our water and sewer systems.

When that’s the case, we prefer to have an entity in charge that’s answerable to the local government and residents for water rate and quality issues, that’s controlled by people who would be affected by their decisions, and that must adhere to the state’s Open Records and Open Meetings laws.

We want our water and sewer utilities run by people who act in the best interests of those they serve, not shareholders.

Look at it this way, if a private company ran a city’s water utility and you objected to the rate increases or the quality of the drinking water, you couldn’t take your business elsewhere because there would be nowhere else to go. You’d be stuck or have to move. The people you'd complain to wouldn't have to listen.

In Fort Wayne, Ind., the city paid $67 million to buy back a water utility that was run by Aqua America. The immediate results of that repurchase were a reduction in rates for those 12,600 customers and savings associated with using pre-softened water.

We understand that public utilities and governmental bodies aren’t perfect. Bad governmental decisions are having a disastrous effect in Flint, Mich., where lead in the drinking water has set back the community for decades. However, those problems were due to the lack of local control and are easily traced to the governor’s office where decisions were made to cut costs and use a different, albeit more polluted, water source.

We believe a municipality can exercise more control and influence over one of its departments than it can over a privately owned company that’s handling those duties in order to make money from afar.

The bill itself is rigged to help the private utilities, not the taxpayers of Wisconsin. Consider these changes:

» A referendum would not be required to approve the sale of a public utility. The law now says that after the state Public Service Commission approves the deal, the municipality must hold a referendum. Under the proposed changes, a referendum is held only if a petition is filed within 60 days.

» Residents won’t know what they’re voting on. Under current law, the referendum is held after the PSC approves the sale and sets the price and terms of the sale or lease. Under the proposal, if there even is a referendum it would be held before the PSC action. That means voters won’t have information on the cost or other terms of the deal.

If there’s no referendum, the sale goes straight to the PSC.

Those changes aren’t being made to benefit taxpayers; they are being made to benefit privately run utilities.

Think about it. Sen. Tyler August, R-Lake Geneva, told the Milwaukee Journal Sentinel that he introduced the bill after meeting with Aqua America representatives, not after talking with municipalities or residents who were worried about their water.

Like so much that this Legislature has done, it has come up with a solution for a problem that doesn’t exist.

The Green Bay Press-Gazette is part of the USA TODAY NETWORK-Wisconsin.

CONTACT YOUR SENATOR

We encourage readers to call, email or write their senators and urge them to oppose this bill if it comes up for vote.

In Northeastern Wisconsin, state Sen. Frank Lasee, R-Ledgeview, is a co-sponsor of the bill, but Sen. David Hansen, D-Green Bay, held a news conference last week opposing it. Here are the Northeastern Wisconsin senators:

» 1st District: Frank Lasee, R-Ledgeview, (608) 266-3512, Sen.Lasee@legis.wisconsin.gov

» 2nd District: Rob Cowles, R-Allouez, (608) 266-0484, Sen.Cowles@legis.wisconsin.gov

» 12th District: Thomas Tiffany, R-Hazelhurst, (608) 266-2509, Sen.Tiffany@legis.wi.gov

» 30th District: Dave Hansen, D-Green Bay, (608) 266-5670, Sen.Hansen@legis.wisconsin.gov

Read or Share this story: http://gbpg.net/1T5IXtu