This is the photo in Skirt Sports' April Fools' joke newsletter that led the company to design the Gotta Go Skirt. ( Skirt Sports / Courtesy photo )

Learn more Get additional info about the Gotta Go Skirt and the Kickstarter at skirtsports.com. Pledge $65 or more and get a skirt (free shipping), which will retail at $79. Skirts are expected to be available in mid-May.

It started out as an April Fools' joke.

A joke with a hunch, says Nicole DeBoom.

In Skirt Sports' April newsletter, a spoof ad introduced the new Trap Door Skirt, with a picture of two runners waiting in line for an outhouse.

"Now you can go anywhere you want," joked the ad, which featured an athletic skirt with a Velcro crotch panel. For quick and easy access, no mooning necessary.

The newsletter had one of the highest open rates in Skirt Sports' history. Women clicked on it. They wanted it.

For real.

This led Skirt Sports to send out a survey. Really? Thousands of women said yes. They wanted a Trap Door Skirt, and they said they'd support a Kickstarter campaign to make this unusual — and, let's face it, awkward but necessary — garment more than just an April Fools' joke.

"It's funny and makes it more human to talk about this, but this is not a joke. This is real," DeBoom says.

One in three women suffer from athletic-induced incontinence, she says.

And the jolting of jogging can make matters worse, she says.

DeBoom, of Boulder, the founder of Skirt Sports, says she decided to go for it. Her company designed a prototype with a new name, the Gotta Go Skirt, "to keep your assets covered when nature calls," and launched a Kickstarter. It quickly met its $35,000 goal with more than 540 backers.

Now in the final stretch of the campaign (it ends Wednesday), Skirt Sports is not far from its second goal — raising $70,000.

A front view of the Gotta Go Skirt prototype. (Skirt Sports / Courtesy photo)

Supporters will get their own Gotta Go Skirt, with free shipping, and some will be sold through Skirt Sports' website after the campaign, to test the waters. DeBoom says she hopes it will become a regular staple for the Boulder-based company.

She doesn't know of any other business offering something like this.

"Our whole company's goal is about helping women feel great in their bodies," DeBoom says. "This can make them feel more normal. This isn't an unusual thing. They're not weird. We want them to feel better about it so they get out the door and get active."

The design of the skirt is simple. The crotch features an anatomically placed hole protected and reinforced by a Velcro "release hatch." You know, like long underwear back in the day. Except made specifically for sports, designed not to bunch and hidden inside shorts under a skirt. Skirt Sports' style.

Some of the backers are ultra-runners and racers who don't want to waste time in line for an outhouse or, er, squatting behind a bush. After running about 50 miles, if you squat down, you might not be able to stand back up to finish the race, DeBoom says.

Other backers are pregnant, frequent urinators, leakers — without getting into too much personal detail, the Gotta Go Skirt is compatible with "athletically inspired pads" and includes three pockets to store more supplies.

Yes. The topic is awkward.

DeBoom knows that. But over the years, she says, she has received enough requests seeking attire to address this issue that she believes it's time to stop denying it.

"The first time a woman asked me, I thought ... this sounds interesting, but I don't know. But women continue to ask me," she says. "Then I got pregnant."

Sometimes it takes a personal experience to understand, she says.

"This is happening," she says.

Aimee Heckel: 303-473-1359, heckela@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/aimeemay