In less than a year as the Nashville Old Spaghetti Factory’s general manager, Sami Khoury achieved one of the company’s highest accolades.

Khoury, 28, was named General Manager of the Year throughout the company’s 42 nationwide locations. He is a 2003 Spring Hill High School graduate who received his bachelor’s degree from the University of Tennessee-Knoxville.

Khoury received the award on Aug. 22 at the restaurant’s home base in Portland, Ore.

In Oct. 2009, he hired on as a department manager. Khoury was promoted to assistant general manager in 2011, then general manager in Oct. 2012.

“It’s certainly very rare to find someone who is a new GM to win it in less than a year,” Khoury said. “I had basically eight months to prove myself, and that’s what did it.”

The Columbia native was one of two people nominated for the award in their 20s — everyone else ranged from age 30-50, he said. Excited, overwhelmed, honored and grateful were a few words he used to describe winning.

He said he cannot take full credit for the accolade and praised his team members for helping him get the recognition. The honor was more a “store of the year” award to him, he added.

The Nashville restaurant at 160 2nd Ave. North has a high customer volume and serves thousands of patrons per week, Khoury said. As a new GM, he increased guest counts by 5.5 percent from last year — a major contributor to him winning, he said.

Kirk Michael, The Old Spaghetti Factory vice president of operations, said the award is generally given to the highest performing GM, or the one who has the best year.

“It’s by far our most coveted award in the company,” Michael said. “It’s a big deal to us — It’s our Super Bowl.”

The award also resembles another national sports item — the Stanley Cup — because all the previous winner’s names are featured on it, including Michael’s moniker.

The winner is chosen based upon how well the restaurant fares in sales, profits, cost control, cleanliness, food quality and service. Regional winners are chosen by district managers, then OSF owner Chris Dussin chooses the top person.

Khoury said his ambitions do not stop at the general manager position.

“I’d love to be a district manager with the company,” he said.

Nashville’s Old Spaghetti Factory restaurant opened on 2nd Avenue in March 1980. Later this year or early next year, the location will update its look with a new lobby layout, furniture and other items, Michael said.

The company’s first restaurant opened in Portland in 1969. Since then, the family owned eatery has grown to 42 restaurants across the country with a 10 million-plus annual volume, according to the company’s website.