President Barack Obama has a bit of a sore spot when it comes to those who make fun of his mom jeans, as he lamented to radio host Ryan Seacrest on Friday that he has been “unfairly maligned” about his denim wear.

As part of a last-ditch attempt to enroll so-called “Young Invincibles” in Obamacare, President Obama joined media connoisseur Ryan Seacrest on his radio show, “On Air with Ryan Seacrest,” to discuss his appearance on the web series “Between Two Ferns,” recent shopping trip to Gap and attacks on his penchant for mom jeans.

While discussing a conversation the “American Idol” host had with a Gap employee who assisted Obama during his shopping spree, Seacrest warned the president that the worker thought Obama could use some help with his wardrobe, specifically his denim wear.

“I’ve been unfairly maligned about my jeans,” Obama responded. “The truth is, generally I look very sharp in jeans. There was one episode like four years ago in which I was wearing some loose jeans mainly because I was out on the pitcher’s mound, and I didn’t want to feel confined while I was pitching, and I think I’ve paid my penance for that. I got whacked pretty good. Since that time, my jeans fit very well.”

President Obama’s “mom jeans” have become an easy target for those looking to poke fun at the commander-in-chief.

Former Republican Vice Presidential nominee and Alaska Gov. Sarah Palin slammed Obama for his denim wear during an appearance on Fox News last week, comparing Obama, “one who wears mom jeans and equivocates and bloviates,” to Russian President Vladimir Putin, “one who wrestles bears and drills for oil.”

Obama, though, believes that despite what his opponents say about his fashion sense, he still has good taste. Daughters Malia and Sasha, he said, agreed.

“They thought for a dad, I displayed reasonably good taste,” the president told Seacrest of shopping for wife Michelle and his daughters. “The bar is fairly low, but I didn’t get too adventurous.”

The president has been making the rounds of media outlets as the open enrollment period for consumers to purchase health insurance under Obamacare draws to a close. His appearance on “On Air with Ryan Seacrest” is part of an attempt to encourage young people, specifically, to enroll in the law, as their participation is crucial to its success.

Obama has employed a host of tactics to convince Millennials to head to healthcare.gov, often using fatherly rhetoric to share the dangers of not having health insurance. But in his conversation with Seacrest, the president cut straight to the chase and told listeners that failing to purchase coverage would leave them paying a monetary penalty.

“If you can afford it and you just decide you don’t want to get it because your attitude is ‘nothing’s ever going to happen to me,’ then you’ll just be charged a penalty,” Obama said. “And the reason is because if you end up having an accident and you go to the emergency room, somebody has got to pay for it. And that somebody is folks who’ve been responsible about getting health insurance.”

The fee for not purchasing the health insurance in 2014 is 1 percent of one’s income or $95. That increases to 2 percent of ones income or $325 in 2015 and 2.5 percent of income or $625 in 2016.