The Eye

'Love and Hip Hop New York' Star Tara Wallace Reveals How to Spot a Cheater, Actress Opens Up on Failed Relationship With Co-Star Peter Gunz

SIGN UP TO RECEIVE THE LATEST NEWS FROM FASHION&STYLE

(Photo : Facebook/Love & Hip Hop) Tara Wallace stars in Yandy Smith's stage play, "Caught Up and Confused."

"Love and Hip Hop New York's" Tara Wallace has been through a lot when it comes to love, especially after she most embarrassingly found out on TV that her boyfriend of 13 years, Peter Gunz, up and married another woman while they were still together.



As the season for of the hit reality show nears its finale episode, Tara says looking back on it all she still has no regrets.



"Things happen for are reason. Before I was willing to accept that there must be something better for me. Before I accepted that, I was like, "Why did I do this?"' Tara said in an interview with S2S Magazine. "When I accepted that this had to happen in order for me to see who the person was that I had been with that obviously I didn't know, I needed that to happen, so I that I can make choices in my own life that benefit me more, versus living my life taking care of everyone else. I don't regret it."



After being in the difficult situation of dealing with a man living a double life, Tara says she now knows how to look out for signs of her future partner cheating, and the aspiring actress has ample advice for other women that may suspect their lovers of cheating.



"I'm such a firm believer now in female intuition. You do have some women out there who are extremely jealous who have been cheated on in previous relationships and accuse their men of all kinds of things, but I think that you have to go with your gut instinct," she said.



"My issue with women, and even with myself, is forget what he's doing. When you are unhappy or when you are not getting what you need, you have to act accordingly, not wait around for him to make it right. If you're not happy in his actions, that's reason enough for you to leave. That's a pill that I have to eat myself."



Now that all of Peter's dirty laundry has been aired out on the show, she says she has completely washed her hands of her children's father, and has even changed the locks limiting the music manager from popping up at her home anytime he pleases.



"We have a moment where we revisit something for whatever reason, but then reality kicks in. I'm moving on from this and that has to show in every sense and every respect," Tara said when asked what motivated her to finally change her locks.



Although she says she is officially done with Peter, as we previously reported, the mother of two has still be able to successfully co-parent with her ex, without her small children knowing exactly why the former couple is no longer together.



"Our children don't know exactly what's going on. Our children don't understand that we're going through a breakup, so I do bite a bit of the humble pie for the sake of our kids so that we don't disturb the functionality of the household," she said. "But I'm moving to another apartment in the next couple of weeks, and we will not obviously be moving together, so they will know at some point. Very soon I will have to tackle and address this issue with my boys."



SIGN UP TO RECEIVE THE LATEST NEWS FROM FASHION&STYLE

© 2015 Fashion & Style.com All rights reserved. Do not reproduce without permission.