Bell says program one of the best for youth

Fremont County Commissioner Debbie Bell (center) cuts a ribbon while Fremont County Commissioner Tim Payne holds it Saturday during the 2015 Fremont County Fair Ribbon Cutting Ceremony at Pathfinder Park in Florence. ( Sarah Rose / Daily Record )

Click photo to enlarge «

1

»

A Fremont County Commissioner who cut the ribbon during the 2015 Fremont County Fair's Ribbon Cutting Ceremony on Saturday won a Grand Champion ribbon for junior sewing at the fair when she was in seventh grade.

"I still remember that. It was that important to me," Commissioner Debbie Bell said. "I loved every minute that I spent in 4-H."

The 4-H program helps people build strong friendships, she said.

"One of my very, very best friends and I grew up together in 4-H out in Penrose, and we don't see each other hardly ever," Bell said. "She lives out of state now, and yet when we do get together, it's like all those years melt away."

She said 4-H is a valuable program for children in Fremont County.

"I can't even tell you how many life lessons 4-H gives kids," Bell said. "You learn so much about responsibility, about how to take care of the greater good, about how to look outside of yourself and see things in the community that you might not see otherwise. I think it's one of the best programs that we have for youth."

She said the volunteers help instill positive personality traits to others.

"The adults that we have that run the clubs, I think they are in great part responsible for the great lessons in 4-H," Bell said. "They are great volunteers, they are great people."

Bell invites everyone in the area to attend the fair.

Advertisement

"We would really love to see folks come out and participate and take part and see exactly what it is that all of these young people have spent an entire year working toward."

Commissioner Tim Payne, who also participated in the ribbon cutting ceremony, said he is looking forward to the fair's Parade of Champions.

"We hand out the actual awards and you see the smiles on those kids' faces," Payne said. "That's a highlight for me to hand those awards out on Sunday at noon."

Sarah Rose: 719-276-7648, roses@canoncitydailyrecord.com