.......... .......... .......... .......... .......... .......... .......... .......... .......... .......... .......... .......... .......... .......... .......... .......... .......... ..........

ALBUQUERQUE, N.M. — State officials are warning medical providers their payments will be reduced. They blame escalating Medicaid spending.

In total, New Mexico will spend $928.6 million in the coming fiscal year through the Medicaid program on health care for low-income citizens, about $62 million less than the state Human Services Department said it needed.

HSD plans to cut $33.5 million in payments to hospitals, physicians and other providers in the 2017 fiscal year to help with the shortfall. Medical professionals are warning that care will suffer and some programs that deliver care may shut down.

A more constructive effort, but one that would take years before any success is achieved, would focus on the real problem in health care: spiraling costs driven by gross inefficiencies. The Centers for Medicaid and Medicare Services reported last December that health care spending grew 5.3 percent in 2014 to more than $3 trillion.

That’s more than 17 percent of the value of America’s total economic output that year. Some studies show that as much as a third of that spending is lost to waste.

Medicaid in New Mexico has two major components with two levels of federal funding.

For years, Medicaid was available primarily to low-income children, disabled adults and Medicare-eligible older citizens. The state picks up about 30 percent of the cost of their care, and the federal government pays the rest.

The other component became available with the passage of the Affordable Care Act. The federal government offered states the option of expanding Medicaid to any adult citizen, disabled or not, earning 138 percent of the federal poverty level or less.

In a two-person household, that’s $15,930 a year. Thirty-one states accepted the offer, and Oklahoma is considering it. Uncle Sam will pay 100 percent of the cost of expansion until 2017, when he pays 95 percent of the cost. By 2020, the feds will pay 90 percent.

HSD expects more than 250,000 able-bodied, working-age adult citizens to be on the Medicaid rolls this year. When the state first decided to accept the expansion dollars in 2013, HSD expected at most about 154,000 new enrollees. When you add all of the people covered by traditional Medicaid, close to half of the state’s population is receiving government help paying medical bills.

Economic models operated by the University of New Mexico Bureau of Business and Economic Research forecast that expansion of Medicaid would bring $11 billion in federal funds into the state over a seven-year period. The models estimated the health care system employed 6,000 more people last year than it would have absent the expansion. Their personal income was estimated at a total of $223 million.

BBER said that between the 2014 and 2021 fiscal years, the state will receive a total of about $300 million more than the cost of caring for the population covered by the expansion, due to savings obtained by ending some programs that had been in place to help the poor and the collection of some new taxes, primarily new taxes on insurance companies.

But starting in 2020, BBER estimates, net program costs will exceed cost savings and new revenue as the federal contribution declines to 90 percent.

These problems would barely register in the civic debate if the American health care system’s ceaseless cost spiral could be tamed.

Some of the spending increase is unavoidable. As the population ages and as the ACA pushes the number of insured citizens higher, spending necessarily increases.

Spending on pharmaceuticals rose 13.1 percent from 2013 to 2014 to $373.9 billion, partly because with ACA in place more people can now pay for them, partly because manufacturers are replacing older drugs with more expensive new drugs, partly because of price increases and partly because there are fewer manufacturers and, therefore, less competition.

Unhealthy behavioral and lifestyle choices are the biggest factor in determining anyone’s health status. As much as 70 percent of health care costs are attributable to behaviors such as smoking, alcohol abuse and poor diet.

An enormous amount of money is simply wasted. According to the National Association of Health Underwriters, preventable mistakes committed by hospitals and health care providers cost $1 trillion in 2012.

About 25 percent of physician visits and 55 percent of emergency room visits are unnecessary. Unnecessary tests cost about $200 billion a year. Duplication of procedures and overuse of expensive procedures waste $11 billion annually in hospitals alone.

Common sense says that better quality control in New Mexico’s health care system would more than cover the $33.5 million HSD is trying to extract from providers. If any long-term good comes from state efforts to cut provider payments, it will be a renewed effort to improve health system efficiency.

UpFront is a daily front-page news and opinion column. Comment directly to Winthrop Quigley at 823-3896 or wquigley@abqjournal.com. Go to ABQjournal.com/letters/new to submit a letter to the editor.