WASHINGTON (MarketWatch) — The United States added just 74,000 jobs in December to mark the smallest gain in three years, a disappointing number likely influenced by poor weather. Yet the weaker pace of hiring could also be a sign of slowing momentum in the up-and-down U.S. economy as it entered 2014.

The unemployment rate fell three ticks last month to 6.7%, the first time it’s dropped below 7% in 60 months, the Labor Department said Friday. The decline mainly occurred because more people dropped out of the labor force, however. Read Rex Nutting on decline in labor force.

Some 347,000 Americans stopped looking for work last month and the size of the labor force actually shrank in 2013, a sour note in a year where the economy added a robust 2.19 million jobs. The U.S. has created at least 2 million jobs for three straight years, though the unemployment rate still remains abnormally high by historical standards.

Economists surveyed by MarketWatch expected a seasonally adjusted increase of 193,000 nonfarm jobs in December, with unemployment holding steady at 7%.

Investors largely shrugged off the jobs data in Friday action, viewing the report as an aberration, analysts say. U.S. stock markets seesawed in late-morning trades and the interest rate on the 10-year Treasury US:10_YEAR declined. Read: Why you should ignore the unemployment data

In Washington, Republicans seized on the report to blast the Obama administration’s economic policies and urge the president to back conservative bills to boost employment.

“Every American has a right to ask the question ‘Where are the jobs?’” said Ohio Rep. John Boehner, the House speaker. Read more reactions to jobs report.

Senior White House economic adviser Jason Furman said the labor market “continued to make progress,” but he added that the December report shows why Congress needs to renew a program that pays extended benefits to Americans who have been without a job longer than six months. The program expired at the end of 2013 in a dispute between the two parties over how to pay for the estimated $26 billion annual cost.

The jobs report also calls into question whether the Federal Reserve will pause before cutting its bond purchases again. The central bank is still buying $75 billion in bonds a month — down from $85 billion in December — as part of a longer-term strategy to jazz up the economy. For now most economists believe the Fed will cut purchases again at its next big meeting in late January. Read: Fed still on steady taper course despite weak job growth

Inside the report

Most economists believe unusually poor weather last month contributed to the smallest increase in jobs since January 2011. The number of people who said they could not work last month because of the weather was two-thirds higher than normal.

“The weather did have some role,” said J.J. Kinahan, chief strategist at TD Ameritrade. “It turned nasty in much of the country.”

Diane Swonk, chief economist at Mesirow Financial, told MarketWatch Radio that the harsh cold snap in January could also lead to a subpar employment report for the first month of 2014 when it’s released next month. Listen to Swonk interview.

Until the December surprise, a slew of other labor-market indicators had signaled that hiring was on the upswing. Most economists say the bulk of evidence continues to point to faster job growth in the early months of 2014.

Still, the final jobs report for 2013 also contained worrisome signs. Hiring was soft or nonexistent in virtually every industry, reversing the broad gains seen in November. November’s gain was revised upward to 241,000 from an initial reading of 203,000.

White-collar ranks, for example, only swelled by 19,000 in December, far below the annual monthly average of 53,000. And the resurgent manufacturing sector, which should not have been affected much by the weather, added a modest 9,000 workers.

Construction companies, meanwhile, eliminated 16,000 jobs and the health-care industry shed workers for the first time since 2003, perhaps in anticipation of the Affordable Care Act. The law commonly known as Obamacare kicked in on New Year’s Day.

The bulk of the jobs created in December, what’s more, were concentrated in the retail industry as companies added 55,000 workers to handle the holiday season. These jobs generally do not offer great pay or benefits, however, and many are temporary.

Indeed, the increase in temp jobs in December was the largest in 22 months.

The lack of well-paying new jobs was evident in worker earnings. Average hourly wages edged up 2 cents to $24.17, putting the increase over the past 12 months at a lackluster 1.8%.

The average length of the workweek also showed slippage, falling one-tenth to 34.4 hours. The workweek usually rises as the economy strengthens and declines as growth softens.

For the second time in three months, the civilian-participation rate sagged to a 35-year low of 62.8% in another nagging sign. The rate measures the percentage of Americans 16 years or older who have a job or a looking for one. See slide show on December jobs report.

Although the rate has been declining in part because more baby boomers are reaching retirement age, millions of workers aren’t looking for jobs because they believe the search is futile. In a healthier economy and labor market, the participation rate should rise or at least hold steady.

More news from MarketWatch:

T-Mobile tries a ‘take no prisoners’ approach

China: We’re number one by trade

More from MarketWatch