Please enable Javascript to watch this video

MADISON, Ala. (WHNT) - The Stop Common Core Bus Tour kicked off in Madison, Tuesday morning, the first stop on a state-wide tour.

For the opponents in attendance, Common Core is considered a dirty word.

"Common Core is the worst thing that has ever happened to our country except Obamacare," said Ann Eubank, of the Alabama Legislative Watchdogs.

Eubanks, like the candidates and protesters at the rally, are furious about the state standards. furious about its implementation, and at candidates who support it.

"[The state] didn't sign on because [they] like Common Core. [They] signed on because [they] like money coming from the federal government," Eubanks accused. "It’s called voluntary force. You either do it or you don’t get the money to help educate our children. That’s a habit we must get rid of!"

Opponents at the rally expressed distrust education leaders who support Common Core, calling it a "Federal takeover of our schools."

On numerous occasions state education leaders, assured that was not the case. Earlier this year, State Superintendent Tommy Bice told WHNT News 19 he has never received oversight, guidance, or direction from the U.S. Department of Education regarding Common Core.

However, that assurance means little to the Anti-Common Core crowd at the rally.

Protesters at the rally called him and Common Core supporters nothing short of liars.

"You've been told Common Core started with the states getting together and deciding 'oh we need all the same standards for children who move across the country'. Nothing could be further from the truth! They are telling li - oh I can't say that," Eubanks cut herself off.

Proponents and the creators of Common Core standards say the testing process and standards are meant to ensure students are taught the same math and English principals and are meeting the same standards from district-to-district and state-to-state, so once they arrive at college they will be on the same page, educationally, no matter where they are from.

District 8 State School Board candidate, Mike Parsons, who is running against State School Board member Mary Scott Hunter, had this to say to the crowd on Tuesday:

"I figure if I get a progress report from my kids every 9 weeks and they're making A's and B's, they're on track to go to college if they want to. And if they're making D's and F's and they want to go to college they may need to pick up the slack. I don't need to spend $6 million on an assessment test to try to figure out if they're ready for college," said Parsons.

Parsons, like several candidates in attendance are running on an almost solely anti-Common Core platform.

On June 3rd the protesters will vote, and the protesters hope the elections will serve as a referendum on Common Core Standards.

Organizers of the Stop Common Core tour say they will continue to travel across the state until the day Common Core is repealed.