"Squeaky" Bob Wheeler's tent cabin resort was located near the present-day Colorado River trailhead and 9.4 miles north of the Rocky Mountain National Park's Grand Lake entrance. Wheeler called his lodge, shown in the background, the "Hotel de Hardscrabble." ( Courtesy of Rocky Mountain National Park )

Robert N. Wheeler came from the midwest with his parents and settled in Fort Collins. He was apparently impressed as a young age by the lush meadows along the Colorado River in a place called Phantom Valley. After serving with Teddy Roosevelt's Rough Riders in the Spanish-American War, he returned to Colorado. He homesteaded in Phantom Valley in 1900 and "proved up" to gain title to his 160 acres.

Wheeler, because of his high-pitched voice, was better known as "Squeaky Bob." As a child, he suffered from severe bronchitis. He was an exceptional cook and at the time, the tourist industry was growing.

In 1907, Wheeler got the idea of opening a tent-cabin resort in his lush meadow along the Colorado River. He may have suspected that the area would eventually become a national park. His lumpy mattresses and primitive accommodations were soon forgotten by most guests, and they enjoyed the lively yarns spun by "Squeaky Bob" combined with his excellent meals. Mountain guide Shep Husted brought his "dudes" by for a night's stay and to sample Wheeler's cooking. Teddy Roosevelt even stopped by for some of Wheeler's sourdough biscuits and venison steaks.

Advertisement

Wheeler added more tent cabins and called his main lodge the "Hotel de Hardscrabble." With a smile on his face, people enjoyed their stay. Wheeler, however, suffered from heart problems and sold his resort in 1926 to Lester Scott. The new owner renovated and enlarged the lodge changing its name to Phantom Valley Ranch. In its desire to return most of the park to its natural state, the National Park Service purchased the structures in the early 1960s and razed the buildings.

Wheeler lived out his life in Denver and passed away in 1945.

Kenneth Jessen has been a Loveland resident since 1965. He is an author of 20 books and more than 1,600 articles. He served on several Loveland boards and was an engineer for Hewlett-Packard for 33 years.