Lincoln, NE

In four years at Washington Nate Gerry played in four state championships while helping the Warriors bring home three. He will forever be known as one of the best athletes South Dakota has produced. Now Gerry is making an early impression at Nebraska.

In his second start as a Husker linebacker Nate Gerry got to face a familiar foe when South Dakota St. came to town. The Sioux Falls native received a loud ovation from the SDSU section, as well as family and friends, when he was announced on the jumbo-tron before the game.

"It was pretty cool that I had so many friends and family members come down in this atmosphere for me. I treated it like playing another game and not like playing South Dakota St. It was another opportunity to be great," Nebraska Freshman LB Nate Gerry said.

Nebraska needed to be great after a week of turmoil in Lincoln surrounding by not only a colossal loss at home, but also the leaked tape of coach Pelini's rant. The players used the chaos as motivation to get a win for their ball coach.

"At the beginning of the week, that was one thing that the team talked about. All the things Coach Bo Pelini does for us, we used this game to kind of give back to coach for everything he does for us," Gerry said.

Gerry was recruited from Washington as a safety. But just three days into camp the coaching staff had an idea that the 6'2" 220 pound freak athlete may be a solution to their hole at linebacker in the famous Blackshirt defense. In high school he was bigger, faster, and stronger than everyone else. He quickly learned the most important muscle at this level is between his ears.

"One thing that I've learned since fall camp is that preparation is more mental than physical now. That is one thing that I have to work on individually is being more mentally prepared for games. But football is football," Gerry said.

Gerry and the Huskers have the week off before kicking off Big Ten play as Illinois comes to town. You can catch most of Gerry's games on the Big Ten Network.