Learn more For more information about volunteer opportunities, contact the Humane Society of Boulder Valley at boulderhumane.org.

In 1959, after the death of Boulder County Humane Society president Anna Belle Morris, the obituary writer stated that Morris "grew rich in the rewards money can't buy and left the community better than she found it."

Others, however, had paved the way for Morris, while volunteers today follow in her footsteps. In Boulder, caring for homeless animals has spanned a century and benefits those who volunteer, as well.

Debbie Hopkins, an HSBV volunteer, plays with three kittens in her home. (Courtesy photo)

The BCHS (since renamed the Humane Society of Boulder Valley) was founded in 1902 after a rash of dog poisonings. Several well-meaning individuals advocated kindness towards animals, but the organization got off to a slow start.

Thirty years later, the Humane Society was revived after a $50,000 endowment from a wealthy pet owner. In 1935, Morris, who never drew a salary, opened the doors of Boulder's first animal shelter on the north side of Arapahoe Avenue on land now occupied by the Riverbend Office Park.

There, the middle-aged woman welcomed homeless cats and dogs, loved and tended to their needs, then offered them for adoption. She also boarded animals (including cattle and horses) by the day, week or month.

At the time, Morris wrote that the shelter aided in what she called humane education. For the first time, she said, children (and adults) had a place to bring homeless cats and litters of kittens found in yards and alleys.

Today, volunteers carry on the framework set in place by Morris 80 years ago.

One such volunteer is Debbie Hopkins. A science writer who works from her Boulder home, Hopkins has found her house the perfect place to foster kittens.

During the past five years, she has cared for dozens of kittens and cats before they were made available for adoption from the HSBV, now located at 2323 55th St.

Other volunteers take in puppies and dogs. Sometimes a mature cat or dog does best in a quiet place when recovering from surgery or an injury.

Kittens and puppies, however, often can use some socialization while putting on weight before being spayed or neutered.

Hopkins and the others have found that animals initially cared for in private residences learn, at very young ages, to adapt to children, other pets and the hustle and bustle of busy households.

According to Lindsay Scott, volunteer services manager for the HSBV, the Humane Society wouldn't be able to exist without its volunteers. In addition to fostering, volunteers work in the shelter, clinic, and training center, and they raise funds through society-sponsored fundraisers, special events and a thrift shop.

As the shelter's founder, Morris explained in her writings that by caring for animals, both children and adults learn empathy, a concept that Hopkins has noticed when watching her own children interact with the household's turnover of visitors.

Asked why she volunteers, Hopkins said, "My family always gets more back in love from the cats and kittens and the reward of knowing they've gotten a second chance and forever home."

Morris would have agreed.

Silvia Pettem and Carol Taylor write about history for the Daily Camera. Email Silvia at pettem@earthlink.net, Carol at boulderhistorylibrarian@gmail.com or write to the Daily Camera, 5450 Western Ave., Boulder 80301.