Tuscaloosa's homeless face many of the same challenges while being less overt than those in other metro areas

On Friday, 53-year-old homeless Tuscaloosa resident Bobby Norton was in the process of getting a new Social Security card, a key step in acquiring other forms of identification that would allow him to work and find permanent housing.

“If you can't get no IDs, you can't get no work because nobody will hire you,” he said.

Norton hopes to acquire his identification and return to work, adding he would like to become a certified automotive mechanic. He currently resides at Adam's Way, a 15-room independent living facility in West Tuscaloosa.

Norton, a framing carpenter and general construction worker since his teens, said he has spent the past decade homeless, following work opportunities across the country. Norton moved from state to state, chasing the construction boom that follows natural disasters such as hurricanes and tornadoes. He began his transient life a decade ago, leaving his home in Blue Ridge, Ga., because work had dried up in North Georgia.

“I left in a Ford F-350 dually. See where I am now ...” he said.

Norton came to Tuscaloosa in the hope of finding work in the rebuilding efforts after the April 2011 storm which struck Tuscaloosa. Norton said he was unable to join a crew once he arrived in town and lost his most recent set of identification in Tuscaloosa and has scavenged discarded food from dumpsters and panhandled and collected scrap metal from area streams to earn cash while he camped at sites off of Skyland Boulevard, the most recent behind the Ashley Furniture store near the train tracks.

“You can live pretty good when you don't have any bills to pay,” he said.

Norton spent most of the last two years living in camp sites in Tuscaloosa until he moved into Adam's Way recently with help from Rebecca Wright, who oversees the Homeless Management Information System for the city of Tuscaloosa and is chair of the West Alabama Coalition for the Homeless, the collection of roughly 29 area agencies that provides services to the homeless population in some capacity.

The agencies are part of the Continuum of Care, a program mandated by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development for the state and local governments and the nonprofit providers they work with who receive federal funding, according to Wright. The program's goal is to quickly rehouse the homeless, promote access and use of homeless programs, and optimize self-sufficiency among the homeless, according to the HUD website.

The coalition's member agencies do regular outreach to make contact with the area's homeless and try to match them with services and resources, according to Wright.

Wright estimated Norton is part of a homeless population in Tuscaloosa that averages about 500, including 269 homeless K-12 students. The estimate is based on unofficial numbers from an annual count by the coalition's agencies. The annual Point in Time Count, conducted during a 24-hour period over two days, was completed last week.

Wright estimated there are about eight to 10 major homeless camps in the Tuscaloosa area.

Tuscaloosa's homeless are less overt than populations found in other metro areas, she said.

Many of the area's homeless, including Norton, reside in wooded locations or other out-of-the-way places to avoid encounters with property owners and law enforcement, she said.

The population is a diverse group including military veterans, the mentally ill, drug addicts, sex offenders and families, according to Wright.

“Many but not all have some kind of mental illness,” she said.

Some simply feel more comfortable living outdoors.

The reasons for their homelessness vary, according to Wright, though Norton's predicament — the lack of important documents such as birth certificates or other forms of identification necessary to secure employment or housing — is a common challenge.

Available housing is another challenge in Tuscaloosa, according to Wright. The area's housing situation was challenging before the 2011 tornado, but it has become more challenging following the storm's destruction of many of the cheap or affordable housing options, Wright said, noting many of the post-storm replacements have been more expensive.

The loss of affordable housing has shifted some low-income and poor families into situations where they are residing with relatives or friends in temporary arrangements.

“We see them go home to an address but that is not their home,” Wright said.

Norton described it as being working homeless.

Wright also noted felonies and poor credit scores are often barriers as well.

“It's not necessarily that they don't have income,” she said.

Norton said one of his challenges is a requirement to pay off about $1,500 in court costs from a 2012 unlawful manufacture of a controlled substance charge. Norton was arrested in May 2012 and entered a chemical addictions diversion program in February 2013 after spending 273 days in jail, according to his court records. Norton said law enforcement officers arrested him after discovering a “shake-and-bake” methamphetamine lab at a campsite north of Memorial Hill Gardens cemetery on Skyland Boulevard he shared with a transient couple. Norton, denied the lab was his, but said he refused to reveal the identity of the cookers. He returned to the woods after his release last year.

More than a year later as he stood in the parking lot behind Ashley Furniture overlooking the stand of gum trees and pines netted with vines surrounding his latest campsite, the Georgia native with a deep tan, drifted from nostalgia for the freedom of his life in the camp and pride at his resourcefulness to his conviction that he is leaving it behind.

“I'm getting out of the woods, but, if I have to go back, I know what I have to do,” he said.

Reach Ed Enoch at ed.enoch@tuscaloosanews.com or 205-722-0209.