Recently, Rep. Nancy Pelosi (D-Calif.) was asked about her thoughts on the recent health care rollout crisis. She avoided actually answering the question and instead devolved into a weird chant about its affordability.

“It’s called the Affordable Care Act. It’s called the Affordable Care Act … ” she told a reporter. “Affordable. Affordable. Affordable. Affordable. Affordable!”

The fact of the matter is simple, though. No matter how many times or places — or with varying amounts of gusto — one tries to emphasize the first word of its title, the Affordable Care Act is far from ‘affordable.’

First of all, there are the premiums. The CEO of Aetna predicted more than a year ago that healthcare premiums would likely double, and other health industry officials have since predicted similarly. Even more troubling, one unnamed swing-state insurer recently told The Hill that in some markets, the individual-market premiums under the ACA exchanges could even triple.

Then are the hidden costs that simply don’t appear in basic side-by-side premium comparisons. The Department of Health and Human Services examined a hypothetical 27-year-old in Texas with an annual income of $25,000. The government claimed this individual would pay between $133 and $145 for the silver plan. However, an outside analysis noted that this plan, in reality, would then be accompanied by a $5,000 deductible and a $6,350 out-of-pocket maximum costs. For this 27-year-old earning very little — and statistically also straddled with enormous student debt — the “affordable” coverage through the ACA could consume up to 30 percent of his or her income.

Estimations this year predict that the average millennial enrolling in the exchanges will spend an average of $1,700 per year on out-of-pocket healthcare costs. However, those who refuse to buy into the exchanges and are forced to pay the penalty will spend approximately $348 in out-of-pocket costs.

The numbers are plain. It’s far more “affordable” to not enroll, and instead be punished by the government for being financially savvy.

Despite this obvious gloom on the nation’s healthcare horizon, Pelosi claims that the Affordable Care Act faced resistance not because it’s poor policy, but rather because we just don’t understand it. She called upon America to fix its purported collective ignorance: “Everybody has to spread the word as to what this is.”

Unfortunately for Democrats, people are spreading the word about what Obamacare “is.” As information-sharing about the Act has increased, support has appropriately decreased.

However, the federal government and progressive marketing organizations have tried wooing millennials not with information, but rather with tactics ranging from silly to insulting.

We all remember that infamous 20-something guy smugly sipping on hot cocoa in a snuggly onesie while clamoring to stay on his parents’ insurance.

Then there was “Brosurance,” an ad campaign featuring smiling frat boys holding up their red Solo cups, framed next to the mind-blowingly clever tag line: “Keg stands are crazy. Not having health insurance is crazier.” An equally awkward gem was the Colorado “Got Insurance?” campaign, successfully conveying excitement about having sex.

“OMG, he’s hot!” read the ad. “Let’s hope he’s as easy to get as this birth control.”

Apparently, today’s progressives, supported by the Democratic wing, have sadly reduced the millennial generation to oblivious partiers who have no desire or ability to process information. Such dumbed-down tactics are disrespectful to millennials’ hard work and diligence, evidenced in their salaries — which the government undeniably needs to fund this flailing program.

Thankfully, millennials didn’t actually fall for the ignorance-infused wooing tactics. They are over the broken promises of 2008’s “Hope and Change.” They are looking at the Act for “what it is.” And they’re not impressed.

A recent Harvard University Institute of Politics survey found that a majority of millennials, an age group historically supportive of progressive programming, disapprove of Obamacare. A majority rightfully believes that personal costs will increase and quality of care decrease. Only 10 percent believe the opposite – that their healthcare will be more “affordable.”

Pelosi is right about one thing, however. It is time to continue to spread the word about “what this is.”

The Affordable Care Act is this: a mechanism by which government sloppily attempts to spread fiscal responsibilities, further crippling the millennial generation already straddled with unprecedented amounts of individual student debt, a broken entitlement system, an anemic economy and an ever-skyrocketing national debt. It’s a taxpayer-subsidized logistical nightmare month after month, one in which the administration and national leaders have resorted to ridiculous peer pressure campaigns to sway young people.

One thing it is certainly not, Pelosi, is “affordable, affordable, affordable, affordable, affordable.” Nice try.