After years of speed dating our politicians, it's time to start asking for some long-term commitment and fidelity.

By Jeff Coleman

No one admits it, but most of us have tried it at least once. Despite the fashionable way we guttersnipe about people who run for office, we still fall in love with politicians. We give in to pick-up lines, take the gifts and agree to conditional relationship terms for two or four years. As someone who has been both the pursued and the pursuer, I've watched it happen hundreds of times. It's the art of political dating.

The proof of our participation in the ritual is found on Facebook pages decorated with pictures, quotable speech lines and videos of people who hold, once held or hope to hold public office. When the love interest break s our heart, we rebound with a founding father, The Constitution or a talk show host who despises all politicians living and dead. It’s a funny kind of love, but has every symptom of a teenage crush, especially the fickleness.

Let me sketch this idea out a bit further.

This past Labor Day weekend I combined a family vacation with a few hours at a political conference in a sunny southern state. Three thousand conservative leaders and personalities, radio talk show hosts and a battalion of bloggers made the pilgrimage from around the country to coordinate message and strategy on subjects like defunding Obamacare to opposing war in Syria.

With the disappearance of the time-honored, gentleman’s ceasefire between presidential elections, events like this take on the feel of a perpetual political convention in miniature. Just nine months into a new presidential term, nearly half of the leading GOP contenders were testing out their Iowa Fair fodder and showcasing cosmetic refinements to their persona.

When U.S. Sen. Ted Cruz -- the conservative rising star Rick Santorum and Sarah Palin helped elect in Texas -- strode the main stage without TelePrompter or notes, the audience thundered affection with cheers and a series of rowdy standing ovations.

Just a few hours before, the same audience let his colleague and ally, U.S. Sen. Marco Rubio, R-Fla., know their love was on hold, and a breakup was on the table if something didn’t change. The offended parties even silk-screened their dislike on loud, red t-shirts.

As one love bloomed, another faded.

But expressions of the deepest love and hate for political figures aren’t limited to convention-going activists. Political dating is a raging, full-scale pastime for millions of cheering, jeering Americans.

Ideological cable channels, radio talk shows, newspapers, blogs and social media rotate in, and pull out, the hot prospects with the speed of a 24-hour news cycle. One day we’re introduced to the hot, “rising star,” the next day we watch the jury usher out the latest batch of faltering prospects. Republicans, Democrats and now even Libertarians are combed over for the smallest, disqualifying imperfection. Most of them never had a chance.

There’s something seriously askew about the way we’ve placed so much value on a politician being exactly what we want them to be, then suddenly and brutally severing the relationship when they’ve done us wrong.

Our approach seems to reveal one of the shallower moments in our long, national story. We accept people who momentarily parrot our own convictions, without waiting for proof they actually hold or understand them. When they fail, we divorce for irreconcilable differences and re-marry.

The modern political process is a sophisticated, data-driven dating game. The voter tells the pollster the ideological height, weight, eye and hair requirements they’re looking for, then a campaign team crafts and delivers a politician who fits the order. When a candidate is delivered and follows the script, everyone wins.

In the past few days Norway and Australia chose conservative governments. In the land of the wallabies, Prime Minister-elect Tony Abbott, a pro-life conservative, won his second attempt to win the premiership after his team meticulously reconstructed a public image that protected, but somewhat obscured, his lifelong defense of traditional values.

In political dating, the “look over there” strategy is something Americans have found useful. Ballot-box defeats are often followed by announcements of a grand “change-of-heart” that allows for politicians to grow and evolve within the span of a single election cycle. The new politician looks like the old one, but cured of all the nasty habits.

The problem with migrating our faith from God and permanent values to politicians is that it’s a bland, temporary fix for the real thing. When we shoehorn our hopes into willing, empty vessels, it quiets our conscience about our own inaction on issues we believe require immediate attention and action.

We don’t have to pray and work for real solutions for crumbling cities, persistent poverty, failing public schools or a 20 percent statewide abortion rate, we simply have to elect politicians who parrot our beliefs and mimic our own lifestyles.

I think we’ve reached a point in our state and national life when we need leaders willing to articulate and defend ideas without submitting to reparative conviction therapy before the next election reveal.

The challenges we’re facing require leaders willing to say the true and hard things, with thoughtfulness and grace. Love isn’t withholding a difficult diagnosis from a sick patient, it’s delivering the news with a plan to confront the hardship together.

After years of speed dating presidents, governors and state senators, it's time to start asking for some long-term, steady commitment and fidelity in these kinds of relationships. It’s time to choose leaders, not people who only make us feel special.

Jeff Coleman, a former state lawmaker, is a principal of Churchill Strategies in Harrisburg.