While earning her master’s degree in architecture, Emilie Schmitz barely had time to sleep, let alone remember to take a birth control pill every day. She’d already tried the contraceptive patch – a thin plastic strip that sticks to the body and delivers hormones through the skin – but it had given her a rash. She didn’t like needles and had no desire to choose Depo-Provera, the pregnancy-preventing shot. And in the past, she’d used the NuvaRing – a flexible plastic ring that’s placed inside the vagina and releases progestin and estrogen – but for her, its side effects included “extreme mood swings, to the point where I was crying and then I was laughing.”

During a break from school, Schmitz – now a 28-year-old architectural intern who lives in Atlanta – visited a trusted primary care physician, a female doctor whose husband was an architect. She listened closely to Schmitz’s concerns, and then suggested the student try a form of contraceptive she’d never used before: an intrauterine device, more commonly referred to as an IUD.

IUDs, the doctor explained, are small, T-shaped plastic devices that are either wrapped in copper – a metal that’s toxic to sperm – or release a hormone called levonorgestrel. They’re inserted into the uterus by a health care professional, and depending on the type, can be left inside the body for time periods ranging from three to 10 years. And perhaps most importantly, they’re nearly 100 percent effective in preventing pregnancy. An IUD, Schmitz’s doctor said, would free her from worrying about birth control so she could focus on her budding career.

After weighing her options, Schmitz decided to opt for Mirena, a levonorgestrel-releasing IUD that releases hormones into the uterus instead of the entire body. It's known to lighten cramps and menstrual flows, and is approved by the Food and Drug Administration for five years of use. Four years later, Schmitz says, it’s almost time to get a new one – and depending on life circumstances such as marriage and pregnancy, she wouldn’t hesitate to choose the method again.

“It was a godsend,” she says. “I didn’t have mood swings, I had very few periods or they were light, and I didn't have to worry about [pregnancy] anymore. I didn't have to think.”

Both Schmitz and medical experts stress that there are many different forms of birth control. Some might work better than others for certain women’s bodies and lifestyles, be it condoms, a patch or a pill. But according to recent national figures, more and more women, just like Schmitz, are opting to choose the IUD – once viewed as a contraceptive method best suited for busy mothers – as a first-line method of birth control.

The Guttmacher Institute, a nonprofit organization that works to advance reproductive health, reports that women using long-acting reversible contraceptives, or LARCs – which primarily consist of IUDs, but can also include hormone-releasing implants – have increased among all women, regardless of age, race, education or income. Only 2.4 percent of women used LARCs in 2002. By 2007, that figure had risen to 3.7, and by 2009 it was 8.5 percent.

Similarly, Planned Parenthood reports that it’s seen the total number of patients using IUDs increase 75 percent from 2008 to 2012. In just one year, between 2011 and 2012, the organization says it saw a 19 percent rise in patients with IUDs. And because the data was compiled before the Affordable Care Act’s no-copay birth control benefit took effect, Planned Parenthood says they expect the numbers to keep rising.

Meanwhile, both the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists and the American Academy of Pediatrics recently recommended long-acting contraceptive devices as the first choice of birth control for sexually active teenage girls – outweighing conventional views that IUDs and implants were better suited for older women.

But are IUDs the right option for you? Here are a few common questions answered – and a few longstanding myths debunked:

How Do IUDs Work?

At first glance, IUDs look alike – they’re small, plastic, T-shaped devices that are several centimeters high and wide. Thin strings that resemble fishing line dangle from the bottom and are primarily used so the doctor can remove the device and women can manually check to make sure it's still in place.

However, there are differences between various types of IUDs. Although many kinds are used across the world, the U.S. currently offers three on the market: ParaGard, which is covered in tiny copper coils; Mirena; and Skyla, a new IUD that also releases levonorgestrel but is slightly tinier than Mirena or ParaGard and designed for women who have a smaller uterus.

The basic science of how they work differs as well, according to Anne Burke, an assistant professor of obstetrics and gynecology and director of the Family Planning Fellowship Program at the Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine. For Mirena and Skyla, “The progesterone – which is the kind of hormone that levonorgestrel is – has several contraceptive effects,” she says. “One is that it helps thicken the cervical mucus, which creates a more impenetrable barrier for sperm. It also suppresses the growth of the lining of the uterus, which also probably impacts fertilization and enhances the contraceptive effect. There’s also some evidence that it may impede some of the function of sperm.”

Meanwhile, she says, ParaGard – the copper IUD – creates a mild inflammatory reaction inside the uterus, which primarily helps prevent the sperm from fertilizing the egg.

ParaGard can be left inside a women’s uterus for 10 years, whereas Mirena only prevents pregnancy for five years, and Skyla for three. Upon insertion, ParaGard works to prevent pregnancy immediately; Mirena and Skyla are fully effective after a week. According to the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, between 0.2 and 0.8 percent of women who use an IUD will have an unplanned pregnancy within a year.

What’s the Insertion and Removal Process Like?

Before getting an IUD, you’ll usually need to take three things: a pregnancy test if you’re sexually active, an STD test (the insertion process could potentially carry any infections through the cervix into the uterus) and a pain reliever like ibuprofen to alleviate the procedure’s potentially painful aspects. Before actual insertion, the doctor will also perform a quick pelvic exam and check the position of the uterus.

According to Burke, the insertion process itself is done by a medical provider, be it a primary care physician who’s trained in IUD insertion, a gynecologist or another clinician. After explaining any risks and benefits, the procedure begins similar to a Pap smear: The doctor inserts a speculum into the vagina, dilates the cervix and occasionally provides numbing medicine to remove some discomfort. Then, the physician uses forceps to hold the cervix still, and a tool called a sound to measure the uterus to make sure it’s large enough for the IUD to fit inside.

Finally, the IUD is placed into the uterus through an insertion tube, which flattens the IUD’s “T” and pushes the IUD through the cervix into the uterus before it’s taken out. Once the IUD is inside the uterus, the doctor trims the strings so they poke out only slightly beyond the cervix and then removes the speculum. The entire process takes 5 to 10 minutes.

Although IUDs can be left in for years, Burke says a woman can have her IUD taken out anytime she wants. Removal is a no-fuss procedure; a medical provider grabs hold of the strings with forceps and simply pulls the IUD out of the vagina.

As for a women’s return to fertility, it’s “fairly immediate,” Burke notes. “There's been some studies showing that out of the women who have their IUDs removed and are trying to get pregnant, about 85 to 89 percent ... will be pregnant by the end of [a] year,” she says.