Tracy Scarvinni answers the phone Friday at Cañon National Bank's Royal Gorge Boulevard location. In October, the bank is celebrating 40 years of business. ( Sarah Rose / Daily Record )

Cañon National Bank opened its doors the same year President Richard Nixon resigned.

It happened 40 years ago.

CNB Market President Michael Till said as far as he knows, the business is the only locally-owned bank in Cañon City.

The business, originally named Empire National Bank, opened at 2101 Fremont Drive. In 1986, the name was changed to its current name, Till said.

"There was an Empire Savings & Loan in town and it was at the location where Great Western Bank is," Till said. "The directors of the bank changed the name so there wouldn't be confusion."

Nine branches are now in Colorado. There are two in Cañon City, one in Florence, two in Colorado Springs, one in Pueblo West, two in Pueblo and one in Colorado City.

In March of 2007, the bank hit the milestone of $200 million in assets, Till said.

Till said Darryl Biggerstaff founded the bank and was in charge of it up until his death several years ago.

"The family wanted to make sure there was a community bank in town and that there was a place where the community felt comfortable going to," he said.

Biggerstaff was very involved in making the city a better place, Till said.

The founder helped raise $1 million for the construction of the Fremont Campus of Pueblo Community College. PCC's Darryl Biggerstaff Learning Resource Center, which was remodeled in November 2013, is named after him.

Advertisement

Phil Meinert, CNB board director, said there are three main reasons why the bank has been a part of Cañon City for 40 years.

"The first (reason) is the integrity and honesty of the original founders," he stated in an email. "Specifically Dan Tanner and Darryl Biggerstaff. Dan, as chairman, continues to provide leadership and insists on these character traits in every member of the staff."

The branches continuously serve the towns they are located in, he said, which has helped the bank expand.

The partnership between other locally-owned banks in the state is the third reason why the bank has a long history, Meinert said.

"Cañon National is a respected member of state organizations and can be counted on by other independent bankers to assist them in their efforts to support their own communities," Meinert stated in an email.

CNB board member Daniel Tanner said he appreciates all the people who have been a part of the business.

"We thank all of our loyal customers and staff for their support and look forward to the next forty years," Tanner stated in an email.

Tanner said the bank has been in business for decades because the "ownership is committed to community bank principals and a culture of personal service dedicated to serving the communities that we do business in."

Willy Faris, president of the board, said the bank has always been technologically modern and "operated in a manner to promote the financial goals of families and businesses."

"Even during the last recession we never stopped making loans and continued to look for opportunities to promote the local economy," Faris stated in an email. "Our actions during this time was key to maintaining our loyal customer base and attracting new customers that were seeking a more stable and equitable banking relationship. ... Banking is a very volatile business so anytime, and especially in this day and age of complicated mega banks, that a community bank can successfully operate for four decades is quite an achievement."

Darryn Biggerstaff (the founder's son), David Reynolds, Lynn Greenlee, Jim Williams and Larry Shriver are also current board members.

To celebrate their 40-year anniversary, the bank will have an open house in conjunction with the Cañon City Chamber of Commerce's Business After Hours. The event is from 5:30 - 7:30 p.m. Oct. 23 at the CNB Depot location, 816 Royal Gorge Boulevard. Admission is free.