While the national minimum wage is at $7.25 an hour, a slew of large companies have recently hiked their minimum pay including Target, T.J. Maxx, McDonald's, Wal-Mart and the Gap.



Read More McDonald's to raise pay as franchises may feel new pressure



Last week, congressional democrats unveiled their plan to hike the federal minimum wage to $12 an hour by 2020, which is sure to be a key talking point for candidates heading into the 2016 election. While most NFIB business members pay above the federal minimum of $7.25 an hour, Jack Mozloom, a spokesman for the conservative advocacy group, says those who don't offer higher wages can't afford higher pay.



"Everyone supports higher wages for workers, but you can't have a government mandate for higher pay when you don't have the sales to support additional costs," Mozloom said.



Supporters of higher wages disagree, of course. The National Employment Law Project recently applauded the introduction of the Raise the Wage Act of 2015, which would gradually raise the federal minimum wage to $12, index the rate to rise yearly and eliminate the subminimum wage for tipped employees.

"With the economy still tilting toward low-paying jobs, the nation needs bolder action to improve jobs across the bottom of the economy," said Christine Owens, executive director of NELP, in a prepared statement.



Raising wages is likely to be part of a larger discussion about benefits.

President Barack Obama has also advocated for paid sick leave. He has directed federal agencies to give employees up to six weeks after the birth or adoption of a child. The move is something democrats would like to see extended to all workers.

Read MoreObama plans to push paid family and sick leave for workers



A separate Bank of America report recently found 29 percent of those surveyed said mandated sick leave would have the greatest negative impact on their small business. About 26 percent said a higher minimum wage would take the biggest toll, according to the research released last week.