Should employers be able to opt out of the contraception mandate because of executives' religious beliefs? Share your thoughts below.

COLUMBUS, Ohio -- Two Democratic state lawmakers plan to introduce legislation they say would prevent businesses from blocking contraceptive coverage on employer health plans.

The "Not My Boss's Business Act" would prohibit employers from restricting coverage of contraception and from firing or punishing employees for having abortions and making other reproductive health care decisions.

Sen. Charleta Tavares, a Columbus Democrat, plans to introduce legislation in the Senate and Rep. Kathleen Clyde, a Kent Democrat, plans to introduce companion legislation in the House. The bills have little chance of passing either chamber of the Republican-dominated General Assembly, but that didn't prevent the bills' sponsors from touting their need during a news conference Tuesday.

"It's hard to believe that in 2014 this kind of legislation is necessary," Clyde said. "But right here in our own state, we have companies who are trying to impose their views on women and not cover women's birth control -- companies that that have no problem covering men's Viagra and men's vasectomies."

The bill was prompted by last month's U.S. Supreme Court decision allowing closely-held private companies to opt out of the Affordable Care Act's contraception coverage mandate. In that case, craft supply chain Hobby Lobby officials sought to exclude from its health insurance plans some types of birth control they believe constitute abortions, which are against their religious beliefs.

Tavares said 99 percent of women will use birth control at some point in their lifetimes and more than half use it to treat a medical condition, not to prevent pregnancy. Tavares said birth control use can help reduce infant mortality.

"This is about more than contraceptives and whether or not someone chooses to take them or not, it's about what's best for the woman's health," Tavares said. "The Not My Boss's Business Act sends a clear message that birth control is not up for grabs."

Clyde and Tavares said 28 states have laws prohibiting employers from excluding birth control in their health insurance plans and several states have introduced similar legislation.

A U.S. Senate bill that would mandate contraceptive coverage despite religious claims failed to get enough votes last week.

A spokeswoman for Ohio Right to Life, the state's largest anti-abortion organization, said like that bill, the Ohio legislation will not pass the "pro-life legislature." Spokeswoman Katie McCann said the bills are a political stunt meant to set the stage for a "war on women" debate during the fall campaign season.

Ohio Right to Life does not take a stance on birth control, but McCann said the types of birth control excluded by Hobby Lobby destroy a fertilized egg, which goes against their mission statement.

"The Supreme Court specifically rules here that abortifacients are not a CEO's responsibility to be forced to pay for it," McCann said.