HOLLYWOOD–God bless America, and how’s everybody?

Highmark Health Insurers sued the U.S. for the two hundred million dollars the U.S. owes them for Obamacare reimbursements. The insurers are facing the same extra expenses as the patients. Obamacare is just like one of those hospital gowns that ties in the back, you just think you’re covered.

Massachusetts General Hospital surgeons Monday performed the first penis transplant in the U.S. on sixty-four-year-old Thomas Manning. The next day the surgeons reported that Manning is doing very well. However it’s turning out to be very expensive, the patient has a four-inch deductible.

Khloe Kardashian said Tuesday it’s tough for her to separate from Lamar Odom because her dad Bob Kardashian taught her divorce is wrong. Views vary widely. Bob was a defense lawyer for his old friend O.J. Simpson, who believed divorce was just one of the options available to a celebrity.

Philadelphia began worrying about riots at the Democratic Convention after a Bernie Sanders mob got violent in Nevada’s state convention. Security is iffy. Philadelphia is broke and can’t pay overtime, so cops are being asked to work just for the chance to beat demonstrators at a historic event.

Donald Trump released a list of eleven judges he’d consider nominating to the Supreme Court if he’s elected president on Tuesday. The list accurately reflects his world view. There’s one judge from Yale, one judge from Texas, two judges from Utah and seven judges from the Miss USA Pageant.

Former Miss USA California Carrie Prejean defended Donald Trump from sexism charges by the New York Times. She won Miss California USA seven years ago after the pageant bought her a boob job. It’s an act to remember the next time Democrats say that rich white guys don’t believe in welfare.

Melania Trump on Tuesday laughed off the New York Times article about her husband’s past womanizing. She’s learned the same thing Hillary, Maria Shriver and Elizabeth Edwards learned. The best thing about having a famous husband is that it saves you a lot of money on private detectives.

The GOP on Tuesday formed a political action committee called Amish PAC to convince sixty thousand Amish voters in Pennsylvania and Ohio to vote for Donald Trump. Presentation is everything to the Amish. Don’t miss Donald Trump entering Lancaster in a horse drawn Boeing 747.

Donald Trump said in an interview Tuesday as president he’d have no problem speaking with North Korea’s brutal dictator Kim Jung Un. This could really work out for U.S. interests. If there’s one thing Kim Jung Un is sure to respect, it’s the one man in the world with crazier hair than he has.

California’s Attorney General agreed to investigate why gasoline prices in California are over a dollar higher per gallon than the rest of the U.S. Critics say that Californians are being screwed by the big oil companies. It’s no accident that the number one actor’s name in porn movies is Derrick.

CNN says a Saudi divorced his wife the day of their wedding because she was too busy texting friends to have sex with him on their wedding night. Such is the state of love today. A man never knows five minutes into lovemaking if his wife is shrieking from pleasure or from iPhone withdrawal.

The British Museum curators said they discovered an original copy of America’s Declaration of Independence in their basement vault in London. It got nice laugh. Parents always save the notes that their children write to them, especially the ones that say they’re running away from home.

Donald Trump met with Henry Kissinger Tuesday for a foreign policy tutorial from Nixon’s legendary diplomat. As a young Harvard professor in 1957, Kissinger wrote a book on how America could survive a nuclear war with the Russians that was so scary that Hollywood’s Stanley Kubrick made Kissinger the role model for Dr. Strangelove. Six Flags never had a ride as wild as the Cold War.

Argus Hamilton is the host comedian at The Comedy Store in Hollywood and entertains groups and organizations around the country. E-mail him at Argus@ArgusHamilton.com.