The volatility we are witnessing in the equity and debt markets is already manifesting itself in private equity fundraising, but not in the way that many general partners would expect. Obviously, some limited partners with overweighting to energy or high-yield debt have been sidelined by the downturn in those sectors, but other limited partners have been underwhelmed by public equity and hedge fund performance recently and are seeking superior returns from alternatives.

During the global financial crisis of 2008, we experienced such sharp declines in the public equity markets that many LPs experienced a “denominator effect,” which required a rebalancing of their portfolios at the expense of their private equity investment programs. The volatility we are seeing today is not nearly as dramatic, and private equity has often become the beneficiary of LPs seeking to mitigate the short-term performance variability and capture incremental performance not offered by the fully valued public markets. So, instead of a complete rebalancing, there is a more subtle shifting of focus and capital toward fund managers and strategies that fare better in these more volatile economic conditions.

Effect on exits and fundraising timing

Many fund managers, anticipating a downturn, have decided to return to the fundraising market earlier than expected in order to access what they perceive as a reduced allocation before markets cool. As discussed, the good news is that we are not yet seeing a reduction in private equity fundraising volume, and in some instances we've actually seen an increase as underperforming asset classes are pared back.

That being said, it hasn't been all champagne and caviar for GPs during this recent downturn. Fund managers are finding it increasingly difficult to exit portfolio companies at the pace and valuations we were all accustomed to seeing in 2015. This is largely a result of the financing markets becoming much more difficult to access for potential acquirers, particularly strategics. This slowdown in the exit markets might make it difficult for fund managers to raise capital because thedistributed-to-paid-in ratio has been such a crucial component of fund assessment over the past few years.

In other words, GPs are increasingly trying to tackle the fundraising market with less validation of their strategy through partial or full realizations. Likewise, fund managers that have conservatively marked their companies during this recent runup in valuations will be rewarded by still meeting or exceeding their marks, while others will be forced to take write-downs that reflect the constrained financing markets and delayed exits.

Who is experiencing success?

The fund managers that we are seeing achieve the most success in this volatile environment are the sector-focused groups that have the domain expertise to navigate choppier markets and the deep value players that have a focus on distressed assets, credit or a differentiated secondary approach. Real assets have also gained traction, with the infrastructure and timberland sectors seeing notable spikes.

North American LPs continue to show strong conviction around domestic opportunities with high-quality managers — even those launching spinout funds — and those GPs that have spent time off-cycle deepening and broadening their investor relationships will continue to gain traction from these forward-looking investor groups.

Investors focused on health-care specific strategies

Following enactment of the Affordable Care Act, the $3 trillion U.S. health-care market has increasingly become a sector of focus for investors. Favorable macro trends, including aging baby boomers and advancements in technology, have provided attractive opportunities for investment amid the volatility in the macroeconomic landscape. As other sectors become crowded and overbought, LPs recognize that, identifying rationally priced assets will become a more significant challenge than in past years.

Sector specialists will benefit from a distinct sourcing advantage in these difficult markets and the dynamics within the health-care sector at present should reward dedicated health-care focused funds. Public-to-private transactions and corporate divestitures will continue to drive deal volumes particularly in health care's lower middle market. Investors have shown a strong appetite for fund managers dedicated to capitalizing on health care's favorable market trends and others, including:

Strong public equity markets and hungry strategic buyers in the industry are creating attractive exit conditions for sellers; As strategic firms continue to reposition their portfolios for growth, carve-out assets will continue to reach the market, creating a solid pool of assets for health-care private equity firms; Many health-care segments are still extremely fragmented, playing to classic private equity strengths around buy-and-build strategies; and A favorable regulatory landscape and evolution of care delivery continues to create opportunities for new business models.

As can be seen in the chart below, health-care focused funds have increasingly met and exceeded their targets in the last three years compared to the prior five.

Eric Zoller is a co-founder and partner at Sixpoint Partners. Colin Dinneen is a director at Sixpoint Partners.