Buy Photo Assembyman Steve Katz, after reading a statement in March, after he had been issued a ticket for marijuana possession and speeding. Prior to his arrest he had opposed medicinal marijuana; he has since voted for medical marijuana and recently announced his plans to invest in marijuana, and his support for legalizing marijuana, for medical and recreational use. (Photo: Joe Larese/The Journal News)

ALBANY -- Democrats are blasting legislation sponsored by Assemblyman Steve Katz that would defund Planned Parenthood in New York.

Katz, R-Yorktown, introduced a bill this week that would prohibit New York from funding Planned Parenthood, which has been at the center of a national debate over abortion rights.

"Using taxpayer dollars to support procedures residents may or may not support is an irresponsible use of taxpayer dollars," the bill, which is co-sponsored by Assemblyman Kieran Michael Lalor, R-Fishkill, Dutchess County, states. "At a time when New York is desperately trying to revive its economy, there are much better areas for hard earned taxpayer dollars to be used."

Democrats have been trying to bolster abortion rights in New York, and they cited Katz's bill as a reason why greater protections are needed. The bill has no chance of passing in the Democratic-led Assembly, but other states have successfully banned funding to the organization.

"We have been told repeatedly that there are no threats to reproductive rights here in New York state, yet legislation and efforts to de-legitimize women’s health organizations prove that our rights are very much under attack," Senate Democratic Leader Andrea Stewart-Cousins, D-Yonkers, said in a statement.

"This bill caters to the fearmongers and anti-choice extremists who refuse to acknowledge the facts about Planned Parenthood. This essential organization provides vital, life-saving screenings and support to millions of women throughout New York."

New York has more than 60 Planned Parenthood locations, and it has secured about $134 million in state contracts since 2009, state records show.

“Debate the morals surrounding Planned Parenthood all you like,” Katz said in a statement to the Times-Union in Albany. “It is not debatable, however, that tax dollars are being wasted by funding Planned Parenthood which offers the same services New Yorkers can now receive from a doctor through the Affordable Care Act. My bill will defund the organization so that residents’ tax dollars are utilized for more worthwhile and essential areas of need.”

Katz, who is not seeking re-election, was knocked by Democrats in 2014 for his stance on women's rights during his successful re-election bid in a district that stretches across northern Westchester and Putnam counties.

“What a shame that New York has now joined the dubious list of states with legislation to withhold funding for vital reproductive health services," Sen. Liz Krueger, D-Manhattan, said in a statement.

"But even more shameful is that Assembly Member Katz justifies his bill by resorting to the same discredited litany of lies about Planned Parenthood that have been proven time and again to be nothing but a straw man manufactured to justify attacks on women’s healthcare decisions."

Read or Share this story: http://lohud.us/1SMpC0n