We recently told you about some great laptops for less than $1,000. Laptops like the Apple MacBook Air, for about $900, are loaded with features like large HD screens and long-lasting batteries.

But there are so many high-quality laptops these days that we can push that price down even further. So, just in time for school, we did.

We found several really good laptops for less than $500, including some for under $300. These are high-quality laptops.

The ones we’re talking about have large screens, including some with 15-plus-inch screens. They’re sleek, shiny, colorful and lightweight.

They have plenty of storage, considerably more than bulky desktops had just a few years ago. In fact, most have 4GB of RAM, although there are ones with 2GB.

These laptops have fast processors like the Intel Core i3 and the Intel Core i5. Others have the Intel Celeron, which is more than sufficient for most people.

Before we get started, just remember the prices here are Amazon’s list price. As always, you should bargain hunt. When we dug deeper into Amazon, we found some of these laptops for half their list prices.

So, before school starts, check out these laptops.

1. Dell Chromebook 11

This is a high-quality laptop with a super-low-price option. For students on the run who spend all their time on the Internet, and who don’t really need word processing programs or spreadsheets, Dell’s Chromebook 11 ($427 at Amazon) is a good compact laptop.

This 11.6-inch laptop is a little heavy, at 4.8 pounds, and the battery life could be better - it gets you seven hours on one charge.

Under the hood, it holds up well to pricier laptops. It runs on the Intel Celeron processor and has 4GB of RAM.

Remember we told you to bargain hunt? We found a 2GB option with a list price of $249.

2. Acer Aspire E5

Acer’s Aspire E5 ($389 at Amazon) is an excellent solution to bring Windows’ functionality and ease of use to a value-priced laptop.

Plus, it’s got 4GB of RAM and it’s powered by an Intel Core i3 processor. A bump up to the Intel Core i5 brings its list price on Amazon to $499.

There are downsides, though. This 15.6-inch Windows laptop also gets just seven hours of power. At 5.5 pounds, Acer’s Aspire E5 is heavier than other fast and powerful laptops listed here.

3. Acer Chromebook 15

The first thing you’ll notice about the Acer Chromebook 15 ($349 at Amazon) is its big, bright 15.6-inch HD screen. But its insides are impressive, too.

It’s got 4GB of RAM and it’s powered by an Intel Celeron processor. At this size, it’ll get nine hours of battery life. A bump up to Intel Core i3 brings its list price to $449. It’s available with Intel’s Core i5 for just under $500.

At 4.8 pounds, Acer’s Chromebook 15 is a middleweight compared to some of the other laptops we found for under $500.

4. Toshiba Chromebook 2

The Toshiba Chromebook 2 ($299 at Amazon) is a good-looking, lightweight laptop that packs a serious punch. It’s got 4GB of RAM and it’s powered by an Intel Celeron processor.

The screen is a compact 13.3 inches, and it weighs just three pounds. Probably on purpose, it resembles Apple’s ultra-sleek MacBook Air. You’ll get nine hours of life on this battery.

This laptop is an excellent laptop for students of all ages.

5. HP Stream 13

If you, or the students in your life, like a pop of color, HP’s Stream 13 ($229 at Amazon) has just that. It comes in orchid magenta, which is a bright-bright purple-y pink, and a deep, rich horizon blue. Trust us, heads will turn.

More important, the Stream 13 is a low-cost option for accessing the functionality and reliability of Windows. It has a smaller 13.3-inch screen and has over seven hours of battery life. It’s not too much to haul around, weighing only 3.4 pounds.

Plus, under the hood, it stacks up OK to pricier laptops. It has 2GB of RAM and runs on the Intel Celeron processor.