Company donates $2,000 for trails project

Blaine Johnson of Tallgrass Energy shows guests the inside of the pump house at the Sterling pumping station for the Pony Express Pipeline during an open house Wednesday. ( Sara Waite / Sterling Journal-Advocate )

Doug Johnson (second from right) of Tallgrass Energy presents a check for $2,000 for the Logan County Economic Development Corporation to, from left, LCEDC President Gary Nichols, Logan County Chamber of Commerce President Tom Bedford and Sterling Mayor Dan Torres. The funds will go toward a multi-use trail near Sterling High School. (Sara Waite / Sterling Journal-Advocate)

Local officials and other interested parties gathered with representatives from Tallgrass Energy Wednesday to celebrate the opening of the Pony Express Pipeline's Sterling pumping station.

The 690-mile long pipeline connects Guernsey, Wyo., to Cushing, Okla. While 260 miles — from Lincoln County, Kan., to Payne County, Okla., were new construction, the stretch of pipeline that runs through Sterling has been converted from natural gas. The pipeline transports light, sweet crude oil from the Bakken production area of North Dakota and eastern Montana.

The pipeline's capacity at this point is 230,000 barrels per day. Six storage tanks are under construction at the Sterling station that will be part of the Northeast Colorado Lateral (NECL) project. That project will add another 90,000 barrels per day from northeast Colorado — from north central Weld County through Logan County — to the pipeline, with plans to expand further from there.

At Wednesday's ribbon cutting and open house, Doug Johnson of Tallgrass told the guests that safety is the company's "No. 1 priority." He talked about the constant monitoring systems in place to detect any problems with the line, including leaks, and said that if there is a problem they can shut down the pipeline in less than a minute.

Advertisement

Johnson also said that the station has four to five direct employees now, and will have 10 by the time they bring NECL online. There will also be six other employees in the Sterling area.

As evidence of the company's desire to build a good relationship with the local business community, Johnson presented a check for $2,000 for the Logan County Economic Development Corporation. Accepting the check were Sterling Mayor Dan Torres, Logan County Chamber of Commerce President Tom Bedford and LCEDC President Gary Nichols. The money will be put toward a trail project near Sterling High School that will improve safety and recreation in that area. "It's going to be put to good use," Nichols said.

Local officials join Tallgrass Energy representatives in a ribbon cutting at the Sterling pumping station for the Pony Express Pipeline Wednesday, Oct. 15. From left: Gene Meisner, Blaine Johnson, Gary Nichols, Tom Bedford, Craig Meis, Dave Donaldson, Doug Johnson, Rocky Samber and Dan Torres. (Sara Waite / Sterling Journal-Advocate)

After a ribbon cutting, guests were invited to don hard hats and take a tour of the facility. One of the guides, Blain Johnson, has over 30 years of experience in the field, and worked at the Sterling station when it was converted to natural gas. During this conversion back to crude, he said the pipeline went through a lot of upgrades and multiple inspections. "A lot of work was done to make it safe," he said, noting that the pipe was replaced at river crossings and other sensitive areas.

He explained how the crude oil will come into and flow out of the pumping station once it is brought online. That will happen by the end of the month.

Inside the pump house, Johnson talked about the two electric-motor pumps and what will be done to bring them online. The pumps don't work well with air in the lines, he said, so hoses will be connected to high-point drains and watched by crew members as the station is "flooded" — the term for filling the pipes with crude. The level of oil in the lines is also monitored electronically. Once the air is bled from the pipes the hoses are disconnected and the drains closed.

A third pump will be brought in for the NECL expansion. The pipeline construction is slated to be complete by December, and they expect to be loading tanks by April.

While the process sounds simple, Johnson said, there are always "bugs" to be worked out during the flooding and commissioning process.

Contact Journal-Advocate managing editor Sara Waite at 970-526-9310 or swaite@journal-advocate.com