By Mike Davis and Brendan McGrath

TRENTON — It was viewed as a dead heat by pollsters and political insiders from the start, but in the end it was a resounding victory for Assemblywoman Bonnie Watson Coleman (D-Mercer), who yesterday won the Democratic nomination for the open congressional seat in the 12th District.

Supporters at the Lafayette Yard Hotel & Conference Center last night erupted in cheers as whispers of the results circled around the room.

“We take nothing for granted. We’re going to work very hard,” Watson Coleman said in her victory speech last night at the hotel, where she was introduced by outgoing U.S. Rep. Rush Holt (D-12th Dist.)

With 90 percent of precincts reporting, the Associated Press reported that Watson Coleman received 14,356 votes from Democrats in Mercer, Middlesex, Somerset and Union counties.

Watson Coleman, a Ewing resident, will face Franklin Township doctor Alieta Eck, who ran unopposed in the Republican primary election.

A victory by Watson Coleman Nov. 4 would keep the 12th District Congressional seat in Mercer County. Holt (D-12th Dist.) announced in February that he wouldn’t seek reelection to a ninth term in the House.

Watson Coleman, if elected, would become the state’s first African American woman in Congress, to which she stated last night, “I believe that Congress and our Legislature always benefit from having someone that sees the issues and the needs and the opportunities through the lens of both the women and the minorities.”

In her speech last night, she talked about tackling immigration reform, health care, and education.

In a statement last night, Holt remarked, “I look forward to talking with voters about Bonnie Watson Coleman, who I’m confident will be a fierce advocate for progressive issues in Washington, as she has been in the Legislature.”

As expected by pollsters and political insiders, the primary election came down to a race between Watson Coleman and second-place finisher, 14th Legislative District state Sen. Linda Greenstein (D-Middlesex), who received 9,475 votes.

“I’ll figure out what I’m going to do and continue to be a senator,” Greenstein told about two dozen supporters at a North Brunswick union hall. “I must enjoy my life with or without Congress, though I sure would have liked to go.”

Greenstein picked up the endorsements of her home county’s Democratic organization and a number of powerful union allies, but Watson Coleman’s base — anchored by county and church endorsements in Mercer and Union — proved enough to win the nomination.

Assemblyman Upendra Chivukula (D-Somerset) finished with 4,979 primary votes, good for third place, while South Brunswick resident Andrew Zwicker — who works at Holt’s former home, the Princeton Plasma Physics Laboratory — finished in fourth place, with 2,430 votes.

“I’m proud of everything we were able to accomplish,” Zwicker said. “We started from nothing and built up this wonderful, wonderful beginning.”

Chivukula could not be reached for comment before press time.

FIRST CONGRESSWOMAN

With Watson Coleman and Eck set to face off on Nov. 4, voters will likely elect the state’s first female member in either house of Congress since 2003, when former U.S. Rep. Marge Roukema (R-5th and 7th Dists.) retired from politics.

For Eck, the win last night was her first political victory since she burst onto the scene last year, filing as a Republican candidate in the primary election to replace Democratic U.S. Sen. Frank Lautenberg after his death.

Eck lost that primary election to former Bogota Mayor Steve Lonegan, who lost his bid for a seat in the 3rd Congressional District last night, but used her political debut as a springboard for her Congressional campaign this year.

“There are no women physicians in Congress and the Affordable Care Act has been purported to do for women what they can’t do for themselves. That’s a fallacy,” said Eck, who runs a free medical clinic in Franklin Township.

But Eck faces a tough road in the general election: The 12th District has been a Democratic stronghold since Holt was first elected in 1998, aided by redistricting efforts that placed historically Democratic communities, such as Trenton and Plainfield, within its borders.

“I’m going to prove them wrong,” Eck said. “The message I have resonates with every group, the message that we don’t have to have government as usual. Our economy is at the bottom of the other states, and it’s because of the policies of these legislators.”

Watson Coleman last night said she wouldn’t take anything for granted, instead vowing to keep her campaign team focused on the next five months of campaigning throughout the district.

Contact Mike Davis at (609) 989-5708 or mdavis@njtimes.com.

Contact Brendan McGrath at (609) 989-5731 or bmcgrath@njtimes.com.

On mobile or desktop:

• Like Times of Trenton on Facebook

• Follow @TimesofTrenton on Twitter