The IRS is promised $10.9 billion, about $341 million below current funding. House GOP cuts IRS, SEC funding

House Republicans rolled out a $21.3 billion financial services bill Tuesday that cuts more than $2 billion from President Barack Obama’s budget requests — chiefly at the expense of the Internal Revenue Service and Securities and Exchange Commission.

The IRS is promised $10.9 billion, about $341 million below current funding and $1.5 billion less than what Obama has asked for in the new fiscal year that begins Oct. 1. The SEC is essentially frozen in place at $1.4 billion, $300 million below the president’s request.

Story Continued Below

At one level, the 148-page measure defines a new realism and measure of moderation for the GOP which sought much more dramatic cuts in the same bill a year ago. But it also keeps up what’s become an almost relentless war of attrition aimed at slowing the implementation of the president’s most prized initiatives: health care and Wall Street reforms.

For sure, the IRS has added to its troubles, given the ongoing controversy over its attempts to rein-in tax-exempt conservative political groups. But it’s a target now too because of its role in administering the subsidies promised under the Affordable Care Act, just as the SEC is important to the Dodd-Frank law, enacted four months later in July 2010.

( Also on POLITICO: Congress ups budget for refugees)

Included in the bill, for example, is legislative language barring any transfer of funds from the department of Health and Human Services to the IRS to assist in implementing the ACA. And the measure seeks to block the tax agency from using its powers to enforce the individual insurance mandate in the law.

On balance, the SEC has fared better than its smaller sister agency, the Commodity Futures Trading Commission. But in both cases, House Republicans—whose leadership has greatly benefited from Wall Street campaign donations—have taken the position of rejecting any major new funding for the two regulators going into November’s elections.