Gov. Sam Brownback is content to leave a lid on political consideration during the 2014 session of expanding Medicaid.

His likely opponent in the November general election, Democratic Rep. Paul Davis, is just as keen to press for open dialogue on delivery of Medicaid to more low-income Kansans who are struggling to afford health insurance. Republican leaders in the House and Senate have, so far, cooperated with Brownback to stifle conversation about Kansas accepting an enlarged Medicaid footprint. A bill to provide for expansion was introduced by a House Democrat, but it hasn't received a committee hearing.

Brownback remains skeptical the federal government would abide by financial pledges to cover at least 90 percent of each state's cost increase tied to eligibility shifts in Medicaid. He said his central objective was service to Kansans with physical and developmental needs enrolled in Medicaid, which the governor renamed KanCare, before moving to add able-bodied adults to the roll.

"My first priority is to extend KanCare to those who need it most — Kansans with disabilities on waiting lists for services," he said.

Davis said hundreds of millions of dollars annually in federal Medicaid aid rejected by Brownback could improve health outcomes for Kansans and provide a financial boost to hospitals, especially facilities struggling to stay open in rural areas. Hospitals are required to accept shrinking Medicare reimbursements, but growth in Medicaid enrollment and spending was to balance that revenue loss.

"Our taxpayer dollars are just going to other states," Davis said. "We need to do this. It's the right thing to do."

Davis said broadening access to Medicaid could reach 80,000 uninsured Kansans ineligible for federal subsidies — and also ineligible for Medicaid under existing rules applicable in Kansas — to buy private health plans through the insurance marketplace formed under the Affordable Care Act.

Davis said he hadn’t settled on a strategy for amending Medicaid offerings in Kansas but would welcome results of a pending study by the Kansas Hospital Association.

States declining to engage in Medicaid expansion may change that decision at any time, but the Kansas political landscape could prevent meaningful evaluation of that possibility until 2015 following the election for governor.

Under the KanCare program directed by the Brownback administration, poor non-elderly adults without children are blocked from enrolling in Medicaid. Adults who have children may participate if they earn no more than $7,700 annually or 32 percent less than the poverty level.

The national health reform law, adopted by Congress and President Barack Obama, permitted states to accept into Medicaid adults earning up to 138 percent of poverty. Initially, the federal government is obligated under the law to cover all costs of expansion. The state's share would rise to no more than 10 percent of costs, and the federal portion would fall to no less than 90 percent.

In 2012, the U.S. Supreme Court ruled states could refuse to accept evolution of Medicaid under provisions of the Affordable Care Act. Kansas is among two dozen that have declined to deepen Medicaid offerings.