Advertisement - story continues below

Government by decree is tryanny.

Tyranny always leads to poverty, destruction, and violence.

Republican candidates are missing a golden opportunity to differentiate from the Democrats. They are missing a chance to speak to the heart of voters’ concerns by attacking the central threat domestically.

Advertisement – story continues below

If polling is correct, voters are most concerned about jobs, the economy and security. All three of these major areas of concern are impacted negatively by the size, power, incompetence and lawlessness of the central government. That size, power, incompetence and lawlessness is increasingly evident in the agencies of the federal government, most of them working against economic development and national security.

In fact, federal agencies act as sovereign governments within the government, operating outside the law, kingdoms unto themselves, operating by decree to forward an agenda. For example, did you know that the abortion pill mandate in ObamaCare was never voted on by Congress, that it wasn’t part of the bill legislators never read before they voted on it? That’s right, the abortion pill mandate was promulgated by unelected bureaucrats within the Department of Health and Human Services.

Actually, ObamaCare has been changed by bureaucrats 43 times. It has been changed by the Supreme Court three times. So much for representative government.

Advertisement – story continues below

We the People had no say whatsoever, either in the passing of the law, since it was done through sleight of hand, or in the subsequent changes. Consequently, the federal government pretty much controls the health care system despite opposition consistently expressed for years by the majority. In other words, the feds have put your health in the hands of incompetent bureaucrats through fraud, lies and manipulation.

Just in case you forgot, the Supreme Court ruled the government has the right to command you to buy health insurance, demanding that you buy certain kinds of insurance, whether you like it, need it, can afford it or want it. The czar has spoken; submit and obey, or else.

May we also remind you the IRS essentially admitted it was persecuting conservatives, Tea Party groups, and ProLife organizations, demanding private information unlawfully, and preventing the issuance of non-profit status, handicapping the operations of those groups. The President said IRS actions were outrageous, he promised an investigation, and before that investigation concluded, he told us there wasn’t a “smidgen of evidence” of corruption. Then, he blamed Republicans.

After two years of investigation, the DOJ said, “Oh well. Nothing to see here folks. Move along.” No one in the IRS was disciplined, charged or prosecuted. In fact, $70 million in bonuses were paid out during the investigation.

Advertisement – story continues below

This column only scratches a small patch of the surface of this deep cancer in our government. Ask western ranchers, farmers and miners how the feds are stealing land and destroying livelihoods, through various agencies, and have done so for decades, leading to the shooting death of LaVoy Finicum in Oregon last month. Again, the DOJ is glad to sue the City of Ferguson, but there’ll be no justice for LaVoy.

Have you read lately about the biggest land grab in history being executed by Obama’s EPA? Who says it is a good thing watching government confiscate more and more land?

Where does the Constitution allow such things? Does anyone recall the relationship between liberty, private property, limited government and prosperity, or does anyone care anymore?

Other examples of the federal bureaucracy run amok: The corrupt VA system that has never reformed, but continues to falsify records, neglect veterans unto death, while paying out bonuses? How about federal surveillance, encroachments of the Second Amendment, the assault of religious freedom, freedom of speech, and the right to assemble and redress, all perpetrated by agencies of state and federal governments acting unilaterally according to regulations they conjure up out of thin air?

From 2009-12, the feds created 13,000 new regulations all carrying the force of law. In 2012 alone, the feds put in place 2,482 new rules. And all this was done by unelected bureaucrats, accountable to no one!

When you consider the negative impact on the economy from taxation and regulation, these numbers scream for reform, and it gets worse. Consider the federal government spends $4 trillion per year, and it wastes as much as $125 billion per year; t hat we are $19 trillion in debt near term, and $199 trillion in debt long term, and you get a sense of how the captain of the Titanic felt just before hitting the iceberg.

The corrupting power of enormous, unchecked federal power is now driving us headlong into financial catastrophe, one striking terror into the hearts of economists worldwide. The political class is now a criminal class willing to destroy everything in preparation for global bureaucracy.

The federal bureaucracy has become more powerful that the three branches of government prescribed by the Constitution. The problem with this kind of vast, concentrated power is it tends toward corruption and self-preservation. When big bureaucrats team up with big government politicians and big corporations, the idea of self-government is destroyed, and the will of The People, ignored.

The only hope for real reform is in a re-energized electorate that refuses to be dominated by government, working in concert with media, lawyers, politicians and activists, all concerned about working daily to restore liberty and justice for all, especially our kids and grandkids.

If we don’t accomplish this, no one else will. Citizens must vote, and Republicans must present candidates worth supporting — people with the brains, guts, vision and knowledge to take on the federal Goliath, and slay him.

It is obvious at this point that Hillary Clinton, Bernie Sanders and Donald Trump will only feed Goliath and watch him grow. They represent the old, the failed and the corrupt system promoting the monster bureaucracy that is destroying our country.

The views expressed in this opinion article are solely those of their author and are not necessarily either shared or endorsed by the owners of this website.