IRS Commissioner John Koskinen said earlier this week that “so far everything appears to be going well” this current tax-filing season despite the agency being hampered by budget and staffing reductions.

As of Feb. 20, the IRS has processed nearly 50 million individual income tax returns, about one-third of the total individual returns the agency expects to receive this year, and issued almost 40 million refunds worth nearly $125 billion, according to new data released by the IRS on Thursday.

“I was delighted that we were able to open the filing season on schedule. This is a stunning achievement by our employees,” Koskinen said at the annual meeting of the New York State Bar Association Tax Section in New York City on Feb. 24. “Along with normal filing-season preparations, there was a significant amount of extra work to get ready for tax changes relating to the Affordable Care Act and the Foreign Account Tax Compliance Act. We also had to update forms and instructions – and our systems – to reflect the passage of the tax extender legislation in December. And, of course, this has all been done under extremely tight budget constraints.”

The 75-year-old Koskinen warned on Tuesday that at the agency’s current funding level, the IRS is going to have to do “less with less,” adding that both enforcement and taxpayer service will suffer. But if the agency falls short in those areas, it’s not the fault of IRS employees, he said.

“I continue to be impressed by the high level of dedication and commitment of our employees in the face of so many challenges,” Koskinen added.

The IRS has seen its funding erode by more than $1.2 billion in the past five years. The agency’s fiscal year 2015 budget was set at about $10.9 billion, which is $346 million less than FY 2014. Koskinen on Tuesday reiterated comments he made before the Senate Finance Committee earlier this month that the budget reduction in 2015 really amounts to $600 million, with another $250 million in mandated costs and inflation factored in.

Trending {{item['sft-title']}}

“But that’s not all. The reduction I just described is on top of another $600 million cut we had already taken as a result of government-wide sequestration in 2013,” he noted. “Congress ended up reversing most of those cuts, so that every other major federal agency was restored to the pre-sequester level, except for one: the IRS. So as I’ve been telling people, the IRS is essentially two sequesters ahead of everyone else.”

As a result of the decline in funding, the IRS ended FY 2014 with more than 13,000 fewer permanent full-time employees compared to 2010, and another 3,000 to 4,000 workers are expected to be lost through attrition by the end of FY 2015, according to Koskinen.

In his proposed FY 2016 budget, President Obama requested the IRS receive $12.9 billion, which Koskinen said would help reverse the decline in funding over the past several years. But don’t expect Republicans, who now control both chambers of Congress, to grant Obama’s request.

Republicans have been extremely critical of the IRS, especially on its admitted targeting of conservative-leaning groups applying for tax-exempt status and what lawmakers consider “wasteful spending,” such as giving bonuses to staffers with conduct issues.

“When you reverse the positions of your predecessors and award bonuses to employees who have not paid their taxes, when your agency throws lavish conferences, and when you spend tens of millions of dollars on public-sector union activity, the public loses faith in your ability to spend money wisely,” Senate Finance Committee Chairman Orrin Hatch (R-UT) told Koskinen during a Feb. 3 hearing on IRS operations.

Compliance and Customer Service Efforts Dwindling

Two published reports this week shed some light on how the budget cuts and reduced staffing have severely hampered enforcement and taxpayer service efforts at the IRS.

The USA Today reported on Feb. 24 that the IRS audit rate for individuals dropped to 0.86 percent in 2014, the lowest level in at least a decade. After rising steadily from 2005 to 2010, the number of IRS audits for individual taxpayers fell 21.4 percent during the succeeding five years, according to the article. The IRS audited slightly more than 1.2 million individuals last year, down more than 162,000 from 2013, and a drop of nearly 339,000 from 2010.

“The math is pretty simple. There are fewer audits because we have fewer auditors,” Koskinen said. “The IRS lost more than 2,200 revenue agents since 2010. Last year alone, there were 600 fewer auditors, with the total falling to 11,600 – the lowest level in more than a decade.”

He noted that the president’s 2016 budget “would help stop the erosion we’ve been seeing in the enforcement area.” If Obama’s budget request for the IRS is approved, the agency would be able to add 1,100 people to help with audit efforts, Koskinen said, who added that every trained IRS compliance employee generates about $1.2 million a year.

The Washington Post reported that during a hearing before the House Oversight and Government Reform Committee on Wednesday, Taxpayer Advocate Nina Olson said as of Feb. 14, only 43 percent of the people who called the IRS this year were able to reach a customer service representative. Those who do get through are waiting an average of 28 minutes. This is substantially down from 2004, when the IRS answered 87 percent of calls, and taxpayers had to wait on hold only about two-and-a-half minutes.

“During this filing season, we expect taxpayers will continue to see longer wait times on the phone, with the real possibility that fewer than half of taxpayers trying to call us will get through,” said Koskinen, who added that tax professionals are also not getting the help they need from the IRS. “[That] is unacceptable to all of us. Tax practitioners interact with the IRS every day, and they need our assistance and expertise to properly represent their clients and help them correctly fulfill their tax obligations.”