Erick Erickson of Erickstown, Ericksylvania is not the world’s biggest fan of the ladies. When we last checked in on Mr. Erick² he was like, super duper mad about the fact that the wimmenz were going around making moneys like they had some kind of penis or something. Now, he is comparing our precious, glorious reproductive systems to the idiot Republicans in office right now.

Via RedState:

As Editor of this site, I cannot use the word I wish to use. At the Republican National Convention in Florida, Code Pink activists dressed up in giant pink consumes designed to look like … well … to keep things polite here … “lady bits” as some might say to convey the message without the word. They were decorative pink costumes that look like hot dog bun costumes but altered. Never has there been a better metaphor for the Republicans in Washington, DC.

He then goes on to explain that, um, because people think Ted Cruz is ridiculous, and because the “establishment Republicans” are not 100% certain that taking their toys and going home or setting the entire country on fire is the best way to deal with the legislation of policies they don’t like, that said “establishment Republicans” are exactly like vaginas. I think?

More Americans oppose Obamacare now than at any time. As rhetoric on defunding Obamacare has gone up, so has Republican popularity and opposition to Obamacare. A full quarter of the American public wants Congress to actually blow up Obamacare. When is the last time a full quarter of the whole population wanted Congress to do any one thing? More than half want Obamacare either destroyed or substantially changed. But the GOP, its allies in the press and pundit core, and its very leadership are such [insert euphemism of choice related to the female reproductive system] that they’d rather plan their surrender before making their retreat. [emphasis added]

This, um. Isn’t actually true. In fact, as long as you refer to Obamacare as The Affordable Care Act, 39% of Republicans even support it.

But more importantly– how dare you Erick Erickson! How dare you compare one of nature’s greatest majesties to a Republican! They should be so lucky! I can tell you right now that my “lady bits” not only want healthcare for everyone in this country (although they would very much prefer single payer), but they also believe in evolution, in social programs that benefit our least well off, in affordable education, in reproductive rights, and they can go a whole five minutes without saying something so bizarre and far fetched that it sounds like it should be an Onion headline rather than something someone says out loud and on purpose.

Granted, while one must assume that you have not seen many “lady bits” in person, and may thus have a bit of a skewed perspective. I assure you, Sir–my “lady bits” as you so delicately refer to them, and the “lady bits” of most ladies in this country, are quite vastly intellectually superior to any sitting Republican in these here United States. I am sure that we would all very much appreciate it if you could, perhaps, refrain from disparaging them so.

Let me tell you, D.C. Republicans–I served with my lady bits. I knew my lady bits. My lady bits were a friend of mine. D.C. Republicans, you are no “my lady bits.”

But Erick Erickson might be a dick.