Endocrinologists are concerned that recent decisions by insurers to stop covering certain diabetic medications could have an impact on glycemic control.

Express Scripts, the largest pharmacy benefits manager in the country, no longer pays for two top-selling Novo Nordisk products -- NovoLog (insulin aspart) and Victoza (liraglutide) -- and has also cut out other popular therapies such as the DPP-4 inhibitors Nesina (alogliptin) and Tradjenta (linagliptin).

The company says it is trying to combat high drug prices by negotiating with pharmaceutical companies the way most governments do -- if the companies won't come down in price, Express Scripts won't cover their drugs. CVS Caremark has adopted a similar strategy, according to the New York Times.

The newspaper reported that Victoza has seen serious declines in market share because of the decision -- and clinicians say it could cause problems when it comes to keeping their patients in good glucose control.

"It's been an unmitigated disaster for my patients and my office," George Grunberger, MD, of the Grunberger Diabetes Institute in Bloomfield Hills, Mich., told MedPage Today regarding the Victoza decision. "Same with the unwarranted forced substituting of Humalog for Novolog. Patients are upset and my office staff is forced to do all the extra work with no reimbursement while insurance executives collect fat checks and enjoy it all the way to the bank."

Sue Kirkman, MD, of the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, called the Victoza decision "short-sighted."

"There are studies that show that higher outpatient medication costs in patients with diabetes are associated with better quality of care and lower costs overall -- fewer hospitalizations, for example," Kirkman said. "In our silo'ed healthcare system, though, different payers may be responsible for different aspects of care."

Although exenatide (Byetta) could substitute for Victoza, Kirkman said it's a little less effective and requires two injections per day instead of one, which could impact compliance.

"Even though [the replacement insulins] are similar, any change affects the patient," said Yehuda Handelsman, MD, of the Metabolic Institute of America in Tarzana, Calif.

Handelsman said endocrinologists have really been feeling the squeeze since January, particularly with the new plans coming online as part of the Affordable Care Act: "Many patients have been denied access to meds they have been on for a long time."

Even more concerning is the potential for diminished access to these drugs to impact research. David Nathan, MD, director of the Diabetes Center at Massachusetts General Hospital, said an ongoing trial is still underway to determine the optimal use of the many new diabetes drugs that have flooded the market in recent years.

"We are currently trying to determine the best use for all diabetes medications in the GRADE study and until we have those results available, it is difficult to know which of the now numerous classes of diabetes medications is 'best' and how to individualize their use," Nathan told MedPage Today.

"In general, while I question the utility of these more expensive agents," Nathan said, "I don't think that completely restricting them at this time is a good idea."

A spokesperson for Express Scripts said the company wouldn't comment about specific drugs, but offered that officials there "continually evaluate clinical data and consult with our independent panel of experts to make sure we're providing the most clinically-appropriate, cost-effective therapies to members."

The spokesperson also referenced a blog by the company's chief medical officer, which states that 48 drug products were moved to "not covered" status for the 2014 formulary.