ADVERTISEMENT

By the time the open enrollment period for Medicare Advantage ends on Dec. 7, tens of thousands of area seniors will have signed up for the popular health insurance program. It’s a period of high stakes for insurance companies, which compete vigorously in promoting their managed Medicare plans. Experts say it’s important for seniors to review their options to make sure they’re selecting the best plan based on their medical and prescription-drug needs. “Open enrollment is here for a reason. This is your time to actually explore to be able to make sure you’re getting the right plan for you, at the right cost with the right coverage,” said Bill Armbruster, the associate state director for AARP in New York. That leaves insurance companies, seniors and the agencies to navigate a period of upheaval in the Medicare Advantage program. “We had no idea that it was going to be so much, I think, turmoil in terms of the plans,” said Linda Carr, director of government sales for Independent Health. Medicare Advantage plans are a type of Medicare insurance offered by companies that contract with the federal government. Created in 2003 to encourage private insurance companies to provide coverage to seniors, the plans enroll about 15 million seniors and disabled people today. “The goal was to have better health outcomes and keep costs lower,” Armbruster said.

Federal changes National enrollment in Medicare Advantage has nearly tripled over the last decade, and the plans are exceptionally well-liked in this region, where 54 percent of seniors enroll in managed Medicare plans. The plans can provide gym memberships or vision plans, for example, and they can have lower out-of-pocket costs than traditional Medicare. “It provides better services and additional benefits and quality care, including case management services and fitness benefits and other services that aren’t part of traditional Medicare,” said Donald Ingalls, vice president of federal and state relations for BlueCross BlueShield of Western New York, which has about 53,000 Medicare Advantage members. However, the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services found, on average, a senior enrolled in a Medicare Advantage plan cost the federal government about 14 percent, or $1,280 annually, more to insure than a senior enrolled in traditional Medicare. That added up to $14 billion in higher annual payments. As part of the Affordable Care Act, the federal government began reducing how much it pays private insurers through the Medicare Advantage program, bringing the payments in line with those for traditional Medicare, AARP’s Armbruster said. The Centers for Medicaid and Medicare Services also began tying Medicare Advantage bonus payments to a star-rating system that measures the performance and member satisfaction of insurers. “Those are hugely important to us. We’re talking eight-figure impact to have a star rating of four or higher,” said Roger Van Baaren, vice president of Medicare sales for Univera Healthcare, which has more than 18,000 Medicare Advantage members in the region.

Most prices rising In this area, Medicare Advantage enrollees still have a number of options, and some plans are going down in price, but overall the cost to members here will rise by nearly 7 percent next year, according to a Buffalo News analysis of federal plan data. For seniors in Erie County, the change in monthly premiums between 2014 and 2015 ranges from a $3 decline for one Today’s Options plan to an increase of $67 for a BlueCross BlueShield offering, according to the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services, or CMS. “It’s not just when they turn 65. I recommend that they do it every year during the annual enrollment period,” said Raymond Hurd, regional administrator for CMS. “It’s really about assessing your personal health status.”