Vote Now:

Do You Support Tougher Regulations on Abortion Clinics?

Vote Here:

Should Abortion Clinics Be Subject to Tougher Regulations?

North Dakota has tight restrictions on abortion procedures. The state has taken measures to restrict abortion even further that have not been successful in the courts and at the ballot box. Neighboring South Dakota has equally strict abortion laws, but nearby Montana and Minnesota are more lenient.Both North and South Dakota have received F grades from the NARAL Pro-Choice America organization , which bases its ratings on the leniency on abortion regulations in each state. Montana received an A- and Minnesota got a C+ from the pro-choice group.North Dakota, like South Dakota, requires women seeking abortion to undergo state-sponsored counseling, which pro-choice activists say is designed to discourage women from having an abortion. The woman then has a 24-hour waiting period before the procedure is allowed. South Dakota requires a 72-hour waiting period before an abortion, according to the Guttmacher Institute Private insurance policies in North Dakota can only include abortion coverage in cases of life endangerment, but people can purchase an optional rider for their policies to cover the procedure. Health plans under the Affordable Care Act do not allow abortion coverage in North and South Dakota, but North Dakota allows an optional rider at additional cost.Public funding for abortion is only allowed in cases of life endangerment in North and South Dakota, but North Dakota also allows public funding in cases of rape and incest. Public employees in North Dakota can have abortion coverage in cases of life endangerment. Both states require the consent of a parent when a minor decides to have an abortion.Montana has few major restrictions. Its abortion laws include notification of a parent before an abortion can be provided for a minor, under age 16. Minnesota also requires notification of a parent of a minor and includes state-directed counseling for women, who must wait 24 hours before having an abortion.In July 2015, a federal appeals court struck down a North Dakota law that would have banned abortions if a fetal heartbeat could be detected, possibly as early as six weeks into the pregnancy, according to the New York Post . The law had been passed by a Republican-controlled legislature in 2013. Republican Gov. Jack Dalrymple called it “a legitimate attempt by a state legislature to discover the boundaries of Roe v. Wade,” referring to the 1973 U.S. Supreme Court ruling that legalized abortion in the U.S.Voters in North Dakota turned down a proposal for the state constitution in 2014 that would have added the language, “the inalienable right to life of every human being at any stage of development,” ProPublica reported