A pow wow honoring the 50th anniversary of Olympian Billy Mills’ gold medal win in the 1964 summer games in Tokyo is set for Friday, September 12, at the Lakota Dome Prairie Winds Casino & Hotel.

Mills and his charity Running Strong for American Indian Youth is hosting a wacipi powwow that features a community supper, grand entry, traditional dance competitions and raffle prizes.

Members of the Pine Ridge community where Mills grew up will honor his historic win and his many contributions to American Indians through his work with Running Strong. The event will take place at the Lakota Dome Prairie Winds Casino & Hotel in Pine Ridge, South Dakota.

Also happening this weekend, the Redhawk Native American Arts Council is hosting their final powwow of the year in honor of Sgt. Alan Two Crow. Two Crow’s body was discovered on West Point military grounds in 2002, in what his family says were under suspicious circumstances.

RELATED: Family of Sgt. Alan Two Crow to Attend Redhawk Powwow in His Honor

The Redhawk FDR powwow attracts more than 1,000 guests who enjoy Native food, music, dance, arts & crafts and Native traditions.

And a final highlight this weekend. The annual Wild Rice Festival and the Last Dance at the Old Bowl Pow Wow will be held this Saturday, September 13th, in Lac du Flambeau.

The Indian Bowl has been a Northwoods tradition since 1951, welcoming visiting families and Native Americans to gather to celebrate life through song and dance, a news release said.

If one of these pow wows are not in your area, be sure to check out our list below and/or ICTMN’s extensive listing of pow wows that may be right in your town.

25th Annual Wyandotte Pow-Wow

When & Where: September 12-14; Wyandotte, Oklahoma

For more information, call: Sherri Clemons, (918) 678‑6344

Welcome Home Traditional Pow Wow

When & Where: September 12-14; Mendota, Minnesota

For more information, go to: MendotaDakota.com.

94th Southern UTE Powwow

When & Where: September 12-14; Ignacio, Colorado

For more information, go to: SouthernUte-nsn.gov.