RALEIGH — The legislature is pushing forward with a budget that will create a new fund for an At-Sea Observer Program for commercial fisheries and allow the state Division of Marine Fisheries to make a joint enforcement agreement with the National Marine Fisheries Service.

While a commercial fishing organization first proposed the fund, watermen have largely been against a joint agreement between state and federal fishery agencies.

The state Senate approved a draft of the Appropriations Act at 12:44 a.m. on Friday 33-10, with seven abstentions. The state House met Friday for budget negotiations; it approved the bill 68-46.

Before the budget can go into effect, it still needs Gov. Pat McCrory’s signature. At this point, no more amendments can be made to the budget; the governor can only sign it or veto it.

According to the Senate-approved bill, the budget for fiscal 2014-15 will include increases to fees for Standard Commercial Fishing Licenses, Retired Standard Commercial Fishing Licenses, shellfish license, land or sell licenses for out-of-state vessels, Recreational Commercial Gear Licenses and fish dealer licenses. These increases are to support the creation of a N.C. Commercial Fishing Resource Fund.

The N.C. Fisheries Association – a nonprofit dedicated to promoting the state seafood industry – came up with the idea for this fund, including the fee increases. Jerry Schill, NCFA executive director, gave the proposal to the N.C. Marine Fisheries Commission at its regular meeting Feb. 21. The MFC recommended it to the General Assembly and the Senate added it to the Appropriations Act in May.

The fund will be a non-reverting, special revenue fund in the office of the State Treasurer. It will provide funding for developing sustainable commercial fishing, including funding the state’s incidental take permits for the commercial fishing industry.

The National Marine Fisheries Service issues these permits to allow a certain number of interactions between fishing gear and species protected by the Endangered Species Act, including sea turtles and Atlantic sturgeon. North Carolina needs such permits in order to allow its commercial gill net fishery to operate, and one of the requirements of the permits is an observer program for the gill net fishery.

Money from the fund will be distributed by the state treasurer. The treasurer will only disperse funds on written direction by the MFC and a funding committee made up of six representatives from six fishing industry organizations:

•The NCFA.

•N.C. Watermen United.

•The Ocracoke Working Watermen’s Association.

•The Brunswick County Fishermen’s Association.

•The Carteret County Fishermen’s Association.

•The Albemarle Fishermen’s Association.

The bill also authorizes the DMF director, or a designee of the director, to enter into a joint enforcement agreement with the NMFS. This will allow DMF inspectors to accept delegation of law enforcement powers over matters within the NMFS’s jurisdiction.

Patricia Smith, DMF public information officer, said the division supports creating such an agreement.

“It helps with funding,” she said. “There’s usually an amount of money the federal government gives for joining into a JEA.”

Ms. Smith said the agreement would require state officers to help with federal regulation enforcement, but she said many federal regulations have already been adopted into state regulations.

Commercial fishermen at public MFC meetings have been opposed to the division making such an agreement with the NMFS. NCWU sent a general letter in April to state senators, in which it opposed creating a “Joint Enforcement Agency,” saying the federal fisheries service already has law enforcement personnel in the state.

“Adopting the Joint Enforcement Agency would affect the sovereignty of the State of North Carolina provided by the state constitution and the U.S. Constitution,” NCWU said. “The Joint Enforcement Agency would bring in federal money to the state, but much of it would be used for training N.C. Marine Patrol officers about the countless federal laws, rules and regulations.”

Ms. Smith said the DMF already gets funding from several federal sources.

“It’s never been a matter of giving up our sovereignty,” she said. “If anything, it may mean fewer federal officers (in the state) because it will be us enforcing things while they concentrate on other matters.”

Brent Fulcher, owner and operator of Beaufort Inlet Seafood and NCFA chairman of the board, said the association thanks the legislators for the coastal counties – particularly Rep. Pat McElraft, R-Carteret; Sen. Norm Sanderson, R-Carteret; Rep. Christ Millis, R-Pender, and Rep. Michael Speciale, R-Craven.

“We applaud the Senate for helping us be proactive and have a sustainable fishery without being a burden to the taxpayers,” Mr. Fulcher said, talking about the new fund. “However, we’re opposed to a JEA because we feel N.C. sovereignty is worth way more than what the state will be asked to do. We think that in the long run, they’ll be asked to do more than they’ll be paid for.”

Contact Mike Shutak at 252-726-7081 ext. 206, email mike@thenewstimes.com; or follow on Twitter at @mikesccnt.