Obamacare begins to address the issue, but more is needed.

First-grade teacher Lynda Jensen and her class in January in San Jose. (Photo: Ben Margot AP) Story Highlights Multiple medical issues regularly interfere with children functioning in the classroom.

Nationally, at least 10 - 15% of school children are known to have visual problems.

Asthma alone accounts for more than 11 million days of school absenteeism in the U.S.

One of the much anticipated consequences of the Affordable Care Act -- Obamacare -- will be providing health insurance to millions of children currently without coverage access to regular medical care. So for many school age kids who are struggling in school because of undiagnosed or undertreated medical conditions, access to comprehensive health care can't come soon enough.

Sasha Redlener, an elementary school teacher in one of Brooklyn, New York's toughest neighborhoods, was recently speaking about some of the classroom challenges she and her colleagues face that have nothing to do with teaching methods or school budgets.

She talked about a six year old boy who would regularly fall asleep at his desk. When the school spoke to his dad, he acknowledged that his son has asthma and was only irregularly getting treatment. But without proper treatment, his son would be up all night coughing. So by the time he got to school, he was simply exhausted.

Another 7 year-old complained of a severe toothache -- but the family couldn't find a dentist that would take him without insurance. When the child eventually showed up in class with a fever and swollen face from a dental abscess, he finally got emergency treatment.

The sad reality is that these are not unusual events in schools throughout the nation. According to Columbia University Teachers College professor, Charles Basch, millions of children are underachieving in school simply because we aren't paying enough attention to a handful of common health concerns that seriously undermine a child's ability to study or learn.

Many important learning barriers are obvious -- like visual deficits which interfere with a child's ability to see the board or read. But even if these problems are detected on routine vision testing, getting prescription glasses -- or replacement glasses if a pair is lost or the prescription changes -- may take months. That is, months of a child falling behind at a critical stage of learning where classroom participation -- or reading at home -- is critical.

Just how prevalent are these health related barriers to learning? When the Children's Health Fund in collaboration with New York's Council of School Administrators surveyed area principals in low-income school districts, a substantial majority reported that multiple medical issues regularly interfered with children functioning in their classrooms.

Nationally, 10 - 15% of school children across the U.S. are known to have visual problems that can interfere with learning. And more than a third of kids with uncorrected hearing impairment will repeat at least one grade.

In addition to fatigue from a night interrupted by coughing, asthma alone accounts for more than 11 million days of school absenteeism in the U.S.

And there's more. Behavioral disorders also represent significant classroom problems. Chronic, recurrent hunger can be responsible for fatigue, discomfort and diminished cognitive capacity among the 16 million kids who are among those euphemistically referred to as "food insecure" in America.

It's fair to ask, how is this possible? Aren't all children "cleared" of potential health problems and checked to see if vaccinations are up to date as a requirement of school entry? Unfortunately, school entry eligibility is inconsistent and generally insufficient. And few schools, even those with on-site nurses or clinics, have effective protocols to monitor or screen for important chronic conditions which may interfere with learning.

President Obama has proposed universal access to preschool for every child in the country. And Bill de Blasio, Democratic candidate for NYC Mayor, has made this a signature issue of his campaign. Hardly anything could do more for the country's future than making sure that our kids are truly ready for school success by starting the process of formal learning as early as possible. But making sure that kids entering school are free of health barriers to learning is essential.

We need to make certain that teachers can focus on teaching without having to worry that preventable or treatable medical conditions may be impeding the capacity of children to develop and learn to their full potential. And if there ever was a national priority that should reach across all boundaries of politics and party, this is it.

Irwin Redlener, a pediatrician, is president of Children's Health Fund and directs the Program on Child Well-Being and Resilience at Columbia University's Earth Institute. Jane Pauley is a special correspondent for NBCand serves on the board of the Children's Health Fund.

In addition to its own editorials, USA TODAY publishes diverse opinionsfrom outside writers, including our Board of Contributors. To read more columns like this, go to the opinion front page or follow us on twitter @USATopinion or Facebook.



Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1ajALfa