Why would the New York Times spend all that time and reporting talent to tell the story of the exploits with women of a 44 year old Donald Trump who was going through a divorce and probably a mid-life crisis at the time, and in an era when relationships between men and women were in a state of flux at the time in any case?

Of course, the story is not very flattering for the Donald, but is it relevant to voters' decision on whom to vote for as President of the United States? And if you read the whole story it really is a mixed bag as the Times itself admits, "What emerges from the interviews is a complex, at times contradictory portrait of a wealthy, well-known and provocative man and the women around him, one that defies simple categorization. Some women found him gracious and encouraging. He promoted several to the loftiest heights of his company, a daring move for a major real estate developer at the time."

Most of the incidents in the Times piece could be racked up to the behavior of a young brash privileged young man from a family of means who was attending an elite private all boys prep school, or later a fellow who was following in his father's shoes in carrying on a successful family real estate business, or still later a man in his 40's and 50's going through some mid-life crisis years.

Probably the most telling fact in the whole Times story is that Donald Trump hired a woman as head of construction for his company in the 1980s. He was way ahead of his time on that one.

Rather than some gossipy piece about Trump and women, the New York Times should be directing its impressive reporting power towards revealing Donald Trump's knowledge and experience or lack thereof with issues of national importance, knowledge and experience crucial to being President of the United States.

Why not explore Donald Trump's view and knowledge of the importance of the role the United States plays in nuclear non-proliferation, or what he understands about the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action between Iran and the P5+1 countries - the Iran nuclear deal? Does Trump even know the P5+1 countries are China, France, Russia, the United Kingdom, the United States, plus Germany, and Germany is the +1 country that does not have nuclear weapons?

What does Trump know about the scientific evidence on climate change and what is causing it? What does Trump know about how a cap and trade policy on carbon emissions would work and what are the pros and cons? What about a tax on carbon as an alternative to the climate change problem?

Why not explore Donald Trump's knowledge about how monetary policy works and how it is implemented in the United States? Trump's statements that the United States could just print money and discount U.S. Treasury bonds suggests he knows very little about monetary policy, and that he confuses running a country like the United States and its budget and its money supply as akin to running a real estate company.

What about Donald Trump's plan to defeat ISIS, which calls for 30,000 U.S. troops fighting another war in the Middle East? What would it cost in lives and treasure? What is the chance at success? Could he enlist key allies in the Middle East like Saudi Arabia, especially after insulting Muslims around the world? What would a President Donald Trump do about North Korea and its rogue regime?

What policies would a President Donald Trump follow on growing income and wealth inequality in America? What would be Trump's education and training and workforce skills policies? We know Donald Trump wants to repeal the Affordable Care Act known as Obamacare. What would he replace it with? What about homelessness in America? Does Trump have a plan to attack it. What is Trump's view on the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP) or food stamps. What about the crisis in child care for working mothers? Does Trump have a concern, a plan? How will a President Trump fight the next U.S. recession that may very likely come during his tenure? What is Trump's view on the independence of the Federal Reserve? Given Trump's view of international trade agreements what does he think are the chances his approach could start trade wars, shrinking international trade and starting a world wide recession?

The views on and knowledge of these issues of all the Presidential candidates is far more important than how Donald Trump behaved around women in his 20s, 30s and 40s. Though, now that Trump is 69 years old, you might think he would be more politic and generous about his comments on how people look.