Wednesday’s announcement by the state’s dominant health insurance company that it would not reinstate plans deemed “substandard” under the Affordable Care Act means tens of thousands of Alabamians will have to figure out a way to pay higher costs.

People like the Rev. Brad McClain, a pastor with congregations in Mobile and Fairhope.

McClain said he found that a family insurance plan comparable to the one he had would double his monthly premium from $800 to $1,600 and increase his deductible from $200 to $2,000 per person.

“We were just shocked,” he said. “We were like, ‘Are you kidding me?... It just doesn’t make sense.”

Bob Mannich, a Fairhope Realtor, said his premium would rise from $647 a month to $1,544. He said he was able to cut that to $890 by removing two adult children from his insurance.

Pondering the increase, Mannich said he thought not only of the immediate hit to his wallet but the potential impact on his livelihood. He said selling houses will be harder it potential buyers have to absorb increases of hundreds of dollars a month in their health insurance.

“It’s going to hit the real estate market tough. … That’s a house payment,” he said. “People can’t pay what they can’t pay.”

In addition to the increased monthly premium, he said, the deductible for prescription drugs will rise from $600 to $2,000.

Responding to mounting criticism that he had broken a promise to allow Americans to keep their insurance if they liked it, President Barack Obama last week announced he was seeking a one-year reprieve for folks in the individual insurance market who had plans that were no longer valid under the law that took effect this year. That is about 87,000 Blue Cross and Blue Shield of Alabama customers.

But the insurer announced Wednesday that a one-year continuation of policies that violate the law “could create significant legal and financial risks” to policyholders and the company.

McClain said Blue Cross and Blue Shield informed him that a cheaper option would give him a premium that is lower than what he faces but still higher than the one he had paid. Plus, he added, the per-person deductible would rise to $12,000 under that policy.

McClain said the new plan would cover procedures he does not need. For instance, the 60-year-old preacher whose child-rearing days are behind him, said the plan covers maternity care. But the new plan will not cover things he previously had, like dental care.

As a pastor, McClain said, he supports the goal of providing health coverage for the millions of Americans who don’t have it. But he questioned whether the government has taken the right approach.

“It is not as if we’re trying to be callous about people’s medical needs,” he said.

McClain said he believes his income is too high to qualify for subsidies through the federal health care exchange under Obamacare. He said he checked with Humana Health Insurance and got quotes even higher than Blue Cross.

“This is going to be a reach for us,” he said. “I think we’ve seen the beginning of a train wreck.”

Mannich, the Fairhope Realtor, said he believes insurance companies ultimately will benefit from Obamacare.

“This whole thing is nothing but a windfall for the insurance companies,” he said. “I feel like they were behind it, behind the scenes.”

Mannich does not spare Obama, either.

“I don’t think he ever cared how that was handled or how it was paid for,” he said. “He just wanted it out there.”