In the interview series Meet Native America, the Smithsonian National Museum of the American Indian invites tribal leaders, cultural figures, and other interesting and accomplished Native individuals to introduce themselves and say a little about their lives and work. Together, their responses illustrate the diversity of the indigenous communities of the Western Hemisphere, as well as their shared concerns, and offer insights beyond what’s in the news to the ideas and experiences of Native peoples today.

Please introduce yourself with your name and title.

My name is Brenda Meade. I'm chairperson of the Coquille Indian Tribal Council.

Where is your tribal community located?

The Coquille Indian Tribe is headquartered in North Bend, Oregon, on the southern Oregon Coast.

Where were the Coquille people originally from?

We are originally from Southern Oregon. Our knowledge of the exact boundary and use areas of our ancestors is evolving as we recover from federal termination. Our ancestral range includes lands in Coos, Curry, Douglas, Josephine, and Jackson counties in Oregon.

Is there a significant point in your tribe's history that you would like to share?

It would have to be June 28, 1989, the day that Congress finally acknowledged the efforts of my tribal elders and restored federal recognition of the Coquille Indian Tribe. As a result of that day, a historic injustice—the U.S. government's termination of the tribe as a nation and denial of our status as Indian people—was corrected. We are now the second largest employer in Coos County, Oregon, and an undeniable force for positive change in our communities.

How is your tribal government set up?

We are governed by a seven-member Tribal Council that is elected by our General Council—all enrolled tribal members 18 years old or older. Our constitution reserves several rights to the General Council. We provide many leadership and government-participation opportunities for our members. One thing that I am especially proud of is that we are forming a youth council to promote leadership and cultural competence among our young tribal members.

Is there any other functional, traditional entity of leadership in addition to your modern government system?

I would say it is in the way we gain knowledge from our elders. We continue to gather as Indian people on this land and share information with each other. We continue to learn and understand as we hunt, fish, and gather traditional foods and materials together.

How often are elected leaders chosen?

All Tribal Council members serve three-year terms.

How often does your government meet?

Our Tribal Council meets at least twice per month. Our General Council has at least two meetings a year, always coinciding with the winter and summer solstices.

How did your life experience prepare you to lead your tribe?

When I grew up my tribe was not recognized as a tribe by the federal government, and we had very few financial resources. But we had our collective desire to make a change. Coquille people are characteristically kind, generous, humorous, and absolutely unwavering when it comes to tribal sovereignty. These values shaped me and many other tribal members who grew up during that time. I understood how important sovereignty was and how important it was to uphold our cultural and historic values.

Who inspired you as a mentor?

Many people every day! But I would first recognize my uncle Jerry Running Foxe for teaching me as I was growing up to always fight for the rights of all Indian People. He taught me always with a kind heart and for the right reasons. Also my aunt Sharon—as a child I was lucky enough to spend time with her as she fought for us to be recognized as Coquille people. Her lifelong dedication and personal sacrifices in gathering Coquille people together in support of those efforts will never be forgotten. I watched her and many other tribal members work tirelessly for our people—after mass disbursement to the reservation, termination policies, and very successful assimilation programs—to be recognized again. Thankfully our elders never gave up, and for that reason we must continue to strengthen our nation every day.

I later was able to sit on Tribal Council with my auntie and with many other amazing tribal leaders. One that I must mention is our chief of 23 years who recently passed, Chief Ken Tanner. He taught me to be humble, to be grateful for what we have, and to always save some for the others. I must also recognize my amazing husband who supports me every day and allows me to do the things I feel I need to do. All of my family influences me—my children, my mother, my brothers, and those who have passed. I have also been very fortunate in my life to be able to work and spend time with many of our tribal elders and our tribal youth. I know that we must learn from our elders, teach our children, and never forget!

To read the full interview, visit the NMAI series here.