Western Heritage, which creates belt buckles and gift items for U.S. Forest Service, opens a new downtown shop

Mike Lynch, owner of Western Heritage Co. in downtown Loveland, holds one of the official U.S. Forest Service belt buckles that his foundry supplies to the government. ( Craig Young / Loveland Reporter-Herald )

A Loveland business with a nationwide reach is taking steps to raise its visibility at home.

Western Heritage Co., which has its products in every national forest in the country, recently opened a downtown storefront and is working to build a retail presence.

The company has a small foundry at 337 E. Fourth St., producing cast pieces and also personalizing items with laser engraving and embroidery.

The natural resources agencies of the federal government, specifically the U.S. Forest Service, are Western Heritage's biggest customers, said Mike Lynch, who took over the business from his father in 2001 and moved it from Wyoming to Loveland.

Cindy Corman, embroidery manager for Western Heritage Co. and manager of the new 4th St. Embroidery and Gifts shop at 345 E. Fourth St. in downtown Loveland, explains the process of adding a U.S. Forest Service emblem to a polo shirt. (Craig Young / Loveland Reporter-Herald)

The only government contract the company has is for the official bronze belt buckle for the Forest Service uniform: "I think we are on over 70,000 of those," Lynch said. The rest of the sales to the government come in the form of discretionary spending for gifts and mementos to employees, volunteers and others.

The 50-page catalog that Western Heritage mails out is filled with metal belt buckles, bolo ties, pendants, rings and spurs with a variety of government and company logos, plus engraved wooden boxes, name plates, plaques and knives, and embroidered caps, jackets, fleece beanies and much more.

Lynch, who moved his business from north Loveland into the former Remo's location on Fourth Street in 2010, also owned a building at 239 E. Fourth St., where he ran his embroidery operation.

Advertisement

4th St. Embroidery and Gifts opens

He sold that building last year and leased 345 E. Fourth St., part of the former Loveland Music building at Fourth and Jefferson.

On Valentine's Day, the new 4th St. Embroidery and Gifts opened, with Western Heritage embroidery manager Cindy Corman at the helm.

"We want it to be a unique little gift shop," said Corman, who also sells her own merchandise in the store.

An embroidery machine inside Western Heritage Co.'s downtown Loveland shop stitches a U.S. Forest Service emblem onto a shirt. (Craig Young / Loveland Reporter-Herald)

The shop offers apparel such as hoodies, shirts, vests and caps — some already embroidered with designs and others that can be custom-embroidered.

Corman has many designs ready to load into her machines — she can select the colors — and she also can have a customer's artwork digitized.

Lynch said Western Heritage is working on a retail line of Western-themed belt buckles and jewelry for the store and will sell gift baskets featuring a mix of embroidered and metal items and Loveland mementoes.

He also sells a Create-a-Cast do-it-yourself sculpting kit for $75. Budding artists work with the enclosed tools and wax blanks, send in their creations and get back a small finished bronze sculpture.

Rolls of embroidery thread stand at the ready on a machine in Western Heritage Co.'s embroidery shop in downtown Loveland. (Craig Young / Loveland Reporter-Herald)

Expanding business reach

Federal budget cutbacks over the past few years "made for a lot of ramen eating," Lynch said, and forced the company to look elsewhere for business.

"We've survived sequesters, and we've survived shutdowns, but we've never had both in the same year," he said. "We started doing contract casting at that point, kind of opened our doors."

A high-tech, electric-powered casting machine that he bought used from NASA speeds the process and uses less energy that the old gas-fired furnace. He estimated that he's using only 5 percent of the machine's capacity so is looking for customers such as artists who need small sculptures and other metal pieces cast.

Mike Lynch, owner and president of Western Heritage Co., takes a wax master out of a rubber mold as he explains the foundry process at his facility in downtown Loveland. (Craig Young / Loveland Reporter-Herald)

Lynch said his father, Pat Lynch, "accidentally started a business" when as a forest ranger in Wyoming, he started making gifts for his buddies, using a foundry in Denver. One thing led to another, and he ended up founding Western Heritage Co. in Encampment, Wyo., in 1976.

Last year, U.S. Forest Service Deputy Chief Tommy Thompson came to Loveland to present the Lynches with a lifetime service award for all the work they had done and donations they'd made to the agency.

"We've just been a go-to place for them," he said.

The new shop is open 9 a.m. to 5 p.m. Tuesday through Saturday; phone: 970-663-1450.

Craig Young: 970-635-3634, cyoung@reporter-herald.com, www.twitter.com/CraigYoungRH.