The change was quick, the staff was depleted and Melvin Hunt had to adjust on the fly.

Friday night’s game at San Antonio is Hunt’s 17th game as interim head coach since taking over for the fired Brian Shaw on March 3. Though things were coming at him at warp speed, and though his staff was reduced to a skeleton crew, Hunt says none of his first foray into head coaching has felt like drinking from a fire hydrant.

“It doesn’t,” Hunt said.

He credits the remaining staff, who have all taken on added responsibility, for keeping things together over the last month.

“It’s a lot of stuff, but it’s manageable. I think when you put things in perspective, and you prioritize things and you have good people working with you — I’ve got Noel Gillespie who has a wealth of experience, I’ve got Patrick Mutombo, who is a quick study.

“Our new video guy – Brian Boyle – has been great, figuring it out on the fly. John Beckett has been great. Al Harrington and Corsley Edwards, they’ve been my muscle. They bring a different edge. And then, the foreign guys, they lean on (Ognjen Stojakovic). So this really helps me as a coach. I don’t feel overwhelmed or that there’s so much coming at me at one time because my guys are catching a lot of that, and that helps.”

Keeping an eye on Hickson and Arthur. The Nuggets have two players that are being watched closely in the final two weeks of the season. J.J. Hickson and Darrell Arthur are champing at the bit to play more than they sit before the season is over, but each is dealing with an injury that could lead to shutting them down for the remainder of the season.

Arthur’s injury is a right calf strain, but it has persisted and Arthur noted it was similar to what Clippers standout Jamal Crawford has gone through this season. Crawford missed 15 straight games going into Friday night’s games. Arthur has missed four straight games and was forced to sit out of two others as well due to calf issues.

Meanwhile, Hickson has simply dealt with the pain since after the All-Star break. It is soreness in his right knee, but playing on it can make it worse. The Nuggets training staff and strength staff has done a good job of keeping Hickson as healthy as possible, but the wear and tear of six months of basketball may dictate he watches much more than he plays — if he plays.

Follow Chris Dempsey on Twitter @dempseypost or email him at cdempsey@denverpost.com