Flying Doctors clinic provides free medical care to the uninsured and low-income Coachella Valley residents at Desert Mirage High School in Thermal. Richard Lui/The Desert Sun

Buy Photo Esperanza Sotelo talks about the benefits she gets out of the Flying Doctor clinics that visits the Coachella Valley in her Coachella home. (Photo: Richard Lui/The Desert Sun)Buy Photo

Ophelia Amavizca has worked as a dishwasher and a house cleaner, jobs that she said left her with lingering hand and back pain but no help covering the cost of seeing a doctor.

So on Saturday, Amavizca, 38, and hundreds of other valley residents will head to Desert Mirage High School in Thermal to see the Flying Doctors, a free one-day, volunteer-run medical clinic that for almost two decades has provided health care in the eastern Coachella Valley for people who have few other affordable options.

This month marks Flying Doctors’ 48th visit to the Coachella Valley since 1997. When it started, the semiannual clinics were the nonprofit’s only domestic U.S. events, but since then visits to Riverside and Fresno have been added.

Amavizca, an undocumented immigrant from Mexico, is the only member of her family without health insurance. She’s gone to Flying Doctors to be seen by dentists, chiropractors and even an acupuncturist at least three times.

“I’ve even slept there,” she said in Spanish. “One time I got there at 6 p.m. the day before to get in line to get treated, but it’s worth it.”

The clinic is a temporary comprehensive health care center offering physicals, eye exams, teeth cleanings and cancer screenings, among other routine checks. During the single day of services a year ago, 242 volunteers including 96 fly-in doctors and 15 local doctors, saw 804 patients.

“I know that they’re investing their time on a good cause and God is going to reward them for it,” Amavizca said.

The number of patients who attended last year was down from previous years, a change Lucy Moreno, the local coordinator for Flying Doctors, attributed on some level to people in the east valley signing up for health insurance through the Affordable Care Act.

Expanding the initiative to give more people, including undocumented immigrants like Amavizca, access to health care was something Moreno and others saw as a solution to the eastern Coachella Valley’s perpetual health care deficiencies.

Part of Moreno’s job is encouraging patients who come to Flying Doctors to maintain their health care. The Monday after the clinic she makes hundreds of phone calls to remind people what they need to do next.

“The (clinic) is a place where you can not only get your immediate health care needs met by professionals, but it’s also an opportunity for people to be connected so they don’t have to go to Flying Doctors,” Moreno said. “We don’t really want them to continue coming.”

‘A detrimental situation’

Dr. David Morgan had been flying his own plane from his home in Northern California to Mexico since 1974 before he was encouraged by a local nurse to make a stop in Thermal. On that first visit in 1996 Morgan surveyed the conditions, and what he saw convinced him that the same free medical care he was offering Mexican villagers was needed in the rural desert communities less than an hour drive from Palm Springs.

“It was just a detrimental situation where we saw that the people had nothing and needed everything,” Morgan recalled.

People lived in deteriorating shacks and trailer homes. Their clothing was tattered and their cars didn’t run. And unlike in Mexico, the junk and dust made everything look dirty.

But similar to Mexico, dental care is consistently the top need, followed by vision care and then medical care, something Morgan noticed in 1997 when he returned for his first local clinic.

“They just didn’t have glasses and they needed glasses,” Morgan said. “Anything they wanted to read, the paper, the Bible, you name it, they couldn’t read it.”

Almost two decades later, the clinic is still in high demand.

A 2013 survey by HARC, Health Assessment and Research for Communities located in Palm Desert, found that more than a quarter of Coachella Valley adults lacked health insurance. Since then, thousands have likely signed up for insurance through the ACA.

The twice yearly visits are now once a year. Flying Doctors partnered with another group known as Remote Area Medical, or RAM, and Goldenvoice, the company that puts on the Coachella Music & Arts Festival for the April 2013 clinic. Since then Flying Doctors has stepped aside to let those groups run the spring clinic.

Delaying care

Esperanza Sotelo, 52, believes she was involved in planning for Flying Doctor’s first valley visit. She got a tooth pulled the first time they were here. On Saturday she goes back again for a mammogram.

“Many times I have put my health at risk for not having the money to pay for the consultation, or for the medicine,” said Sotelo, who like like Amavizca is undocumented and the only member of her family without health insurance.

Buy Photo Esperanza Sotelo talks about the benefits she gets out of the Flying Doctor clinics that visits the Coachella Valley in her Coachella home. (Photo: Richard Lui/The Desert Sun)

“When I get the flu sometimes I have to send for my medicine to come from Mexicali because here it’s too expensive,” she said. “I know a lot of people that can’t even afford to get their medicine from Mexicali so they heal themselves with herbs and creams.”

For people without insurance or the ability to pay a free clinic, even an infrequent one becomes their primary means of care.

“I would say the vast majority of the reason people go to these once or twice a year events in because they’ve got something wrong with them and they want to get it checked,” said Dr. Les Zendle, a retired physician who is the volunteer medical director at Coachella Valley Volunteers in Medicine, a free clinic based in Indio. Many people who come to Flying Doctors and then need follow-up care are referred to Volunteers in Medicine.

High blood pressure and diabetes make up most of those referrals, Zendle said.

“They’re the two things that if we can treat, it will keep this person healthy and out of the hospital and out of the ER,” he said. “These are the people who will (otherwise) end up having heart attacks or whatever, and end up with higher medical costs that we all pay for.”

Beyond cost, there is the problem of transportation, said Silvia Paz, a manager with Building Healthy Communities Eastern Coachella Valley, an agency funded by the California Endowment to address health in undeserved communities.

Growing up in Mecca, Paz, now 33, heard adults talking about how so many kids were missing school because it took all day to go to a doctor. Since then, a clinic has opened and buses are more frequent than once a day.

“There have been improvements. Unfortunately, not at the pace we need them,” Paz said.

Finding a permanent fix

The economics of the area go hand-in-hand with its lack of health care services.

U.S. Census Bureau statistics on Mecca provide a picture of at least part of the eastern valley. The town of about 8,600 people close to where the Flying Doctors clinics take place is nearly half foreign-born. Almost the same amount lives in poverty. Less than a third of Mecca residents age 25 and older have graduated high school.

The Clinton Foundation, in a plan developed with local input to improve health services in the Coachella Valley, noted that 105 dentists worked in Palm Desert but the city of Coachella 10 miles east had just four dentists.

One priority identified as part of that plan is establishing a health care district to serve the east valley. This could be through the creation of a completely new district or by expanding the existing Desert Healthcare District beyond the west valley. Both options come with unique hurdles, including possible legislative requirements and winning the support of residents who’d likely pay for the district with new taxes.

State Assemblyman Eduardo Garcia, a Democrat who grew up in Coachella and served as the city’s mayor, told The Desert Sun that he’s researching a potential bill that would place the question about a health care district before voters. But before a vote takes place, details such as boundaries and funding would have to be worked out by locals.

“There have been meetings after meetings after meetings looking at the process at the local level to create a new district or expand the (Desert Healthcare) District,” Garcia said. “But no one — for lack of a better term I guess — has pulled the trigger.”

Topping Garcia’s to-do list for any district in the east valley would be attracting more primary care doctors and funding better health care facilities. While the region has one small hospital, John F. Kennedy Memorial Hospital in Indio, a lot of specialized care requires travel to Palm Springs and sometimes further.

V. Manuel Perez, Garcia’s predecessor in the California Assembly, thinks a health care district would help the area. He now works for the Borrego Community Health Foundation.

Buy Photo Ophelia Amavizca talks about the benefits she gets out of the Flying Doctor clinics that visits the Coachella Valley in her Indio home. (Photo: Richard Lui/The Desert Sun)

“One of my fears though is something happening where there’s an overwhelming amount of folks against the idea, so we’re not even able to start it before we get it off the ground,” said Perez, who is also a member of the Coachella City Council.

One question that will have to be resolved is whether wealthier cities like La Quinta and Indian Wells can remain outside of any health care district. If not, those residents may resist paying a new tax created with the main goal of helping places like Coachella, Mecca and Thermal.

Perez agreed that more doctors and dentists and permanent clinics are all needed. Getting local residents into health-related jobs is also important because it will bring up the area’s overall economy. Perez is also focusing on getting people through the front doors of those offices.

“We did a really good job over the last couple of years of enrolling folks into health care coverage, whether it’s Medical or Covered California, but one piece we’re missing is how to actually utilize those health care services,” he said.

“I see it like getting people to vote. It’s one thing to get people registered to vote, but it’s another thing to get them to the polls. It’s the same thing here with getting people access to primary care.”

But for now, hundreds of people will head to Thermal on Saturday for what for some will be there only doctor visit for the years. Flying Doctors will continue to fill in the gaps and serve as a reminder that those gaps likely aren’t to close on their own.

“I’ve always said it’s a great thing that they’re here, but it’s not a great thing that they’re here,” Garcia said.

Desert Sun producer Jose Bastidas contributed translations for this story. Health and wellness reporter Barrett Newkirk can be reached at (760)778-5767, barrett.newkirk@desertsun.com or on Twitter @barrettnewkirk.

Read or Share this story: http://desert.sn/1UJrROl