Three health care lobbyists formerly of DLA Piper have left the law firm to form a health consulting shop, Sirona Strategies, the firm plans to announce Thursday.

Founding partners Krista Drobac and Kristen Ratcliff created Sirona on Nov. 7 and are joined by lobbyist Vanessa Cramer, the firm’s director of client relations.

The new venture specializes in health care business, policy, regulatory, legislative and communications strategy. Drobac and Ratcliff have represented health insurers and pharmaceutical companies including Aetna, Blue Cross/Blue Shield, Pfizer and the Alliance for Connected Care, a group of pharmacies and health care companies lobbying for greater access to telemedicine services.

Sirona is an independent shop, but will partner with law and lobby giant Akin Gump, which has a large health policy team, on some projects dealing with the implementation of the Affordable Care Act and Medicare and Medicaid issues.

The firm chose its name, Sirona, after the Celtic goddess of health. All three members have a background in government — Drobac was a health advisor for Sen. Dick Durbin (D-Ill.) and a senior adviser at the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid, Ratcliff worked in the Obama administration in the Office of the National Coordinator for Health Information Technology, and Cramer was a legislative aide for Rep. Gary Ackerman (D-NY).

The trio is the second group of departures from DLA’s lobbying practice in recent weeks. In late October, former Sen. Tom Daschle left DLA to form a health lobbying subsidiary at Baker Donelson and plans to bring between six and 10 of his former DLA colleagues with him. At least three — Ilia Rodriguez, Tiffani Williams and Nicole Carelli — have joined already. Senior policy advisors Amy Cunniffe and Mary Langowski have also left in recent months, with Langowski joining CVS Health in September.

Those exits, along with the three that left to form Sirona, bring the total number of lobbyists departing DLA to seven, about a fifth of DLA’s lobbying roster, according to the Center for Responsive Politics, a nonprofit that tracks money in politics. A firm spokesman said DLA thanks its former colleagues for their service and wish them well in their new endeavors.