SIGN UP FOR OUR NEWSLETTER

When The New York Times is more honest about gun violence than you, that’s when your integrity has gone off the deep end, which is where the leftwing Washington Post has practiced its dishonest tradecraft for quite some time now. But in the fascist pursuit of restricting your Second Amendment civil rights, the Post is desperately furthering a Big Lie about mass-shootings that even the New York Times refuses to spread.

SIGN UP FOR OUR NEWSLETTER

Using biased sources and a definition of “mass shooting” that is so wide open it includes gang fights and family disputes, the Post’s Philip Bump re-published this Saturday: “The San Bernardino shooting continues a disturbing trend: No week since 2013 without a mass shooting.”

That’s not even close to the truth. The truth is four — four mass-shootings this year. Still four too many but a far cry from Bump’s manufactured number.

Bump is not practicing journalism, he is practicing propaganda — propaganda so noxious and dishonest even the gun-grabbers at The New York Times felt the need to debunk it:

On Wednesday, a Washington Post article announced that “The San Bernardino shooting is the second mass shooting today and the 355th this year.” Vox, MSNBC’s Rachel Maddow, this newspaper and others reported similar statistics. Grim details from the church in Charleston, a college classroom in Oregon and a Planned Parenthood clinic in Colorado are still fresh, but you could be forgiven for wondering how you missed more than 300 other such attacks in 2015. At Mother Jones, where I work as an editor, we have compiled an in-depth, open-source database covering more than three decades of public mass shootings. By our measure, there have been four “mass shootings” this year, including the one in San Bernardino, and at least 73 such attacks since 1982.

Bump isn’t only trying to take guns away from law-abiding citizens, he is playing Palace Guard for a White House desperate to distract from the fact that they have failed to keep the homefront safe.

Hey, maybe Bump’s colleague, Chris Cillizza, can write another one of those columns crybabying over how terrible it is that the American public no longer trusts the media.

Follow John Nolte on Twitter @NolteNC