Q: Does it do any good to see a doctor for back pain?

A: Back pain is one of the most common health complaints, affecting more than one in four adults every year, and a popular reason for physician visits.

But most people recover from back pain whether they’re treated medically or not, says Wolf Mehling, a professor of medicine at the University of California at San Francisco.

For people who do see a doctor, research shows that while the vast majority get better, a small percentage get worse.

The American College of Physicians guidelines for back pain generally recommend over-the-counter pain medication, rest and exercise for initial treatment for “nonspecific” back pain, which means pain that is not clearly linked to injury or disease.

Yet many people go to the doctor for nonspecific back pain, where they are often given prescription pain relievers and are sent for expensive tests.

A recent study categorized treatments offered in nearly 24,000 patient visits for back or neck pain over a 12-year period. This sample did not include people with “red-flag” symptoms such as pain radiating down the leg, which can indicate a nerve problem.

For those patients, prescriptions for opiate pain medication increased, from 19 percent in 1999-2000 to 29 percent in 2009-2010; likewise, referrals to another physician increased from 7 percent to 14 percent, and CT or MRI scans increased from 7 percent to 11 percent. These trends run counter to clinical practice guidelines, such as those published by the American Pain Society and the American College of Physicians, the study says

Getting an MRI scan or an X-ray is a reasonable step if back pain has persisted for six weeks or more, the guidelines say. But imaging can be misleading, Mehling says. In “25 percent of people walking down the street with no pain,” doctors could find some pathology, he says, such as bulging or thinning disks.

Indeed, says Daniel Cherkin, a senior investigator at Seattle’s Group Health Research Institute, “in 85 percent of people, it’s not possible to confidently identify a cause of back pain.”

With unclear cause, treatment options are murky. Yet many doctors turn to surgery.

“As a spine surgeon, I try to avoid surgery,” says Jay Khanna, director of the Johns Hopkins Orthopedic and Spine Surgery practice. For chronic back pain, he recommends physical therapy to strengthen muscle support for the spine as well as “activity modification,” which might mean avoiding bending over or lifting heavy things.

If pain persists, he may recommend injecting steroids or nerve blocks directly into the back. Such injections provide temporary relief — weeks to months for steroids — which might be enough for natural healing to take place.

More researchers are studying how the emotional component of pain contributes to back problems. One study found that people with acute back pain had increased activity in sensory areas of the brain, but people with chronic back pain had increased activity in emotional areas, which suggests doctors should find ways to address the emotional aspects of lingering pain.

Alternative care, such as chiropractic, acupuncture, physical therapy, therapeutic massage or yoga, may also provide relief.

– Jill U. Adams