As part of President Barack Obama’s new final rule that will regulate Affordable Care Act (ACA) standards for patient protection, the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS) and Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) will be looking to hand out civil money penalties when data privacy and security issues arise out of the health insurance exchanges.

One part of the rule amends 45 CFR §155.260(g) to add a reference to §155.285, linking the two standards and stating that notice is required to be given to a person when a civil money penalty is assessed after an exchange participant improperly discloses or uses patient information. According to the rule, 45 CFR 155.260, which regulates handling and safeguarding consumers’ personally identifiable information, will now reference the new penalty provisions associated with §155.285, which is “knowingly and willfully using or disclosing information” in violation of section 1411(g) of the ACA.

Protection of consumer information is one of the most critical duties of consumer assistance entities and Exchanges. Section 155.260 provides privacy and security standards handling and safeguarding consumers’ PII. Section 155.260 also provides that the Secretary can determine additional uses and disclosures of PII and develop a framework through which Exchanges can seek the Secretary’s approval of other requested uses and disclosures of eligibility and enrollment PII that would ensure the efficient operation of the Exchange, comply with other applicable law and policy, and require the consent of the individual subject of the PII prior to the requested use or disclosure. Uses and disclosures of information that are not permitted by §155.260 or otherwise permitted by statute or regulation, therefore, are prohibited. Those prohibited uses and disclosures are the focus of the penalties imposed in §155.285 to the extent they are knowing and willful.

It appears as though HHS and CMS are aiming to use the civil monetary penalties as a preventive measure against patient data disclosures within the insurance exchanges, but there were plenty of comments regarding the rule. Some recommended that HHS retain discretion to impose CMPs under both §155.206 and §155.285, referencing some violations under §155.285 will also violate consumer assistance standards. Others said that HHS should impose a CMP under only one section.

To implement these requirements, HHS has included detailed privacy and security requirements in its agreements, contracts, and grant terms and conditions with the consumer assistance entities that are carrying out functions in States with an FFE, including a State Partnership Exchange. We recognize that these strong consumer protections restrict the personal consumer information that consumer assistance entities are able to retain and therefore limit the information available to them in preparing a response to a notice of investigation in §155.206(e).

Read through “Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act; Exchange and Insurance Market Standards for 2015 and Beyond” here. According to the rule, the new language will be posted in the Federal Register on May 27, 2014 and the rule will be effective 60 days later on July 26, 2014.