Topics: From the Wires, News

NEW BRAUNFELS, Texas (AP) — Tommy Vaughn knows his clients may be distrustful when a court appoints him to handle their case. Without enough money to hire their own lawyer, defendants are often suspicious that court-appointed attorneys will provide a poor defense or just try to coerce a quick guilty plea.

“I kind of assume that’s what they’re thinking when I first meet them,” said Vaughn, who has worked as a defense attorney in Texas for 2½ years.

The issue of trust has long been part of a larger discussion about the quality of indigent defense in the U.S. Now, the Central Texas county where Vaughn works will be the first in the country to give these individuals the ability to choose their own attorneys at the government’s expense.

It’s part of a pilot program in Comal County that could determine whether the idea could be adopted in other jurisdictions and provide a new wrinkle to how the Sixth and Fourteenth Amendments are exercised.

Under the new system, a defendant who is declared indigent will be given a list of 30 to 50 attorneys who have been approved by the county. An individual will have a day to make a choice.

Legal experts have suggested that defendants will be more invested in their cases, and there will be more accountability for attorneys.

“When the attorney has to earn the business for these indigent defense appointments, as opposed to being their turn in the rotation, they have new and stronger incentives to provide good quality services,” said Edwin Colfax, project manager for the Texas Indigent Defense Commission, which gave Comal County a $200,000 grant for the program, tentatively set to begin Jan. 12.

In countries such as Australia, Canada and England, indigent defendants have for years been able to choose their own lawyer.

In Texas, the most common indigent defense model is the “wheel” system, where judges appoint whichever lawyer on a previously approved list is next up on the rotation. Some court systems in Texas and across the country also use public defender offices or contract with attorneys or law firms to provide indigent defense services.

The commission envisions the idea working in Comal partly because of its manageable size. The county has about 118,000 residents between Austin and San Antonio.