For too many years, 80204 was an unlucky number for Katrina Aguirre and others like her who felt stuck in an unsafe, unhealthy neighborhood.

The characteristics of a single ZIP code are key factors in the health outcomes of Colorado residents. Study after study is revealing how much more important the ZIP code can be than our own DNA code in determining the strength of body and mind.

Now the story behind Aguirre’s ZIP code is changing. A longtime resident of the La Alma/Lincoln Park neighborhood, just southwest of downtown Denver, Aguirre told YourHub she has moved into new public apartments there, reborn as Mariposa. Her unit, the third phase of an ambitious project to rethink the public role in personal health, is one of the first public housing projects in Colorado to be designed for putting human movement back into daily life.

Mariposa III has an artistically designed staircase to encourage taking steps; raised community garden beds that get people outside and growing healthier food; quick connections to transit; and economic development connecting residents to good jobs. The gunshots Aguirre remembers not so long ago are being replaced by the click of bicycle spokes and the snips of gardening shears.

The Denver Housing Authority has joined with partners in the public, private and nonprofit sectors to end the cycle of ZIP code as health destiny — a dedicated group of Colorado advocates determined to reverse the spread of “health deserts.” These progressive thinkers see a focus on reshaping the built environment as a key tool in attacking high obesity rates, diabetes, mental distress and more that are holding back whole geographic areas.

We need more formulas for better health going beyond a five-digit code. A better mix would include residential input to the built environment; increasing access to affordable housing and transportation options; cross-sector partnerships from public health to the real estate industry; and broadening the mission of health care providers to go beyond treatment.

Denver has both areas for improvement and successes that go beyond ZIP code. Interestingly, these new opportunities emerge less in health care as in areas such as housing and transportation. They make health a primary driver of community planning and development, with the aim of building communities where the healthy choice is the easy choice.

Recommendations put forth earlier this year by the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation Commission to Build a Healthier America call for a fundamental change in our approach. Building healthy communities is an essential component of the commission’s prescription.

Mile High Connects has developed an equity atlas and policy solutions for significant amenity disparities in the metro area. Take a map of Denver’s Westwood neighborhood, for example. Shove all the existing green space into one corner square, and trace a larger square available to other Denver ZIP codes: The difference is jarring. Now, Mayor Michael Hancock and other leaders have noticed: We must join their call to action.

If you live in a Denver neighborhood where decent housing is unaffordable, jobs are scarce, convenience stores far outnumber grocery stores, and there are no places for safe outdoor exercise, it’s difficult to be healthy, even if you try.

The metro Denver FasTracks plan for improving commuter rail, light rail and rapid bus transit offers a great opportunity to expand access to affordable housing, quality schools and preschools, good jobs, healthy food options, and essential services.

The foundation’s Healthy Places initiative is designed to inspire and support the development of healthy communities in suburban Arvada, rural Lamar and urban Westwood in southwest Denver.

There should be more Katrina Aguirres waking up to the sounds of a healthier community. Let’s break the ZIP code disorder, and create those places.

Anne Warhover is president and CEO of the Colorado Health Foundation, and was featured in a live-streamed Colorado Health Symposium session (www.ColoradoHealth.org/14CHSlive) discussing the commission’s recommendations to Build a Healthier America on July 23.