Currently collaborating with the University of Oklahoma on an upcoming educational opportunity, Oklahoma's own Gary England has been named OU's Consulting Meteorologist-in-Residence, according to OU News. The appointment was announced by OU President David L. Boren at the March meeting of the OU Board of Regents. England's appointment is effective February 1.

England and OU are working together to provide an exciting new series about severe weather. OU News reported the online series is a collection of short, entertaining videos hosted by England that will allow people of all ages to better understand Oklahoma's weather. Additional information about this series will become available when the series is released in April.

“We are very excited to welcome Gary England back to the University,” said OU President David L. Boren. “An OU alumnus himself, Gary has pioneered and revolutionized many of the technologies used in meteorology today. His experience will be of significant value to our students, and we look forward to him rejoining the OU family in this official capacity.”

“Returning to my alma mater is a terrific opportunity to share my lifetime of experience that OU launched me into many years ago,” said England. “OU's meteorology programs are nationally ranked, and I am excited to serve as a resource for OU students and the people of Oklahoma as OU's Consulting Meteorologist in Residence.”

Born in Seiling, Oklahoma, England joined the U.S. Navy at age 17, after which he attended the University of Oklahoma, graduating in 1965 with a Bachelor of Science in mathematics and meteorology.

England began his broadcasting career with KWTV in Oklahoma City in 1972. Over his 41-year career with KWTV, England is credited with saving countless lives and properties with his steady, measured reporting during severe storms in Oklahoma. England became internationally noted for pioneering innovations in weather technology and systems that are now common tools in the world of severe weather coverage, including first acquisition and application of commercial Doppler radar, the storm time of arrival warning system, corner screen warning maps and cellular still picture/video transmission. With the firm Enterprise Electronics, he implemented the world's first commercial Doppler weather radar, in 1981 becoming the first person in history to use Doppler radar for direct warnings to the public.

Named “The Weather God of Oklahoma City” by The New York Times, England is the recipient of numerous awards and honors, including four Emmys and the Silver Circle Award by the National Academy of Television Arts and Sciences, Heartland Division. He was inducted into the Oklahoma Hall of Fame in 2013. He also received the prestigious Edward R. Murrow Award for best in the nation in breaking weather coverage in all large markets.

England is the author of four books and has appeared in more than 60 national and international severe weather programs. In 2013, England assumed a new role at KWTV-9 as the vice president for corporate relations and weather development at Griffin Communications.

England was named an OU Outstanding Alumnus in 2008. He was further honored by OU in October 2013 at the annual Ring Ceremony and also served as parade marshal for OU's Homecoming. England received the University of Oklahoma's highest award in 2014, an Honorary Doctorate of Humane Letters.