Survey results show employers in West Michigan followed the same path in 2013 as past years to stem the ever-rising cost of health coverage.

That means higher premium contributions by employees and higher deductibles and copays were the norm once again this year, as employers responded to increased costs for employee health coverage.

The continuation of those trends came as key provisions are about to kick in from the federal Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, including affordability and coverage mandates for 2014 health policies that contribute to cost increases.

The survey results show that employers generally moved to comply with the mandates in the reform law but did not otherwise pursue changes in benefits beyond what’s required or what’s already been happening in the market for years, said Maggie McPhee, director of information service at The Employers’ Association in Grand Rapids.

“Everybody once again is still holding tight because of the Affordable Care Act,” McPhee said. “Everybody’s just kind of waiting it out.”

The annual cost survey conducted by The Employer’s Association and the Alliance for Health shows that many respondents adjusted co-pays, deductibles and the share of the premiums that employees need to pay as a way to mitigate higher costs.

Two-thirds of the cost survey’s 144 respondents said they made at least one change to their employee health benefits. Sixty-two percent reported that they increased premium contributions, and 40 percent increased deductibles.

Thirty percent increased co-pays for services such as office visits and prescription medications, and 28 increased out-of-pocket maximums that employees pay for their health care, according to survey results.

The use of wellness as a cost-containment continued to gain traction in 2013. Forty-six percent of survey respondents indicated they now have some form of wellness program, which compares to 43 percent in 2012 and 40 percent in 2010.

About half of the wellness programs are tied to employer medical plans, and 48 percent of companies responding to the survey said they conduct annual biometric health screenings of employees, checking blood pressure, cholesterol and blood glucose levels.

An employer-sponsored family health plan in West Michigan had an average monthly premium of $1,097 in 2013, up 6.9 percent from the average monthly premium of $1,026 in 2012 and 8.9 percent from 2011’s average of $1,007.

The averages are across all types of health plans — HMO, PPO and POS — and represent the premiums after employers altered benefits to mitigate higher costs.

Monthly premiums for a two-person health plan averaged $883, up from $826 a year earlier. A one-person plan averaged $398 in premiums, which compares to $379 in 2012.

On average, employers responding to the annual cost survey require employees to cover 27 percent of the premium for a family plan, 28 percent for a two-person plan and 24 percent for a one-person plan.

As they’ve pushed more of the cost for health coverage onto employees, employers have sought to add other benefits to make up for a perceived “take away,” said Shannon Enders, a benefits consultant with Lakeshore Employee Benefits in Muskegon. Enders said he’s seen an uptick in the last few years in employers adding benefits such as dental, optical or disability coverage that they can offer at a fixed cost as they switch to a lower-cost high-deductible medical plan.

The 15 percent an employer can “easily” save on high-deductible health premiums typically more than covers the price to add other benefits, which helps to keep employees satisfied, Enders said.

“They view you as bringing more range in ‘what I can and can’t have,’” he said.