Tamar Kahn

Motsoaledi returns for second term as health minister

AARON Motsoaledi comes back for a second term as health minister, with former deputy arts and culture minister Joe Phaahla as his deputy.

A medical doctor by training, the hard-working Dr Motsoaledi has won praise from all sides for his frank acknowledgement of the problems facing South Africa’s health system, and the energy he has devoted to undoing the damage wrought by former health minister Manto Tshabalala-Msimang, who allowed the health system to crumble while she promoted unscientific remedies for AIDS.

He has also restored dignity to the scientific community, once much maligned by Dr Tshabalala-Msimang.

President Jacob Zuma has in all likelihood kept him in the portfolio because he is widely perceived to have done a stellar job.

Not only would Dr Motsoaledi have been a hard act to follow, but a change at the helm would have led to delays in implementing key policies such as National Health Insurance.

Dr Motsoaledi had a high profile in the media in the run-up to the elections, seizing every opportunity to present himself as a campaigner for affordable healthcare, for example when he took on multinational pharmaceutical companies over their attempts to counter South Africa’s planned reforms to its intellectual property rights regime.

He has also been unafraid to put his money where his mouth is: not only has he sent his children to public school, but he turned to a public hospital when he needed surgery last year.

Under Dr Motsoaledi’s political leadership, South Africa’s HIV treatment programme has evolved from virtual dysfunction to an initiative providing care to more than 2-million people. The programme is far from perfect, and there are growing concerns about medicine stock-outs, but it is demonstrably saving lives.

Dr Motsoaledi’s critics say he is reluctant to delegate, and tries to keep his hand in too many projects. He has failed to publish the long-awaited White Paper on NHI, which has been repeatedly delayed. And he is far from being the darling of the private healthcare sector, which he regularly criticises for its high prices.

However, he has yet to acknowledge that even public hospitals levy high fees on all but the very poor, and can place a huge financial burden on families.

He has taken little action to address the structural issues facing the private healthcare sector, but this may change when the Competition Commission’s market inquiry into healthcare is completed. The inquiry has been delayed by litigation, and will now only begin in earnest in August.

One of the biggest challenges of his past term was his inability to really hold provinces to account for their service delivery failures. Without a change to the constitution — which is unlikely — that issue is likely to continue holding up the implementation of whatever policies his department devises, no matter how sound.

Dr Motsoaledi’s deputy, Joe Phaahla, takes over from Gwen Ramokgopa, who stepped down and was not on the ANC’s list.

Dr Phaahla qualified as a medical doctor at the University of Natal, but his only health-related executive role in government was when he was the Northern Cape’s MEC for health and welfare between 1994 and 1997.

He does, however, have extensive, if not recent, experience of the public health sector: he started out as an intern at the Edendale hospital in Pietermaritzburg in 1984 and progressed to become a medical superintendent at various public hospitals in the early 1990s. He joined South Africa’s first democratic government in 1994 as a member of the Northern Cape’s provincial legislature.

The deputy health minister’s position is by and large overshadowed by the minister of the day, who delegates duties to them.

The only deputy health minister who really made waves was Nozizwe Madlala-Routledge, who publicly clashed with then health minister Ms Tshabalala-Msimang.

Dr Phaahla’s role will largely be determined by the trust Dr Motsoaledi places in him and the extent to which he is willing to delegate responsibilities to him.