Minus defensemen Ryan Wilson and Nate Guenin, the Avalanche reconvened Monday morning to prepare for an evening game against the visiting Calgary Flames. Wilson (sent to the minor leagues) and Guenin (ankle injury) will not play in Game 5 of a seven-game homestand.

Wilson’s demotion is a 14-day conditioning stint to the Lake Erie Monsters of the American Hockey League. Wilson has played just 13 games this season, seemingly rarely meeting coach Patrick Roy’s expectations.

“I suggested that might be good for him to go to the minors and play five games,” Roy said of Wilson, who is making $2.375 million. “He’s going to come back on the 19th.”

Guenin absorbed a puck off a skate in Saturday’s 4-3 win over San Jose, and Roy said he can’t put weight on his bruised ankle. He is day-to-day.

Tyson Barrie, a healthy scratch the past two games, will replace Guenin, and Roy said the team will carry just 21 active players, and 20 currently available.

Meanwhile, injured forward Alex Tanguay (knee, groin) did not skate with the team Monday morning. Roy previously said Tanguay might undergo season-ending surgery if he is not free of pain in his latest comeback attempt.

Mike Chambers: mchambers@denverpost.com or twitter.com/mchambers

Monday: Calgary at Colorado

7 p.m. Monday, ALT; 950 AM

Spotlight on Shane O’Brien: The former Avalanche defenseman has played in 37-of-41 games for Calgary, his sixth NHL team, since being traded last summer in a four-player deal that sent forward Alex Tanguay and defenseman Cory Sarich to Colorado. The talkative O’Brien, 30, was a popular player in his two seasons with the Avalanche, and likely has a bright future as hockey analyst or comedian when he retires from his playing career.

NOTEBOOK

Flames: They have been outscored 10-1 in their four-game losing streak and haven’t won in regulation or overtime in their past nine games. “As we all know, we’re a very fragile group right now,” Flames coach Bob Hartley told reporters after Friday’s 2-0 loss to the visiting Tampa Bay Lightning. … Finnish goalie Karri Ramo is scheduled to start in net. Ramo and Reto Berra have combined to give up just eight goals (2.00 average) in Calgary’s losing streak.

Avalanche: The team didn’t practice Sunday, after Saturday’s 4-3 victory over San Jose. … Colorado is 2-0 against Calgary, winning 4-2 on Nov. 8 in Denver and 3-2 on Dec. 6 in Alberta. … The Avs are entering the second half of their seven-game homestand that continues Wednesday against Ottawa and Friday against the New York Islanders. … Left wing Gabe Landeskog is on a six-game points streak, the longest by an Avalanche player this season, and winger Jamie McGinn has scored in each of his past three games. … Goaltender Semyon Varlamov is on a 10-game unbeaten streak (6-0-4).



Mike Chambers, The Denver Post