Running back Ronnie Hillman and cornerback Kayvon Webster were limited in the early portion of practice Monday, four days after not accompanying the team on its charter from Dallas because of an undisclosed medical issue.

Hillman and Webster paired off with their position groups, but did not participate in the drills. Neither played last Thursday in the final preseason game. They participated in the pregame workout. However, they became ill at some point Thursday. Webster required assistance to walk out of the locker room, with a teammate explaining that the cornerback wasn’t feeling well.

Hillman and Webster were taken to a Dallas-area hospital for treatment. They returned to Denver on Sunday, a day later than expected, because they didn’t have proper ID to travel. When asked whey they didn’t travel on Thursday, general manager John Elway said tersely, “It’s a medical issue.”

They are both backups at key positions. Hillman performed well in preseason, and is in line to get plenty of reps against the Colts on Sunday, if healthy. Montee Ball played only one series in the preseason after undergoing an appendectomy. C.J. Anderson is listed third on the depth chart followed by undrafted rookie Juwan Thompson.

Webster lined up as a starting cornerback in Chris Harris’ absence. Harris expects to start on Sunday, but might need to be spelled in his first game since tearing his left ACL on Jan. 12. If Webster is compromised, it could lead to additional playing time for first-round pick Bradley Roby, who finished the preseason strong after a difficult start going opposite of Demaryius Thomas in drills.

Receiver Wes Welker continues his conditioning work as he recovers from his third concussion in 10 months. He has not yet been cleared for contact or Sunday’s opener.

Offensive lineman Ben Garland, a former Air Force star, was not present when the team began practice. He suffered a minor injury in the final preseason game.

Footnotes

Two players switched numbers. Linebacker Corey Nelson, the seventh-round pick who made the final roster, will wear No. 52 and Shaquil Barrett, a practice squader, is donning No. 50.