Is it time to break up with my historical boyfriend Abraham? April gives me a wrench amid the cherry blossoms and daffodils.

We were talking about the new deal in sight with Iran over its nuclear program when the thought of parting crossed my mind. Anyway, he said President Barack Obama was wise to pursue peace with our enemy since 1979. With malice toward none, with charity toward all, he said, fond of quoting himself, best not to let hate fester in the dark. He said Obama, the other man from Illinois, never carried the mantle of power so well as he has done lately, acting alone without Congress.

Sometimes it takes just one man and a pen to get things done. You know, like my proclamation, he might add.



[SEE: Political Cartoons on Congress]

How modest. Then his blue-gray eyes twinkle and that's part of his charm. He always gets the joke and he usually tells it in a jarringly modern way. He made it through the Civil War telling stories and jokes which some in his Cabinet thought were a pure waste of time. Yet he loved to laugh in order to survive the tragedy unfolding in front of him, up until his very last days in office. It was nothing to boast of, being a war president, he told me. His face got haggard, speaking of the shadow of 620,000 deaths that tore the nation apart.

We've been living together for nearly four years now, in imaginary conversations. Ever since the Civil War sesquicentennial started in Washington in 2011, his presence here has been heightened as the dominant male in a male-dominated town. Ford's Theatre on 10th Street NW has convened many panels, programs and plays, giving new angles and authors on Abraham Lincoln, and I fell in with that crowd.

The tower of books about Lincoln at Ford's? No problem, if one fell under his spell. Visiting the tiny bedroom where the president died, mortally wounded, across the street from the theater? Yes, I'm still not over that little room where such a large heart gave out. His lean frame was so tall, 6'4", that he had to be laid diagonally. Nine hours after the sobs and shouts started, he was out, at age 56.



[SEE: Political Cartoons on the Republican Party]

The Easter sunrise service at the Lincoln Memorial? Shucks, I missed it. Made of stronger stuff, my friend Amy, who brought hot chocolate to see us through the dawn, is having doubts about my faith. Lincoln's death 150 years ago takes on force at Easter when you realize John Wilkes Booth's murderous shot in the dark happened on Good Friday.

So gradually I joined the Lincolnistas. Takes one to know one. Their favorite haunt is the Willard Hotel, where as president-elect he stayed for a few days after stepping off the train from Springfield in 1861. With a hand from my friends, I published Lincoln essays of my own. I traced his steps in Richmond, the conquered Confederate capital, which he visited 10 days before the fateful date at Ford's. Soon I felt Lincoln belonged to everybody the way the elegant early Virginian presidents, slaveholders all, did not. As a girl from Wisconsin, he was, after all, the president next door.



[SEE: Political Cartoons on the Democratic Party]