Ohio Gov. John Kasich Makes Watertown Campaign Stop

Republican presidential hopeful John Kasich was in Watertown Friday for a town hall meeting at the Bruce Wright Conference Center.

Kasich spoke to the packed audience about his early life, his career in politics and his track record as governor of Ohio, including creating jobs, reforming welfare, and cutting government.



Then he fielded questions from the audience on the Affordable Care Act and health care in general, autism awareness, the economy, climate change and tax policy.



"The personal tax rate, I'm for the 28-, 25-, 10-percent rate, which is realistic -- it's the Reagan plan -- with the 15 percent capital gains tax, he said. "How is that going to work? Very hard."



Kasich also criticized his fellow Republicans for not fixing health care.

"It is amazing to me that the Republicans, when they were in control, actually didn't do what they needed to do to reform health care, " he said.

He also said he'd keep parts of the Affordable Care Act, often called Obamacare.

"You should always be able to get health insurance no matter if you have a pre-existing condition," he said.

Kasich also criticized fellow candidate Ted Cruz, pointing out Cruz called a fellow Republican a "liar." He said that's not leadership and neither is the way President Obama has dealt with Congress.

He did make on thing very clear - saying he's the only Republican who can beat Hillary Clinton.

"Who can win the fall? I'm the only one that consistently does it. And secondly, who actually can be the kind of a leader that can run our country," he said.

His supporters say Kasich is the one to do the job.

"I think he would make a wonderful president and we should support him," said Dennis Whelpley, a local lawyer.

"I just hope that in the end he can get the delegates and he can be the one to vote for," said Carol Ssimpson of Cape Vincent.

His is one of three campaigns making stops in the north country.

Bill Clinton will be campaigning for Hillary at 1 p.m. on Saturday in downtown Watertown and Donald Trump will have a rally at 3 p.m. Saturday at the Watertown airport.

Texas Sen. Ted Cruz will be in Cicero Friday afternoon.



The campaign stops are in advance of New York's presidential primary on Tuesday.