Hillary Clinton has a tough presidential race ahead of her if she decides to compete for the Oval Office in 2016, especially considering 56 percent of Americans disapprove of the way in which President Obama is handling health care.

The former secretary of State has gone to bat repeatedly for Obama’s disastrous Affordable Care Act, likely because Hillary herself championed an eerily similar universal health care proposal when she was first lady in the White House and then again when she ran unsuccessfully for the Democratic nomination for president in 2008.

As recently as late June of this year, Clinton insisted that she would run a campaign on Obamacare “if [she] were a Democrat running for reelection in 2014” despite the fact a majority of Americans don’t like the way the president has handled health care likely because of the mounting problems with the Affordable Care Act.

Hillary’s paltry attempts to distance herself from the president by way of criticizing Obamacare — she admitted in July the need to “fix” the law — do little to conceal the fact that Clinton, in her conception of HillaryCare and support of Obamacare, will not lead the country the way it wants to be led on health care.

This isn’t the only Obama issue on which Clinton finds herself stuck. Hillary also criticized Obama’s foreign policy earlier this month despite the fact that she served as his secretary of State and, as the White House pointed out in response, was “fully on-board” with the Obama foreign policy strategy at the time.

Clinton has also waxed hypocritical by promising to fight for youth jobs when her support of HillaryCare and eventually Obamacare has only done young Americans an economic disservice by forcing universities to cut student work hours and raise tuition.

Unfortunately for Clinton, her inability to shake Obama’s shadow will not do her any favors leading up to the 2016 election. Currently, the president has extremely low job approval ratings on the economy, foreign affairs, immigration and the like, the majority of Americans actually disapproving of his actions with respect to these issues.

As Congressman Paul Ryan (R-Wisc.) so eloquently put it, “Hillary Clinton is very beatable because a Hillary Clinton presidency is basically the same thing as an Obama third term.”