State Sen. Cam Ward co-authored a guest column for AL.com Sunday headlined: "Prison Reform Through the Conservative Lens."

Ward, head of Alabama's Prison Reform Task Force, now has some high-powered company in preaching that the conservative thing to do is stop wasting money building prisons, filling them up, and building more: The Koch brothers, the billionaire heads of Koch Industries, known for bankrolling anti-ObamaCare ads and countless GOP candidates.

An article last week in the New York Times detailed how the Charles and David Koch have joined forces with an unlikely ally - the left-leaning Center for American Progress - to fund a multi-million dollar campaign to push sentencing, probation and other criminal justice reform nationwide.

The amazingly bipartisan "Coalition for Public Safety" includes Koch Industries, the American Civil Liberties Union, Americans for Tax Reform and Freedom Works, a Tea-Party leaning group, according to the New York Times.

"We have in the past and will in the future have criticism of the policy agenda of the Koch brother companies, but where we can find common ground on issues, we will go forward," Neera Tanden, the APC president, told The Times. "I think it speaks to the importance of the issue."

Here are some other conservatives names who support sentencing and probation reform over building more prison cells: Former Fla. Gov. Jeb Bush, Kentucky Sen. Rand Paul, former Speaker of the House Newt Gingrich, New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie, Miss. Gov. Phil Bryant, Americans for Tax Reform head Grover Norquist, and former NRA chief David Keene, just to name a few.

The conversion of conservatives to criminal justice reform isn't new. In 2005, the Texas Public Policy Foundation changed the conversation there by pointing out that building new prison cells wasn't stopping crime and was costing the public more and more, according to a 2014 article in Mother Jones.

In 2007, Texas Gov. Rick Perry was convinced to put an eighth of the $2 billion the state was spending to build new prison beds into drug courts and rehab programs for drug-addicted and mentally ill inmates. Since then, according to Mother Jones, Texas' has seen a 20 percent decline in incarceration.

That effort spawned a nationwide effort called "Right on Crime," headed by Texas lawyer Marc Levin, that pushes "conservative criminal justice reform."

Redder-than-red Texas was also among the first states to work with the Council of State Governments' Justice Center to pass "Justice Reinvestment" legislation that emphasizes getting nonviolent offenders treatment, not jail time.

The reforms being pushed this session in Alabama are based on similar data-driven analysis and recommendations by CSG.

In Alabama, where the prison population is growing out of control and the entire system faces federal scrutiny, Ward is using conservative words like "public safety, accountability and cost-efficiency, and personal responsibility," to sell the plan.

"It is the goal of conservative leaders in the Legislature," Ward wrote, in tandem with Republican Rep. Mike Jones and Alabama Policy Institute's Katherine Robertson, "to see our prison problems addressed through principle-based solutions, not irresponsible quick-fixes."