Washington has more than a million low-income residents, including 672,000 children. Access to quality health care is essential.

THE low rates Medicaid pays to doctors sounds like a problem for doctors, right?

Wrong.

Ultimately, low Medicaid rates are a problem for children.

Washington state has more than 1 million low-income residents, including 672,000 children (42 percent of all Washington children). These children depend on Apple Health for Kids, our state’s Medicaid program, for their health insurance.

Our state’s pediatricians depend on sufficient reimbursement to care for these children, but the Medicaid rates in our state are often not even enough to cover costs. This makes it difficult for pediatricians to accept children with Medicaid as patients, and many clinics are reducing the number of these children they will see or even closing clinic doors altogether. This has created a system where children in low-income families are unable to access the care they need.

Historically, payment rates for Medicaid have averaged about two-thirds of Medicare payment rates. Many basic services are dramatically underfunded under Medicaid, but less so under Medicare. For example, vaccine administration is reimbursed at $23.44 per vaccine under Medicare, but only $5.96 under Medicaid.

To address this problem, the federal government, under the Affordable Care Act, authorized and funded an increase in Medicaid payments to match the higher rates paid by Medicare for two years. The hope was that the states would see the value in compensating physicians fairly for primary care and continue the payments going forward.

Thanks to the federal funding in 2013 and 2014, Washington’s children finally received a chance for equal access to care because pediatricians were paid adequately. At the end of the day, more of the children who are most in need of consistent, quality health care were able to access it.

Unfortunately, the enhanced Medicaid rate expired last year, putting access to care for these children at risk, unless the state steps in.

At the Washington chapter of the American Academy of Pediatrics, we are hearing from pediatricians across the state who are in the unenviable position of having to turn away Medicaid patients or shutting down their practices.

A recent Washington state primary-care Medicaid survey found that nearly three-quarters of primary-care physicians would stop accepting, reduce or limit the number of new Medicaid patients if the fair Medicaid payments aren’t maintained. The result is that disadvantaged children have insurance, but their only source for care is less effective and more expensive episodic care in emergency departments.

So if you’re not a doctor, why should you care? There are a few reasons:

• It’s the right thing to do. Children should never have restricted access to care because of their insurance.

• Prevention pays off. The cost of providing quality preventive care for children is minimal compared to the cost of treating illnesses that could be prevented altogether.

• It will save money. Access to quality primary care is shown to reduce preventable emergency-room visits. One program in Washington state to reduce nonemergency visits showed a savings of $33.6 million in Medicaid fee-for-service emergency-care costs in fiscal year 2013.

The state House and Senate released their budget proposals for the 2015-17 biennium. Neither budget includes funding to maintain the enhanced Medicaid rate. As legislators engage in budget negotiations during the special session, we urge them to make the right choice for children and fund the enhanced Medicaid rate.

Please contact your legislators and ask them to make sure our state’s most vulnerable children have access to health care by retaining the Medicaid rate at the Medicare level.