It took President Obama less than a minute to destroy the Republican budget proposal by pointing out the many failures of the conservative financial fantasy blueprint.

Video:

The president said:

I should mention that I was hoping for a little luck of the Irish as the Republicans put forward their budget today. Unfortunately, what we’re seeing right now is a failure to invest in education, infrastructure, research and national defense. All the things that we need to grow, need to create jobs, to stay at the forefront of innovation and to keep our country safe. “It’s not a budget that reflects the future. It’s not a budget that reflects growth. It’s not a budget that is going to help ensure that middle-class families are able to maintain security and stability and that people who are trying to get into the middle class are going to have the rungs on the ladder to get into the middle class.

The president was so easily able to rip apart the Republican budget proposal, because it is the same tired ideas that they have been pushing for years. The Republican budget would lower taxes for people at the top while gutting Social Security, Medicare, and Medicaid. The budget is also based on the myth that Republicans will be able to repeal Obamacare. There is not a single forward thinking idea in the Republican budget.

The Republican budget was more of the same old stuff that is never going to see the light of day. It is an ideological wish list. A fantasy that is not based on the reality of what the country needs in order to move forward. The Republican budget is a broken record that is loaded with fatal scratches.

It is not surprising that President Obama was able to take it apart so quickly. This budget is a failure. It is a failure in every way that the president described and dozens more. It is a betrayal of our veterans. It is a betrayal of the poor. This budget crushes the American dream and destroys any hope of upward mobility.

The Republican budget is a Koch dream that President Obama quickly shocked back to reality.