It’s a sad day for Iowans, and, for once, it’s not just because they live in Iowa.

The Iowa Straw Poll, a staple of Republican presidential politics since 1979, has been canceled because several of the top-tier GOP presidential candidates didn’t want to participate.

Jeb Bush, Mike Huckabee, Sen. Marco Rubio and Sen. Lindsey Graham all said they wouldn’t take part in this year’s event. While the poll has rarely been an accurate predictor of the eventual GOP nominee, it was considered an early measure of which candidates might have staying power.

It was also one of three things that made people pay attention to Iowa, the other two being the Iowa caucuses and someone carving something large out of butter.

But the straw poll took money to win, and the 2016 candidates clearly saw it as a waste of resources.

According to an Associated Press report, Iowa Republican officials “wanted to make sure negativity surrounding the straw poll didn't hurt Iowa's traditional place in holding the first votes of the presidential nomination contest, with its leadoff caucuses.”

The problem is, with the field of GOP candidates growing like a rabbit colony in the shadow of a Viagra manufacturing plant, there is nothing to winnow the crowd down before the Iowa caucuses. It’s quite possible there will be more GOP presidential candidates than there are Iowans.

That’s where I believe the Illinois Republican Party can step in and steal some of Iowa’s “first in the nation” thunder.

My proposal is simple and in keeping with conservative principles: Introduce the first-annual Illinois Presidential Paintball Tournament.

All 17,523 candidates will be invited to attend the event, held in a large field outside Springfield. Everyone will be armed with a high-powered paintball rifle and suited up in the kind of camouflage hunting gear that makes presidential candidates look awkward.

Then it’s just winner take all. Splat! Splat! Splat!

The event will have everything the Republican base could want: guns, people trying to protect themselves with guns and lots of screaming and yelling.

I sent a tweet to the Illinois Republican Party: “@ilgop With Iowa Straw Poll gone, you guys want to jump in and launch the Illinois Presidential Paintball Tournament? I have #ideas.”

I haven’t heard back, but I have to imagine officials will jump at this chance to put Illinois on the presidential campaign map. The event would demonstrate which candidates have the most American exceptionalism (paintball prowess is a well-established measure of exceptionalism) AND it would make the party a ton of cash.

Imagine how much money both Republicans and Democrats would pay to watch GOP candidates fire paintballs at each other. It’d be far more entertaining than just watching them shoot themselves in the foot.

rhuppke@tribpub.com