The combined home health and hospice businesses will operate within the Kindred at Home division and be based in Louisville. It will keep a significant regional presence in Atlanta, where Gentiva is based. (Photo: MATT STONE)

Kindred Healthcare's $719.6 million acquisition of Gentiva Health Services could lead to expansion of the Louisville facilities and workforce while providing "enormous opportunities" to help more patients across the nation, said Kindred CEO Paul J. Diaz.

Kindred and Gentiva on Thursday said that the combined company will be the largest operator of long-term acute care hospitals and inpatient rehabilitation facilities in the U.S. and the country's largest provider of rehabilitation, home health and hospice services.

It is expected to have annual revenues of approximately $7.1 billion.

"The opportunity that this creates for patients is enormous across the country and in Louisville," Diaz said.

He added, "If the stars align, we expect to expand our (Louisville) campus and add jobs in a meaningful way."

No specific new job numbers were provided. The cash-and-stock deal to acquire home health and hospice care provider Gentiva seals a deal Kindred has been pursuing after previous rejections by Gentiva.

LEARN MORE: Kindred-Gentiva highlights

Kindred will pay $14.50 per share in cash and $5 of its common stock for each share of Gentiva, whose board approved the deal. The companies put the transaction's value at $1.8 billion, including the assumption of debt.

Kindred initially went public in May with an offer to buy Gentiva at $14 per share. It later raised its bid to $14.50 per share, but Gentiva rejected both of those offers.

In July Gentiva said that it had received a competing bid from an undisclosed party that valued Gentiva at $17.25 per share, and said that it would review that proposal.

That same month Kindred said it would pay $16 per share in cash to buy up to a 14.9 percent stake in Gentiva. That would have made Kindred Gentiva's biggest shareholder, but would have fallen short of the 15 percent limit imposed by a shareholder rights plan, or "poison pill" measure, that Gentiva's board adopted after Kindred started bidding for the company.

It appears that the two companies were able to come to an agreement since that time.

The combined home health and hospice businesses will operate within the Kindred at Home division and be based in Louisville. It will keep a significant regional presence in Atlanta, where Gentiva is based, and "no more than one percent of that workforce will be affected," Diaz said.

"I think this is a great thing for the town we call home," Diaz said. "For us anchoring Fourth Street, and the renaissance going on downtown, I think it speaks to this combination with Gentiva and really gives us a platform to do incredible great things for our patients."

He added, "This is going to grow Kindred at home, quite a bit, but it does not preclude us from looking for opportunities to grow and build."

In August The Courier-Journal reported that Kindred Healthcare is planning to expand its headquarters along Fourth Street just north of Broadway.

Since late last year, Kindred has purchased nearly all the property at Theater Square across from The Brown hotel. Its corporate offices are in a six-story building on the north side of Broadway between Fourth and Fifth streets.

Diaz said the Gentiva acquisition provides "enormous opportunities to care for a growing, aging U.S. population and, sadly, the growing need for care for people with chronic disease."

Kindred expects the acquisition to immediately add to its earnings, excluding transaction and integration costs.

Both companies' boards unanimously approved the deal, which is targeted to close in 2015's first quarter. It still needs approval from Gentiva stockholders.

Highlights

The combined company will:

• Serve more than one million patients per year.

• Operate in 47 states.

• Employ about 109,000, making it the 78th largest private employer and the 4th largest healthcare employer in the United States.

• Be the largest operator of long-term acute care hospitals and inpatient rehabilitation facilities in the United States.

• Be the nation's largest provider of rehabilitation, home health and hospice services and one of the leading sub-acute and skilled nursing providers.

Source: Kindred

Share jump

Shares of Gentiva jumped $2.41, or 14.4 percent, to $19.12 in premarket trading shortly before the market open, while Kindred's stock rose 91 cents, or 4.6 percent, to $20.65.

the parties

Kindred Healthcare

• Kindred Healthcare is a Fortune 500 healthcare services company based in Louisville with annual revenues of $5 billion and approximately 63,000 employees in 47 states.

• As of June 30, 2014, Kindred through its subsidiaries provided healthcare services in 2,353 locations, including 97 transitional care hospitals, five inpatient rehabilitation hospitals, 98 nursing centers, 21 sub-acute units, 153 Kindred at Home hospice, home health and nonmedical home care locations, 104 inpatient rehabilitation units (hospital-based) and a contract rehabilitation services business, RehabCare, which served 1,875 non-affiliated facilities.

Gentiva Health Services

Gentiva Health Services is one of the nation's largest providers of home health, hospice and community care services. Gentiva is a single source for skilled nursing; physical, occupational, speech and neurorehabilitation services; hospice services; social work; nutrition; disease management education; help with daily living activities; and other therapies and services.

Source: Kindred

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1xtJWG6