LITTLE ROCK — The state House and Senate gave approval Thursday to a plan to continue and revamp the state’s Medicaid expansion program, but with majorities that fell short of the vote thresholds the program will need during the upcoming fiscal session.

The Senate voted 25-10 and the House voted 70-30 to approve matching bills containing Arkansas Works, Gov. Asa Hutchinson’s proposal for a Medicaid expansion program to replace the current program known as the private option. The bills then went to the opposite chambers and sailed through committees.

The chambers are expected to give final approval Friday to each other’s bills. The governor is expected to sign the legislation into law soon afterward.

Hutchinson said in a statement Thursday, “I was pleased by the strength of the vote margin for the passage of the Arkansas Works. The results exceeded our expectations and are a clear indication that a very strong, bipartisan majority supports this policy for Arkansas. This impressive vote is a solid foundation for the funding approval in the fiscal session.”

That foundation will have to be expanded if the program is to survive, however. Appropriating funding for Arkansas Works during the fiscal session that begins Wednesday will require support from at least 27 of the 35 senators and at least 75 of the 100 House members, meaning some members who voted against the policy must vote for the appropriation to keep Medicaid expansion alive.

Asked about Arkansas Works’ chances in the fiscal session, Senate President Pro Tem Jonathan Dismang, R-Beebe, told reporters that voting on policy and voting on an appropriation are two different things.

“We’ll have to have a conversation with those members (who voted no) and see if their intent was to only vote against the policy or if they’re going to attempt to set new policy during the appropriation process,” he said.

Under Arkansas Works, Arkansas would continue to accept federal Medicaid money to pay for private health insurance for low-income Arkansans but would add features, including referral to voluntary work training for unemployed recipients, premiums of up to 2 percent of their income for recipients earning over 100 percent of the federal poverty level, and a requirement that recipients obtain employer-sponsored insurance if an eligible plan is available.

More than 267,000 Arkansans with incomes up to 138 percent of the federal poverty level have obtained government- subsidized private health insurance through the private option since it launched in 2013. The program, an alternative to the expansion of Medicaid rolls envisioned in the federal Affordable Care Act, has divided Republican legislators from the beginning.

Presenting the legislation for Arkansas Works on the Senate floor Thursday, Sen. Jim Hendren, R-Gravette, said ending Medicaid expansion would cost Arkansas’ health-care industry $5 billion over the next five years, jeopardizing rural hospitals, and would create a fairness issue because federal subsidies for health insurance would continue to be available to people earning at least 100 percent of the federal poverty level but would no longer be available to people earning less.

“Whether you support the Affordable Care Act or oppose the Affordable Care Act, that’s not the debate. What is the debate here is the impact on the state of Arkansas,” he said.

Sen. Gary Stubblefield, R-Branch, said he was concerned about the impact of the Affordable Care Act on the national debt.

“We’re running up a trillion dollars of debt for our children and grandchildren,” he said.

Sen. Scott Flippo, R-Bull Shoals, acknowledged that ending Medicaid expansion in Arkansas would not have a major impact on the national debt, but he said, “You’ve got to start somewhere.”

Presenting matching legislation in the House, Rep. Charlie Collins, R-Fayetteville, said other, richer states such as California and New York are accepting federal money for Medicaid expansion.

“What I ask my colleagues is, can you please, please, please not put (fixing) the entire U.S. debt on the little old state of Arkansas?” he said.

Rep. Bob Ballinger, R-Hindsville, said he did not want to commit the state to a program negotiated with the federal government at a time when a change of administration at the federal level is less than a year away.

“Who knows what kind of flexibility we’ll have come Jan. 20? If we’re going to put together a long-term health plan for Arkansas, let’s not do it now when we have universally, at least on my side of the aisle, universal hatred of Obamacare,” Ballinger said.

Voting against Arkansas Works in the Senate were Sens. Cecile Bledsoe, R-Rogers; Alan Clark, R-Lonsdale; Linda Collins-Smith, R-Pocahontas; Flippo; Bart Hester, R-Cave Springs; Missy Irvin, R-Mountain View; Blake Johnson, R-Corning; Bryan King, R-Green Forest; Terry Rice, R-Waldron; and Stubblefield.

Voting against it in the House were Reps. Ballinger; Nate Bell, R-Mena; Mary Bentley, R-Perryville; Donnie Copeland, R-Little Rock; Bruce Cozart, R-Hot Springs; Gary Deffenbaugh, R-Van Buren; Jim Dotson, R-Bentonville; Charlotte Douglas, R-Alma; Trevor Drown, R-Dover; Mickey Gates, R-Hot Springs; Justin Gonzales, R-Okolona; Michelle Gray, R-Melbourne; Justin Harris, R-West Fork; Grant Hodges, R-Rogers; Lane Jean, R-Magnolia; Jack Ladyman, R-Jonesboro; Tim Lemons, R-Cabot; Robin Lundstrum, R-Springdale; David Meeks, R-Conway; Stephen Meeks, R-Greenbrier; Josh Miller, R-Heber Springs; John Payton, R-Wilburn; Rebecca Petty, R-Rogers; Marcus Richmond, R-Harvey; Laurie Rushing, R-Hot Springs; Brandt Smith, R-Jonesboro; Nelda Speaks, R-Mountain Home; Dan Sullivan, R-Jonesboro; Dwight Tosh, R-Jonesboro; and Richard Womack, R-Arkadelphia.

Dale Ellis contributed to this report.