Topics: Best of 2013, Music, Rock, rock music, rock n roll, Entertainment News

Searching for rock music on Billboard’s Hot Rock Songs chart is an odd exercise in futility. The No. 1 song in the country, Lorde’s “Royals,” has dominated the rock chart for 12 weeks, spending another six weeks at the top of Alternative Songs. Aside from Paramore, Arctic Monkeys and the Neighborhood, most of the tracks on the Rock Songs list can only be called rock if you’re being charitable. Capital Cities’ “Safe and Sound” is more in the EDM tradition and Imagine Dragons’ debut record was marked for its genre-hopping, the way the band blended a wide variety of musical styles to appeal to the broadest possible audience. It’s less rock ‘n’ roll than musical goulash, and Lana Del Rey isn’t rock at all. She’s a trip-hop Nancy Sinatra.

People who have long been predicting the death of rock music will have no difficulty finding evidence to support that thesis. Aside from niche rock stations, emerging rock artists don’t get the kind of airplay or attention that they used to a decade ago, when critics credited the White Stripes for saving rock ‘n’ roll. The Stripes’ “White Blood Cells” debuted in 2001, a year when momentum seemed to be shifting toward other genres. 2001 was dominated by pop-tinged R&B — between Alicia Keys’ ubiquitous breakthrough hit, “Fallin,” the Janet Jackson comeback and the rise of Jennifer Lopez. The rock songs that were popular catered to an adult contemporary crowd — with acts like Dido, Train and Uncle Kracker selling the ’90s coffeehouse to suburban soccer moms.

Although “White Blood Cells” flopped initially, the album quickly turned into a cultural phenomenon. It’s hard to underestimate the impact of the Stripes. Hip-hop would continue to enjoy its stay in cultural prominence throughout the decade, but in 2003, albums like Outkast’s genre-bending “Speakerboxx/The Love Below” were joined by a staggering number of notable rock releases. 2003 saw the Strokes’ “Room on Fire,” the Postal Service’s “Give Up,” Radiohead’s “Hail to the Thief,” Yeah Yeah Yeahs’ “Fever to Tell,” the Shins’ “Chutes Too Narrow,” Death Cab for Cutie’s “Transatlanticism” and killer work from My Morning Jacket, Fountains of Wayne, Drive-By Truckers, the Rapture, Cat Power and the New Pornographers. And the Stripes themselves released “Elephant,” a chic pick for album of the decade.

At first glance, these past few years feel a lot like 2000. In 2012 and 2013, the albums getting the lion’s share of attention included releases from Kanye West, Frank Ocean, Daft Punk, Kendrick Lamar and Disclosure. Jack White moved on to more of a bluegrass sound, branching out from the genre he helped redefine, and even the bands who were big in 2003 lend a prevailing sense that rock is on life support. Outkast broke up, and Big Boi has been staying away from his rock influences ever since. The latest records from Yeah Yeah Yeahs, the Rapture and Death Cab for Cutie have all been their worst, and like TV on the Radio, My Morning Jacket were never the same after they embraced prog rock and got weird.

As is the case with Jack White’s solo work, many of these bands have been eager to experiment with a new sound as the musical landscape changes, embracing trends like electronica, but rock itself has yet to discover a new paradigm.

Nearly every year there are critics proclaiming the genre dead, but rock more likely is undergoing an identity crisis in an industry where it’s no longer king. Bands like U2 used to control the music universe, winning wide critical acclaim and selling crates of records, but in 2013, that brand of band is all but extinct. The closest we have today is Coldplay, whose last record was surprisingly heavy on pop and R&B. While Arcade Fire is bigger than ever, their newest album, produced by LCD Soundsystem’s James Murphy, feels closer to “Sound of Silver” than “The Suburbs.” Just as these acts have the ability to ascend the throne, it feels as if they are abdicating rock royalty. When you look at what happened to Nirvana or Fleetwood Mac, you can understand why they didn’t want it.