Tips for raising stock

Justin, 13, left, and Jessica Veeman, 16, both of Wiggins will show their steers at the Morgan County Fair this year. ( Dan Barker / Fort Morgan Times )

Justin Veeman shows his pig handling skills, which will be part of the judging when he enters it in the Morgan County Fair. (Dan Barker / Fort Morgan Times)

Justin, 13, and Jessica Veeman, 16, have plenty on their hands raising multiple animals for the Morgan County Fair this year.

Justin is planning to show a steer he named "Buddy," three pigs named "Sugar," "Stitch" and "Hermes," and a dairy heifer named "Mimi."

Jessica will show four pigs, "Lilo," "Charlotte," "Wilbur" and "Zorro," plus two steers named "Panda" and "Neo," a dairy heifer named "Demi" and a lamb named "Jeris."

They've had some good success over the years with their animals. Jessica won grand champion for a dairy cow two years ago, and won reserve grand champion with a pig at the Colorado State Fair, among other honors.

Justin has won first place in class a couple of times with dairy cows.

Jessica Veeman takes her lamb for a walk at her home near the Veeman Dairy. This is the first year she will show a lamb, but this is her seventh year in 4-H. (Dan Barker/ Fort Morgan Times)

And they frequently make the livestock sale, which is where the big money comes in.

"We're both like animal people," Jessica said.

Growing up next to a dairy, showing dairy cows came naturally, but when she saw all the different kinds of animals at the county fair, she just had to try raising them, too, she said.

"I love 'em all," Jessica said.

This is her first year raising a lamb, and that has been a lot of fun, she said.

This is Justin's first year showing a steer, and it was not as much of a challenge as he expected, since he is used to handling big dairy cows, he said.

It's exciting to anticipate showing "Buddy," though, Justin said, and he really bonded with the animal.

Both Jessica and Justin advised kids new to raising livestock to spend plenty of time with the animals, so they will bond. That means spending some serious time with them.

"The hard work really does pay off in the end," Jessica noted.

One tip is to spend time frequently, not just all at once. For example, it is better to spend 10 minutes every day with an animal than to spend two hours all at once just once a week, she explained.

Justin said to make sure that the essentials are taken care of by providing plenty of clean water and food, and making sure the animals' habitat is clean.

He stressed making sure animals get fresh water at least twice a day when it is really hot.

Learning to raise animals through 4-H has some real benefits, Jessica said.

It has taught a lot about responsibility, and the determination to keep going, she said.

Dealing with the issues of animals teaches kids not to give up, Jessica said.

Another responsibility is keeping records of the animals, which is a benefit that can be used in the rest of life, Justin noted.

Record keeping teaches a person what they will need to know for a business, Jessica said.

When 4-H kids are younger, it is mostly about having fun with the animals, but as they grow the stress is increasingly on the business side, she said.

Contact Times News Editor Dan Barker at business@fmtimes.com or follow twitter.com/DanBarkerFMTime