JACKSONVILLE, Fla. - An argument during a cookout at a Westside home Sunday afternoon ended with one man dead and another charged with murder.



Jacobo Brinoes-Anaya, 33, was ordered held without bond on a count of murder during a first appearing hearing Monday. Jail records there is also an immigration hold on Brinoes-Anaya.



The Jacksonville Sheriff's Office responded to the fatal shooting at a duplex on Dagail Lane about 4 p.m. Sunday. Homicide detectives said the victim and another man were began fighting when the second man pulled out a handgun and shot the victim.



Police have not released the name of the victim, saying only that he was a Hispanic man in is 30s. Family has identified him as 33-year-old Lucio Martinez (pictured below).

A family friend told News4Jax that Martinez was shot several times in the stomach.

"There was no need for an ambulance," Kayla Blane said.

Police said the suspect left in a vehicle, which patrol officers stopped a short time later and detained the driver.

The state attorney's office said there was an arrest in the case and Jacobo Brinoes-Anaya, 33, was the only person News4Jax could find that was booked on a murder charge in the past 24 hours.



Family members told News4Jax that Brinoes-Anaya (pictured at first appearance on Monday) was a co-worker of Martinez who was attending the barbecue. They said Martinez actually brought Brinoes-Anaya here from Texas because he needed a ride and a job, but they had grown apart because the accused was using drugs and alcohol.

At the family home Monday, there was a memorial set up for Martinez -- the youngest of 12 children and the father of a 9-year-old.

"He's got a beautiful daughter, a beautiful daughter that he's leaving behind," said Lynn Daingerfield, who said she was a close friend of the victim.

The family has set up an account to help with funeral arrangements: gofundme/mjmno4.





Copyright 2015 by News4Jax.com. All rights reserved. This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten or redistributed.