Now that the health insurance exchanges are open, all you have to do is shop. In Missouri, that might not take as long as it will in neighboring states.

As the final outlines of Obamacare come into focus, there’s still a lot left to learn. But early indications from a U.S. Health and Human Services preview last week indicated Missouri, compared to its neighbors, has fewer insurance carriers to choose from and fewer qualified health plans to compare, as well as higher premiums.

You must login to view the full content on this page. Screen Name or Email Password Forgot? Remember me on this computer Login Screen Name or Email Now I remember! Or, use your facebook account: facebook Need an account? Create one now.

The bigger problem now might be accessing a workable website to actually compare the plans. The launch of the exchanges yesterday was dogged by glitches. Tribune reporters were unable to log on throughout the day.

Regardless, the biggest provisions of the health care law signed by President Barack Obama three years ago are finally taking effect. Like any major policy overhaul, there are winners, losers and a learning curve.

WHO ARE THE PROVIDERS? There are two confirmed insurance carriers that cover Mid-Missourians on the health insurance exchange. Aetna/Coventry will not participate in the small business health insurance exchange, or SHOP, in 2014, but it will offer eight insurance plans on the individual exchange. Anthem Blue Cross Blue Shield will include all of the health systems below in its SHOP network, but Boone Hospital Center and Lake Regional Health System will not be in its network on policies sold on the individual exchange. University of Missouri Health Care (University Hospital and Capital Region Medical Center in Jefferson City): Coventry and Anthem

Boone Hospital Center: Coventry

SSM Health Care (St. Mary’s Health Center in Jefferson City and Audrain Medical Center in Mexico): Coventry and Anthem

Moberly Regional Medical Center: Anthem. Coventry unknown.

Lake Regional Health System: Coventry

People with pre-existing medical conditions no longer can be barred from purchasing insurance. Women can’t be charged more for insurance than men. People who got by without insurance on a bet they wouldn’t get sick or hurt will have to purchase it or pay a fine starting next year. Some companies are shaking up how they provide benefits, pushing spouses or other dependents off company insurance plans.

However, most Americans receive insurance through their employers, and for them, the change is expected to be minimal.

“I don’t think we’re going to have a mass exodus of employers providing coverage if they were providing it before,” said Debra Mathes, an accountant and owner at Mid-Missouri accounting firm Williams Keepers.

But there are big uncertainties surrounding Obamacare. One is whether it will do anything to tame the rising costs of medical care. Experts are skeptical, but they admit it does begin to move the system toward one that pays based on outcomes, not on the number of services rendered.

Another question is whether the ranks of the uninsured will be able to afford the new requirement to purchase health insurance. People earning between 100 percent and 400 percent of the federal poverty level ($11,490 to $45,960 for an individual) will qualify for government subsidies to help pay their monthly premiums. But that raises another question: How much will those subsidies eventually cost? In the first year, at least, the estimate is $16 billion, according to the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation.

Individual subsidies will vary, and they are calculated for you when you sign up for health insurance on the individual exchange.

“It’ll be paid directly to the insurance companies,” said Kit Wagar, a communications official at U.S. Health and Human Services, or HHS, who spoke at a Cover Missouri conference in late August. “So the consumer doesn’t even have to worry about it.”

Despite the recent focus on the individual insurance exchanges, the law is designed to keep employer-sponsored insurance as the lynchpin of the American health care system. Starting in 2015, many employers will be required to offer insurance or pay a fine. But for many people, there’s a steep learning curve ahead. The biggest challenge will be learning how to navigate the new exchanges — once they start working.

THE EXCHANGE

The health insurance exchanges, unique to each state, are online marketplaces where consumers can shop for insurance plans and easily compare prices — a new level of transparency in at least one portion of the opaque health care services market.

Answer a few questions about your age, where you live and lifestyle behaviors such as smoking, and you’ll be able to look at premiums (monthly payments for insurance) and deductibles (the out-of-pocket costs you pay before insurance kicks in) for health insurance plans offered in your state.

To better help consumers compare plans, they are supposed to be divided into easily comparable coverage tiers: bronze, silver, gold and platinum. Those plans range from covering about 60 percent of medical costs in a bronze plan to as much as 90 percent in a platinum policy.

In Missouri, relatively few insurers have signed up to sell policies on the exchange, which will primarily serve those who don’t get coverage through their employer. Only two have said they will sell plans, but that could change depending on how popular the exchanges become.

“The biggest incentive is going to be the success of the program,” Gary Cohen, a deputy administrator and director for the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, said in a conference call with reporters last week. “This is a marketplace. This is private commercial companies deciding whether they want to be a part of it or not. Some have decided to sit back and see how it goes. Others have decided to jump in with both feet.”

THE PREMIUMS

While technical problems on Missouri’s federally run health exchange made it difficult to compare plans, prices and provider networks yesterday, a report from HHS last week gave an early indication of what the state’s residents can expect.

Insurers can still charge different rates depending on age, and in Missouri, the average monthly premium for a middle-of-the road health policy — the second-lowest-costing silver plan — was expected to cost around $334, slightly higher than the national average.

Comparing that price to existing premiums is difficult because health insurance plans offer different levels of coverage. Here’s a rough comparison: In 2011, the average monthly premium paid for employee coverage in Missouri was $400, according to a report released in April by the University of Minnesota and the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation. Employees typically paid only about 20 percent of that. But that average takes into account all plans while the HHS estimate is for a middle-of-the-road policy that covers 70 percent of health care costs.

Data for average premiums that include those who buy on the individual market are more difficult to find on a state-by-state basis. The National Conference of State Legislatures says no federal agency releases those figures on an annual basis. It cites a 2007 report from the Joint Economic Committee of Congress for recent state figures. That report says Missouri’s average annual premium in 2006 was $4,186, or about $349 a month. That number has no doubt risen, but even in 2006, it was still higher than the average estimate for a silver plan on the new insurance exchange.

The estimates released by HHS tell only a portion of the story. While premiums might appear comparable, it’s still unknown how affordable the plans will be when taking into account deductibles and co-pays and the provider network of each plan. Some news reports suggest the lower-than-expected premiums are a result of smaller provider networks.

Missouri seems to have higher premium costs than all of its neighbors except Arkansas. Average premiums for a silver benchmark plan in Illinois and Iowa are around $285. Kansas is at $260, and Oklahoma is at $266.

All of those states have more insurers participating in the exchange. In Illinois, some regions have as many seven insurers and 80 plans to choose from. Kansas has only three insurers in some regions of the state and two in others, but even in the places with two insurers, consumers will have as many as 36 plans to choose from, according to a report released by HHS last week.

Missouri, by contrast, has at most 23 plans to choose from (in the St. Louis area) and only two insurers expected to participate in each of the state’s 10 regions.

“It’s just going to be really different state to state, even in regions of the state,” said Ryan Barker, vice president of health policy at the Missouri Foundation for Health.

THE PROVIDERS

In Mid-Missouri, choices seem to be more limited and premiums higher than in many areas of the state. Residents in Boone, Cole, Callaway and other Mid-Missouri counties can expect to choose from only 18 plans from two insurers initially, according to HHS.

One of those insurers is Anthem Blue Cross Blue Shield. It will include many Mid-Missouri health systems on its network, including University of Missouri Health Care, Moberly Regional Medical Center, Audrain County Medical Center and St. Mary’s Health Center.

It will not include Boone Hospital Center, operated by St. Louis-based BJC HealthCare, on its individual exchange plans, a spokeswoman confirmed. Nor will it include Lake Regional Medical Center in Osage Beach in its network for individual policies sold on the exchange. However, both health systems will be included in the small business marketplace, or SHOP.

A spokeswoman for Aetna, which owns Coventry Health Care, said Coventry of Missouri will provide eight plans in the region: four bronze plans, two silver plans and two gold plans. Coventry’s network will include Boone Hospital Center as well as University of Missouri Health Care.

In Mid-Missouri, a benchmark silver plan monthly premium for a 40-year-old would cost around $307 a month. In St. Louis, it would run about $263, and in Kansas City and Springfield it would be $238.

There are fewer lives to cover in Mid-Missouri and fewer providers to negotiate with than in the state’s more populous areas, said Thomas McAuliffe, a heath policy analyst with the Missouri Foundation for Health.

“They can’t bargain for the rates they can in the urban areas,” he said.

More insurers that jump in as the exchanges mature might drive down health insurance rates. That might be the only way because it doesn’t look likely that new hospitals are going to start up in Columbia anytime soon.