Rubio Calls Trump's Violent Rallies 'a Frightening, Grotesque, and Disturbing Development in American Politics'

During a press conference in Florida Saturday morning, Marco Rubio strongly condemned the violent rhetoric coming from GOP front-runner Donald Trump, accusing him of manipulating the anger of the American people for votes. The somber and subdued Florida senator called the unrest at Trump's rallies "a frightening, grotesque and disturbing development in American politics."

"This is a man who in rallies has told his supporters to basically beat up the people in the crowd, and he'll pay their legal fees -- someone who has encouraged people in his audience to rough up anyone who stands up and says something he doesn't like," Rubio charged.

He also chastised the media, which he said bears some of the responsibility. "For too long, those comments were ignored, some people thought they were cute, and he's gotten an extraordinary amount of coverage for all the stuff he says that's outrageous." That "wall-to-wall coverage has elevated" Trump, Rubio argued. He continued:

The broader anger that now exists in American discourse is a direct result of the fact that words have consequences. That when you run for president of the United States, or if you are president of the United States, you can't take on the attitude that "I'm just going to say whatever I want!" You can't say whatever you want! It has real life consequences for people in this country and all over the world. And we're starting to see that bear out. We saw those images of people getting in their face - often divided among racial lines....police officers bleeding from the head -- reminiscent of images from the '60s. I mean, we're going backwards, here. This is a frightening, grotesque and disturbing development in American politics.

He continued:

A Donald Trump supporter sucker-punched a man the other day at an event. Donald Trump has yet to condemn it. After the man was released from jail, he said, "next time I'll kill him." He still has not condemned it. So it tells you, in many ways, he doesn't want to say anything to his supporters because he doesn't want to turn them off. Because he understands that the reason they are voting for him is because they have tapped into this anger. The problem is, leadership is not taking people's anger, and using it to get them to vote for you. If it is - it's a dangerous style of leadership. Leadership is about acknowledging people's anger, but as a leader, trying to address why they are angry, instead of manipulating their anger so that they become your voter, your donor, your supporter.