Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share "We are holding up our side of the bridge just like Prospect is," Utica town council president Steve Long said.

Buy Photo A small riverside house is dwarfed by the new East End bridge, which is under construction in Utica, Ind. (Photo: By Pat McDonogh/The Courier-Journal)Buy Photo

When the East End bridge project began in 2012, the top elected official of Utica, Ind., was "thrilled to death" for the span that would connect his town of 800 to Prospect, Ky.

Those dreams of economic development and growth now seem far-fetched, said Utica Council President Steve Long as he sat in the town's community center, his truck parked out back with fresh bread in the backseat awaiting delivery.

"Our town's destroyed," he said. "... I know construction takes time and makes a mess, but you reap the benefits. Utica is not reaping the benefits."

Long points to several problems - such as a lack of interstate access to the bridge from Utica and the damage to downtown roads from construction equipment - as signs that his town without even a stoplight has been caught in the path of an approaching juggernaut being driven by everyone else's development goals.

But transportation officials say these projects take time and that some major road developments expected to benefit Utica are well on their way.

Bridge in backyard but no access

When the new East End bridge opens, Interstate 265 travelers driving north from Kentucky will be able to exit almost immediately on the Indiana side and turn east to enter River Ridge. If drivers want to turn west toward Utica, a concrete barricade will stop them.

The reason: Old Salem Road off of the interchange, west toward Utica, is hardly accessible.

The aged road, marked by potholes and large cracks in the asphalt, runs straight into downtown. It's barely wide enough for a bus or a large truck, and it's impossible for two cars to pass and stay on the road.

Old Salem passes by homes with yards dotted by surveyor's flags that show the right-of-way for a planned road expansion. Eventually, Old Salem will have two 11-foot lanes with shoulders on each side - but not by the time the new bridge opens, or for even a year after.

Related | Indiana land rush is on near East End bridge

Other local projects have slowed the Old Salem widening, which is funded 20 percent through the Clark County highway department and 80 percent with federal and state funds.

Brian Dixon, the county's highway engineer, said they are waiting on the design of a state-funded portion of the new $30.4 million heavy-haul route for big trucks that will cut across Old Salem and link River Ridge and the Port of Indiana-Jeffersonville.

Buy Photo Mulberry Street, near the end of Old Salem Road in Utica, Ind., has changed little since this photo was made in 1975. (Photo: CJ file photo)

"The River Ridge side (of the heavy-haul road) is already under construction," Dixon said. "The other side ran into environmental issues... It's really been one stumbling block after another."

Will Wingfield, an Indiana Department of Transportation spokesman, said the River Ridge portion of the heavy-haul route advanced quickly because it didn't involve the use of state or federal funds. The exact route for the road between I-265 and the port hasn't been proposed yet, Wingfield said.

"We're still studying and documenting the environmental impact," Wingfield said. "We want to minimize impact to the wetlands, homes and businesses."

Before the first Indiana interchange from Kentucky allows drivers to travel into Utica, the heavy-haul route will have to be finalized and Old Salem widened.

Dixon said August 2016 is the target date to accept bids to widen Old Salem, although that depends not only on the heavy-haul road, but finalizing property acquisition and working with utility companies on new underground infrastructure.

Related | At $150,000 an acre, Clark County land is hot

"We have and will continue moving the project forward the best we can," Dixon said. "It will be done. We're spending a lot of money and resources on it."

But Council President Long thinks the county and state should've made better plans for Old Salem to be finished and open for traffic before the East End bridge opened.

"We're not telling River Ridge they can't have their exit open for a year, we didn't tell (Jeffersonville) they couldn't have theirs open, so why are we telling Utica they can't have theirs open for a year?" Long said.

Buy Photo A concrete wall can be seen blocking the new exit onto Old Salem Road, leading to Utica, Ind. The exit to Utica won't be open for at least a year, while the town waits for the road to be widened. (Photo: By Pat McDonogh/The Courier-Journal)

Future development

When Old Salem does connect Utica to the interstate, the sleepy town will quickly begin to change, local officials predict.

Utica is in the process of annexing most of the properties down Old Salem, town council Vice President Jimmy Carter said. He hopes to see restaurants and gas stations near the interchange and some businesses on the Fourth Street, the town's main drag.

In 2014, the council approved new zoning regulations and updated some of its land-use documents. Officials have dreams of updating sidewalks, street lamps and landscaping around the junction of Old Salem and Fourth Street.

But, as Long pointed out, the town's budget consists of barely more than $200,000. Carter hopes the bridge and River Ridge will entice people to move into the town, increasing its tax base.

“It's really going to change where we live. We probably won't stay.” Mike Hansford, Utica resident and local firefighter

Mike Hansford, a Utica resident and local firefighter, isn't as excited about coming changes. Hansford and his family live on Old Salem and he's received an offer from the county to buy part of his property for the road expansion.

"The reason we moved out here was because of the dead-end road and lack of traffic," Hansford said. "It's really going to change where we live. We probably won't stay."

Meanwhile, Long is left fuming about Utica's limited involvement in road projects and local development. He considers Utica to be the "landing pad of the bridge."

"The governor's going to come down here in October and make a big deal about this bridge," Long said. "The department of finance told us Utica is lucky for the economic development of this bridge. Tell me what we've seen in economic development."

Reporter Lexy Gross can be reached at 502-582-4087, or via email at lgross@courier-journal.com.

Other issues on Utica's plate

Utica town council President Steve Long isn't happy about the condition of the roads throughout the small town. He said the town has an agreement with the Walsh Group to repair damage done by bridge construction equipment, but he "hasn't seen a penny of it yet."

Long said there used to be trees lining River Road, beneath the new East End bridge. They were torn down during construction and now there's no barrier between the road and the Ohio River. He said the state told Utica it was a town project, but Long said Utica's entire budget is barely more than $200,000.

Long said he's had trouble contacting state officials regarding some of these issues in Utica.

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1MKmUHh