What if the latest environmental catastrophe in the heart of the Colorado Plateau had not been accompanied by a a visible aberration of the Animas River? The viral image of kayakers on the tainted but somehow oddly aesthetic yellow waters forced attention — of newspaper editors, TV news crews and consequently, the public, with its demands on the Environmental Protection Agency and other regulatory agencies to properly investigate the nature and extent of the toxins released into the river. But absent the altered appearance of the water, would the reporting of the contamination by the media and the EPA itself have been as forthcoming as it has been? And what of the public's response?

It has been reported by some sources that the would-be mine remediator that caused the breach was a company contracted by the EPA. Without the river's yellow coloration, would a contractor have attempted a fix on its own and possibly forgo proper reporting, figuring it could go unnoticed at least for the while it might take to stop the release? And even if promptly reported, would the lack of a visible marker to the contamination possibly moderate the response given this situation from media, the public and even the EPA itself?

Advertisement

These are obviously uncomfortable questions to ask. But we are a culture of the obvious, so I ask them. Our proclivity to be more concerned about things which present to us via our senses is well known. Sir Paul McCartney famously stated that, "If slaughterhouses had glass walls, everyone would be a vegetarian." ( I personally believe more would convert if they could see first hand the conditions on feedlots). The point is, however, that things that present to our senses, more than scientific data, are what become salient and worthy of investigation to most of mainstream media, the public and, well, sometimes even government bureaucracies.

I suspect that many folks likely imagine a stronger response to this catastrophe by virtue of "the Yellow." And this is unfortunate given the current profusion of mining and drilling project proposals all around the country and particularly in the West in and around what is all of America's natural heritage wilderness areas and vitally important water resources. Certainly not all failures of environmental projects come with such a commanding spectacle.

Perhaps now, because of the Animas River catastrophe which is now affecting the San Juan and Colorado rivers, the public will demand more input on projects and more rigorous mining and drilling Environmental Impact Statements before any new mines and oil and gas fields are developed. Hopefully it will also be the animus for more public insistence on greater protections for all of our cherished natural heritage sites.

Keith Robzen is a nature photographer based in Boulder.