Photo

Good Thursday morning from Washington, where the Supreme Court’s coming decision on health care is not the only court ruling on the law watchers have their eyes on. But most of Thursday’s action and focus will be on Utah, where Republicans will meet Mitt Romney‘s list of donors and spend time in the sun.

In a seemingly endless string of cattle calls, Mr. Romney’s weekend in Deer Valley, Utah, stands out as an offering of Kobe beef.

Which is to say that starting on Thursday, a half-dozen 2016 Republican presidential hopefuls will descend on the Stein Eriksen Lodge to pitch themselves behind closed doors to Mr. Romney’s extensive donor network.

On the guest list are Gov. Chris Christie of New Jersey; Carly Fiorina, the former chief executive of Hewlett-Packard; Senator Lindsey Graham of South Carolina; Gov. John R. Kasich of Ohio; Senator Marco Rubio of Florida; and Gov. Scott Walker of Wisconsin.

In addition to speeches, donors will be treated to flag football with Mr. Rubio, skeet shooting with Mr. Graham, horseback riding with Mr. Romney’s wife, Ann Romney, and early morning hikes with the Romneys.

Last year, Republicans gathered at this event to help chart a path forward for the party. And this week, a similar discussion will most likely be on the agenda. To the surprise of many, no clear Republican front-runner has emerged, despite donor eagerness to coalesce around someone they think can beat Hillary Rodham Clinton, whom they expect to be the Democratic nominee.

That top-tier candidate was supposed to be Jeb Bush. But Mr. Bush, who is in Europe, has endured a series of high-profile stumbles and has already had a campaign shake-up before officially announcing his candidacy.

It was the threat of Mr. Bush’s “shock and awe” campaign that helped dissuade Mr. Romney from a third bid earlier this year. So expect to hear at least a bit of nostalgia for Mr. Romney himself — and, at least among the wishful thinking crowd, the prospect of a brokered convention where the former Massachusetts governor rides in to save the day.

Ashley Parker

Stay tuned throughout the day: Follow us on Twitter @NYTpolitics and on Facebook for First Draft updates.

President Obama will participate in a Democratic National Committee discussion in the afternoon.

Mr. Graham, who recently sought to distance himself from his fellow Republicans on social issues, will hold a news conference over the introduction of a bill he supports to prohibit abortion “if the probable post-fertilization age of the unborn child is 20 weeks or greater,” with exceptions for incest and rape.

Senator Bernie Sanders of Vermont will speak at the Capitol about legislation establishing paid leave and vacation requirements for employers.

From the confines of Iowa State University, Mr. Christie on Thursday will lay out his platform for education overhaul, part of a series of “policy speeches” he has been making in his run up to a potential presidential campaign.

Most notable will be the message he sends on Common Core. The issue has been a litmus test for many conservatives, and until a few weeks ago, Mr. Christie had been a supporter of the plan. He has said he changed his view because he gave the program four years to work, and, in his opinion, it didn’t.

“Unlike some other folks, who just reflexively dismissed it, I said, ‘All right, let’s give it a chance,’ ” he said on “Face the Nation” this week, denying that the timing was related to his presidential decision.

Mr. Christie has also recently hinted at other elements of his education plan. He spent the first third of a speech in Washington on Wednesday discussing educational access, saying that parents should be able to “vote with their feet” in choosing without restrictions the schools they want their children to attend.

He also, much like Mr. Bush, believes that the school calendar is outdated. He proposed a longer school year and school day, based on the communities the school serves.

And finally, expect to hear criticism of the teachers’ unions, a favorite target of Mr. Christie during his tenure as governor.

— Nick Corasaniti

While all sides anxiously await the Supreme Court ruling on the new health care law, another challenge to the Affordable Care Act is moving in federal court, and it could mean more trouble for the Obama administration.

After a spirited hearing last month in the case brought by the House of Representatives against Health Secretary Sylvia Mathews Burwell, Judge Rosemary M. Collyer of the United States District Court has asked lawyers for the House and for the administration to clear up a central point in the case, which revolves around whether Congress approved new payments for insurance companies under the law.

The judge, who was rather tough on the administration in the hearing, sought a conclusive determination of whether the White House requested money for the cost-sharing program, was turned down by Congress and then went ahead anyway — the House argument — or whether the administration withdrew a request for funding after deciding it did not need additional authority, as the administration argued. Congressional documents appear to support the House view, and if the judge accepts that position, she could allow the House to proceed with its suit.

Responses to the court request are due next week. No matter what the Supreme Court does, the legal fight over the new health care law might be far from over.

— Carl Hulse

Republicans are playing catch up on the digital campaign trail, and finding the right talent to build the tools candidates need to compete has been a challenge.

And Michelle Obama has been opening up in personal terms about her struggles with race, even after moving to the White House.

Former President Bill Clinton said that if Mrs. Clinton won the White House, he would no longer give paid speeches.

The Iowa Straw Poll, a tradition from which several Republicans have pulled out, will learn its fate on Friday, The Des Moines Register reports.

Senator Mitch McConnell of Kentucky, the majority leader, told a radio station on Wednesday that there was a plan ready in case provisions of the Affordable Care Act were struck down. “When asked if he would share the details,” BuzzFeed writes, he said, “Uh, no. We’ll let you know.”

The Washington Post has devised a new way to make sure no one gets any work done: a guess-the-candidate game you can play against either another human being, or against “a robot.”

With Mr. Bush expected to announce his candidacy on Monday, The Washington Post looks at the turmoil and tensions among his advisers and donors.

Mr. Obama has long been planning for his own library, which will open after he leaves office. Now, he has a second library to worry about.

On Wednesday, James H. Billington, the Librarian of Congress, announced that he plans to retire after nearly three decades at the helm of the Library of Congress, one of the country’s most important cultural institutions. He leaves after a storied career, but amid complaints from staff members and other librarians that he has failed to modernize the institution.

A Washington landmark, the Library of Congress is also a pop culture presence, having been featured in Disney’s “National Treasure” movies starring Nicolas Cage. Moviegoers might also recall scenes from “All the President’s Men” when Bob Woodward (Robert Redford) and Carl Bernstein (Dustin Hoffman) pored through book slips in the library’s great hall.

Only the 13th person to hold the job since it was created in 1802, Dr. Billington has been a force of nature in Washington, advising presidents and lawmakers and turning the post into a position of power.

Now, Mr. Obama is faced with a crucial question: Who should replace him?

In 1987, when President Reagan tapped Dr. Billington, a Soviet scholar with deep Washington connections, the Cold War was nearing its end, and the hire seemed to make sense. Now, the library is bulging with 160 million items that Dr. Billington collected, few of which are available online.

That may be Mr. Obama’s biggest challenge: To find a tech-savvy leader who can modernize the library while also having credibility among the nation’s historians.

He has time. Dr. Billington’s retirement starts on Jan. 1.

— Michael D. Shear

The newsletter on Wednesday misattributed a report quoting Mr. Graham, who is single, about his plans for “a rotating first lady” should he be elected president. While the post was indeed from Politico, the quote was given instead to The Daily Mail.

Also, the newsletter incorrectly described the Wednesday itinerary for Ben Carson in Iowa. His day included a visit to a food bank, not a foot bank. We cannot recommend attending a foot bank.