Up to 250,000 Virginians need to change individual health plans to be ACA-compliant on Jan. 1

Thousands will need to choose new coverage

At last week's meeting of Virginia's Health Insurance Reform Commission in Richmond, led by Del. Kathy Byron, R-Lynchburg, the number of people affected by noncompliant plans was estimated at up to 250,000.

Virginians who renewed their health plans early last year to avoid a January 2014 deadline requiring compliance with the Affordable Care Act are running out of time. Renewals for 2015 coverage must comply with 10 minimum benefits mandated by the ACA, such as the inclusion of mental health services and hospitalization.

"It's completely made up," said Doug Gray, executive director of the Virginia Association of Health Plans, an industry association. He testified at the meeting that about 60 percent of people with individual plans renewed early, but wasn't able to give a specific number of those affected; the figure emerged when a participant extrapolated the number from a Kaiser Family Foundation figure of 400,000 enrolled in the individual market.

"There's no study, no data for it. I don't know how many people. Some went into the exchange, some have grandfathered plans, and others have moved on to group coverage. It's a wild estimate, it's just politics," said Gray. However, he added, "Lots of people will have to be transitioned."

And those people will likely face a steep hike in premiums unless they choose higher-deductible plans or qualify for subsidized coverage through Virginia's federally facilitated marketplace. "People making under 400 percent of the federal poverty level get a considerable subsidy. It's an enormous benefit for that group," he said.

The reason some — mostly younger, healthier subscribers — will face a premium hike is the ACA's change from health underwriting, basing charges on an individual's health, to across-the-board acceptance with just minor variations based on smoking status, age, and locality.

"Your health condition is no longer a provision by which they can non-renew your policy. You must be offered a health plan, regardless of your health. … You can't have holes in coverage anymore," said Ken Schrad, spokesman for the State Corporation Commission.

Some subscribers to Optima Health, the insurance arm of Sentara Healthcare, are on 2013 plans that expire in October and November because they renewed early last year, said Bobby Pearson, spokesman for the insurance carrier. He didn't provide the numbers affected, but noted that the individual market is a small portion of Optima's overall subscriber base.

The state Board of Insurance has allowed Optima to extend those plans until the end of 2014 with no benefit or premium changes. That will ease the transition to a calendar-year plan starting Jan. 1, 2015, which will have to be ACA-compliant, said Pearson. Typical exclusions from coverage in noncompliant plans included maternity care and pediatric dental care.

"As of last year, 2013 to 2014, the average consumer changing from a noncompliant plan to a compliant plan saw an 89 percent rate increase," he said. Part of the increase stemmed from taxes and fees charged by the Department of Health and Human Services for participation in federally run state exchanges. "The 3.5 percent monthly user fee — that's probably the largest of them — is passed on to consumers," said Pearson.

Anthem, the state's largest insurer with 3 million subscribers, acknowledged that it has individual and small group plans whose members will need to move to ACA-compliant plans. "Impacted Anthem individual members will receive a letter by mid-October explaining the need to choose a new plan," said Scott Golden, a company spokesman. "To help make the transition as smooth as possible, in the letter we will highlight a comparable ACA-compliant plan members can choose that will be effective Jan. 1, 2015."