BARTLESVILLE -혰 The Voice of the Martyrs is a global organization that sees itself as a bridge between American Christians and Christians in hostile and restricted nations.

"We bring the stories of persecution out of these countries, so that Christians in the United States know what's going on, and they know how God uses persecution to build the church," said Todd Nettleton, director of media development.

Login required We have used your information to see if you have a subscription with us. So far we have not found one. If you feel you are currently subscribed please click on the button to attempt to find your account. Screen Name or Email Password Forgot? Remember me on this computer Login Screen Name or Email Now I remember! Need an account? Create one now. Back Thank you for reading and relying on TulsaWorld.com for your news and information. You have now viewed your allowance of free articles. Login

You must login to view the full content on this page. Screen Name or Email Password Forgot? Remember me on this computer Login Screen Name or Email Now I remember! Need an account? Create one now.

"And going in the other direction, we carry back into those countries help and aid and encouragement and prayer.

"Last year we did over 1,000 projects to help Christians in hostile and restricted nations," such as providing legal help to a pastor and distributing more than 1 million Bibles.

Voice of the Martyrs is a large and growing organization.

It sends out 500,000 newsletters a month, all over the United States, telling the story of the persecuted church.

It moved in 2011 from downtown Bartlesville to a modern, spacious $28 million complex of buildings on 70 acres on the east side of town. The facility will be paid off this year.

President Jim Dau said the facility was built with high security because of the nature of the organization's work, but there have been no incidents.

For security reasons, the organization protects the identity of the people they work with in foreign countries.

Voice of the Martyrs operates on a $40 million budget and has 125 employees reaching 64 nations.

Donors fund the entire operation.

About 80 to 85 percent of the budget goes to direct ministry. The organization meets the standards of the Evangelical Council on Financial Accountability and has been named one of Ministry Watch's Shining Lights for its financial accountability.

"We are trying to awake the American church to what the persecuted church is dealing with," said Allan Walker, manager of reader services.

He said experts have estimated that 100,000 Christians are being killed each year for their faith 혰 a million people from 2000 to 2010.

And the church is growing rapidly in the midst of persecution. China had 1 million Christians in 1970 and has some 70 million to 100 million today.

"Nothing in history compares to the growth of the church in China," he said.

Voice of the Martyrs workers develop relationships with Christians in restricted areas of the world and are a conduit for Bibles, Christian study materials and other aid.

A Voice of the Martyrs pilot has dropped some 100,000 small parachutes over Colombia, carrying books, Bibles and solar-powered radios.

More than 200,000 "Action Packs" containing clothing and bedding have been shipped to the Middle East since 2001.

Volunteers from around the U.S. come to Bartlesville to help out, staying in apartments on the complex or in the RV campground.

Last year they donated 39,000 hours of labor.

"We are not helping persecuted Christians immigrate to the United States," Walker said. "We help them work in their own country."

Voice of the Martyrs was founded by Richard Wurmbrand, a Romanian Jew who converted to Christianity in 1938 and became a Lutheran pastor.

When Romania became communist in the 1940s, he denounced it and later was arrested. He spent 14 years in prison 혰 on and off 혰 before coming to the United States, where he founded Jesus to the Communist World, the organization that became Voice of the Martyrs.

He tells his story in "Tortured for Christ," a classic Christian book.

Voice of the Martyrs started in California. It moved to Bartlesville in 1991 because former Director Tom White was from Bartlesville and wanted to raise his family there.

Dau, a retired Marine, joined the organization in 1999 and became president in 2012 after White took his own life in the wake of allegations that he had molested a young girl.

Bill Sherman 918-581-8398