Regardless of any personal opinions about the Affordable Care Act, it’s a whole new ballgame when it comes to filing a tax return, as even experienced preparers may end up scratching their heads in utter befuddlement.

For the volunteer tax preparers at Hendersonville’s AARP Tax-Aide site, the new rules surrounding the ACA often mean a much more complex return process when working with clients who lack the minimum health insurance coverage required by law.

“Everything was pretty smooth before ACA came up,” said Bob Smith, local coordinator for the Henderson County AARP Foundation Tax-Aide Program, a free tax preparation service.

Additional training for all preparers was completed in January for experienced AARP volunteers, amounting to almost a full day of training just surrounding ACA-related issues, including practice on a number of sample returns.

As a specialist coordinator — Smith is a retired tax professional — he participated in almost a full day of training as well. “It’s that complex,” he said.

“If they come in with MEC (Minimum Essential Coverage), it’s a no brainer,” he added of those who had health insurance for themselves and family members listed on their returns. “We just put a check mark on their 1040 and they’re done.”

However, to prepare returns for those who were either not insured or have a family member on the return without insurance, the process quickly gets more complicated.

It’s so complicated that new tax volunteers are not expected to help those with potentially complex returns, said Smith, adding that those clients are funneled to experienced counselors at intake.

“We follow flow charts that tell us the steps we need to take,” said Sue Hatch, a volunteer AARP tax counselor with nine years of experience preparing returns with AARP. “I don’t think we could function without those.”

The complexity begins in determining whether the uninsured is responsible for the Shared Responsibility Payment — the so-called tax penalty — or if the volunteer counselor can find an “out” through a qualifying exemption.

“Our job as tax preparers is to see if we can get an exemption for that SRP,” Smith said. “We’re finding that we’re able to find exemptions for people rather than them paying the SRP; to me, that is our job.”

Between about 85 and 90 percent of those across the U.S. having their 2015 returns prepared by an AARP Tax-Aide service have the minimum coverage required by the ACA.

Preparing returns for that remaining 10 to 15 percent can take a lot longer than other returns, said Hatch.

“It can double the amount of time, easily,” he said. “We sometimes get people who say, 'I’ve always done my own taxes but this threw me.' It’s the most complicated part of filing returns — it takes intensive study.”

The areas where a return can get complicated include when the individual filing the return has insurance but members of the family listed on the return do not, such as parents who have children covered under Medicaid but the adults are not insured. Others might have a spouse eligible for Medicare but are too young to qualify.

Some clients have opted to simply pay the “penalty,” though what Smith said many do not realize is that the SRP thresholds are higher for the 2015 tax year, and will get even higher for the 2016 tax year for the comparison with a full-year premium payment.

“Our argument to people who come in without insurance — would you pay the penalty or would you rather apply that toward insurance?” Smith said “Though we want to avoid this, because there are exemptions.”

There is a list of exemptions two pages long, with the one of the top exemptions used is for those with household incomes below the federally determined poverty level. Also, in states that didn’t expand Medicaid, like North Carolina, those under 138 percent of the poverty level get an exemption.

To help illuminate the process of determining qualification to volunteers, Smith said that Lance Goller, community outreach coordinator for Blue Ridge Community Health Services, made a presentation during the January training on the navigator process.

For those eligible for the Marketplace, at 138 to 400 percent above the poverty level, if income reported at the beginning of the year is different than that on their return, it must be determined whether that amount means they must pay more or are entitled to a premium tax credit.

However, filing returns for those with household incomes over 400 percent of the poverty level is likely the most complicated, as comparisons must be made to determine if insurance was affordable.

“We use a series of calculators for this,” Smith said of looking up bronze and silver insurance plans to see if any plan would have been affordable per the household income. “If it’s affordable, there’s no exemption, but if not, they get an exemption.”

Smith said the flow charts, created by tax volunteers like themselves in Salisbury, are a huge help.

“There’s another end to this Obamacare, and that’s the tax preparation side,” he said. “Heretofore, preparing taxes was fairly easy.”

Reach De Bona at beth.debona@blueridgenow.com or 828-694-7890. Follow @BRNBeth