The New York Times on Wyoming's pro-ignorance legislation... Frank Bruni waves a hanky over all those still flustered by Michael Sam's televised kiss... Ross Douthat admits that the evil the Tea Party has done may live after them... Scott Martelle on Memorial Day... but first...

Phillip Howard on why gridlock seems ever gridlockier

It’s time to stop taking Washington seriously. How likely is it that Congress will deal with unsustainable deficits, climate change, decrepit infrastructure, unaffordable health care, muddled immigration policy, obsolete laws, unmanageable civil service, rigged electoral districts . . . ? The list of failures of our democratic government is getting long. Responsible reform seems hopeless. But hopelessness, it turns out, has its own political arc. Most change comes not incrementally, but in large gulps after long periods of inertia, according to political scientists Frank Baumgartner and Bryan Jones. It may look like nothing will ever change, but the pressures keep building until, all at once, like the “stick-slip” phenomenon of earthquakes, the ground gives way and a new order evolves. Revolutions occur this way. In the United States, most major changes in social policy have occurred in tectonic shifts after pressures built up for decades, such as in the 1960s (civil rights), in the progressive era (regulation) or during the Civil War (ending slavery). The New Deal (social safety nets) differed only in that pressures of the Great Depression were more immediate. ... What’s the new philosophy of how democracy should work? A laundry list of specific reforms is unlikely to galvanize a public movement. All the reform periods in U.S. history had a clear goal with a moral high ground, such as ending laissez faire or segregation. The major overhaul needed today also requires a clear goal that citizens can understand and get behind. What’s gone wrong with modern democracy? Polarized politics is one villain. The rise of political extremism is apparent. But why is it happening? I think we have it backward. Polarization is mainly a symptom, not the cause, of paralysis. Democracy has become powerless. Politicians who are impotent have no way to compete except by pointing fingers. The main culprit, ironically, is law. Generations of lawmakers and regulators have written so much law, in such detail, that officials are barred from acting sensibly. Like sediment in the harbor, law has piled up until it is almost impossible — indeed, illegal — for officials to make choices needed for government to get where it needs to go.

But the size of the law itself can also be seen is just another symptom of polarization. Canada's Health Act, establishing a full national system of healthcare, is much (much) smaller than the Affordable Care Act. The same is true of similar bills in many countries. Why is that? Because most countries trust to the experts to define the details of how a bill is applied. In the US, rife with idiocy like talk of "death panels" and deliberate efforts to terrify people about what may be "hiding" in a bill, there's a tendency to try and cover every possibility in the initial legislation, leaving nothing to the interpretations of bureaucrats we've been taught to hate. The result is massive, inflexible legislation much of which contains many more contradictions and issues than would be generated by simpler bills.

But whatever order of events you blame, there's little doubt about the outcome.

Recently the White House issued a five-year report on the $800 billion stimulus plan from 2009. Part of the original goal, as President Obama announced then, was to “rebuild America’s infrastructure.” So how much of that huge stimulus went to this worthwhile goal? Buried in the fine print of the report is this fact — barely 3 percent went to transportation infrastructure. Why? The president of the United States lacks the power to approve the rebuilding of decrepit bridges and roads. In the New Deal, by contrast, Harry Hopkins had employed 2.6 million people two months after he was named head of the new Civilian Works Administration.

When you have one of two major parties devoted to the idea that government can't be allowed to operate effectively, it's hard to blame anything beyond the people who vote for them. Still, this is your read-it-all-then-think-up-a-solution assignment for the morning.

Then come in and see what else is up in punditry...