Editorial: Congress has work to do Budget should come first, bickering last, on the congressional to-do list this month.

Photo: J. David Ake, STF Image 1 of / 1 Caption Close Image 1 of 1 The orange sky of sunrise is captured behind the skyline of Washington, Tuesday, Sept. 8, 2015, on the first day back to work for the U.S. Congress after their summer recess. (AP Photo/J. David Ake) The orange sky of sunrise is captured behind the skyline of Washington, Tuesday, Sept. 8, 2015, on the first day back to work for the U.S. Congress after their summer recess. (AP Photo/J. David Ake) Photo: J. David Ake, STF Editorial: Congress has work to do 1 / 1 Back to Gallery

Students getting used to the new school year should be thankful they don't have Congress' schedule. Summer recess just ended and the first big test is at the end of the month - Sept. 30 marks the due date to pass a budget or face a government shutdown. Also on that to-do list: address the upcoming debt ceiling, vote on the Iran Nuclear Deal, reauthorize the Federal Aviation Act, debate crude oil exports, fix the Highway Trust Fund and the Social Security disability trust fund and hopefully renew the Import-Export Bank charter. There's also a visit from Pope Francis.

Given that Congress scheduled only 10 work days through the end of the month, congressional observers have placed their bets on our elected officials knocking only two items off the list before September ends. The House and Senate are scheduled to vote next week on the Iran deal, which stands as the best current option for preventing Iran from developing nuclear weapons. Also, a continuing resolution will probably be used to delay any major budgetary changes for another day. Really, that only addresses one-and-a-half issues, but some politicians would rather see that number sit at zero.

Over the summer recess, U.S. Sen. Ted Cruz wrote a letter to Senate leadership stating that he would "oppose any government funding legislation that would authorize or provide federal funds for Planned Parenthood."

Cruz may find himself standing alone in this fight. His senior partner in the Senate, U.S. Sen. John Cornyn, said Tuesday that shutting down the government over Planned Parenthood would be a mistake. "That would set the pro-life cause back, in my view," Cornyn said, according to Politico.

Politico also reports that Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell, R-Ky., lacks the 60 votes necessary to advance the sort of bill that could strip Planned Parenthood funding from the budget. One poll even shows that nearly 70 percent of Americans oppose a government shutdown over the issue.

But political failure doesn't mean Cruz can't win in another way.

When Cruz tried this shut-down strategy in a fight over the Affordable Care Act in 2013, it didn't turn out too well for his Republican colleagues. The party hit a record low in approval polls. Nor did Cruz help the nation as a whole, which suffered a $20 billion economic hit from the 16-day shutdown, according to Moody's Analytics. And in the end, the Affordable Care Act remained on the books.

However, one man came out on top: Ted Cruz. Fundraising skyrocketed for Texas' junior senator, who made headlines with his 21-hour speech on the Senate floor. You may remember the part where he read "Green Eggs and Ham" by Dr. Seuss.

Our nation faces serious challenges at home and abroad, and the senators hoping to lead our nation as president may be tempted to look at Cruz's personal success in the last government shutdown as a model for raising money and garnering attention in a crowded field.

But as Speaker Sam Rayburn once said, with his famous Texan bluntness, any jackass can kick down a barn.

A truly impressive presidential candidate would actually get the gears of government turning and help usher through a new federal budget that reduces long-term debt while fully funding government services. But so far, nobody seems up to it. It's back to school season, and Congress could stand to show that it still remembers civics class.