Councilor Daryle Klassen, current Mayor Cecil Gutierrez also in contest

Alexi Grewal ( STEVE STONER )

In the race for Loveland mayor, Alexi Grewal has been here before, and he doesn't intend to quit until he wins the seat.

He'll face off in November against current Loveland Ward 4 City Councilor Daryle Klassen and current Mayor Cecil Gutierrez, against whom Grewal ran in his 2009 bid for mayor.

"I always intended to run for mayor again," Grewal said Tuesday. "I feel a responsibility and it's something I think I would be very good at."

Grewal, an Olympic gold medalist in road cycling, has lived in Loveland since 2001. He believes his experience in competitive team environments as team leader and team captain have provided leadership skills that are required to be mayor.

"I think that the city is missing leadership for sure," he said.

A supporter of a moratorium on hydraulic fracturing, or fracking, to recover oil and gas in Loveland, Grewal sees fracking as the only new issue since he ran for mayor in 2009. He's still concerned about downtown -- empty buildings, still-pending projects such as the Feed and Grain.

"We need to be proactive in strengthening our core first and filling our empty buildings," Grewal said. "We will be only as strong as our core in the long run."

And don't get him started on the temporary art plaza at Lincoln Avenue and Third Street. The city hopes that plaza will be purchased in the near future, but Grewal thinks benches and a gazebo would have been a better way to spend money.

It's one of the ways Grewal is concerned about Loveland's spending.

Advertisement

He also said that last year's branding effort baffled him and he questions recent economic incentive packages.

"The way we hand out money for people to stay here is not well thought through," Grewal said. "A business has to have a commitment to community."

Grewal has been active in advocacy for the homeless and said his background and experience as an artisan and blue-collar business owner also sets him apart from other candidates.

Jessica Maher can be reached at 669-5050, ext. 516, or maherj@reporter-herald.com. Follow her on Twitter: @JessicaMaherRH.