At Presence Saint Joseph Medical Center in Joliet, administrators were so concerned about the number of discharged patients being readmitted for treatment that they took extra steps.

In the past few years they set up several outpatient clinics for those with chronic diseases to get follow-up care. Nurses reminded patients to take their medications and see their doctors. The hospital emphasized a healthy lifestyle to avoid the likelihood of a serious flare-up.

But the steps, at least for now, are still not enough.

Readmissions are still too high, the federal government says, and Presence will pay a hefty penalty — likely worth millions of dollars — after Medicare reduces reimbursements to the hospital by 2.79 percent, the highest in the Chicago metropolitan area.

For the fourth year in a row, hospitals across Illinois and the nation are being penalized by Medicare for having what the agency defines as too many patients return within a month of discharge.

The federal government says readmissions are costly and often unnecessary, and taxpayers need to be protected. Across Illinois, 113 hospitals, or 62 percent, will get lower payments for each Medicare patient, readmitted or not, starting in October.

Those hospitals will have an average cut of 0.72 percent in Medicare reimbursements, which could be worth millions of dollars.

The list includes some of the most prominent hospitals in Illinois, like Northwestern Memorial and University of Chicago Medicine, along with many that serve the poor and elderly.

Nationwide, 2,592 hospitals will lose a combined $420 million, according to a Kaiser Health News analysis of Medicare records.

Illinois ranked eighth in the nation for average penalty, behind Kentucky, Virginia, West Virginia, Arkansas, Washington, D.C., New York and New Jersey.

In Chicago, 25 hospitals are being fined for high readmissions, even though most have improved from last year. Medicare has determined that their readmission rates are still too high.

Several large hospitals declined to comment on the figures, including Northwestern Memorial, which is being penalized with a 1.03 percent reduction. That penalty ranks among the top third for Chicago's hospitals, although it is smaller than last year's penalty.

For each hospital, Medicare determined what it thought the appropriate number of readmissions should be based on the mix of patients and how the hospital industry performed overall. If the number of readmissions was above that projection, Medicare fined the hospital.

The fines are based on readmissions between July 2011 and June 2014 and include Medicare patients who were originally hospitalized for one of five conditions: heart attack, heart failure, pneumonia, chronic lung problems or elective hip or knee replacements, according to Kaiser Health News.

Thousands of hospitals were automatically exempted because they specialize in certain types of patients, like veterans or children, or because they were designated "critical access" hospitals.

Many hospitals say they are working hard to reduce readmissions but are fighting an uphill battle.

Illinois Valley Community Hospital in Peru, about an hour west of Chicago, said it serves mostly elderly patients with serious conditions. The hospital's readmission penalty climbed 1.22 percentage points from a year earlier, the highest jump among Illinois hospitals.

At the rural 56-bed hospital, administrators recently set up a "transitional care program" to help discharged patients stay on course with their treatments. Several nurses work full time to help former patients order prescriptions, remind them about follow-up visits to their doctor, and sometimes even accompany them to the doctor's office.

Even so, readmissions at Illinois Valley are still climbing, and now Medicare is socking the hospital with a 1.77 percent cut.

"Readmissions, despite our best efforts, are sometimes unavoidable when you're dealing with that age group," hospital spokesman Gene Vogelgesang said.

The Chicago hospital with the largest penalty, 1.52 percent, is Louis A. Weiss Memorial Hospital, a for-profit hospital on the North Side.

In a statement, the hospital said it is "committed to reducing preventable readmissions" and improving the health of patients. It said it has seen improvements in its readmission data since the Medicare figures were collected more than a year ago.

Some hospitals see the penalties as being unfair because they can lose money even if they had fewer readmissions than they did in previous years. In fact, more than 70 Illinois hospitals facing penalties had drops in readmission rates last year.

Other hospitals say Medicare is not making allowances for the complexity of illnesses.

Advocate Christ Medical Center in Oak Lawn said it often treats complex cases, with patients suffering from several chronic diseases. It added that the majority of its penalty was related to "a very few patients" having hip or knee procedures who were readmitted with issues unrelated to their surgery. It said that since it implemented some changes in follow-up care, its readmission rate has fallen by nearly 40 percent in the past 12 months.

Presence Saint Joseph says hospital quality is measured in many ways, like patient outcomes.

"It is important to point out that readmission rate is but one facet of a hospital's total quality picture," Lisa Lagger, regional chief mission officer for the hospital, said in a statement. She said Presence has a top rating by HealthGrades for patient outcomes.

Some patient advocates say the Medicare penalties are pressuring hospitals to avoid admitting or readmitting patients in order to keep their numbers acceptably low. Instead, hospitals will take patients "under observation," a designation that often results in the patient — including poor and elderly — getting a huge bill for hospital services and for rehabilitation later.

"Sometimes seniors will be stuck with a $10,000 bill they can't pay," said Teri Dreher, a registered nurse and chief executive of North Shore Patient Advocates in Chicago.

Tribune reporters Jennifer Smith Richards and Ameet Sachdev, and Kaiser Health Network contributed.

jrussell@tribpub.com

Twitter @johnrussell99

HIGH READMISSIONS, HIGH FINES

More than 100 hospitals in Illinois are being penalized for having too many patients return within a month of discharge. Those hospitals will see their Medicare reimbursements reduced by up to 3 percent this year. (The national average penalty is 0.61 percent.)