The Planned Parenthood abortion business is having a hard time keeping its story straight after it was exposed over a staffer who told a 15-year-old in an undercover video that she should engage in sadomasochistic sexual relations.

As LifeNews reported, the abortion giant initially told Indianapolis media that it fired the staffer in question. Then, in a follow-up undercover phone call to the abortion center where the staffer was employed, Planned Parenthood officials set up an appointment with investigators to meet with the staffer, making it appear the staffer was still employed.

Now, in a new interview, Planned Parenthood representatives claim they knew the phone call was fake and admit they lied to the Live Action undercover agent. As USA Today reports:

A day after Planned Parenthood officials said an employee at the Indianapolis-Midtown Clinic — who was captured in video offering the controversial advice — no longer worked for the organization, Live Action claimed they were lying. The allegation that Planned Parenthood was lying was based on a phone call Thursday, in which a Live Action worker posed as the 15-year-old girl shown in the surreptitiously captured video. This time she was seeking another appointment. She specifically asked for the counselor who Planned Parenthood said no longer worked for the agency. A recording of the conversation was later posted online. A Planned Parenthood official acknowledged the staff member who took the call Thursday set up an appointment for the woman posing as the teen, even though she knew it was a Live Action operative. Planned Parenthood staff went along with the caller’s request to meet with the specific counselor only because the agency would never tell a client about confidential personnel or employee issues, said spokeswoman Tammy Lieber. “We knew it was a fake,” she said. Live Action CEO Lila Rose, 25, defended her group’s undercover tactics — including the phone call she made Thursday to the Indianapolis clinic — as necessary to fight what she believes is Planned Parenthood’s promotion of misinformation and dangerous sexual activities among teenagers. “This organization regularly hides the truth from the public, misinforms women, misleads people about their services and outright lies, so posing undercover was important to really get to the bottom of how they engage with teens about sexual issues,” she said.

What is not fake is the fact that a Planned Parenthood staffer encouraged an underage teen to engage in BDSM sex.

In the first video released in its new expose’ of the Planned Parenthood abortion business, Live Action has caught a counselor for the abortion giant urging a 15-year-old to have BDSM sex and to engage in sexual relations as a dominatrix.

The entire video series catches the Planned Parenthood abortion business teaching teenagers about S&M-based sexual relationships and concepts such as gagging, whipping and asphyxiation. In a series of undercover audits, Live Action investigators documented Planned Parenthood counselors and nurses advising our investigators, who the Planned Parenthood staffers thought were minors, on how to practice torture sex.

In this and forthcoming videos, Planned Parenthood counselors encourage undercover investigators posting as 15 and 16-year-old teens, to engage in the sadomasochistic practices, telling the underage teens “if it’s consensual, it’s OK… it’s totally OK.”

In its response to the video to the Star newspaper, Planned Parenthood claimed that it does not represent how its staff would normally handle a discussion with a teenager and it claims the staffer in question has been fired. From the report:

Planned Parenthood of Indiana and Kentucky says an undercover video released Wednesday by a pro-life group doesn’t reflect the agency’s training or standards and that the employee advising the fake client no longer works at the Indianapolis Midtown center. Planned Parenthood president and CEO Betty Cockrum doesn’t dispute the authenticity of the tape, but also said it is not indicative of the type of counseling and information clients are provided. “While the heavy editing of this video makes it impossible to know the full exchange that took place, this video clearly does not reflect our professional standards or training protocols, and this staff member is no longer employed at PPINK,” she said in a written statement. “This video does not reflect the work our dedicated employees do every day, nor the experience shared by parents and teens who participate in our programs,” Cockrum added. Planned Parenthood spokeswoman Tammy Lieber said Cockrum was not available Wednesday night to answer questions. Lieber also would not reveal whether the employee was fired or left voluntarily, or when that occurred, due to privacy policies.

In this first expose’ footage, the Planned Parenthood employee explains to the Live Action investigator, posing as a fifteen-year-old girl, several sexually deviant concepts, such as role-play and the use of whips and handcuffs to inflict pain on a sexual partner. “You could be a dominatrix-type of person,” she says, “where you dress in all leather, with the whips and the handcuffs.”

She continued, “It just depends what type of pain you can take.”

LiveAction complains that the video comes in the wake of news that through ObamaCare, an additional $75 million in taxpayer funding will be allocated by the Department of Health and Human Services for sex education. Planned Parenthood, which has received hundreds of millions already to be an ObamaCare “navigator,” is poised to receive a significant amount of this funding.

Lila Rose, Live Action’s president, roundly condemned the Obama administration’s “unbelievable mismanagement” of public funds. “No matter your interpretation of the government’s taxing power, you’d be hard-pressed to justify forcing Americans to give money to an organization that counsels a fifteen-year-old girl to look up porn sites to get ‘ideas’ on BDSM sex, and to get someone over 18 to go into a sex shop to buy whips and handcuffs for her.”

Click here to sign up for daily pro-life news alerts from LifeNews.com

Planned Parenthood, which casts itself as a leading sex educator, regularly implements sexually explicit advertising campaigns and seminars, including a series of metro ads reading, “We’re your one-night stand,” “We’re your friend with benefits,” etc., and a seminar for teenagers on “how a BDSM relationship is successfully navigated between sexual partners.”

“These tapes are so outrageous,” Rose said, “that they are hard to believe – so-called ‘health’ counselors promoting dangerous and violent practices to young girls, recommending porn sites, sex shops, and how to hide these activities from parents.”

Live Action is providing uncensored investigative footage by request but has declined to make it available for public consumption. “It’s a travesty that this is even happening,” Rose said. “We are calling on proper authorities to see this footage as an incentive to hold Planned Parenthood accountable for the dangerous practices this abortion corporation is promoting to our teens.”