Topics: Abortion, down syndrome, fetal anomalies, fetal screening, morality, Pro-choice, Reproductive choice, reproductive health, Reproductive Rights, Richard Dawkins, twitter wars, Media News, Life News, News

Prominent evolutionary theorist Richard Dawkins seems to be confused about choices. The noted atheist drew ire on Wednesday after he announced that it would be “immoral” for a pregnant woman not to abort a fetus if she discovered that it had Down syndrome — ignoring the fact that when women have the right to choose an abortion, they also have the right not to choose an abortion.

During a discussion with followers over the recent case of a suicidal woman in Ireland who was denied an abortion and forced to undergo a C-section at 25 weeks, Dawkins noted that “screening [for fetal abnormalities] offers a humane moral choice.” But instead of leaving it at that, Dawkins also suggested that only one choice a woman could make in response to a Down syndrome diagnosis would be morally just:

@InYourFaceNYer Abort it and try again. It would be immoral to bring it into the world if you have the choice. — Richard Dawkins (@RichardDawkins) August 20, 2014

Dawkins went on to say that he “OBVIOUSLY wouldn’t TELL a woman what to do” (emphasis original), because women’s reproductive decisions should be up to women:

Women have a right to early abortion. Choice is theirs. Down Syndrome is 1 of the commonest & most moral reasons to exercise that right. — Richard Dawkins (@RichardDawkins) August 21, 2014

Dawkins is right about one thing: Women do have a right to early abortion and the choice is theirs. But there is no such thing as a “most moral reason” to have an abortion. The reasons that women choose to have abortions are varied and personal, as are the reasons women choose to carry pregnancies to term. Choice is responsive to individual needs, beliefs and circumstances. No woman should be attacked for the reproductive rights she chooses to exercise — whether it’s the right to have an abortion, or the right not to.