As a Democrat, I almost never agree with the conservative former House Speaker Newt Gingrich. But this week I find myself in a rare circumstance. On Wednesday, Gingrich wrote an op-ed for the New York Times in support of increasing the budget for research at the National Institutes of Health. In the op-ed, he argued that conservatives’ drive to cut spending on research in order to rein in government spending is ill-considered, stating:



As a conservative myself, I’m often skeptical of government “investments.” But when it comes to breakthroughs that could cure – not just treat – the most expensive diseases, government is unique. It alone can bring the necessary resources to bear. (The federal government funds roughly a third of all medical research in the United States.) And it is ultimately on the hook for the costs of illness. It’s irresponsible and shortsighted, not prudent, to let financing for basic research dwindle.



Gingrich went on to say that a “greater budget” is needed to realize the potential of research at the NIH. I couldn’t agree more. Congress should work to protect and increase funding for medical research at the NIH.



[READ: Under Obamacare, Mental Health Lacking]

Curing a disease is ultimately more cost effective than managing it, just as preventing an illness is much cheaper than treating it. In a way, the lack of investment in the the NIH is a symptom of what’s wrong with how the country views the health care system as a whole. We focus too much on treating the symptoms of disease and not preventing the underlying causes or trying to eradicate it altogether. As a result, money spent on treatment only goes up, while promising research and prevention measures are left to linger. One of the only true ways to bring down the cost of health care spending is to begin to shift this paradigm. Gingrich indicated this when he wrote: ““By funding basic medical research, Congress can transform our fiscal health, and our personal health, too.” He is also right when he said that government is in a unique position to make these investments. Not only is the U.S. government one of the biggest funders of medical research, but, through the Medicare program, it is also the biggest health insurance payer in the country. Where Medicare sets the example, the private sector tends to follow. Medicare reforms could also go a long way toward helping our health care system make this shift.



[SEE: Editorial Cartoons on Obamacare]