EASTERN SHORE, Va. (WAVY) — Voters in parts of Norfolk and all of the Eastern Shore went to the polls Tuesday and chose Republican Robert Bloxom, Jr. to fill the House seat vacated by Lynwood Lewis.

Bloxom and Democrat Willie Randall ran against each other in the special election for the 100th House District. The seat was vacated by Lewis when he was elected state senator in the 6th Senate District in November.

The polls closed at 7 p.m. Tuesday, and by 8 p.m. preliminary results indicated Bloxom as victor. With 32 of 33 precincts reporting, Bloxom had little more than 60 percent of the vote. With the win, Republicans now hold about 70 percent of the seats in the House of Delegates.

Speaker of the House William J. Howell, R-Stafford, issued a statement after Bloxom’s win, saying it was a clear sign that voters in Virginia reject ObamaCare’s Medicaid expansion:

Rob’s opponent proudly and vocally ran on President Obama’s agenda, ObamaCare and implementing Medicaid expansion in Virginia. The citizens of the 100th House District made it absolutely clear tonight that they oppose ObamaCare and ObamaCare’s Medicaid expansion.

Governor McAuliffe and General Assembly Democrats have wrongly injected Medicaid expansion into the budget debate. Because they know Medicaid expansion does not stand on its merits, they have decided to use the budget as a bargaining chip in order to implement ObamaCare in Virginia. The results tonight show that Virginians think that is wrong.

Governor McAuliffe and General Assembly Democrats should stop using the budget as a bargaining chip, drop their demands for Medicaid expansion and let Virginia pass a clean budget bill.

Bloxom, a business owner on the Eastern Shore, will now follow in the footsteps of his father, who represented the district before Lewis. Bob Bloxom, Sr. endorsed Terry McAullife’s campaign for the Governor’s mansion.

Recently, 10 On Your Side talked with both candidates about several issues, including a judge’s recent decision to overturn the state’s ban on gay marriage.

“From a religious point of view, I am against gay marriage,” Bloxom said. “I understand civil unions is an individual and a personal choice that they need to make. I’m concerned with the possibility of churches being brought into lawsuits. I’m not a lawyer, but I see that as a possibility that we really need to careful of when we venture into that area.”

Randall had a drastically different opinion: “Well, you know I’m happy for the decision that the judge made. And if it were to come up into the House, we’ll look at it very closely, and I would more than likely support the decision that the judge made.”