Topics: AlterNet, Bobby Jindal, Donald Trump, Jeffrey Lord, slavery, Politics News

This article originally appeared on AlterNet

We all got to think a little too much about Donald Trump’s manhood this week. No one deserves that. Of course, the state of the Republican campaign for president being what it is, Thursday night’s debate was hardly the only shitshow in town. Just in case you missed them, right wingers spewed a variety of vile and ridiculous things in the past few days. Here are some other less-publicized low-lights.

1. Bobby Jindal blames President Obama for the rise of Trump.

Dear Rhodes Scholarship Committee,

Please immediately rescind Bobby Jindal’s Rhodes Scholar status. He is not a good look for you because he is a complete moron. This has been amply demonstrated in the past by his denial of fundamental realities like climate change and evolution and his insistence on making Louisiana youngsters ignorant of these basic realities as well.

Now, this genius has penned an absurd op-ed in the Wall Street Journal blaming—who else?—President Obama for Trump’s rise.

Yeah, that makes sense.

“Let’s be honest,” Jindal wrote, as if he knew how to be honest. “There would be no Donald Trump, dominating the political scene today if it were not for President Obama….After seven years of the cool, weak and endlessly nuanced ‘no drama Obama,’ voters are looking for a strong leader who speaks in short, declarative sentences.”

Soooo, Obama’s sentence structure caused Trump. You read that right. Okay, here’s a simple declarative sentence: You’re nuts, Bobby Jindal, and a liar to boot. Sorry about those commas. Didn’t mean to confuse you.

Not that Jindal likes Trump, but being half right doesn’t make you any less crazy.

“President Obama loves to construct straw men so he can contrast his heroic self against them. But Donald Trump needs no characterization; he is capable of being absurd on his own, no outside help required,” Jindal wrote. “Without President Obama, there is no Donald Trump. Mr. Trump often diagnoses the ills Mr. Obama has caused, but his prescriptions are just as often wrong. America deserves better.”

Rhodes Scholarship committee, we rest our case.

2. Sarah Palin and Andrea Tantaros are, like, soooooo mad at Mitt Romney.

The Palinator and Fox Newsian Andrea Tantaros have this much in common: They both love them their Trumpster. So it stands to reason that they were sooooo mad at Mitt Romney this week for his point-by-point takedown of the Republican frontrunner. These ladies definitely know which billionaire they prefer, and it isn’t Lord Mittens.

From Sarah Palin’s fevered brain came these words in the form of a Facebook video:

“The ‘machine’s’ deception and nonsensical attack on Trump isn’t really an attack on the candidate. It’s an attack on conscientious, hardworking, patriotic Americans who know we need a revolution to stop the complicit politicians who are fundamentally transforming America. We found the revolutionary. Donald Trump is the shock the Permanent Political Class needs to wake them up…to destroy their selfish cabal…to respect the will of the people…to make America safe and solvent…to make America great again.”

Got that?

“Don’t take the bait, Mr. Trump,” Palin warned her crush, before promising that she and her ilk have his back.

And with friends like her…we’re not sure why Trump needs all those burly security people.

For her part, Tantaros did her best to come out as a reasonable person, with what passes for cool-headed analysis on Fox (yes, yes, low bar, we know): “Mitt Romney, smart guy, good family man, wrong messenger,” Tantaros told her fellow panelists. “It’s almost like the coach who lost the Superbowl is now coming out and telling the winning coach what plays to call.”