Signs like this one will start appearing on B-Line buses in Butte County to promote local programs for depression awareness. Contributed Photo

Chico >>Today may be a celebration of motherhood, but for some mothers it’s a badge they’re not so sure about. Motherhood is an instant job that delivered more than they ever expected or were ready for — physically and mentally.

Becoming a mother means joy, but it can also be a mental wallop as women deal with perinatal mood and anxiety disorders, said DeAnne Blankenship, who is part of a relatively new local organization called Mothers Strong.

The group was formed last year in hopes of helping mothers understand and deal with the joys and challenges of motherhood. Group members include mothers, individuals, therapists and representatives of local agencies that host supportive services from throughout Butte County.

It also put on Butte County’s first “mothers summit,” held Saturday at Enloe Conference Center in Chico.

The group and the half-day conference “came about through a recognition there is a lack of services and awareness of perinatal mood and anxiety issues,” said Blankenship, who is with the Chico office of the California Health Collaborative.

The California Health Collaborative held a couple of classes regarding women’s mood issues in Fresno and Merced, which spun the idea for the summit.

“It’s a growing topic in the maternal world because it’s a huge public health crisis,” Blankenship said.

Citing national data, Blankenship noted that studies show one in seven women may suffer from depression, a message that Mothers Strong is posting on signs on B-Line buses.

According to the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, depression during and after pregnancy is more than feeling a little down.

“Depression is more than just feeling ‘blue’ or ‘down in the dumps’ for a few days. It’s a serious illness that involves the brain. With depression, sad, anxious or ‘empty’ feelings don’t go away and interfere with day-to-day life and routines. These feelings can be mild to severe. The good news is that most people with depression get better with treatment.”

It’s not just a matter of feeling a little off, Blankenship says. It can affect a mother’s ability to bond with her child or gets in the way of an adult relationship. It can lead to chronic depression and to behavior issues in a child, she said.

National headlines speak to the condition, with incidents of mothers harming or even killing their children and themselves.

Helping women understand the complexities of their moods and depression was part of the reason for the free summit.

Speakers at the conference helped mothers discern their feelings and ways for relief.

Advertisement

Why there are so many instances of postpartum mood issues now compared to other generations isn’t clear. Perhaps earlier generations had more support from families or women who were close, or had resources to read or turn to. Or it may be that the health industry is paying more attention and incidents are reported more frequently.

“Women aren’t growing up in large families of women. In areas where women are more isolated, in rural areas for example, the rate (of mothers with depression) is suspected to be higher than 20 percent,” Blankenship said.

Pointing the way to resources was a goal of several dozen women representing local agencies, as well as mothers and professionals, who met monthly and were eventually able to assemble support groups in both Chico and Paradise that included health professionals and therapists to help. Mothers Strong was the result.

With the implementation of the Affordable Care Act, mental care can be covered along with physical care, Blankenship said.

Mothers Strong is also a resource for obstetricians, who Blankenship said have known about the issues for decades, but not really had many options for their patients.

While there is no website nor regular meetings for mothers to attend yet, there is a Facebook page for Mothers Strong, as well as information on www.Butte211.org — a Butte County resource website.

Blankenship stresses that agencies formed the foundation of Mothers Strong, but they want to see mothers, individuals and families come in to play a larger role in the organization.

To that end, information is available by calling 2-1-1 or the toll-free number 1-866-916-3566, and asking for information on the Mothers Strong program.

Contact reporter Laura Urseny at 896-7756.