Buy Photo An attendee gets a tattoo done at the fifth annual Visionary Tattoo Arts Festival in Convention Hall in Asbury Park. <137>More than 150 tattoo artists tattooed on site during the weekend.<137> (Photo: Mike DeSocio/Staff Photographer )Buy Photo

Lisa Brown lives in the Bronx, has a doctorate in biomedical sciences from Albert Einstein College of Medicine and has multiple tattoos, most of them designed and inked by Louis Bengard and Korrie Brown, tattoo artists with Black Square Tattoo in Brooklyn.

“How many tattoos do I have? A lot, maybe 20, and I’ve had them done from all over the country,” she said, adding that one of her favorites is labeled “True Blue.” It is a scene of the Blue Ridge Mountains framed with pink dogwood flowers.

Brown was helping out at the Black Square booth, one of 150 tattoo booths at the fifth annual Visionary Tattoo Arts Festival held at Convention Hall Saturday. The festival continues from noon to 8 p.m. today.

While many visitors could be seen sporting tattoos on every visible skin surface, Charles Ignar of Sea Bright, who was waiting in line to enter the festival, said he has no tattoos and doesn’t plan to get any.

“I came more for the atmosphere and not a tattoo,” he said. “There are sideshows, a pin-up contest and burlesque shows today (Saturday) and music.”

Glenda Rojas of Newark said this is her first time at the festival.

“I’m excited to be here. I love tattoos and can’t wait to see how people are using them to express themselves,” said Rojas, who has several tattoos on her arms and legs.

She also expressed concern that people often get the wrong impression about people who have tattoos.

“I work for a restaurant and they don’t discriminate based on whether an employee has a tattoo or not,” she said. Still, Rojas said, she doesn’t have any tattoos on her hands or face and can easily cover her arms and legs by wearing long sleeves or pants if necessary.

“But I feel that people should be allowed to show off their body art if they choose,” she said.

Jon Lane, the creative director of the festival, said this is the biggest show to date, in terms of the number of tattoo artists who signed on to participate.

“Asbury Park is a great place for the show, and this year we are also having our second annual Miss Asbury Park pinup contest,” said Lane, who with partner, Shannon Moran, operate a tattoo and oddities shop called Triple Diamond Tattoo in Brooklyn. Among the oddities on display at their booth at the festival are a hairy tarantula and other large insects in glass shadow boxes.

In a nod to Asbury Park and its heyday, a large banner of Tillie, this one with three eyes, is the theme of the festival.

if you go

Today is the final day, from noon to 8 p.m. At 5 and 7:30 p.m., there are tattoo contests. Awards will be given for best tattoos in these categories: large color, large black-and-gray, chest/back, sleeved arm/leg, best overall and best of show. Shore Skate Team will give a demonstration at 2 p.m.; Gisella Rose is the featured sideshow at 3 p.m.; and Old City is the 4 p.m. sideshow. Daily admission is $20, or $40 for a three-day pass. The festival is at Convention Hall, 1300 Ocean Ave., Asbury Park. For more information, visit visionarytattoofest.com.

Read or Share this story: http://on.app.com/1rIxXF1