Carey Price already has a lengthy list of accomplishments.

And now the 27-year-old, a member of British Columbia's Ulkatcho First Nation, is hoping to lead the Montreal Canadiens to glory in the National Hockey League playoffs, which begin today.

Price and his teammates will face off against the Ottawa Senators, in an opening best-of-seven Eastern Conference series. The first two matches are scheduled for tonight and Friday in Montreal.

Many hockey experts believe Price, arguably the top goaltender in the world right now, will backstop the Canadiens to a rather lengthy post-season. A club needs to win four playoff rounds to capture the Stanley Cup, annually awarded to the NHL's playoff champions.

Price, who also led Canada to the gold medal in the men's hockey tournament at the 2014 Winter Olympics in Sochi, Russia, appears primed for a successful post-season. The eight-year pro shone during the 2014-15 regular season.

Price registered career highs this season for wins (44) and shutouts (nine) and for the first time in his pro career also had a goals-against average below 2.00 (1.96).

Based on his regular season performances there's a chance Price might not only be selected as the league's top goalie but as the NHL's most valuable player as well.

Price, however, is not the only Native who will be involved in the NHL playoffs.

RELATED: Ted Nolan Out As Buffalo Sabres’ Head Coach

T.J. Oshie, an Ojibwe forward, is a member of the St. Louis Blues. The Blues will battle the Minnesota Wild in their opening best-of-seven Western Conference series, set to begin Thursday night in St. Louis.

Oshie, who is in his seventh NHL campaign, is an integral part of the Blues' offense. He had 55 points (19 goals, 36 assists) in 72 regular season contests.

Also, Michael Ferland, a 22-year-old Cree who is a rookie forward with the Calgary Flames, will get his first taste of NHL playoff action.

Calgary will square off against the Vancouver Canucks in their best-of-seven Western Conference series. Game 1 is tonight in Vancouver. Ferland split the season between the Flames and their American Hockey League affiliate Adirondack Flames. He appeared in 26 games with Calgary and contributed five points, including two goals.