Thursday’s Supreme Court decision (King v. Burwell) allows Obamacare premium tax credits (subsidies) in states that do not run their own health insurance exchanges. The decision pretty much guarantees that all the Obamacare tax increases will be with us through at least 2016 — and probably forever. If the Court had ruled the other way, Obamacare detractors had hoped to trade the nullification of some or all of these tax increases for an extension of the premium tax credits for folks who would have lost them. That possibility is now off the table. With that thought in mind, here’s a quick refresher course on the now-entrenched Obamacare tax increases that could affect you.

Additional 0.9% Medicare tax on salaries and self-employment income earned by “rich” folks

Before Obamacare, the Medicare tax on salary and/or self-employment (SE) income was a flat 2.9%. If you’re an employee, 1.45% was withheld from your paychecks, and the other 1.45% was paid by your employer. If you’re self-employed, you paid the whole 2.9% yourself.

After Obamacare, an extra 0.9% Medicare tax is charged on: (1) salary and/or SE income above $200,000 for an unmarried individual, (2) combined salary and/or SE income above $250,000 for a married joint-filing couple, and (3) salary and/or SE income above $125,000 for those who use married filing separate status. For self-employed individuals, the additional 0.9% Medicare tax hit comes in the form of a higher SE bill.

Additional 3.8% Medicare tax on investment income collected by “rich” folks

Before Obamacare, investment income was not subject to any sort of Medicare tax.

After Obamacare, all or part of your net investment income, including long-term capital gains and dividends, can get socked with a 3.8% Medicare surtax (the so-called net investment income tax). Therefore, the maximum federal rate on long-term gains and qualified dividends is actually 23.8% (20% for the “regular” capital gains tax plus 3.8% for the net investment income tax) versus the advertised 20% maximum rate.

Fortunately, the 3.8% surtax will not hit you unless your adjusted gross income (AGI) exceeds: (1) $200,000 if you’re unmarried, (2) $250,000 if you’re a married joint-filer, or (3) $125,000 if you use married filing separate status.

If you are affected, the 3.8% surtax applies to the lesser of your net investment income or the amount of AGI in excess of the applicable threshold. For example, a married joint-filing couple with AGI of $325,000 and $100,000 of net investment income would pay the 3.8% surtax on $75,000 (the amount of excess AGI). If the same couple has AGI of $400,000, they would pay the 3.8% surtax on $100,000 (the entire amount of their net investment income).

For details on the 3.8% surtax, see Are you exposed to the net investment income tax?

Cap on Healthcare FSA contributions

Before Obamacare, there was no tax-law limit on annual contributions to your employer’s health care flexible spending account (FSA) plan (although many plan imposed their own limits). Amounts you contribute to a health care FSA are subtracted from your taxable salary. Then you can use the funds to reimburse yourself tax-free to cover qualified medical expenses.

After Obamacare, the maximum annual health care FSA contribution for each employee is capped at $2,500 (with periodic inflation adjustments).

Higher threshold for itemized medical expense deductions

Before Obamacare, you could claim an itemized deduction for medical expenses paid for you, your spouse, and your dependents, to the extent those expenses exceed 7.5% of your AGI.

After Obamacare, the hurdle is raised to 10% of AGI. However, if either you or your spouse is age 65 or older at year-end, the more favorable 7.5%-of-AGI threshold remains in force for this year and next year. For 2017 and beyond, however, the 10%-of-AGI deduction threshold will apply to everybody, regardless of age.

Punitive penalty on employer reimbursements for individual employee health policy premiums

As I explained in last week’s column, Obamacare also imposes a stiff penalty on employers that offer plans that reimburse employees for premiums paid by them for individual health insurance policies. The penalty can also apply to direct employer payments of premiums for employees’ individual health policies. The penalty is $100 per-employee per-day, which can amount to $36,500 per employee over the course of a full year. Needless to say, employers aren't going to continue arrangements that would be hit with the penalty, and that is too bad for employees who would have benefited. For details on this penalty, see What changes to Obamacare could mean for small-business taxes.

The bottom line

Realistically, King v. Burwell virtually eliminates any chance of dismantling Obamacare — and all the tax increases buried within. Even if the Republican presidential candidate wins in 2016, legislation to repeal Obamacare would probably not make it through the Senate. On the other hand, folks who are now sure to be eligible for Obamacare premium tax credits have reason to be happy with the Supreme Court’s decision.

More from MarketWatch