<p>FILE - In this April 26, 2007 file photo, Tennessee Attorney General Robert Cooper, left, and Republican Senate Speaker Ron Ramsey attend a legislative meeting in Nashville, Tenn. Cooper announced on Monday, Aug. 11, 2014, that he will seek another eight-year term after Ramsey spearheaded a failed effort to oust Democratic members of the state Supreme Court. Tennessee is the only state in the nation where the Supreme Court appoints the attorney general. (AP Photo/Mark Humphrey, File)</p>

State Supreme Court justices, having unanimously and publicly opined that the judicial system should be above politics, now face the first political decision of their new eight-year terms. That is choosing someone to serve as Tennessee attorney general for the next eight years. For two of the justices — Connie Clark and Gary Wade — this is not a new experience. They voted back in 2006 to give the job to Bob Cooper, and politics was less a consideration then.

Tennessee is the only state in the union that grants, in its state constitution, a Supreme Court the right to pick the attorney general. Other states are much more overtly political, in most cases leaving selection of an AG to a popular vote. A few let the governor appoint; Maine has an AG chosen by the state Legislature.

Clark and Wade initially were appointed by former Democratic Gov. Phil Bredesen, as was new Chief Justice Sharon Lee. The other justices who will vote on a new AG — first-termers Jeff Bivins and Holly Kirby — are appointees of Republican Gov. Bill Haslam. During the retention election campaign, Lee declared that she would work with Bivins and Kirby in selecting a new AG — a public statement widely interpreted as saying she would go along with whoever the Republican appointees wanted.

After the three Democrats won new terms with about 56 percent of the vote, Cooper declared he wants another term now that voters in general have “sent a clear message … that they want an independent, nonpartisan judicial branch.” For that, he says, he’s the man.

Well, maybe. And one might suspect that Cooper — who is politically as well as legally astute — may well have reason to believe three of the five justices are inclined in his favor. Otherwise, he might step aside gracefully. Given Lee’s statements, that would imply a Republican willing to back him.

But there are multiple political considerations in the justices’ decision.

Most importantly, the justices must consider already uneasy relations with the Legislature’s Republican supermajority. Senate Speaker Ron Ramsey led the crusade to oust the three Democratic justices. The Legislature sets a budget for court operations and otherwise has a great deal of authority over what the judicial branch can or cannot do.

Reappointing Cooper could be considered a gesture of defiance or a stand for independence of the judiciary. It’s worth noting that Haslam and other establishment Republicans — House Speaker Beth Harwell, for example — deliberately avoided taking a position in the retention election.

In that campaign, Cooper was deemed a liberal Democrat and thus deserving of ouster by Ramsey and the Tennessee Forum, the lead in-state group pushing for rejection of the three justices. Their central premise was that Cooper had failed to join 28 other state attorneys general — almost all of them Republicans elected by popular vote — in attacking the Affordable Care Act.

Cooper contended that there was no point in becoming the 29th attorney general to file a lawsuit against Obamacare and he saved the state thousands of dollars by not joining the effort.

Then there’s the consideration of those seeking to replace Cooper and their political connections. The long list of Republicans considering applying range from Senate Minority Leader Mark Norris and Sen. Doug Overbey to Bill Young, a Ramsey political friend now serving as director of the Administrative Office of the Courts — a position filled by Supreme Court appointment. Perhaps the most overtly political prospect is Tom Lawless, a former Davidson County Republican chairman who says Cooper’s failure to file an anti-Obamacare lawsuit was “very wrong” and indicative of a need for a “change of perspective” in the attorney general position.

The five men and women who elect an attorney general can choose an identifiable Democrat or an identifiable Republican. Wade says political affiliation makes “absolutely” no difference, emphasizing in a recent interview that he speaks only for himself — and that he thinks Cooper has done a good job.

But, of course, partisan affiliation does make a difference. Virtually all of the names circulated in the upcoming selection are quite qualified to serve. It’s just a matter of how the five-person electorate figures which applicant is in their best political interest.

Tom Humphrey, retired Nashville bureau chief, may be reached at tomhumphrey3@aol.com.