Welcome to the Daily Kos Election ad roundup! Every weekday from now through Election Day, we'll be bringing you summaries of all the day's campaign ads. We'll also be covering notable independent expenditures by third-party groups looking to influence races around the country. Each day, we'll feature a notable ad or expenditure above the fold; below the fold, you'll find writeups for every Senate, gubernatorial, and House ad we can get our hands on. And if you ever spot an ad we might have missed, be sure to let us know.

Leading off:

• GA-Sen, Gov: Here's a major surprise: In addition to backing Republican Gov. Nathan Deal, former Democratic Gov. and Sen. Zell Miller has endorsed Democrat Michelle Nunn, and recorded a commercial for Nunn. In Miller's spot, he extolls Nunn as a bridge builder who can work across party lines.

Miller was once a loyal Democrat, and a prominent supporter of Bill Clinton in 1992. Miller was one of the keynote speakers at that year's Democratic National Convention, where he declared, "We can't all be born rich, handsome and lucky. And that's why we have a Democratic Party." However, over the years Miller has shifted much farther to the right. He last backed a major Democrat in 2002, when he supported his Senate colleague Max Cleland's unsuccessful reelection effort.

Since then, while Miller has still called himself a Democrat, he has exclusively endorsed Republicans. In 2004 as a sitting Democratic senator, Miller gave the keynote address at the Republican National Convention (after-which he memorably challenged MSNBC host Chris Matthews to a duel). Miller has gone on to back Republicans in his home state as well as elsewhere: In 2006, Miller founded "Democrats for Santorum" to help then-Pennsylvania Sen. Rick Santorum's unsuccessful re-election campaign. Needless to say, Miller's days as a genuine Democrat appeared to be long behind him.

It doesn't appear Miller has suddenly lurched to the left again, so it's not shocking he's behind Deal. But his Nunn endorsement is very eyebrow raising. While it's possible Miller is doing it out of respect for her father, former Sen. Sam Nunn, Ed Kilgore at the Washington Monthly has an interesting theory. As governor, Miller was proud of his accomplishments with the HOPE scholarship program, and with his record of appointing women to important posts. Someone like Nunn, who ran a major non-profit, is the type of candidate Miller likely respects and wants to help. It's unclear if Miller will move any votes for Nunn, but he could help give her an opening with the type of white conservatives who have deserted the Democrats in recent cycles but may not be sold on Perdue.