Jarred Dwiggins, Butler County Jobs and Family Services Eligibility/Referral Specialist, files medicaid forms for approval. Butler County has had to spend almost $500,000 a year to hire extra staff to handle Medicaid expansion. GREG LYNCH / STAFF

By Denise G. Callahan

Staff Writer

Medicaid expansion has cost almost $500,000 annually on labor costs in Butler County since it was expanded in 2014, causing some officials to say it is yet another unfunded mandate.

Commissioner T.C. Rogers recalls that when he first came on the commission he attended a retreat where state officials said Medicaid expansion would be budget neutral at the local level.

“I was told maybe one, maybe one-and-a-half,” Rogers said. “Based on my math it’s more like six… I’ve got a problem with when you say you have to take the people in and if you’re saying there is not going to be a cost, and there is, then that’s an unfunded mandate. So just tell it like it is.”

Rogers said he understands the state pays for Medicaid workers now, but he worries if that might change, hence he has dubbed it an unfunded mandate.

“It’s been my experience where it’s a state cost and they cut it and now it’s a county cost,” Rogers said.

Ray Pater, executive director of the county’s Job and Family Services agency figured it has cost $440,000 per year to pay eight new employees’ salaries and benefits. The number of Medicaid recipients jumped more than 20 percent or 14,069 people in 2014 to 81,521 and today stands at 86,909.

Medicaid records show there were 64,445 recipients in the county in March 2013 before the expansion was pushed through by Gov. John Kasich and $41.4 million was spent and $55.6 million was spent in March of this year on 86,263 people.

Over the past two years, more than 600,000 Ohioans have signed up for Medicaid under expanded eligibility requirements that allow most able bodied adults with incomes up to 138 percent of the federal poverty level — or $27,724 for a family of three in 2015 — to obtain coverage.

The county doesn’t pay the Medicaid costs but Pater said “absolutely” it was an unfunded mandate that impacted his whole operation.

“With the expansion and with all the additional changes coming July 1st there’s a lot that goes into the processing of these cases,” he said. “We’re still fighting the whole food stamp timeliness and trying to have the best customer service we can on the phones and in the lobby. If we didn’t have to put the resources to this we could absolutely then put them to the other areas and be more effective and efficient.”

Scott Rasmus, executive director for the Butler County Mental Health and Addiction Recovery Services Board, said there used to be a local match for Medicaid which stood at 60/40 with the federal government picking up the lion’s share prior to the Great Recession. It gradually it moved to 80/20 and now the federal government is footing the whole bill through the end of this year. Beginning next year states will begin chipping in, up to 10 percent by 2020.

Medicaid expansion has had a positive impact on the MHARS board.

“What the local board may have used as subsidy dollars, that’s local taxpayer dollars and some state dollars, now Medicaid covers,” Rasmus said adding things like assessments, case management, counseling, psychiatric evaluations and treatment and intensive outpatient for substance abuse. “It has freed up some funds.”

As a result of President Barack Obama’s Affordable Care Act (ACA) every state was initially mandated to expand Medicaid. A U.S. Supreme Court ruling in 2012 made it optional. There are 26 states that have adopted the expansion and while Kasich did not support ACA he pushed hard for expansion here.

“Some of the poorest Ohioans, they get their primary care in an emergency room,” Kasich said at the time. “When they go visit these emergency rooms and cannot pay, we all pay for it.”

Kasich did kind of an end around the legislature — where expansion was not popular with peers on Republican side — and lobbied the state’s Controlling Board to get it approved.

Kimball Strickland, CEO of Butler Behavioral Health, said in addition to freeing up local dollars for things that aren’t covered by Medicaid, like residential services, vocational services and social services, it opened up services to many people who previously had no access.

“You can’t deny that it really brought a lot of people to services that weren’t there before,” he said. “Particularly I have found it to be true in the alcohol and drug area.”

Chuck Demidovich, who runs the county Care Facility, said the biggest change he has seen is a larger number of younger, chronically ill people. While he understands concerns for budgets he said there are needs being met now that have been sorely lacking.

“Expansion for, what it’s done for us, and people won’t want to hear this, but the expansion of Medicaid has allowed people with drug addiction issues and health care issues to be given care,” he said. “Addiction is a disease and those are the clients we are seeing. In the past they would have been indigent people in the emergency rooms.”

Hospitals favored expansion, for the very reason Demidovich mentioned, but Elizabeth Long, spokesperson Fort Hamilton Hospital, said Medicaid expansion hasn’t been a complete panacea.

“Although Medicaid expansion has helped us and reduced our uncompensated care,” she said. “Medicaid reimbursements are below our costs to provide services.”

Medicaid expansion isn’t the only thing having an impact on county JFS agencies either, there are more changes, possibly a requirement that some Medicaid recipients pay a portion of their health care. Joel Potts, executive director of the Ohio Job and Family Services Directors’ Association, said they are also immersed in building a new computer system, the marriage of food stamps and Ohio Means Jobs and more are looming.

“Even if we didn’t do Medicaid expansion, our counties would be drowning,” he said. “Counties have been doing overtime for the past two years, struggling with training, getting everything in, hiring staff, doing what they need to do to get this new system going, then you add Medicaid expansion, which is the largest. growth of a health and human service program in the state of Ohio.”

John McCarthy, director of the Ohio Department of Medicaid said there actually might be some relief coming if they get federal approval to require recipients to help pay for their own health care, because the health savings account contribution might exceed the services they have been receiving.

“There’s about 260,000 people in that situation, so we assume that fifty percent of those people, while they’re still eligible for Medicaid will choose not to enroll because they are making that economic decision,” he said. “So Medicaid enrollment will go down to about 130,000 people a year.”