More employers are joining the growing choir of interest in pushing full-time staffers to private healthcare exchanges, eager to find an option that drops costs and gets employees more engaged in their own care.

A PricewaterhouseCoopers report published last week found that 32 percent of employers are considering moving their employees away from more traditional models and into a private exchange. The interest is such that they could one day outpace the public exchanges created through the Affordable Care Act.

“We’re talking about a third of employers looking into private exchanges going forward. I think that says a lot,” said Ben Isgur, director of the Health Research Institute of PwC. “Twenty-four months ago, I don’t think there was hardly anyone talking about private exchanges.”

According to the consulting firm Accenture, more than 40 million residents will enroll in a plan through a private exchange by 2018, surpassing projected enrollment in state and federal exchanges. As of June, the firm found 3 million employees received insurance through a private exchange, a trend of “hyper growth” that outpaced the company’s own expectations. In comparison, about 8 million have received insurance through public exchanges.

Private marketplaces will likely develop in the long-term rather than the short-term growth seen in their public counterparts: “While the ACA’s public marketplaces are expected to see rapid early growth, the shift to retail-style private exchanges may be more of a steady trickle,” the report reads.

Moving employees to marketplaces allows for more stable premiums across the board. Typically, the employer will offer a set amount to employees for coverage they can purchase on the private exchanges. From there, employees will often have more choices to tailor the plans: Do you want a high deductible with lower premiums? A narrow network? A plan that establishes a health savings account?

The nature of the private exchanges, Isgur says, prompts more customer engagement. They’re true marketplaces, offering comparison shopping for products that meet different needs or wants. In order to get the most out of them—and save the most money—employees will need to be more involved in their own care.

“I don’t think the learning curve will be as pronounced as, say, someone who signed up on a public exchange,” says Steve Love, president of the Dallas-Fort Worth Hospital Council. “Many of those people have never had any type of insurance before whereas these people have had insurance, they’re just migrating.”

The trend is gaining support among some large companies: Walgreen Inc. has guided its 160,000 employees to private exchanges while Safeway Inc. did the same with its 135,000.

The PwC report quotes Tom Sondergold, the senior director of Walgreen’s Health and Well-Being, who says that the private exchanges mean he no longer has to manage administrative tasks such as plan design. He can focus more on providing health incentives for employees. It also stabilizes premiums for its employees nationwide.

“We’re still the plan sponsor, but administration is off my back,” he’s quoted as saying. “Plan design is off my back. I can focus now on well-being and strategy.”

The benefit for smaller and mid-sized companies, PwC found, is that it offers more choices than it would be able to otherwise. It also puts the onus of consumer support and online benefit sites squarely on that of the insurer. Companies with 50 or fewer employees can have them use the public exchanges. Nevertheless, education, Isgur says, will be more important going forward.

“Employers are really going to have to double down on education,” he says. “The employee now has to think about the deductible, their co-pay. They have to think more about who’s in network and who’s out of network, they think about the tradeoff between paying more for a premium and having a wider network or less from a premium and a more narrow network. All of them require a huge amount of employee education.”

The hope is that a more informed population would emerge as a result of this trend. Employees will have to weigh whether a $5,000 deductible is affordable should an emergency happen. Or, if suffering from back pain, would a chiropractor would be a better option than an X-Ray? And if an X-Ray is necessary, how much does each provider charge?

“The more you can inform people to where they make informed decisions about their healthcare and it’s more transparent to them and they feel that they’re empowered in that decision making, well, that’s clearly a good thing,” Love says.

However, the report notes a “paradigm shift in how Americans purchase health coverage is underway.” The interest is indicative of what’s to come—it’s not here yet. Some employers are jumping in while others are waiting to see if it works, Isgur says.

“We’re in a stage of interest and evaluation,” he said. “We have a few first movers who have already moved into the private exchange model … but we’re seeing a lot of wait-and-see. First and foremost, people are trying to evaluate whether it’s going to lower costs.”