With the Wayne Hammerstadt Jazz Fusion band setting the mood, festivalgoers relaxed and enjoyed this past year's harvest at the Winery's Harvest Festival. ( Kimberly Weber / Daily Record )

The Winery at the Holy Cross Abbey hosted its annual Harvest Festival on Saturday, and as usual, it was a knockout success.

The sights, smells and sounds filled the air with a sort of abeyance that you couldn't help but be in a relaxed mood. Fresh chiles were fire-roasted next to Colon Orchard's stand. Their stand was gloriously filled with those perfectly picked crisp apples in stunning hues of red, green and yellow.

Although they lost 75 percent of their trees last November, they are still offering an abundance of fall's favorite. Some of this year's apples are coming in from the western slope.

Lawn chairs, hay bales and picnic blankets filled the tree surrounded grassy field in front of the Winery. With the Wayne Hammerstadt Jazz Fusion band setting the mood, festivalgoers relaxed and enjoyed this past year's harvest. Styria Bakery, of Denver, offered a variety of freshly baked Gourmet European style breads. They offered varieties, such as Ciabatta, Jewish Rye, Kalamata Olive Bread and Giant Pecan Rolls.

Pastamore by Donna, of Colorado Springs, offered up a variety of small batch made pastas. Produced in Denver, made from whole grains, and all flavored with fresh vegetables and herbs, they offer a variety of pastas in several different shapes, as well as gluten free varieties. Olive oil blends and 18-year balsamic vinegars imported from Italy make it a one-stop shop for a wonderful dinner to be paired with the Abbey wines.

Advertisement

A favorite for many was the freshly churned homemade vanilla ice cream. This was no ordinary ice cream, as it was being churned right in front of our eyes by the two horses known as Reba and Clark. These two walked on a sort of horse treadmill that was hooked up to an old-fashion churn. People watched in awe as these two walked their way on their treadmill to churn out fresh, creamy, custard like vanilla ice cream.

The wines this year were as popular as ever. They offered samples of their ever-popular American Riesling, (a sweet white wine made of grapes from Washington), Sangre de Cristo Nouveau, (a sweet, fruity, and chilled red table wine), and Syrah,( a bold and spicy red wine), just to name a few. Their quality of wines continue to prove what dedication they have to producing top wines and winning more than 100 awards and medals in prestigious international wine completions.

The wines this year were delicious. From the crisp, fresh, green apple flavor that you get when you sip on their Apple Blossom Apple Wine to the deep robust peppery notes that you get when you drink their 2013 Syrah. Food, music, and top quality wines were definitely the theme this year at the Harvest Festival.

After another successful harvest, many will have the opportunity to drink, pair and cook with the Abbey wines.