Rent is so extortionately high in San Francisco that young professionals have been forced to think outside, or rather inside, the box when it comes to their living arrangements.

Residents looking to avoid crippling costs of city living, have flocked to Oakland where a bizarre shipping container village is growing.

For just $600 a month, residents of Containertopia get a 160-square-foot metal box, which can be modified to include glass window, electricity and its own bathroom.

Scroll down for videos

Rent is so extortionately high in San Francisco that young professionals have been forced to think outside, or rather inside, the box when it comes to their living arrangements

Heather Stewart, one of the founders of Containertopia, is pictured inside her surprisingly spacious shipping container home

Resident Adam Katz, relaxes on lawn furniture outside his home in Containertopia, a village of 160-square-foot shipping containers

It might not be luxurious but it's a bargain compared to the average rents in the city which have soared by 20 per cent in the last year to surpass even those in Manhattan.

For Luke Iseman and Heather Stewart, the cost of renting just didn't add up.

Fed up with spending most of their income on rent, they bought a $2,300 shipping container from the nearby Port of Oakland, rented a half-acre of land and moved in, reported the New York Times.

It still wasn't cheap. They needed to spend around $12,000 turning the empty metal box into a home.

While it is still basic - the toilet consists of a composting bucket - the homes offer a surprising amount for such a tiny space.

Iseman's box boasts a custom-built shower, queen-size bed and glass windows while the solar panels allow him to power an adapted freezer. A giant roof top dish also gives him internet.

For just $600 a month, residents of Containertopia get a 160-square-foot metal box, which can be modified to include glass window, electricity and its own bathroom

It might not be luxurious but it's a bargain compared to the average rents in the city which have soared by 20 per cent in the last year to surpass even those in Manhattan

Containertopia is a village of 160-square-foot shipping containers, based in Oakland, California

Compact: The homes are tiny but are carefully configured to take advantage of every square inch of space

Co-foudner Iseman said that the shipping containers were actually more suited for homes than anyone expected - as they were built to withstand long trips at sea in all weather

'It's pretty much my dream, post-apocalyptic, cyber punk set up,' said Iseman, 32, who graduated from the University of Pennsylvania's Wharton School and works in technology.

He added that the shipping containers were actually more suited for homes than expected - as they were built to withstand long trips at sea in all weather.

'You have a watertight box that is way more structurally sound that you can possibly need. They have been stacked in hurricanes, in terms of a house they are way overkill.'

The former couple began buying more shipping containers to offer up as cheap rentals.

Together with a group of friends, they bought an abandoned lot for $425,000 as a haven for young professionals looking for an affordable way to live in one of the most expensive cities in the U.S.

Unfortunately, Containertopia was not zoned for residential occupiers so when a neighbor complained last Spring, Iseman and Stewart were forced to move the containers into a warehouse.

The lot is currently being used to grow vegetables for the 'village'.

But Iseman still stands by Containertopia, and hopes to inspire others to follow his innovative solution to the housing crisis.

For Luke Iseman and Heather Stewart, the cost of renting just didn't add up. Fed up with spending most of their income on rent, they bought a $2,300 shipping container from the nearby Port of Oakland, rented a half-acre of land and moved in

Together with a group of friends, the pair bought an abandoned lot for $425,000 as a haven for young professionals looking for an affordable way to live in one of the most expensive cities in the U.S.

A Containertopia resident sets up his computer, desk and bed in the warehouse while his home takes shape

Iseman still stands by Containertopia, and hopes to inspire others to follow his innovative solution to the housing crisis

'If we can do it in one of the highest-cost places in the world,' he told the New York Times, 'people can do this anywhere.'

While for Stewart, the experience has been a life-changing event. She has since given up her job in digital design to manage the village full-time and has sold off most of her belongings to fit in her tiny home.

San Francisco's soaring rents have seen the cost of a one-bedroom apartment rocket to $3,500, according to Zumper – ahead of New York, where it costs $3,150 and twice the price as for the same type of property in Los Angeles.

The sky-high rents have forced many cash-strapped residents to get creative.

From living on board sailboats and inside buses – to even piling into bunk beds – the extreme measures which young professionals have gone to in a bid to survive shows just how crippling the cost of living is in the Californian city.

While one artist is creating miniature portable homes for those squeezed out the market altogether.

Gregory Kloehn has created colorful coffin-like sleeping boxes on wheels for Oakland's 3,000 homeless population. Each of the tiny homes is only eight feet long and just tall enough to sit up in.

Made entirely from recycled materials and painted in eye-catching colorful designs, the artists has already created around 40 for those sleeping on the streets,

The median rent for a one-bedroom apartment in San Francisco is $3,500, twice as much as Los Angeles

Rent is so ridiculously expensive in San Francisco that residents have been forced to become creative with their living arrangements. Sarah Carter bought a boat (pictured) on Craigslist for less than $10,000

Landscape architect Andreas Stavropoulos (pictured) has lived economically in his Airstream trailer for years

Sarah Carter (pictured), 23, moved to the city for a new job – but instead of moving into a costly apartment, she decided to live on a boat after purchasing one for less than $10,000

Kloehn, 44,who created his own dumpster turned studio apartment in Red Hook, Brooklyn, told the New York Times: 'I'm just kind of ripping a page from the homeless people's books. They've been making homes out of this stuff for a long time.'

The authorities have so far turned a blind eye to the portable homes - unlike in Los Angles where the city determined that another artist, Elvis Summers', portable homes for the homeless were illegal.

For young professionals in San Francisco, the movement towards tiny or unusual homes gives them freedom from renting in a city where some people pay as much as $550 to sleep six to a room in bunk beds.

A posting on Craigslist – which has since been removed – advertised the room, above a Thai massage parlor, which also featured a table that seats two and a small oven and stove.

Last year, CBS went undercover in the city's Mission District after the station was denied access to a house with 30 people living in it.

The new station asked a woman to tour the Victorian property advertised on Airbnb.

'If I live there for five months, I'll hit break-even on the rent of the apartments I was looking at,' Carter said. Pictured, the interior of her sailboat

Stavropoulos (pictured inside his trailer) is offering the 15ft-long trailer he restored to a tenant for $525 a month, but they will need a place to park

'Given that housing is a huge issue right now, if somebody has the right situation, this could make a pretty good deal for them,' Stavropoulos said

A posting on Craigslist earlier this month – which has since been removed – advertised a room (pictured above) for $550 a month

After answering a questionnaire and completing a Skype interview, the woman was accepted to pay $1,800 a month to become part of the hostel community called the Vinyasa Homes Project.

That fact may deter many from moving to the city famed for its iconic Golden Gate Bridge, but resourceful residents have come up with cheaper – albeit inconvenient – alternatives.

Sarah Carter, 23, moved to the city for a new job – but instead of moving into a costly apartment, she decided to live on a boat.

She bought her own boat on Craigslist for $9,600 earlier this month.

'If I live there for five months, I'll hit break-even on the rent of the apartments I was looking at,' she told Business Insider. 'It really is a steal.'

Meanwhile, landscape architect Andreas Stavropoulos, 35, avoided paying extortionate rents for years and paid off his student loans by living economically in his Airstream.

Now, he is offering the 15ft-long trailer to a tenant for $525 a month – a bargain considering the trailer was beautifully restored by Stavropoulos and comes complete with a bed and a desk.

However, the catch is that prospective tenants would need their own place to park the trailer – ideally, close to a restroom.