The perhaps not-so-subtle subtext of my Sunday column, which considers the ways in which the Republican Party’s populist flank has jump-started important policy discussions while also pointlessly strewing the budget process with unexploded bombs, is that out of the core group of Tea Party-affiliated senators Ted Cruz has thus far stood out for the, shall we say, purity of his theatrics. (Some of which are ongoing on the Senate floor at the moment.) The others in that group — Rand Paul, Mike Lee, Marco Rubio — have tried to initiate real policy debates and shift the party’s stance on major issues: Rubio with immigration, Paul (and Lee) with foreign policy and civil liberties, Paul with drug policy and criminal justice, and now Lee with family policy and tax reform. But not Cruz: He’s defining himself as a national figure not by taking positions on questions that divide his party, but by picking issues where the party is basically united — Obamacare, gun control, taxes — and playing the maximalist while promising the moon. (Tellingly, on the specific fronts where the others have staked out some legitimately bold stances, the Texas senator has mostly tap-danced — he’s “somewhere between Rand Paul and John McCain” on foreign policy, somewhere in the middle of his party on immigration, and so on.) Paul, Rubio and now Lee are all trying to move the party, and conservatism, in a particular direction; Cruz is telling conservatives to fight harder, but otherwise to stay exactly where they are.

What makes this contrast interesting politically as well as substantively is that Cruz, Paul, and Rubio — while frequent allies in the Senate — are all in real competition with one another, both for the G.O.P. nomination in 2016, and also, as David Frum notes, for the more nebulous but perhaps more enduring role as the “political leader of American conservatism,” a title held by Robert Taft, Barry Goldwater, Reagan, and Jack Kemp, which has been effectively vacant since Newt Gingrich’s late-1990s fall. So we’ll get to see their contrasting approaches put to a very direct sort of test.

Right now, there’s clear polling evidence that Rubio’s policy foray on immigration has hurt him with G.O.P. voters, and decent evidence from polls and anecdotes that Cruz’s spotlight-grab has helped him lay the groundwork for a ’16 run. If you turn on talk radio, there’s no question which of the two men is closer to being Mr. Conservative right now, at least for that segment of the right-of-center audience. Paul, meanwhile, is having a better year politically than Rubio, and enjoying much of the same movement enthusiasm that surrounds Cruz. But what Frum calls the “many ways in which … libertarian politics slant against the grain of conservatives in the country” are still a challenge for Paul, and they could put a ceiling on his 2016 support and limit his long term role as a movement leader, leaving Cruz positioned to eclipse him in electoral support and movement influence alike.

So that’s the case for betting on Cruz’s continued ascent. The case against is, in part, a case from history: The Leaders of Conservatism that Frum cites all built their reputations over long, achievement-rich careers (Taft was a real legislator, Kemp was about Big Ideas and Outreach more than ideological correctness, Reagan was a successful governor, Gingrich was Speaker of the House), and even then most of them didn’t win the Republican nomination for the presidency, let alone the White House itself. Cruz’s “I’m not here to make friends” strategy, on the other hand, feels built for the short term: It could position him as the True Conservative alternative to Chris Christie in 2016, if he can elbow Paul and Rubio and others (Scott Walker, etc.) out of the way, and then he could beat Christie, if the stars align and the base votes for purity in a way that it hasn’t recently, and then he could beat Hillary Clinton, if … well, give me a few weeks and I’ll come up with a scenario. But if he doesn’t run the table, what then? His current influence with the grassroots is built on a promise to fight, and fight, and fight some more — but if he doesn’t deliver victory, or if he ducks out of running in 2016 at all, how long can he actually retain the spotlight?

To my mind, a figure like Paul, who actually has a policy vision to go with his theatrics, and who inspires loyalty based on distinctive ideas as well as affect, seems much better positioned to survive a 2016 defeat with his prominence and influence intact, ready to lead the opposition to Hillary Clinton on both domestic and foreign policy or else to be a occasional-partner, occasional-problem for a President Christie. Whereas for Cruz to run and lose, either in the primaries or the general, feels like it would fatally puncture his current mystique.

Of course he’ll still be a United States senator in that situation (albeit one roundly disliked by most of his co-partisans), and there will be plenty of second acts available to him. Gingrich was a bomb-throwing backbencher originally, too: Maybe there’s a decade-long, Newt-esque path Cruz can walk to become Senate Majority Leader, leading a caucus formed in his image. But right now, it’s easier to see him slipping into a trajectory more like that of Jesse Helms — an influential veto point but not a dominant figure within the party — or else following Sarah Palin into the world of post-political right-wing celebrity than it is to imagine the next twenty years being the Cruz Era in conservatism.