Topics: addiction, After Party Chat, Blythe Danner, Drugs, Phil Mickelson, Business News, Entertainment News

This article originally appeared on After Party Chat

Somewhere in between commercials for mascara and cereal, I saw an ad that was so bizarre I thought it might not have been real. I actually had to rewind to make sure I wasn’t crazy. A voiceover on a white screen with red writing asked viewers the following: “Do you laugh or cry uncontrollably, even at inappropriate times?” It’s safe to say that the former applies to every college guy in a fraternity ever and the latter applies to every woman who has ever had her period. I’ll even go as far to say that this could be applicable to every human being on the face of the earth at one point or another. Isn’t another name for this “experiencing your feelings”? No. Apparently, this is an actual disorder that can be treated with prescription drugs.

It feels like I can’t watch a television show, go online or read a magazine without seeing an advertisement for prescription drugs (America and New Zealand are the only two countries in the world where direct-to-consumer advertising of prescription drugs is legal). I thought I had experienced every form of this marketing until I started seeing ads for Vyvanse (a form of prescription speed) and the ADHD drugs Strattera and Nuvigil on Facebook. As someone who was addicted to Adderall for the better part of my life, I suddenly realized that ads like these could potentially be triggering for people like me. Not that Big Pharma cares.

During my addiction, getting whatever prescription I wanted wasn’t much more difficult than buying potato chips. I knew the right things to say to get any doctor to write a prescription for everything from Adderall to Ativan. Even when I didn’t ask for pills, I was offered them—like free logo pens in the waiting room. In fairness to them, I didn’t look like a stereotypical addict. Walking into a doctor’s office on the Upper East Side of Manhattan with my hair, nails and makeup done, carrying a PPO insurance card, no one would have suspected that I was an addict who had made my doctor into my dealer.

Not all drugs are bad or addictive of course but all drugs are powerful. Unfortunately, easy access and a lot of marketing can make us forget this. In fact, in 2012 Big Pharma spent 19 times as much on marketing as they did on research. This can blur the line between doctor and patient; after a while, all of the ads and Google searches made me start to think I knew enough to do my own prescribing. I even tried to download the Physician’s Desk Reference app, a book that contains information about any and all prescriptions, but I couldn’t without a DEA number (I ended up downloading the WebMD App instead).

Still, between the ads and amount of information available online, it’s not too difficult for anyone to feel like they don’t need a doctor to diagnose them with something they can determine they have on their own. There are obvious benefits to the availability of medical information for most people. But for active addicts, having access to this isn’t all that different from putting a prescription pad in their hands. If someone wants a prescription for a narcotic to get high, all they need to do is provide their doctor with the right symptoms to receive it. I’m not saying that I think we shouldn’t have access to information; it just means that we need to recognize the power of it.