Andrea Mitchell interviews Republican Congressman Sean Duffy of Wisconsin about the disgraceful fact that the Republican shutdown has now cut off survivor benefits to the families of 17 US service members killed in action since the shutdown began.

You have to give credit to Duffy for one thing: He makes clear during the seven-minute interview that the entire shutdown is about Obamacare, Obamacare, Obamacare.

It’s an interesting admission, as the Republicans, over the past day, have steadily moved away from the health care reform talking point as the public is decidedly not on their side about shutting down the government to protest the Affordable Care Act.

Suddenly, the Republicans are talking more broadly about “cutting the deficit,” rather than admitting up front that they’re taking benefits away from the families of dead US service members out of spite against a law they don’t like.

Political Carnival has some of the transcript. Mitchell is on fire:

But the larger point, Congressman Duffy, is these mini CR s– mini continuing resolutions — that’s the whole question of taking little pieces of the government. The issue is not that this is a small matter, it’s a very big matter, but so is the matter of the kids in Head Start. So is the problem of the single moms who aren’t getting food stamps and aren’t getting their help. So down the road are the survivors benefits and that fund is going to run out in weeks if not months. So you can’t take this piecemeal, Congressman. Isn’t the issue that someone has to sit down and figure out what to do about the stalemate that has led to this disgrace?….

After Duffy filibusters about Obamacare for a few minutes, Mitchell jumps in:

With all due respect, this is about military death benefits to kids, 19-year-old kids who died in Afghanistan and who are not returning home, this is about what their families are entitled to by law and what they are not getting. This is not about what you want in Obamacare and not about what the president wants on the debt ceiling.

Snap!

Mitchell should have asked Duffy when was the last time he went to the “essential” House gym.

The fun begins at 6:45 into the video: