The Republican primary field is getting crowded. Now it's time for Republicans to tell us some detailed plans for spreading the economic wealth of this country more broadly.

The 2016 Republican National Convention in Cleveland offers a great opportunity for the GOP to spell that out. They can start Aug. 6, at the first Republican debate right here in our city.

Cleveland is not Washington, D.C., not East Coast nasty. We don't get all weepy when it's cloudy, like they do out in California; we embrace our monochrome skyline.

We want reality.

President Barack Obama has been a disappointing leader. But Obama is hammering home the shrinking middle class, framing a major issue for 2016.

Obama is a lame duck and the ball is in the Republicans' court. Republicans swept the midterm elections, gaining control of the Senate and adding to their majority in the House of Representatives. How? By linking their Democratic opponents to Obama in raw political warfare, saying nothing about what they offer. No ideas.

Republicans have to show Americans their plan to improve living standards and renew the middle class without big deficit spending. Obama jumped on this, proposing to raise taxes on capital gains and dividends for couples making more than $500,000 a year and raise inheritance taxes for the wealthy.

Regardless of what you think of him, at least Obama is giving some specifics.

Republicans do deserve credit for picking Cleveland for their 2016 convention. Of course, Ohio is a major swing state. But Cleveland and Cuyahoga County are overwhelmingly Democratic.

That doesn't mean "liberal." Clevelanders have a blue-collar attitude. There aren't many yuppies. Even the white-collar guys go for a shot and beer, although it's more likely a Glenfiddich and a microbrew.

That's my point: If the Republicans can craft a common-sense message aimed at the average Clevelander, they could easily win the presidency. That's a big "if."

Here's what we want, From Off the Streets of Cleveland (apologies to the late Harvey Pekar): Tell us how you can improve the people's lives. We're sick of class warfare. America should be a place where if you work hard and get a good education, you can have a solid middle-class life. Use clear language.

Explain how weak wage growth for manufacturing and even the service sector is caused mainly by globalization and technology. Automation means companies need fewer workers, but the ones they do hire must have higher skills than our education system is putting out. Tell us how we can improve vocational education.

Spell out a long-term strategy for the Middle East. And explain how we can scale back our own country's perplexing tensions between blacks and the police, between haves and have-nots.

Republicans, here's what we don't want: No Tea Party wackos. Talk about something besides abortion. No gun-toting protests on Public Square. And stop polarizing the debate. We haven't forgotten the ideologues who bragged that they would oppose everything Obama, from Day One of his presidency. Shameful. Idiotic.

Now you're slamming Hillary Clinton around. Tell us what you will do.

Issues facing America are complicated, so don't pander — we'll get plenty of that from Hillary and the Democrats. Let Democratic contenders "roll up their sleeves" down at the steel mill and just look foolish, like Joe Biden. Let them drop their G's, saying, "workin' for you."

I travel a lot for my job, and I believe that my hometown is the most "real" big city in America. Clevelanders are plainspoken. We can be cynical and self-deprecating, but it's not an act. Cleveland is hardworking and hard-rocking. We cranked out the Rush song "Working Man," driving our rusting beater cars in the 1970s, as snow blasted in off Lake Erie. Geddy Lee's voice shredded our Spark-O-Matic speakers.

It fit perfectly. Still does.

I guarantee that, even today in Cleveland, the lawyers, the PR flacks, the urban gentrifiers — they still blister their eardrums to "Working Man" in the car driving down the East Shoreway. Dodging the potholes.

I know that a political convention is scripted for a national TV audience. But Republicans, you should play to Cleveland. We need some adult conversation about the middle class. Nothing phony.

Time to get real.

Bill Bregar is a writer in Mentor. A version of this op-ed previously appeared in Plastic News.