SOCHI — Aw, it’s so difficult to work up a good hate for Canada, where the beer always is cold and the smiles are forever warm. But, with revenge on their minds, Paul Stastny and his teammates on the United States hockey team are itching for a fight with our friendly neighbors to the north.

“I think it will be the true meaning of intense. You know the guys on Canada, but we don’t like them. And they don’t like us,” Stastny told me Wednesday, after Team USA crushed the Czech Republic 5-2 in the quarterfinals of the Olympic tournament. “When you’re playing for your country, there’s always been a rivalry between the United States and Canada. You don’t look at the names on the back of the uniform. You only look at the logo on the front.”

So guess who’s next up for the United States in the medal round of the tournament. An old foe in Canada, and there’s an old score to settle. Four years ago, on Canadian ice, the U.S. men rallied late in the third period to force overtime, only to get beat on a flick of the wrist by Sidney Crosby.

Canada advanced to a semifinal showdown scheduled Friday against the United States with an unimpressive 2-1 victory against Latvia, needing a goal by Shea Weber more than 13 minutes into the third period to survive the upset bid. In a short tournament, highly dependent on the right combination of no ego, instant chemistry and hot goaltending, the United States has clearly been the most impressive team.

“When you play on the big Olympic sheet, there’s a tendency to try to play a really skilled game, but when we’re at our best, I think we just try to keep puck possession in the offensive zone,” Stastny said.

While the star power of Canada is electric, the other three teams remaining in this tournament — Sweden, Finland and the USA — are playing very solid, similar systems based on defense first and suppression of any urge to get in a figure-skating contest with superstars such as Alex Ovechkin, whose Russian team was bounced by the Finns.

While there seems to be serious ambivalence among NHL leadership about whether it’s worth shutting down the season to let the league’s stars play in the Winter Olympics, here’s what commissioner Gary Bettman needs to understand: These Games really matter to the pros now.

Way back in 1998, when the NHL shipped its highly paid athletes halfway around the world to Japan for the Olympics, the Europeans were genuinely pumped about playing for love of country, but at times it seemed the guys from the United States and Canada viewed the competition on ice as little more than an elaborate excuse to play cards between games.

“I think the guys on the European teams all grew up playing together since they were kids, so they’ve got that gel and that natural spirit. I think the more success U.S. hockey has had through the years, the bigger bond it is for these guys on this team. The more history you have, the more of a bond you have as a team. We’re going for something special, and you realize if we do succeed, we’ll have something special to remember for the rest of our lives,” said Stastny, the former University of Denver star and current Avalanche center whose pride in representing the red, white and blue has developed into something real and strong.

“It’s playing for the jersey. … You never know if this chance to win the gold is going happen again. You never know if you’re going to be an Olympian again.”

In 1980, the USA needed a miracle against the former Soviet Union to win a gold medal on U.S. soil.

Here’s what is cool: Stastny and his millionaire teammates want to win gold in Russia every bit as much as Mike Eruzione and his gritty U.S. band of crazy amateur dreamers did a generation ago.