WASHINGTON – Two powerful Texas Republicans are hitting back at FreedomWorks, which has accused them of working with Democrats to protect funding for Obamacare.

Rep. Pete Sessions of Dallas called that a “blatant misrepresentation.” An aide to Sen. John Cornyn said the attacks are only encouraging his supporters.

The influential tea party group targeted the House Rules Committee Chairman and deputy Senate GOP leader this week along with a handful of other top Republicans. It accuses both of undermining Texas Sen. Ted Cruz in his crusade to defund the health care law.

“Ironically, Sessions’ desperation to retain power may cause him to lose it,” FreedomWorks asserted, noting that tea party activist Katrina Pierson of Garland recently announced she’ll challenge him in the GOP primary next spring.

The group’s complaint against Cornyn –aired in today’s DMN story exploring tea party views of the senior senator – is that, like Senate Minority Leader Mitch McConnell, R-Ky., he has rejected Cruz’s effort to tie Obamacare funding to the expiring federal budget. Cornyn has argued for months that threatening a government shutdown is bad tactics, while insisting he wants very badly to end Obamacare.

“I’m for delay, defund, repeal, demolish, destroy, whatever the ‘d’ is, when it comes to Obamacare I’m for it,” Cornyn said earlier this week.

Sessions took strong issue with the allegations, too.

“FreedomWorks’ claims are a blatant misrepresentation of the facts,” he said. “I have stood firmly on the side of the people of the 32nd Congressional District who want to see Obamacare thrown in the dustbin. House Republicans have consistently stood united in our efforts to defund, dismantle, repeal, and delay Obamacare.”

Only last week, Sessions voted to defund Obamacare, the 42d time House Republicans have cast such votes.

Matt Kibbe, president of FreedomWorks — founded by Dick Armey, the former U.S. House Majority Leader from suburban Dallas — stood by the critique.

“There’s been a lot of symbolic votes to repeal Obamacare. The only votes that actually matter are the ones where the Democrats have to act,” he said. “Targeting the CR [the stopgap budget] or targeting the debt ceiling may not be the most elegant strategy. It just happens to be the only strategy that brings Harry Reid and Barack Obama to the table. So all of these symbolic votes, particularly in the House, don’t amount to much, unless they’re willing to stand firm when it comes to these types of negotiations.”

A Cornyn aide pointed out that FreedomWorks gives Cornyn a 92 percent rating on its most recent scorecard. In fact, only four senators (including Cruz) have higher ratings in 2013.

The aide also said Cornyn has received more from small donors ($250 or less) this week than in any other week but one of the campaign, after an email appeal based on pressuring five “red state” Democrats to help defund Obamacare.

“FreedomWorks isn’t working,” the aide said. “They may think they are discouraging our donors and votes, but they are actually encouraging them.”