Democratic residential candidate Bernie Sanders. (Katherine Frey/The Washington Post)

Presidential hopeful Bernie Sanders, who has built his campaign largely on economic issues, picked up an endorsement Saturday from a national environmental group during a swing through New Hampshire.

The political arm of Friends of the Earth, which bills itself as the world's largest grass-roots environmental network, threw its support behind the senator from Vermont at an event in Concord and then joined him at a town-hall meeting in Manchester.

This was the first formal endorsement by a national group of Sanders's bid for the Democratic nomination, and the organization's rationale mirrors that of other progressives drawn to his candidacy.

[Sen. Sanders tries 3,500 parties to drum up support for 2016 bid]

Sanders is more solid than Democratic front-runner Hillary Rodham Clinton on issues the group cares about, said Erich Pica, president of Friends of the Earth. And, he added in a phone interview, while former Maryland governor Martin O'Malley -- who recently put forth a comprehensive white paper on climate change -- is an "intriguing" candidate, Friends of the Earth has a long-standing relationship with Sanders.

Pica pointed to the proposed Keystone XL oil pipeline as an issue emblematic of the differences his group sees between Sanders and Clinton. Sanders has been steadfast in his opposition to the project, which environmentalists see as unnecessary and dangerous. Clinton, meanwhile, hedged this week, saying she wouldn't offer an up-or-down position until she's president.

[Clinton ducks Keystone question, says she will give an answer when she’s president]

"She equivocates," Pica said of the former secretary of state, who released a renewable energy plan earlier this week. "We can't have equivocation anymore."

Clinton aides said this week that she was staying silent because she had a hand in the initial discussions about the Canada-to-U.S. pipeline project as secretary of state.

Pica also cited Sanders's support for a carbon tax and alliances with his group on other key issues on Capitol Hill.

Sanders's events with Friends of the Earth are part of a planned two-day swing through New Hampshire, the first presidential primary state. While his stump speech focuses heavily on economic disparities, he also regularly urges action on climate change, calling it a moral issue.