Tim Barth: 'Saddened to leave such a great community'

Vance Brand Municipal Airport manager Tim Barth, left, talks to pilot Dan Murray on June 14, 2013, as aviators prepared for the Colorado Aviation Historical Society's Antique and Classic Fly-In held later that month at the Longmont airport. ( Matthew Jonas / Times-Call )

Vance Brand Municipal Airport manager Tim Barth is heading north.

On Friday, the Cheyenne Regional Airport Board appointed Barth, the manager of Longmont's municipal airport for the past 18 ½ years, to be the Wyoming airport's director of aviation.

"It's with mixed emotions that I'm leaving Longmont," Barth said in a Saturday interview.

"Part of me is really excited about the future, and part of me is saddened to leave such a great community," Barth said.

Barth's last day in his Longmont post will be Jan. 8, and he's to start the Cheyenne job on Feb. 1.

Longmont city manager Harold Dominguez said of Barth's professional decision: "I think this is a great move for him" in that Barth will be going to an airport "with a larger scale of operations."

The Cheyenne Regional Airport has commercial aviation service and shares facilities with the Wyoming Air National Guard and the Wyoming Army National Guard.

As for Longmont's general-aviation airport, "I definitely think I'm leaving it a better place," Barth said. "We've been able to improve the infrastructure and safety items there and we brought in a lot of businesses."

Dominguez said Barth and the city staff have worked to make Vance Brand Municipal Airport into "an economic development asset" to Longmont. The city manager said that has included the facility's recent designation as an "airport development zone," which carries the possibility of tax breaks for businesses locating or expanding there.

Dominguez said Longmont will be advertising its search to fill the city's soon-to-be-vacant airport manager's post. In the meantime, assistant city manager Shawn Lewis will be adding the airport manager's responsibilities to his other duties.

Barth, who turned age 49 on Saturday, said his Longmont airport manager's salary is about $88,000 a year.

The Wyoming Tribune-Eagle, which reported Friday night that Barth had been chosen for the Cheyenne airport position, said in its story that his base salary as the regional airport's aviation director will be $95,000 a year, with the opportunity to earn $5,000 more when he gets an accreditation from the Association of Airline Executives.

Barth was one of four finalists for the Cheyenne Airport job, the Wyoming Tribune-Eagle reported.

John Fryar: 303-684-5211, jfryar@times-call.com or twitter.com/jfryartc