Health Care: In a stunning admission, our Health and Human Services secretary admits ObamaCare is part of the fundamental transformation of America away from a free market in anything to a nanny state on steroids.

Maybe Kathleen Sebelius was being sarcastic, or maybe she thought it might be a good way to reach the “young invincibles” who feel they had better things to do with their money than enroll in ObamaCare. But her recent appearance on Jon Stewart’s show on Comedy Central went about as well as ObamaCare’s train wreck of a rollout.

Stewart hammered her and ObamaCare, as we have, on why she and President Obama granted delays for employers and insurers in their mandates, while individuals were still being forced into the comedy central known as the ObamaCare exchanges.

Failing to get a straight answer, Stewart pointed out that businesses are basing hiring decisions now based on ObamaCare’s expensive regulatory straightjacket. He noted that businesses are cutting worker hours to exploit a loophole in the law, but Sebelius denied it.

Then in a moment of intended sarcasm that was really one of unintentional honesty, the U.S. secretary of health and human services said, “As you know, we’re facing the end of the Western Civilization by having a market-based strategy. We are bringing Western Civilization to its knees by selling private insurance plans on a website where people can pick and choose.”

People have long been able to buy insurance online and free to choose which insurance to buy and from whom or not to buy any at all. By forcing people to buy a product they don’t want, Sebelius and the Obama administration are bringing Western civilization to its knees — at least our Constitution-based part of it.

ObamaCare limits our choices and freedom. A true market-based strategy would let people save money tax-free in medical savings accounts and use that money to choose their doctor and buy insurance tailored to their needs, with companies competing for their business across state lines. No mandates, no bureaucrats.

But then ObamaCare has never been about health care. It’s been about power, as IRS target Dr. Ben Carson made clear Friday at the Values Voter Summit in Washington, D.C. The former Johns Hopkins neurosurgeon called the Affordable Care Act the “worst thing that has happened in this nation since slavery.”

He wasn’t exaggerating.

ObamaCare puts the U.S. government in charge of fully one-sixth of America’s economy, unconstitutionally seeks to force Americans to buy a service, often against their will, and places each individual’s health at the eventual mercy of government bureaucracy.

ObamaCare’s power to tax is the power to destroy our free-market economy — and our freedoms, as well.

So Sebelius is right after all. ObamaCare, as the song goes, is the end of the world as we know it.