A 6-year-old girl has died in Atlanta after her grandmother's car was broadsided by a semi-trailer.

Gracie Perry and grandmother Mary Perry were heading down Highway 316 about 6pm on Wednesday, when the 50-year-old woman made a left turn off the highway in Barrow County, CBS46 reported.

Georgia State Police said the grandmother's Chevy Monte Carlo failed to yield to oncoming traffic — and was struck on the passenger side by a truck, according to the Atlanta Journal-Constitution.

Gracie Perry, 6, was killed in Atlanta on Wednesday when her grandmother's car was broadsided by a truck and she was ejected from the vehicle

Crash scenes show the destruction of the vehicle where Gracie was traveling. The impact was so great, it sheared the 6-year-old's seat belt

Crash investigators say Gracie's grandmother, Mary Perry, failed to yield when making a left turn on her Chevy Monte Carlo and was struck by a truck. Witnesses said the setting sun created shadows and made it impossible to see the oncoming vehicle

Crash investigators said the impact was enough to damage the car's seatbelts — and little Gracie, who had been buckled, was thrown about 13 feet from the car as it spun on the road, the Gwinett Daily Post reported. She died at the scene.

Her grandmother, Mary, was flown to the Atlanta Medical Center but was expected to survive.

The driver of the truck, 52-year-old Timothy Douglas, did not report any injuries.

Witnesses told crash investigators that the setting sun at the time of the crash created shadows from the trees that made it difficult to see the truck, according to local reports.

The light had been green for both cars, although the truck had the right of way, it was reported.

Police have not said if charges will be filed.

Gracie was ejected 13 feet into the air when the truck broadsided her grandmother's car

One of Gracie's shoes is seen at the scene following the crash that killed her

Gracie's distraught relatives created a GoFundMe page to help pay for funeral expenses.

'Gracie was a beautiful, sweet, outgoing 6 year old girl,' the family wrote on the page. 'She loved her family and friends.

'She was full of life and enjoyed getaways with her aunt Jenny and grandmother.

'Our sweet angel will be missed by so many.'