Jon Stewart jumped on the #Gruber bandwagon during “The Daily Show” Tuesday by skewering MIT professor and Obamacare architect Jonathan Gruber for his now viral remarks about the “stupidity of the American voter” that allowed the opaque health care law to gain passage.

Stewart first rejoiced in the fact that Obamacare’s website is “better” this year, as it allowed for 100,000 individuals to sign up for 2015 health insurance Saturday when the exchanges opened.

However, as Stewart lamented, the improvement of HealthCare.gov has been completely eclipsed by Gruber’s comments that were recorded in multiple videos over past years.

Though he poked fun at Gruber’s voice and labeled him a “super egghead,” Stewart certainly didn’t reserve all of his criticism for the MIT professor.

The comedian also expressed his disappointment in House Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi (D-Calif.), who said of Gruber during a press conference last week that she doesn’t “know who he is” despite specifically naming him and touting his work in 2009.

“That’s pretty lousy,” said Stewart.

He also suggested that Democrats “come clean” and admit that they disguised the fact that the individual mandate in the Affordable Care Act is a tax, an action that Gruber speaks of in the recently surfaced videos.

Stewart labeled this action by Democrats “pretty slimy.”

Of course, Stewart couldn’t resist talking down at Republicans who oppose Obamacare and have spotlighted Gruber’s offensive comments.

“You’ve tried to kill this law every which way,” Stewart said to the GOP. “You keep trying, and now your best remaining move — the strongest card in your deck — looks to the be Gruber. Well, good luck getting somebody to take up a federal case on the offhanded and somewhat dickish comments of some MIT egghead.”

However, as Stewart spotlighted at the end of the segment, opponents may have the opportunity to use Gruber’s comments when the Supreme Court hears yet another challenge to Obamacare involving subsidies.