There is still plenty of time to turn around the campaign of Scott Walker, the goggle-eyed homunculus hired by Koch Industries to run their Midwest subsidiary formerly known as the state of Wisconsin, but the effort is going to be futile unless the candidate shows a lot more than he has been showing on the stump and in the polls. The latest shot below the campaign's waterline came from the gnomes at alma mammy's law school, whose data showed that, at the moment, Walker is less popular at home than several kinds of common household bacteria.

According to the latest Marquette University Law School poll, 39 percent of Wisconsinites approve of Walker's performance as governor, down from 41 percent in April. Fifty-seven percent of voters disapprove, up slightly from 56 percent in April. Meanwhile, Walker is more than 1,000 miles away, campaigning for president in New Hampshire. Thursday's Marquette poll, conducted Aug. 13-16, is the first survey of Wisconsin voters since Walker officially announced his candidacy for president. Poll director Charles Franklin noted that Walker's approval ratings have steadily hovered around 50 percent until these two most recent polls. Walker's momentum has also been slipping in national polls, dropping from double digits to single digits in several recent surveys.

Advertisement - Continue Reading Below

Those are some ugly numbers. I admit that I thought Walker, or the people running him, would be deft enough to capitalize on the actual victories he'd won over nearly all the conservative bogeypeople. What I did not anticipate was: a) the rise of the shiny object that is The Man Called Trump, and b) that the candidate himself would turn out to be such an unimpressive lump of cheese. He was virtually absent in the main event in Cleveland. He rolled out a health-care "alternative" this week that was nothing more than a ragbag of old Republican solutions with the popular parts of the Affordable Care Act tossed in. (Walker has been given an inordinate amount of credit for the simple act of having a plan. Such are the participation trophies handed out by his party.) He belatedly decided to show how tough he was, reminding people that hauling singing grandmothers away in handcuffs is not a job for the faint of heart.

Most Popular

But, as I thought more about how his campaign had found itself up to its wheel wells in mud, I realized that, with all the light that is on a candidate in a national election, Walker's was deprived of the one political tactic that has served him so well in Wisconsin. He often puffs himself up and says that he does what he says he's going to do. This is not precisely true. Walker's most successful political maneuver back home has to do with the fact that he often does what he says he won't do, even though every thinking person in the state knows that he has every intention of doing so.

For example, in his first campaign for governor, Walker never mentioned publicly the assault he eventually would conduct upon the collective-bargaining rights of state employees. (Alas, he got caught on tape giving one of his local sugar mamas the real skinny about his plan to "divide and conquer.") In his last campaign, he really shot the moon. On abortion, he said he was personally opposed to it, but that he realized the choice was an "agonizing" one. He repeatedly refused to answer whether or not he'd sign a bill that forbade abortions after 20 weeks. On March 15, he signed the bill. Shortly after he was re-elected, Walker dismissed questions about whether or not he would sign a bill making Wisconsin a right-to-work state. He called the question a "distraction" from his job putting together yet another cotton-candy-and-air state budget. On March 9, he signed the bill. If you think that proves that Scott Walker lacks the courage of his political convictions, you're wrong. It proves he lacks courage of virtually any kind.

He can't pull this riff in a national campaign, especially one in which, at the moment, he's competing with the most lethal blunt instrument in the recent history of American politics, and especially one in which talking openly and honestly about your most lunatic proposals is taken as a sign of your fitness for office. He does brag on the stump about the results of his having pulled the wool over the eyes of enough voters, but that's not the same thing. Scott Walker is not bright, but he knows how to do a few tricks very well, one of which is keeping his most radical cards closest to his vest. When none of those tricks work, all he becomes is not very bright.