The Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services announced this week that only 78 hospitals across the nation had met Electronic Health Records Stage 2 reporting requirements, part of the government's Meaningful Use program.

The number, while an uptick from the previous month, is a small fraction of the thousands of eligible hospitals and illustrates how difficult it has been for hospitals and health systems to meet federal standards and earn incentive payments from C.M.S.

One of the key problems with the latest requirements, according to the Healthcare Association of New York State and a recent article in the journal Health Affairs, is that hospitals and health systems are being asked to account for what takes place outside their buildings, and be accountable for technology in other health settings such as doctors' offices and nursing homes.

For example, hospitals need to attest that they have sent an electronic summary of a care record to a follow-up care provider for at least 10 percent of all discharges.

That isn't always possible, particularly for hospitals in communities where the nursing home or primary care doctor doesn't use the same system. The hospital can send but the health partner might not be able to receive.

That means even though a hospital has gotten the technology right, it can't qualify for the incentives.

"It's an all-or-nothing approach and an all-or-nothing approach is not very fruitful when you are pushing the bounds of technology," said Susan Van Meter, vice president of federal relations for HANYS.

Meaningful Use is a product of the 2009 federal stimulus program. It offered incentive payments through 2015 to those hospitals and other health care providers that could prove they were correctly using certified technology, which was meant to improve patient safety and be more cost-effecient.

At the same time, it penalized noncompliant hospitals beginning in 2015.

Everyone agrees that the law has spurred a revolution in health-information technology with hospitals across the country converting to electronic records, and making progress toward a goal touted by Presidents George W. Bush and Barack Obama. Some of this was basic, such as putting paper records online, which experts have long said reduces waste and duplication while improving patient safety. Some of it was much more complicated, such as ensuring that records from a hospital in New York be easily transmittable to a nursing home in Florida.

C.M.S., in an effort to measure performance, decided to roll out a new "stage" of the Meaningful Use program every couple years. Federal regulators assumed this would be a way to push progress, and, as the name suggests, ensure that the new technology was being used in a meaningful way.

But Stage 2 has become a nightmare because hospitals can meet most, but not all federal requirements, meaning hospitals lose out on the federal incentive payments because of issues, hospital administrators say, are not their fault.

“What can be controlled within the hospitals' four walls, they seem like they're doing well on. But when you need to coordinate with an external party, that's where they're behind," Julia Adler-Milstein, University of Michigan professor and co-author of the Health Affairs study, told Modern Healthcare.

St. Barnabas in the Bronx had the right technology earlier this spring but local community providers were not ready, said Dr. Jitendra Barmecha, the hospital's chief information officer.

"Even if the technology is there, it is dependent on the community providers," he said.

The hospital has also had problems meeting the requirements surrounding the patient portal. The idea here is simple: Federal regulators want to see patients having access to their health data. The problem is the hospital can build a portal, but if the population it serves has limited internet access, then it can't meet the standard because the patients don't have access to the health portal.

The problem of interoperability—the ability to communicate information across systems—has caught the attention of Congress, and federal officials are trying to find a workaround.

In May, C.M.S. proposed a rule that would allow hospitals and health systems to attest again to Stage 1 and provide a longer window to attest to Stage 2, a not-so-tacit acknowledgement that doctors and hospitals are unable to meet the goals.

HANYS supported the proposed rule during the public comment period, writing that the "proposed flexibility afforded to providers in how they attest for meaningful use in 2014 should allow providers that otherwise may not have able to successfully attest in 2014 to do so."

But, HANYS wrote, a few more months is unlikely to solve the longer-term problem.

"We are disappointed that the rule does not go far enough to address the deeply embedded complications and challenges facing providers seeking to achieve or maintain meaningful use status," HANYS wrote. "The rule is limited by providing flexibility to how meaningful use is met only in 2014, it fails to modify the nature of programmatic objectives incongruent with the current state of HIT-enableness, it does not recognize 2015 as a year of transition, and it sets forth a pathway to establish a Stage 3 rule before any significant analysis of Stage 2 could be done."