Topics: Ben Gibbard, Jay-Z, Music, steve albini, Tidal, Entertainment News

Jay Z’s premium streaming music service, Tidal, launched in late March with plenty of high-profile celebrity support and promises that it would spearhead a cultural revolution by giving power back to the musicians. “This is a platform that’s owned by artists,” he told the New York Times. “We are treating these people that really care about the music with the utmost respect.” Now that the dust has settled, however, the critics have come out in full force. Although Billboard ran an evenhanded overview that was cautiously optimistic, Gawker had some rather harsh words for the service: “Even the free trial I received felt like a ripoff.”

Unsurprisingly, musicians themselves have been the most vocal naysayers of the artist-owned system. Mumford & Sons responded with “fart noises” when Tidal was mentioned in a Daily Beast interview, while producer/engineer Steve Albini in Vulture compared the service to a “budget version of [Neil Young’s high-quality music player] Pono.” Death Cab for Cutie’s Ben Gibbard, meanwhile, expressed his own concerns in a separate Daily Beast interview.

“I think they totally blew it by bringing out a bunch of millionaires and billionaires and propping them up onstage and then having them all complain about not being paid,” he said. “There was a wonderful opportunity squandered to highlight what this service would mean for artists who are struggling and to make a plea to people’s hearts and pocketbooks to pay a little more for this service that was going to pay these artists a more reasonable streaming rate. And they didn’t do it. That’s why this thing is going to fail miserably.”

Indeed, as stories continue to roll in from musicians receiving paltry payouts from streaming music services–for example, Portishead’s Geoff Barrow just reported he received 1,700 pounds (or $2,500), for 34 million streams–it’s hard to be optimistic that this platform is going to be any different than Spotify, Rdio, YouTube and their ilk. First and foremost, Tidal doesn’t have a free or freemium level: The “premium” level is $9.99 per month, while the option with high-fidelity audio is $19.99 per month. That’s immediately a strike against Tidal, especially because the pop, rock and hip-hop stars behind the service are all 1 percenters who aren’t hurting for money. The gesture itself–the richest musicians in the world joining together to provide an expensive service to consumers–is shockingly tone deaf, out of touch and even a smidge condescending. As Gibbard alludes to, it’s definitely not doing much to convey solidarity with most working musicians today.

And with its emphasis on high-quality sound, Tidal is counting on perceived value–the illusion of exclusivity, that anyone who joins the service is part of an elite club or receiving a premium product. From a marketing standpoint, that’s nothing new; it’s the premise behind selling things such as branded headphones, Apple products and basketball player-branded sneakers at a higher cost, or the whole idea behind bottle service. But the artists involved with Tidal have perhaps overestimated the value of their image and brand in the tech space, which is an entirely different animal than the music industry itself. (Jay Z learned this the hard way already, in fact, thanks to the hiccups with his 2013 Samsung deal involving the release of “Magna Carta Holy Grail.”) Although tech gadgets such as Beats By Dre might benefit from celebrity endorsement, digital music loyalty is much more complex: Consumers prioritize ease of listening, song selection and choice, mobile accessibility and price more than they do a product backed by star power.

Of course, the other problem is that recorded music already has a premium product to offer fans that’s not Tidal: vinyl records, which continue to grow in popularity and show impressive sales growth. As Albini points out, vinyl is the medium audiophiles are likely going to gravitate toward anyway. “It’s for the same reason that if you had a screen that displayed paintings in your living room, very few serious art enthusiasts would care for such a screen despite the fact that it might show you very high-resolution images of artworks,” he told Vulture. “They want to own a piece of art that is a direct connection to the person who made it.”