Ready to rumble: Australian UFC fighter Richard Walsh. Photo: Getty Images

With a private school education on the north shore and a construction degree to boot, Richard Walsh isn't your typical UFC fighter.

But the 26-year-old, who opted for a career in the Octagon instead of pursing a secondary degree – this time in law – has his focus set firmly on beating Alan Jouban at UFC 184. It will form part of the main card that is headlined by the women's bantamweight championship bout between Ronda Rousey and Cat Zingano.

The fight will be Walsh's third in the UFC since reaching the semi-finals in The Ultimate Fighter: Canada versus Australia reality show. Jouban has won one of his two fights in the UFC ahead of his welterweight bout against Walsh.

"I expect he'll be pacing the fight in the first round and then I expect him to have good gas and he is very durable," Walsh said. "He'll be coming forward and throwing shots. He is better on the front foot than he is on the back."

Advertisement

While mixed martial arts may not have been part of his education at St Ignatius College, Walsh started fighting at 17.

He continued to balance the training with his university studies at University of NSW before dedicating himself fully to the fight game at the end of 2011.

"[Fighting at school] wasn't even a thought for anyone else but me," Walsh said. "Young kids now all know what the UFC is. Back then I had to get on Google to find out about it. I was stepping out of my comfort zone.

"I wanted to have a crack at the UFC. It gave me that warm and fuzzy feeling inside."

After beating Chris Indich in his UFC debut, Walsh had a controversial points loss to Kiichi Kunimoto in September. Walsh said he had learnt from the shock defeat.

"Don't leave it in the hands of the judges," Walsh said. "I need to get that killer instinct. There were a few times I kind of coasted because I felt I was up on points. At times I got aggressive to finish the fights but it was the right idea but the wrong time."

Meanwhile, Adelaide hosts its first UFC fight night card with Mark Hunt to headline against Stipe Miocic on May 10.