Labor Day wraps up the tourist season on the beach, and that means many seasonal workers are out of a job.

On Monday afternoon, the Texas Roadhouse opened it's doors and it was packed to capacity with lots of people waiting to get inside. On Wednesday, the grocery store The Fresh Market will open up. In just a few weeks, Pier Park will open up a Chipotle restaurant. So, if you're looking for a new, more permanent job, you may be in luck.

The end of the summer season in Panama City Beach doesn't just mean fewer crowds and less traffic, for some it means they're out of a job.

"I actually have a lot of friends who work in the service industry and in restaurants and different retail shops and they've always had a struggle where at the end of the season. It's just the jobs go," said local David Fang.

On Monday, the Texas Roadhouse restaurant opened its doors. Owner Paul Schreiner says he already hired more than 160 employees with plans to add more people to his team.

"We're excited to have an impact on the economy here," said Schreiner.

Schreiner says he knows his restaurant is going to be popular year round and he believes his business and others like it are going to be what makes Panama City Beach a year round community with lots of jobs for locals.

"I think if we work to take care of our locals and really work to be a part of the community by adding value from it not just taking away from it," said Schreiner. "Going out into the schools, going out in the churches and being part of different charity events we can really add to the community and make it a year round community and not have to fight the shoulder season."

Also opening in Pier Park North this week is the Fresh Market, an upscale grocery store. They'll have their grand opening Wednesday at 8 a.m.

"The timing is perfect because we're at the end of the summer and a lot of times these jobs are dropping off about this time of year and they're laying people off and now all of the sudden these businesses are opening up," said Gary Wofford, a Panama City Beach resident.

Many people say they wonder when Chipotle will open in Pier Park. Pier Park officials say they still don't have a confirmed date from the Mexican fast food chain but they know it'll open in the next few weeks.

"I think it's a great thing for Panama City to have a lot of local jobs and adding more jobs so it should help the unemployment rate go down a little bit and bring more jobs in for local people," said Panama City resident Beth Williams.