A breast pump for nursing mothers. (Photo: Molly Corfman/The News-Messenger)

Although breastfeeding is recommended as the healthiest choice for babies, women on Medicaid in Florida have had limited options for accessing breast pumps.

A hospital-grade pump can cost more than $200. Breastfeeding mothers returning to work must pump repeatedly during the ge day to maintain their milk supply, so a quality pump is essential.

Under the Affordable Care Act, private insurers must cover pumps. Medicaid in Florida does not require health plans to cover pumps, but that appears to be changing.

The Agency for Health Care Administration could require health plans to cover breast pumps by the end of the year.

“The Agency for Health Care Administration is amending the Durable Medical Equipment and Supplies Coverage and Limitations Handbook and Fee Schedule to include coverage of breast pumps with prior authorization. That process should be completed before the end of the calendar year. Health plans will be required to cover this service once the handbook and fee schedules are finalized and adopted,” Press Secretary Shelisha Coleman said in an emailed statement.

WellCare’s Staywell Health Plan, the largest Medicaid provider in Florida, covers breast pumps as of January, according to a statement from Heather Urquides, external communications manager. Word about that change is still getting out to moms, said Dykibra Gaskin, public health nutrition program director for the Leon County Department of Health.

She said she has only heard of one mom accessing a pump through Staywell and none through Prestige Health Choice, the other Medicaid provider in Leon and Wakulla counties.

“I feel confident that’s going to change, and that’s a good thing,” Gaskin said.

WIC has fewer than 50 breast pumps available for rent for the hundreds of mothers it serves, Gaskin said. The pumps are reserved for mothers who are separated from their babies in emergency situations, such as a baby being in the NICU, and for those who are exclusively breastfeeding and must return to work or school.

Read or Share this story: http://on.tdo.com/1Nj2wgA