WEST PALM BEACH, Fla. - The Florida Healthy Kids Corporation is considering suing the federal government.

This comes just days after 34,000 kids in Florida and their families learned their premiums through Healthy Kids would soon double.

Last week, families were assured by FHK they could enroll in the federal exchange or private insurance if they found better rates. However, families and health insurance brokers started contacting NewsChannel 5 late last week saying they were being denied a "special enrollment" period.

"It would be Florida Healthy Kids that would be filing a lawsuit," said Wendy Link, Chair of the board for Florida Healthy Kids.

She says she hopes it doesn't come to litigation but families are upset and making sure Healthy Kids knows it.

"We've received some letters from families saying you all are heartless," says Link.

Part of the problem is the lack of warning.

"You we're kind of blind sided by this?" Asked NewsChannel 5's Jared Werksma. "Absolutely, 100% blindsided,"

says Deanna Kirkpatrick, Mother of two.

"$299 per month?" asked Werksma. "Yes!" says Link, "Just for my nine-year-old."

Kirkpatrick says she reached out to her families insurance broker, Terri Kamen, for help.

"My phone still rings of the hook and people are calling to say I don't know what to do,” says Kamen.

This, despite the fact that Florida Healthy Kids says it’s $299 a month premium for one child on the “Plus,” plan is still competative with all other providers.

“They are not even close,” says Kamen, who continues:

“If you have a Palm Beach County zip code, there are 88 policies available specifically in the FFM, the Federally Facilitated Market Place. You can cover children under the age of 18 for under $100 dollars (a month).”

But many Florida Healthy Kids families are being told by insurance reps, a premium increase alone doesn't qualify for special enrollment, meaning they'll need to swallow the hefty premiums until open enrollment in January, which Kirkpatrick says may not be an option.

“He would probably have to go uncovered until open enrollment,” says Kirkpatrick referring to her nine-year-old son.

“But you say that shouldn't be the case?” Werksma asked Link. “They're not just having an increase in premium they're plan ends,” said Link.

Kamen also says the federal statute is clear.

“It's not the same product,” said Link. “So you think that the exchange should be letting these people in?” Asked Werksma. “That's right,” Link replied.

But some brokers and families tell us agents with Healthcare.gov are giving more than a simple "no" as an answer.

Some families tell NewsChannel 5 they're actually getting a scripted response from agents at Healthcare.gov, saying that this is as a result of Florida not going along with the Affordable Care Act and not expanding Medicaid.

“We have heard that people have been saying that.” Said Link. Who Continued: “The problem is, it doesn't make sense.”

“Do you think the federal government is making this political?” Asked Werksma.

“It certainly shouldn't be political. You’re talking about people's children and their health, there's nothing that's political about that,” said Link.

NewsChannel 5 has reached out to Healthcare.gov and the Department of Health and Human Services for comment but we have yet to get a response.

The Florida Healthy Kids Corporation says it is "Cautiously optimistic" that this is a misunderstanding. Counsel for the board says they should be able to decide by Tuesday August 25 whether or not to move forward with litigation.