New Hampshire’s undeclared voters are routinely the focus of many a national poll and pundit — it’s the endless quest of divining which way this nebulous bunch might swing the next big election.

Recent headlines in the Boston Globe, for example, point to this group as not only possibly determining the winners of the first-in-the-nation presidential primary, but as having grown more than 20 percent in the past 20 or so years.

But to experts here in New Hampshire this group is not as unique, large or mysterious as national outlets would lead one to believe.

“A good chunk of those undeclared are committed Republicans or committed Democrats who are hiding,” said Stephen Pimpare, lecturer of American politics and public policy at the University of New Hampshire at Manchester. “Too often for my money, people will talk about undeclared voters as either undecided voters or independent voters. And that tends not to be the case. As a general rule, because somebody is an undeclared voter doesn’t mean that they are not a partisan.”

In fact, he said, while numbers vary from election to election, in New Hampshire, of all undeclared voters, somewhere in the neighborhood of 40 percent can be expected to vote Democrat and 30 percent can be expected to vote Republican pretty consistently year after year. So this leaves roughly 30 percent of that undeclared number that is not affiliated with a political party.

“People over the last number of decades really have been becoming more dissatisfied with the state of politics; they don’t want to be associated with either party,” Pimpare said of that remaining 30 percent. “That’s why we see the rising number of independents. But what political scientists have discovered is that most of those people who register independent still consistently vote for one party or another and that’s the same thing we see here in New Hampshire.”

Undeclared voters are the largest voting bloc in New Hampshire. According to the Secretary of State’s office, as of September, there were 380,993 undeclared voters, or 43 percent, of the Granite State’s 872,171 registered voters. By contrast, there were only 229,584 registered Democrats and 261,594 registered Republicans at that same time. Nationally, Pimpare said, the number of undeclared tends to be anywhere from 40 to 50 percent. Massachusetts for example, is running just above 50 percent, said N.H. Secretary of State William M. Gardner.

While it’s true that the number of undeclared voters in New Hampshire has grown from 29 percent in 1996 to 43 percent today, Gardner added, it’s actually been falling since the elections in 2000 and 2004 when the number hovered closer to 50 percent. By the 2008 election, the number of undeclared voters was down to 40 percent of the total number of registered voters.

These fluctuations tend to have more to do with the way New Hampshire allows voters to declare their party affiliation and less with partisan politics, according to Gardner.

The first time anyone was asked to declare a party affiliation, Gardner said, was in the first primary election in New Hampshire, in 1910.

“But in the beginning — from 1910 until about the 1970s — once you were in a party, you could not get out,” Gardner said. “Once you declared a party, you could never again be an undeclared. You could go from one party to the other party, but once you became a member of a party you could not be an undeclared again, unless you moved to a new town and you started all over again.”

A voter could also register only during two designated times of the year and could only register through the Secretary of State’s office. But changes to election law in the 1970s and 1990s made this process easier. Voters could register at the polls and with town and city clerks anytime they wanted. Voters also were able to declare a party affiliation for voting purposes, only to change it back to undeclared immediately after voting. When the latter happened in the 1990s, Gardner said, the numbers of undeclared voters spiked.

So why so many fluctuations in the 2000s?

“(The number of undeclared voters) may have gone up briefly, but it tends to go down after a primary,” Gardner said. “There are a number of people that, when they leave, they don’t bother to get out (of the party affiliation declared at the polls). So the numbers tend to go up at presidential primaries every four years and then leading up to (the primary), it goes down.”

Which is why, Pimpare said, when he looks at the raw numbers on the Secretary of State’s website, he sees some dips here and there but overall, says the numbers of undeclared voters look stable. And of those who don’t ultimately swing left or right — the ones who are truly independent — he said, “I would characterize most of them as not going any way at all. ... I think that a lot of those undeclared voters are the most disengaged voters. So they may have never voted at all, they may be the least engaged in the political process and may be least likely to vote.”

Part of the reason he believes this lies in the fact that in New Hampshire, the default affiliation when registering to vote is undeclared.

“So what that tells us is that those are people who didn’t declare for a party when they registered to vote and never voted in either primary,” Pimpare said. “If you voted in a Democratic primary, your registration switches to Democratic; if you vote in a Republican party, your registration switches to Republican.”

After voting, one could go back and change his or her affiliation to undeclared, but that act of voting moves a person out of the undeclared category and into whichever party he or she declared at the polls. This leaves the true undeclared voters as those who “tend to be a lot of nonvoters and tend to be the least informed and the least engaged.

“And some of that makes some sense, right?” Pimpare said. “If you think about the fact we live in a world in which the Democratic and Republican parties are more divided now on more issues than they have been in any time since the Civil War. People who don’t know whether they are Democrat or Republican, probably aren’t paying too much attention. Because it’s probably never been easier to figure out which party represents your interests because they are so starkly divided.”

This does change slightly, Pimpare said, in a hotly contested primary race, such as the 2016 Republican primary. If independents are going to come out, he said, they will flock to this race, mostly because they feel it’s a time when their votes actually count.

Frank S. Cohen, assistant professor of political science at Franklin Pierce University in Rindge, said while he doesn’t believe the parties in practice are actually as divided as popular opinion would have one believe, he does believe the influence the parties have historically wielded has dwindled. This, he said, has led in part to the rise of the independent voter.

“A lot of things have happened so that parties no longer monopolize political activities like they did before,” Cohen said. “Go back to the ‘50s and ‘60s, we had people basically getting a lot of their political information on the ballot box from local political party representatives. In a lot of big, major cities it was well-known for political party machines to mail people out a ballot showing them what they should check off.”

But this began to change dramatically in the ’80s with the rise of the 24-hour news cycle and later with the popularization of the Internet. With that, people could get a variety of information from myriad sources.

The parties themselves are also not the powerhouses they once were, and voters have grown more cynical about the information the political parties do disseminate.

“Years ago you’d just go by the label, and the label would tell me everything I’d need to know,” Cohen said. “That’s no longer the case.”