Topics: addiction, AfterParty Treatment, Cocaine, Drugs, Editor's Picks, National Center on Addiction and Substance Abuse, Recovery, Life News

When I went to rehab in 2000, I was dying. Not necessarily physically, though I wasn’t in great shape there, either. But the biggest problem is that I was suicidal and only somewhat willing to believe that my near-constant depression was related to the vats of cocaine I was regularly shoveling up my nose. Still, I was determined to do whatever I possibly could to change.

I was also a little boy-crazy. This was nothing new; I’d been like that, in part, since my first kindergarten crush. The only time in my life when I hadn’t really been like that were the few years before I got sober: My life had gotten so small that the most regular guy in my life at that point was my coke dealer Alex and trust me when I tell you that I didn’t have a single sexual thought about him.

But suddenly, I was among the living again. I was in groups and meetings with a bounty of straight men and though my counselors and sponsor were telling me that I should avoid dating for the first year of my sobriety, it was advice that I nodded at and then promptly ignored. I’d been holed up in my apartment with only cocaine and cats for company for years and now that I wasn’t isolated anymore, they were asking me to turn off the part of myself I’d been somewhat ruled by since before I ever discovered drugs and alcohol? Uh, try again.

How well did the dating go? Suffice it to say that I ended up learning why this yearlong avoidance had been recommended. The best way I can summarize what happened is that my addiction had done something to my “picker” and as a result, the men I was drawn to weren’t the healthiest specimens. But I was one of the lucky ones—even though I dated various men and suffered rejection and remorse and all those things that can accompany less-than-healthy dating, I was able to stay the course. I don’t really know why that was true for me and isn’t always true for others; maybe my disease wasn’t as far advanced as it could have been or the men I got involved with weren’t appealing enough for me to have bottomed out after things went awry. All I know is that I have seen many women leave the program and sobriety because the pain they were experiencing as the result of romantic entanglements left them feeling like they had no other choice.

Strangely, despite the fact that it’s been established for quite some time that there are differences when it comes to treating men and women for addiction and that women from all-female recovery treatment groups relapse less often than women in mixed groups, rehabs have been slow to implement gender-specific treatment. Hazelden (in Florida, Illinois, Minnesota, New York and Oregon), Caron (in Pennsylvania, Texas and Florida) and Solid Landings Behavioral Group (in Costa Mesa, California) are the only major rehabs I’m aware of which separate the genders for treatment. And as far as I’m concerned, there’s nothing that could make more of a difference in terms of helping women find recovery.

Dr. Jerry Brown, one of the country’s leading advocates for gender-separated treatment and the clinical director at Sure Haven, the female treatment center under the Solid Landings umbrella, agrees with me. “What’s emerged is that treating women for addiction is often about treating trauma,” he says. While trauma isn’t, of course, limited to women, the fact that addicts tend to start using much earlier now than they used to—Brown estimates the average age to be 13 or 14—girls are, he says, “more likely now to get themselves in situations where they’re abused if they are impaired by alcohol and other drugs.”