Dr. Rosenblithe will also participate on a panel titled “Naming and Framing African Women's Writing.” The 41st annual African Literature Association conference will feature a group of scholars from around the world.

Dr. Anita Rosenblithe, a Raritan Valley Community College professor of English, has been selected to present at a conference in Germany this June. (Photo: PHOTO COURTESY OF RVCC) Story Highlights Dr. Rosenblithe of New York City, Raritan Valley Community College Professor of English, has been selected to present at a prestigious conference in Germany this summer.

Dr. Rosenblithe will participate on a panel of the Women’s Caucus of the African Literature Association, to be held in June at the University of Bayreuth in Germany.

Conference theme is “African Futures and Beyond: Visions in Transition.”

Dr. Rosenblithe will be presenting her paper, “The Challenge to Colonial Epistemic Violence in Zoë Wicomb’s October and Playing in the Light

Dr. Anita Rosenblithe, a Raritan Valley Community College English professor, has been selected to present at an upcoming conference in Germany. Rosenblithe will participate in a panel of the Women’s Caucus of the African Literature Association, to be conducted this month at the University of Bayreuth in Germany. The theme of this year’s conference is “African Futures and Beyond: Visions in Transition.”

The New York City resident will be presenting her paper, “The Challenge to Colonial Epistemic Violence in Zoë Wicomb’s October and Playing in the Light: A Feminism for the New South Africa.” The paper was part of her sabbatical project that focused on “Putting More of the World in World Literature and the Curriculum: An Interdisciplinary, Transnational Approach.”

Rosenblithe will participate on a panel titled “Naming and Framing African Women's Writing.” The 41st annual African Literature Association conference will feature a group of scholars from around the world, who will examine the latest trends in the study of African and African-diasporic literature and media.

Read or Share this story: http://mycj.co/1Iseb9w