WASHINGTON — An additional 750,000 Floridians would have health insurance next year if state Republican leaders drop their opposition and agree to expand Medicaid to cover more low-income families, White House economic advisers asserted Thursday.

More than 109,000 people would get their cholesterol checked, 31,200 more women would have mammograms, 46,100 would have pap smears and many more patients would have access to primary, preventive and mental health care, according to the report by the White House Council of Economic Advisers.

About 106,700 fewer Floridians would have trouble paying other bills if spared some of the burden of medical costs through a Medicaid expansion, officials said.

The report is the latest salvo in the ongoing conflict between the Obama administration and Republican leaders in Florida and 21 other states that refuse to expand Medicaid, an important component of the nation's new health-care law known as Obamacare.

Gov. Rick Scott and Florida legislators are struggling to find ways to cover about 800,000 residents without expanding Medicaid. Scott has complained that expansion would cost the state $5 billion over 10 years, though Uncle Sam would pay 90 percent or more of the added expense.

"We already knew the Obama administration supported Obamacare," Jackie Schutz, the governor's spokeswoman, said when asked about the report Thursday.

White House economic advisers said the health and financial well-being of hundreds of thousands in Florida would improve if Medicaid were made available to families who live just above the poverty line and cannot afford private insurance.

Council Chairman Jason Furman said the report "leaves no doubt that the consequences of states' decisions are far-reaching, with major implications for the health of their citizens and their economies."

The report says that Florida's failure to expand Medicaid would deprive the state of $5.9 billion in federal funding next year. And hospitals and other providers would be burdened with $790 million of uncompensated care costs, it says.

"The administration is willing to work with any state interested in expanding Medicaid," said Vikki Wachino, acting director of the Center for Medicaid.

The Affordable Care Act calls for states to expand Medicaid to cover families with incomes below 138 percent of the poverty level, about $33,000 for a family of four this year.

The federal government would pay all the costs for newly eligible patients through 2016 and would cover 95 percent of the costs in 2017, 94 percent in 2018, 93 percent in 2019, and 90 percent in 2020 and beyond.

Some 28 states have expanded Medicaid under the Affordable Care Act. Twenty-two states have not, including Florida, which has one of the highest uninsured rates in the nation.

WEgibson@Tribpub.com, 202-824-8256