KALAMAZOO, MI -- Kalamazoo residents Mary Swanson and her husband are among the reported 225,000 Michiganders who received cancellation letters from their insurers because their plans did not meet the minimum standards of the Affordable Care Act.

The Prudential Preferred Realtor, whose husband owns a construction business, said they currently pay $925 a month for a Blue Cross Blue Shield plan with a $4,000 deductible.

They combined the catastrophic coverage with health-savings accounts, she said, which worked well for the couple, who are over 55 and whose income tends to fluctuate with the housing market.

Supporters of Obamacare have argued that the insurance plans being canceled offered substandard coverage. Swanson said that was not the case for her family.

"Our coverage from before was far from substandard. It was excellent," she said during a phone interview.

In June, when her husband's appendix ruptured, he spent five days in the hospital. The medical bills totaled about $32,000, Swanson said.

"All we ended up paying out of pocket was $165," she said.

The plan covered annual physicals and mammograms, but not mental health services.

"We didn't care about that," she said.

She's unsure about whether it included maternity coverage, but "obviously, we didn't care about that."

Because both she and her husband are over 55, she said, their rates have jumped substantially.

"We're in the worst spot we could be, because we're over 55 and we're too young for Medicare. And we are self-employed," said Swanson, who participated in a Google Hangout Thursday sponsored by U.S. Rep. Fred Upton, R-St. Joseph, who is a harsh critic of the Affordable Care Act.

Swanson said she tried repeatedly to research new plans via HealthCare.gov during October, but never could get past the identity-verification stage. Since she and her husband won't qualify for a subsidy, she's been researching plans through individual insurers.

She has been quoted between $1,300 and $1,500 a month for coverage, she said, and the couple's deductible will jump to $6,000 each instead of $4,000 combined.

As a result, in 2014 they would need to budget $26,000 a year for health-care, Swanson said. In a down year for the housing market, such as 2009, she said, that amount would be difficult to reach.

While Swanson said there were "definitely concerns" with the way insurers operated prior to Obamacare, she said that, for her, the worst part is that "we were promised we would keep our doctors and we would keep our plans," she said. "Five million plus got our cancellation letters. And that's just Round 1."

Swanson said she has little hope that her plan will be offered in 2014, despite President Obama's Nov. 14 announcement that insurers could offer outdated plans for one more year. Among other considerations, she doesn't think there's enough time for her insurer to reverse course before Jan. 1.

She has 24 days to decide what to do, she said Nov. 21.

"I would love to have my former plan back."

Yvonne Zipp is a staff writer at the Kalamazoo Gazette. Email her at yzipp@mlive.com or follow her on Twitter.