The Allentown Fairgrounds will be buzzing Friday and Saturday — but it won't be just farmers market shoppers looking for bargains.

The buzz also will come from up to 100 dental drills as part of a huge dental clinic that will set up at the Agri-Plex. The clinic will be for anyone, regardless of insurance — or the lack of it — and it all will be free.

The clinic will be the second held by MOM-n-PA, (Mission Of Mercy in Pennsylvania) a nonprofit dedicated to providing dental care to anyone who needs it. More than 1,000 volunteers, including 160 dentists, as well as hygienists, translators, navigators and office workers, will staff the clinic from 5 a.m.-5 p.m. both days.

According to Charles Incalcaterra, a dentist from Bethlehem, organizers are expecting to treat 2,000 people over the two days.

"There's a pretty big need here in the [Lehigh] Valley," he said, noting that the region's hospital dental clinics are "overwhelmed."

The program is first-come, first-served, and if it's anything like the initial MOM-n-PA mission held last year in Philadelphia, people looking for care should arrive early. Patients began lining up for care the evening before the program began, said Gary Davis, chairman of MOM-n-PA.

"I arrived at 4 a.m. last year and there were well over 200 people in line," he said.

Registration is not required. Caregivers will provide blood pressure screenings and refer patients for further evaluation if they appear to be at risk for diabetes or other chronic conditions, Incalcaterra said. Dentists and other caregivers then will be able to provide a number of basic services — cleanings, fillings, extractions and minor repairs to dentures. Some root canals will be done, but considering the time and demand, they only can be done on front or side teeth, and the tooth must be restorable, Incalcaterra said.

Patients with multiple needs will have the most pressing issues addressed, Incalcaterra said. They are permitted to rejoin the line for a second session, he said.

Pediatric specialists also will be on hand, mostly on Saturday, Incalcaterra noted.

Several dentists have agreed to be available for follow-up care for those who need it, he added.

The organization has raised $150,000 from insurance companies, foundations, dentists, the Pennsylvania Dental Association and private individuals to stage the clinic. Davis said with that support, patients will receive an aggregate of around $1 million in free care.

According to Davis, 40 percent of the patients at the Philadelphia program had dental insurance, but still needed the clinic because of limitations in their coverage. Medicaid, for instance, has dollar limitations on coverage and provides little or no coverage for crowns and orthodontic work.

Medicaid reimbursements also don't cover the cost of services, so many dentists do not accept Medicaid patients. By volunteering with MOM-n-PA, dentists have a way of giving back to the underserved community, Incalcaterra said.

Lack of insurance is a bigger problem. Only about 62 percent of American adults have dental coverage, a rate that hasn't changed since the mid-90's, a report last year from the U.S. Governmental Accountability Office said. Many individuals with dental pain go years without seeing a dentist, he said, adding that some Philadelphia patients shed tears of joy after getting long-standing problems addressed.

"It really is sad," Davis said. "One of the goals of MOM-n-PA is to show legislators and community leaders about the need. I think they don't realize how much people need dental care."

Children's health insurance programs do cover dental work, so the state of their dental health is not as poor as many adults'. Dental care is not one of the essential health benefits required in the Affordable Care Act.

He said he hopes lines of people waiting for care will "open the eyes" of state legislators.

"We don't think MOM-n-PA is a solution to the need," Davis said, "but it can help."

tim.darragh@mcall.com

Twitter: @timdarragh

610 778-2259