Buy Photo Gas price seemed to have stabilized across Louisiana. (Photo: File Photo, The Advertiser)Buy Photo

Louisiana motorists are seeing gas pump prices creep up at a pace faster than the U.S. average, gasoline web site GasBuddy.com says. But one expert said that's because Louisiana prices have more room to travel northward.

Average retail prices rose by 14.7 cents in the week ending Sunday, with an average pump price of $2 in Louisiana. GasBuddy conducts a daily survey of 2,436 gas outlets in the state. Prices had increased more than a penny in Louisiana by 11:45 a.m. Monday.

Nationally, average gas prices rose by 12.6 cents through Sunday to $2.17 a gallon, Senior Petroleum Analyst Patrick DeHaan said. Louisiana ranked No. 14 among states for fastest movers in gas prices.

DeHaan said, typically, pump prices in states with lower gasoline prices rise more quickly than in states that already have higher pump prices.

"Everyone is going to see some increases," DeHaan said. "There is just less margin for increases in states with higher gas prices."

Those prices may rise by 30 to 60 cents for gasoline between February and May, which is typical, DeHaan said. Last year, he said, gas prices rose 30 cents in that time frame; this year, he said, there are more "moving pieces and parts" in the cost of gasoline, including what action OPEC leader Saudi Arabia chooses in producing oil.

In the face of increased U.S. oil production and declining global demand last autumn, the Saudis chose to keep production steady rather than reducing production, an action that most oil analysts said flooded the oil market and drove down prices.

Nonetheless, average gas prices in the state Sunday were $1.08 lower than a year ago, 2.4 cents higher than a month ago.

DeHaan said the price increases marked the largest one-week increase since July 2013.

"While the pace of increases will slow in the week ahead, we're looking at continued gas prices increases over the next few weeks," he said. "Oil prices have risen, contributing to the higher prices, but also worrisome are the refinery strikes initiated over the last week that have oil companies scrambling to keep refineries online."

DeHaan said that a week ago, more than half of the state's gas stations were charging less than $2 a gallon for regular gasoline; on Sunday, only 27 percent were still under $2 a gallon. The number of stations charging more than $2.25 a gallon rose from 17 percent to 31 percent, he said in a news release.

The likelihood, he said, is that summer travelers will spend far less for gasoline this year than last. The highest average weekly price last year was $3.49 a gallon during the week of April 26.

Read or Share this story: http://www.theadvertiser.com/story/news/local/acadiana/2015/02/09/la-gas-price-increases-coming-faster-clip-nations-average/23124943/