Former Florida Gov. Jeb Bush held his first telephone town hall with Granite Staters Tuesday night, calling for repeal of the Affordable Care Act, reform of Medicare for younger Americans, increasing the retirement age, and a concerted effort with Middle East allies to defeat Islamic terrorist groups.

Jeb Bush Jeb Bush (R) is a candidate for president in 2016. More

The Republican presidential candidate also called on Congress to build a veto proof majority and then reject President Barack Obama’s nuclear weapons deal with Iran.

Bush took eight questions during the 45-minute call. While focusing on foreign and domestic policy, he also said that he is a “devout Catholic” and would not shy away from allowing his faith to “inform” the way he would govern as president.

“I’m a Christian and it is something I don’t put in a lock box in public life,” Bush said. “Faith matters and we should not push people of faith outside the mainstream.” He also noted that there is now “religious persecution as never before in the Middle East and some African nations.”

“Radical Islam is challenging the ability of Christians who have had millennia of engagement in the Middle East to continue to exist,” Bush said. “They are now being obliterated.”

On domestic policy, Bush reiterated his goal of establishing 4 percent annual economic growth by addressing the immigration problem, cutting government spending and reducing the federal workforce. He said he has the experience to accomplish his goal based on his performance during his eight years as Florida’s governor.

Bush said that as governor from 1999 to 2007, he cut taxes by $19 billion and the number of state employees by 13,000. He said his state “created more businesses than any other state” during his tenure.

“I don’t think we’ are going to grow economically unless we also re-engage in the rest of the world,” he said. “We lead from behind now. We talk about red lines in the sand. We create instability.”

Bush told a Manchester veteran that the Islamic state, or ISIS, “is a creation of a void that we created when we left Iraq.” He called for arming the Kurds and rebuilding the alliance that created the successful surge in Iraq, which would include engaging and winning the support of Sunni tribal leaders.

“We also need to be engaged politically in Iraq,” Bush said. He also said he supported increasing U.S. air support in the area to “do it with certainty” to defeat terrorist groups such as ISIS.

He also said the United States should re-establish a “take-it-to-the-bank kind of relationship with Israel.”

“It’s hard to image how you could rupture the relationship between the United States and Israel the way this president has done,” he said.

Bush called for reducing the federal deficit by fixing the legal immigration system “to turn it into a catalyst for higher growth.” He said the civil service system should be reformed and the “lobbyist system” should be addressed.

“We have to make a significant reform of Social Security and Medicare and entitlement programs,” he said. He said the retirement age must be raised, and he suggested a review of income eligibility caps to ensure the solvency of Social Security.

Bush said the Affordable Care Act should be repealed and replaced with a health insurance program that promotes flexibility, is portable from job to job, and has both low deductibles and premiums.

He said that 40 percent of the 11 million to 12 million illegal immigrants in the United States “came here legally and overstayed their visas.”

“Why not train local law enforcement to be the eyes and ears of local immigration authorities so we can pick up those who have overstayed their visas?” Bush asked. “Coming here legally should be a heck of a lot easier than coming here illegally.”

He also called for an e-verify system and said he would deny illegal immigrants government assistance such as Medicaid and food stamps.

During the call, participants were asked if they plan to vote in the New Hampshire Primary and whether they support Bush, do not support him or are undecided.