Rand Paul Lists 10 Reasons Why President Obama Is Unqualified For Office

Rand Paul was responding to the White House's suggestion that Donald Trump should be disqualified from the presidency for his proposal to ban all Muslims from entering the U.S.

Dec 10, 2015 01:30 PM EST

Rand Paul is currently polling in seventh place in the GOP field with an average of 2.2 percent. (Photo : Twitter Photo Section)

Following White House press secretary Josh Earnest's comments on Tuesday that Donald Trump's proposal to ban all Muslims from entering the U.S. should disqualify him from the presidency, Sen. Rand Paul, a rival presidential candidate, unleashed a flurry of tweets on Wednesday explaining why President Barack Obama shouldn't be president either.

"What Donald Trump said yesterday disqualified him from serving as president" Earnest said during Tuesday's press briefing, adding that "any Republican who's too fearful of the Republican base to admit it has no business serving as president either," according to Politico.

Paul, whose amendment to stop issuing visas to individuals seeking to come to the U.S. from 32 Muslim countries failed in the Senate last Thursday in a 10-89 vote, decided to chime in on Twitter Wednesday to explain why Obama is also unqualified for the Oval Office.

After 5 years of acting like a King and ignoring our constitution, that takes a lot of nerve. — Dr. Rand Paul (@RandPaul) December 9, 2015

Today I would like to put a mirror in front of the Obama White House and show them the top ten things that make HIM unqualified: — Dr. Rand Paul (@RandPaul) December 9, 2015

The Kentucky senator then listed the following 10 reasons that Obama is not qualified to be president:

1) "Tried to take over 1/6 of the economy in Obamacare, wrecked the system and hurt patients and taxpayers."

2) "Thinks an executive order is legislation and how you make law."

3) "Fought an undeclared, unconstitutional war in Libya, turned it into Jihadist wonderland."

4) "Fighting an undeclared, unconstitutional war in Syria, [and] trying to put ISIS in Damascus."

5) "Signed into law the indefinite detention of American citizens." (Paul is referring to the National Defense Authorization Act [NDAA])

6) "His copy of the bill of rights obviously goes from 1 to 3, skipping the 2nd amendment."

7) "Court ruled his NSA spying on every American was illegal."

8) "He has added more debt than anyone in history."

9) "Appointed an attorney general who thinks speech against Muslims is a bigger threat than terrorism."

10) "EPA rules by executive FIAT trying to kill an entire American industry and way of life (coal)."

Reddit user chrism3 took the liberty of adding an 11th: "Obama authorized the assassination of U.S. citizens (guilty, by decree of the king. No court)." The user then cited an article from the Atlantic that explains how Obama justified using a drone to extrajudicially kill a 16-year-old American.

Paul currently stands in seventh place among the GOP presidential field with an average of 2.2 percent in RealClearPolitics' average of polling data.