None of these arguments get at the root of the problem.

Racism exists. There are people who need health care and could not get it. Not everyone working for minimum wage is lazy or undeserving. There are indeed predatory aspects of student loans and of course veterans should receive benefits, but that doesn’t mean there shouldn’t be paths to citizenship for those who want to contribute to the system.

Again, those who spend their time arguing these issues miss the point and the common thread among them all: money and greed.

The real division in this country is not between black and white or illegal immigrants and citizens. The division isn’t between Christians and Muslims. It isn’t between the lazy and the hard working. It isn’t even between those who think Tom Brady is a lying, cheating no-good no-talent with an overinflated view of his own self worth and those who think he’s The Second Coming.

The difference is between those who have the money and those who have not.

The middle class is shrinking, the poor are becoming poorer and the rich – the idyll rich, the super rich, the rich who make the decisions and don’t work at all – are controlling everything everyone else sees and everything you do.

They don’t want you involved in politics. They own the politicians. They don’t care about taking care of the veterans; they just want us to bankroll more wars to pad their wallets.

Black and white people have more in common with each other than the rich. They have more in common with those on minimum wage too.

They actually have more in common with Tom Brady as well – though I’ll never admit I have anything in common with that cleft-chin Nancy boy, but it is a fact.

Right now people are worrying about racism, sexism and every other ill on the planet without once taking a look at the problems caused by the disproportionate distribution of wealth in this country.

Those who argue – “Hey they worked for it,” are delusional.

Those who berate the poor, the hungry, the tired and the rest of the huddled masses, surely miss the point and sink us further into a slime of stupidity.

Benjamin Franklin once opined we should all hang together for we’ll definitely hang separately.

We are all hanging separately.

We divide ourselves into small groups. We’re liberals. We’re conservatives. We’re pro-police. We’re anti-police. We’re pro flag. We’re anti flag.

But we’re really ignorant. And the greediest continue to take the money and run.

For those worried about lazy poor people, why aren’t you worried about the lazy rich people who do no work and still rake in cash?

For those of you worried about illegal immigrants, why aren’t you worried about the jobs gone overseas – shipped there by corporations that make more money off of cheap labor?

For those who preach revolution and change, why don’t you get involved and vote?

Why don’t you volunteer? Why don’t you become a part of your community and help become a decision maker? Don’t buy into the nonsense you can’t have any effect on the system.

Don’t preach to me about how some people shouldn’t get health care when the richest of us never worry about health care and don’t need it.

In short, there is a division in this country. A real division of meaning and it’s a scary one.

There are actually people who still like Tom Brady and there are the rest of us.

Oh yeah, and there are the Haves and the Have Nots.

Two clubs.

And most of us belong to the larger and poorer one. Brady? Meh.