KAZAN, Russia — Katie Ledecky lowered her own world record by 3.61 seconds in winning the 800-meter freestyle for her fifth gold medal at the world swimming championships Saturday night.

The 18-year-old American completed the 16-lap race in 8 minutes, 7.39 seconds, bettering her time of 8:11.00 set last year at a meet in the United States.

Ledecky completed a sweep of the 200, 400, 800 and 1,500 freestyles in Kazan. She swam the anchor leg on the victorious 4×200 free relay too, giving her five golds with one day remaining in the meet.

She was 3.09 seconds under world-record pace with three laps remaining. Ledecky tore off one of her two swim caps and smashed the water with her hand in celebration of her third world record in Russia.

Ledecky bettered her results from two years ago in Barcelona, where she won four golds and set two world records. In Kazan, she won the 400 by four seconds, the 800 by 10.26 seconds and the 1,500 by 15 seconds.

Chad le Clos defended his title in the 100 butterfly, rallying late to edge Laszlo Cseh in the absence of Olympic champion Michael Phelps.

The South African was second at the turn and then poured it on down the stretch, touching in 50.56 seconds. Cseh was second in 50.87.

Joseph Schooling of Britain, who led at the turn, finished third in 50.96. American Tom Shields was fourth.

Le Clos slapped the water with his right hand, then pounded his chest and nodded his head as if to say yes. His father frantically urged him on from the stands, raising his arms and bellowing when his son got to the wall first.

“I said, ‘Dad, don’t worry. I’m more confident now in the 100 than I was in the 200,'” Le Clos said. “After that defeat I would break my arm before I lose tonight. I would cut it off. I won’t lose.”

Phelps has missed the last two worlds, and Le Clos has emerged as the fly king in his absence. Phelps retired after winning the 100 fly at the 2012 London Games and he was at worlds in Barcelona only as a spectator. The 18-time Olympic gold medalist qualified for the meet in Kazan, but was forced to sit out as a result of his suspension by USA Swimming for a second drunken driving arrest.

Half a world away in Texas, Phelps swam the 100 fly preliminaries at U.S. nationals in 52.12 on Saturday, hours after winning the 200 fly with his best time since setting the world record in 2009.

“I’m just very happy that he’s back to his good form, so he can’t come out and say, ‘Oh, I haven’t been training’ or all that rubbish that he’s been talking,” Le Clos said. “I’ll relish the opportunity to race him again. He’s a great competitor and he was a hero to me growing up. Next year is going to be Muhammad Ali-Joe Frazier.”

Le Clos was coming off a disappointing second-place finish in the 200 fly behind Cseh, who has emerged as a medal threat for next year’s Olympics after a resurgence in Kazan. The Hungarian has won three medals, including a bronze in the 50 fly.

“I was going to bounce back strong,” Le Clos said. “The last three days that’s all I thought about really was Laszlo and the silver medal.”

Florent Manaudou won the 50 free to go with his Olympic title.

The Frenchman claimed swimming’s glamour event in 21.19 seconds, fastest in the world this year.

Nathan Adrian of the United States finished second in 21.52. Bruno Fratus of Brazil took third in 21.55.

Three-time defending champion Cesar Cielo of Brazil left Kazan earlier in the week because of a nagging shoulder injury.

Manaudou sat on the lane line and raised his arms in triumph.

Defending champion Missy Franklin faltered in the 200 backstroke, getting overtaken down the stretch by Emily Seebohm of Australia, who touched in 2 minutes, 5.81 seconds to complete a sweep of the backstroke events.

The men’s 100 and 200 back titles went Down Under too, with Seebohm’s teammate, Mitchell Larkin, claiming both in a double that inspired Seebohm.

“He even said to me, ‘Go out there and get that double. I know you can do that,'” she said. “Just hearing that from him and seeing how hard he’s worked, I know I’ve worked just as hard.”

Franklin, the Olympic champion, settled for silver in 2:06.34. In six events so far, Franklin has four medals, but no individual gold two years after she won a record six golds in Barcelona. The American, who recently left college after two years to turn professional, was fifth in the 100 back and seventh in the 100 freestyle.

“This is probably one of the hardest races to get second, just because I love it so much,” Franklin said. “But I’m honestly really happy with that. I fought my heart out. I went out after it and I swam it like Missy Franklin swims a two backstroke and I’m just not there at the end yet, and that’s all right.”

Katinka Hosszu of Hungary finished third in 2:06.84.

Seebohm took the race out hard, dipping under Franklin’s world-record pace on the first lap. Franklin took over for the next two laps and owned a slight advantage heading to the finish before Seebohm rallied from third to win.

“I have so much left on that last 50,” said Seebohm, who was over a second behind on the last turn. “I definitely knew that Missy and Hosszu go out after it. For me, it was not getting carried away with what they were doing beside me, and sticking to something that I know works so well.”

Sarah Sjostrom earned her second gold, claiming the 50 butterfly, a non-Olympic event. The Swede won in 24.96. She also won the 100 fly and finished second in the 100 free.

Jeanette Ottesen of Denmark was second and Lu Ying of China was third.