Rising mortgage rates have been taken a bunch of the blame this year for weak home sales, but better times may be ahead as data released Thursday showed that mortgage rates been dropping.

The average rate for a 30-year fixed-rate mortgage declined to 4.10% in the week that ended Aug. 21 — the lowest rate since late October — from 4.12% in the prior week, federally controlled mortgage-buyer Freddie Mac reported.

Remarkably, the latest rate is down 48 basis points – almost half a percentage point – from the year-earlier level. What’s happening is that movements in long-term fixed mortgage rates closely follow 10-year Treasury note yields, which have declined as investor demand for high quality debt has jumped.

“Rates have fallen recently despite the pretty good economic data for the U.S.,” said Len Kiefer, Freddie’s deputy chief economist. “If international tensions ease, better economic data should put upward pressure on rates and over the next few months we expect to see rates track higher. But continued troubles abroad could translate to some near term volatility.”

Lower rates translate to more affordable mortgages, a trend that could support home buying, especially if the labor market continues to strengthen. And separate data released Thursday signaled that the sales pace of existing homes has indeed picked up in recent months, supported by a variety of factors.

However, with home sales trending below year-earlier levels, major housing-market roadblocks remain. In particular, lending standards that experts say are overly restrictive are preventing some seemingly creditworthy borrowers from obtaining home loans. And if borrowers who need financing can’t get a loan, it doesn’t make a difference how cheap mortgages are — these families won’t buy a home.

Low interest rates have provided less support to the economy than prominent economists had predicted they would. And rates are expected to eventually resume their climb higher as the Federal Reserve cuts quantitative easing and the economy strengthens.

–Ruth Mantell

Follow Ruth on Twitter @RuthMantell

Follow the Capitol Report blog on Twitter @CapitolReport

Check out these Capitol Report links:

Why a Republican-controlled Senate might not change much

Obamacare acting as drag on employment and lifting prices, survey suggests