The decision to get a vasectomy plagues every man at one point of his life, but the decision to get the procedure done on live TV is another ordeal. On British morning show ITV’s This Morning, a patient named only James underwent the snippy procedure by Dr. Jon Unwin, a Gloucestershire doctor, while This Morning’s resident doctor Dr. Dawn Harper observed on live TV. Leaving nothing to the imagination, the extremely graphic video was aired to dispel common myths and worries surrounding the procedure in honor of World Vasectomy Day.

“My wife and I have five children and we love them dearly, but we don't want any more surprises,” said James, a father of five children, the Daily Mail reported. Speaking before the procedure, he added: “For us, this is a fail safe option. We haven't considered any other form of contraception. Now that our family's complete, this is the option for us. I have a bit of anxiety about the procedure but we have got to move forward and so, unfortunately, I have to go through it.”

Unwin described the procedure as the camera zoomed right in on the patient's genitalia as it was being operated. James was under a local anesthetic. Prior to the procedure, Harper explained to This Morning viewers the snippy procedure is typically carried out under a local anesthetic, but he warned it’s irreversible. “Vasectomy is really just dividing and tying the vas, the tubes where sperm get out from the testicles to the ejaculate,” she said.

The purpose of a vasectomy is to cut and tie the vas off so sperm can’t get into the ejaculate. However, men can still procedure ejaculate because sperm is just a tiny part of it. Since the sperm can’t go beyond the tied vas, it is reabsorbed by the body. This is why doctors cut and tie the tubes to prevent the tubes from reattaching. Unwin explained during the procedure: “The tubes have been fried so they’re blocked off and tied off so they can’t heal and sperm can travel back through” Metro UK reported.

Estimates of vasectomies performed in the U.S. are limited since these procedures are done in many setting other than hospitals. Today, on World Vasectomy Day, around 300 physicians in 30 countries are committed to doing 1,500 vasectomies in 24 hours. Viewers can watch a live broadcast of World Vasectomy Day here.