Takai rejoins private sector: Ex-Defense CIO charts health insurer's IT growth

Teri Takai, who began her first official day today as chief information officer and executive vice president of Detroit-based Meridian Health Plan, has spent the last decade as CIO of government-owned information technology departments in Michigan, California and the U.S. Department of Defense.



Now back in her native Michigan and in private industry, she said she is excited to parlay her experience in the health care industry.



"I wanted to work in an environment where I could make a difference and provide services directly to people," said Takai, 66. "I am happy to be back in the private sector and being in an industry focused on people."



Takai, who grew up in Detroit, spent more than 30 years with Ford Motor Co., had stints at Federal-Mogul Corp. and Electronic Data Systems and also served as CIO for the state of Michigan from 2003-08 under Gov. Jennifer Granholm.



Sean Cotton, Meridian's chief administrative officer, said Takai takes over Meridian's IT department at a crucial growth stage in the company's 17-year history.



"We are going to double in size and should be a $3 billion to $4 billion company by the end of 2015 with the settled contract lines we have," Cotton said. "We are a managed care company, but really an IT company because our main product is information. It is critical we have an (IT system) that is scalable and fits our future needs."



Investment in IT systems is crucial to long-term growth strategies, especially in the health care industry that is expanding under health care reform, said Doug Wiescinski, information technology consulting partner and head of IT for Plante Moran PLLC in Southfield.



"The changes that are occurring in the insurance industry itself and the health care value chain are significant," Wiescinski said. "Companies that have been fairly localized are becoming broader, regional and even national. The ability of IT to support that growth with flexibility, as well as to take on new constituencies, is critical."



For example, when the auto industry faced economic challenges in 2006 to 2013, Wiescinski said IT investment was cut.



"Now we are seeing an incredible amount of investment in IT as organizations are trying to catch up," he said. "Those that were able to invest were able to expand quickly and support customer and supplier relationships. Those that couldn't (invest) had to put projects on hold."



Meridian was founded in 1997 as Health Plan of Michigan Inc. by CEO David Cotton, M.D., and his wife, Shery, who last December stepped down as the company's COO.



Michael Cotton, who formerly headed up Meridian's Medicaid health plan in Illinois, took over for his mother. Jon Cotton, Sean's twin, is president of Meridian Health Plan of Michigan, the state's largest Medicaid HMO with 370,000 members.





Road to Meridian

In May, Takai decided after three years it was time to step down from the Defense Department, return home to family in Michigan and ponder whether she wanted to go back to work in the private sector or possibly go into the academic environment.



"When you are a political appointee, you know you are there for a certain amount of time," Takai said. "I took work on a consulting basis (Lansing-based Dewpoint Inc.) to see how I liked consulting and look at opportunities in other areas. ... Health care kept cropping up."



In early July, David Cotton read in Crain's that Takai had returned to Michigan. He phoned her to ask for advice on Meridian's IT department and to help with Meridian's CIO search, Sean Cotton said.



"We found out she has a real personality fit with our family, with Tom, and everybody," Sean Cotton said. "She is on the same page as we are with family values, and she comes with an impressive background, talent and aptitude."



Educated at the University of Michigan, Takai spent 30 years at Ford, helping the company implement a global IT strategy for such departments as engineering, marketing, purchasing, supply chain and financing. She then spent several years as managing director for Electronic Data Systems and as process development director at Federal-Mogul Corp. before joining the Granholm administration.



"I am most proud in Michigan of getting the (IT) department stood up," Takai said. "(Former Gov. John) Engler consolidated 1,700 employees into a single department" and then left office.



"We got everybody working together, linked IT with the governor's (Granholm) agenda" and four times was named the No. 1 best digital government by the Center for Digital Government, she said. "They judge you on how well you put out information to the public. Costs were down 25 percent, and we put those savings into new projects."

Future plans

Over the next two years, Takai will expand the scale of Meridian's IT system to prepare for massive growth over the next five years in employees and members, Sean Cotton said.



By 2019, Meridian is expected to hire another 1,000 workers, mostly at its headquarters in downtown Detroit, to support a nearly tripling of membership growth that now totals about 540,000 members.