Senegal is poised on Wednesday to sell its first dollar bond in a little more than three years, extending the record pace of African bond issuance amid rampant demand for higher-yielding assets.

The West African country is set to raise $500 million from the 10-year debt sale at a yield of 6.25%, according to a banker working on the deal.

Investors placed more than $4 billion of orders, the banker said.

Bond issuance from African borrowers including Kenya and Ivory Coast has accelerated in recent weeks after a slow start to the year as still-low interest rates coupled with investors’ chasing chunkier returns allows countries to snag relatively cheap funding. So far this year, African countries have sold $7.2 billion of bonds globally, 12% more than a year ago and the most on record at this point in the calendar year, according to data provider Dealogic. About 85% of that cash has been raised since the start of June.

“We knew the likes of Kenya and Ivory Coast had been planning to issue bonds, but the deals have been larger than expected because of the strong market demand,” said Kevin Daly, an emerging-market fund manager at Aberdeen Asset Management. “With the low-yield environment, it’s a great opportunity for these countries to come to market.”

Average yields in the region have fallen to about 5% from 5.89% at the start of the year, according to a J.P. Morgan index of emerging-market bonds. Many people had expected these bonds to rise in yield as the U.S. Federal Reserve scaled back its stimulus program. Instead, riskier assets have retained their allure.

Even so, some investors are wary about how cheaply many African countries have been able to borrow given their relatively low credit ratings and higher risk of default.

“This is the result of massive money printing and will only be resolved once the music finally stops,” said Ben Bennett, a credit strategist at Legal & General Investment Management.

Wednesday’s deal comes a week after West African peer Ivory Coast sold $750 million of 10-year bonds at a yield of 5.625%.

Mr. Daly said he passed on the Ivory Coast bonds because they were too expensive but is considering buying some of Senegal’s issue as the yield on offer is more attractive.

In contrast to Ivory Coast, which has already suffered two civil wars and two defaults since the turn of the century, Senegal’s political backdrop has been relatively trouble-free.

The business landscape is less positive. In 2013, the World Bank ranked Senegal 178th out of 189 countries for ease of doing business. That will continue to weigh on investment and economic growth if there is no improvement, according to credit-rating firm Standard & Poor’s.

Still, Senegal has already received pledges from foreign donors and private investors worth billions of dollars to fund infrastructure projects as part of a wider plan to boost economic growth, S&P noted.

If that succeeds in helping Senegal double growth rates to about 7%-to-8% of gross domestic product as hoped, “this is looking like a very strong story,” Aberdeen’s Mr. Daly said.

Citigroup, Société Générale and Standard Chartered Bank are managing the sale.

Senegal is rated B1 by Moody’s Investors Service and B+ by Standard & Poor’s.

Write to Ben Edwards at ben.edwards@wsj.com.