Weather takes a turn over the weekend, but will warm up after Monday

A horse grazes on bits of grass off of St. Louis Avenue as snow falls Sunday. ( Amanda Sutherland / Loveland Reporter-Herald )

Just as Lovelanders were getting used to short sleeves and shorts, the weather flipped and snow began falling early Sunday morning.

Around 2-4 inches of snow fell during the day Sunday, much of it melting, with a 90 percent chance of precipitation and a predicted 1-2 inches overnight, according to the National Weather Service.

"Wow, what a turn, huh? From 79 degrees on Friday and 70 degrees on Saturday, this was a shock to the system! But not that unusual for us here in Colorado," said Chris Knoetgen, the National Weather Service's official co-op observer for Loveland.

This turn in the weather is by no means unexpected or uncommon, with the latest snow, since Knoetgen started observing weather in Northern Colorado in 2002, falling May 12, 2010. The average date of the last snow is April 9.

A crabapple tree endures the spring storm on Sunday (Amanda Sutherland / Loveland Reporter-Herald)

"We have had approximately 48.8 inches, if no more accumulates tonight, of snow to date for the snow season 2013-2014, which ends on June 30th. We had 85.4 inches last year, so a lot less snow, but more of a cold winter this year," Knoetgen said.

Monday is supposed to warm up a bit, with sunny skies and a high of 46 degrees during the day, with a low of 28 at night.

Temperatures could get as high as 63 degrees on Tuesday, but there's a 30 percent chance of more snow or rain on Wednesday night and a slight chance of snow on Thursday. Friday's temperatures are going to dip down into the 30s.

The forecast for Saturday and Easter Sunday calls for partly cloudy skies with highs around 67 degrees.

Advertisement

The day's snowfall landed on the Christian-marked day known as Palm Sunday, which takes place the Sunday before Easter. How much do you know about the Easter holiday and its Christian roots?

According to the current results of the Reporter-Herald Easter Literacy Quiz, 93 percent of participants answered correctly what the "palm" in Palm Sunday refers to.

Test your own knowledge by visiting http://rhnews.co/EasterTest" title="rhnews.co">RHnews.co/EasterTest. Full results of the quiz will be released later in the week.

Contact Reporter-Herald Staff Writer James Garcia at 970-635-3630 or garciaj@reporter-herald.com. Follow him at Twitter.com/JamesGarciaRH.