5/13/15--Heather Lavoie of Geneia speaks during an interview in Concord on Wednesday. DAVID LANE/UNION LEADER (David Lane/Union Leader)





Q: How does your @home solution allow medical professionals to monitor patients remotely?

What are the cost savings with using @home?

How do you see the company growing?

Doctors talk about how medicine has always been about data. How much do you buy into that, and are you creating more data points for doctors to do a better job?

How are your services paid for?

Is that typically paid for by insurance or Medicare?

Is being efficient always better for society?

What's your advice for college graduates, and what was your first job after college?

Edited for space and clarity.

- Health care companies are jockeying for industry dollars while at the same time looking to help hospitals and physicians' groups save money.Geneia, which grew out of a Manchester consulting company, announced just this month it had signed its first New Hampshire customer, Bedford Nursing & Rehabilitation Center, to use software that can help monitor patients remotely and help doctors discover changes in people's conditions before more serious medical problems develop..."We actually want to improve lives," said Heather Lavoie, the company's chief operating officer, during an interview last week. "The mission does really matter to us a lot."At the company's Warren Street office, the 1988 Manchester High School West grad said the Affordable Care Act provides Geneia, a wholly owned subsidiary of Pennsylvania-based Capital BlueCross, with more opportunities and incentives at a time when the industry is looking toward innovation to control costs.A: We have wearable devices as well as other Bluetooth-enabled devices that are sited in the home. Then measurements are taken from an individual, whether it's a patch where it's taking ... the heart rate, the respiration rate. It can actually do a two-lead EKG, or they might get on a scale or take their blood pressure and do that with some frequency through the day...All of that data then is transmitted wirelessly. Clinical algorithms are then run against it to see if they're outside of any threshold parameters. So if their blood pressure is too low, their blood glucose is too high ... then those alerts are sent to our care team as well as then to physicians and a physician care team member. They can do outreach to the patient, and we can do outreach to the patient...We're still fairly early into its implementation. The studies have shown that the savings are anywhere from 20 to 25 percent of the total medical cost for the high-risk patients that are engaged. We focus on the people where it's most warranted: people with congestive heart failure, diabetes...We're expecting about at least 50 percent growth both in terms of personnel as well as in terms of revenue, and we expect the same trajectory next year. We have around 15 people situated in New Hampshire now. We're expecting to be over 30 next year. We're an organization that has over 200 now in total across our markets. New England is an area - New Hampshire in particular - where we see opportunity for growth because of the tax structure, because we have access to a lot of strong universities in the area, high-tech folks.There's a lot obviously to be gained from an individual meeting with a patient and understanding them, but physicians really need objective measures in order to make decisions. And they need a lot of data points...Up until now, they really haven't had easy access to that on an aggregated basis. It isn't easily extracted out of the electronic medial record, so our software takes in claims data. It takes in data from the electronic medical record. It takes in data from any of these devices, so we have physiologic measures...We actually take in pyschographic data as well - so buying patterns, credit history, things of that nature - that all are used to assess the risk of an individual in terms of health outcomes.Then physicians and their care team, folks back at their offices, can actually intervene and understand when people are at high risk and can get them in sooner. Without that information, there's sort of a black hole.Depending on the service, we have license fees associated with the software. For the remote patient monitoring, we have equipment kit fees as well as monitoring service fees if we actually perform the monitoring on behalf of our clients."..If a hospital system were to buy it, then there is some reimbursement for some case management and some monitoring. Most of the payment that they would actually be able to achieve is really because of savings they might get by doing a more effective job at managing. They don't get a direct fee for service reimbursement. ... The Affordable Care Act is moving away from that direct fee for service and rather paying for the outcomes.I guess it depends on the definition of efficient and if efficient relates to better value, so people are actually getting better care for the amount of money they're providing. If you look at it from a pure manufacturing operation and we're just seeing people more quickly and more of them, then that's not the goal...What we are hoping for is that the care actually is better for the money that's spent on it. Right now we fall behind every other industrialized nation in terms of our health outcomes for the amount of money, and we spend twice as much as anyone else. We know we're not getting the right value for the care that we're providing...I started in health care in high school as a file clerk and continued on through college. I was just on a women in technology panel, and I think the biggest thing I kept expressing to the girls in the room was to just to sort of take on any opportunity. Be inquisitive...