When you are in Italy… you eat ____ (fill in the blank).

So you eat…. fried cow brains ? Wait a tic, that can’t be right. Oh wait, it totally is!

In a minor reform for the art capital, Italy has mandated that the food vendors serve up more produce, and that it’s to be sourced locally and feature local dishes.

Head to Florence, and you will find that nearly 70% of all the food served in restaurants there is locally sourced. (Way to go Italy!).

So what’s the big idea then?

“We are seeing an unstoppable distortion in our cultural heritage, of which food is a part,” Mayor Dario Nardella said in a post on his Facebook page “A restaurant opens every week in Florence, not to mention minimarkets and Asiamarkets.”

Good to hear, but how does this relate to eating fried cow noodles?

In efforts to preserve cultural heritage, these local food vendors may end up serving more fried cow’s brains, according to Reuters. And it sounds like it may be more out of spite than anything else.

Since local eateries in the area are being ordered to preserve the heritage, many may comply by offering up something that most tourists would never imagine sampling, a Florentine specialty, fried cow brains.

According to a Wikipedia entry, “Beef brains and veal (juvenile beef) or calf’s brains are used in the cuisines of France; Italy; Spain; El Salvador; Mexico, etc. where they are called sesos in Spanish and are eaten in tacos and quesadillas; Pakistan, where they are known in Urdu as Maghaz; Portugal; Indonesia; and in the United States, especially in St. Louis, Missouri, and the Ohio River valley.”

But they are not the only ones who think that cow brains are tasty fare. We took some time to dig up more information, and the food is so popular that Hubpages listed several recipes for a cow brain sandwich, veal brain nuggets and more.

It seems fitting to leave you with some related words of wisdom

“Everybody knows brains can be fried – just as all know they can be addled. We of the old South pickled ours. Go and do likewise if you want an experience.” – Martha McCulloch-Williams, ‘Dishes & Beverages of the Old South’ (1913)

As far as actually eating the brains ourselves… we’ll pass. But thanks for grossing us out.

Comments

comments