To help prevent victims of domestic violence living with HIV/AIDS from falling into homelessness, the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) is making more than $9 million available to state, local governments, and non-profits through the Violence Against Women Act (VAWA)/Housing Opportunities for Persons with AIDS (HOPWA) Project Demonstration – a collaborative effort between HUD’s Office of HIV/AIDS Housing (OHH) and the Department of Justice’s Office of Violence Against Women (OVW). More than half of women living with HIV/AIDS in the U.S. do not have access to stable housing and are at higher risk of experiencing domestic violence. Read HUD’s Notice of Funding Availability (NOFA).

Through this demonstration program, HUD will provide funding for transitional and other temporary rental housing assistance and supportive services to low-income persons living with HIV/AIDS who are victims of sexual assault, domestic violence, dating violence, or stalking. Grantees will be required to partner with local domestic violence and sexual assault service providers for client outreach and engagement and for comprehensive supportive services to ensure client success in the program.

“Every American deserves to live in a safe and stable environment,” said HUD Secretary Julián Castro. “This funding will help vulnerable populations with HIV/AIDS to break the cycle of domestic violence and get the help they need.”

“We understand that HIV and domestic violence are both challenging issues and it is a great opportunity for HUD to collaborate with the U.S. Department of Justice (DOJ) to focus on their intersection,” said Ann Oliva, HUD’s Deputy Assistant Secretary for Special Needs. “It is important for us to find partners who help us be strategic in getting the resources to the people they may not be currently reaching.”

This demonstration follows a recommendation by the Federal Interagency Working Group on the Intersection of HIV/AIDS, Violence against Women and Girls, and Gender–Related Health Disparities to enhance Federal efforts in addressing HIV and intimate partner violence (IPV) among homeless and marginally housed women and girls. While the Working Group focuses on women and girls, the housing assistance and supportive services provided through the demonstration will be open to all eligible clients regardless of sex, gender identity, sexual orientation, familial status, marital status, race, color, religion, national origin, disability, or age.

OHH and OVW have collaborated to identify available resources to support this demonstration. OVW identified over $1.4 million from the Transitional Housing Assistance Grants for Victims of Domestic Violence, Dating Violence, Stalking, or Sexual Assault Program. OVW and OHH executed an Interagency Agreement assigning HUD to administer the Transitional Housing Assistance Program grant funds. OHH has identified over $7.6 million in HOPWA funding that will be used to fund housing assistance for program beneficiaries, coordination and planning activities, and grant management and administration.

The HOPWA program is the only Federal program dedicated to addressing the housing needs of persons living with HIV/AIDS and their families. Grantees partner with nonprofit organizations and housing agencies to provide housing and support to program beneficiaries.

HUD’s Office of HIV/AIDS Housing hosted a pre-application webcast on Tuesday, September 8, 2015, for anyone interested in submitting an application for the Violence Against Women Act (VAWA) and Housing Opportunities for Persons With AIDS (HOPWA) Project Demonstration. The webcast covered the information contained in the VAWA/HOPWA Project Demonstration Notice of Funding Availability (NOFA). The archived webcast is now available to view at your convenience.