Andrew Grams

The second concert of our all too brief Estes Park Music Festival will feature an all Mozart program, which will be sure to please all attendees. This concert will be on Monday night, July 28 at 7:30 p.,. in the Stanley Hotel Concert Hall.

Guest conductor is the rising young American, Andrew Grams, who is music director of the Elgin Symphony. Grams, who was assistant conductor of the Cleveland Orchestra, has steadily built a reputation for being one of classical music's most promising young artists. Grams has led numerous American orchestras with rave reviews and promises to give us an unforgettable concert.

Amy Jo Rhine

The soloist is the Colorado Music Festival's Principal Horn Amy Jo Rhine. Rhine is a seasoned orchestral performer who is a member of the IRIS Orchestra, based in Memphis and who performs regularly with the Saint Louis Symphony Orchestra.

An all Mozart program is a real gift for all music lovers. Mozart's music is the seeming paradox of its sweetness and its profundity. A list of of Mozart's musical qualities would include formal elegance, supremely graceful melodic lines and endless ingenious invention. This concert is bound to engage the listener in some of classical music's finest compositions.

Advertisement

The concert opens with Mozart's Symphony No 33, K. 319. The first movement has buoyant melodies that sound carefree; the second has an operatic character. The minuet which follows is a rustic dance. The final movement has three themes that contribute to a general feeling of gaiety.

Mozart wrote six horn concertos of which four have survived and these are the backbone of the hornist's repertory. All four are three movement pieces with a strong, almost jovial first movement. The second, slow movement is an expressive song for the soloist and the final movement is a virtuosic display of good humor and playfulness.

The final symphony on the program is Mozart's Symphony No 41, the "Jupiter" Symphony. It is his last, longest and some say greatest symphony. It is a huge work, expansive both emotionally and structurally. The first movement is grand, introducing material that is used in subsequent movements. The second movement is rich with an interesting use of the strings. The 3rd or minuet movement is built on a falling melodic line. The final movement has a festive breath which contains a highly contrapuntal blending of several independent lines into a harmonious whole. You will know why this work is programmed at the end of the concert when you hear it!

This concert provides opportunity to hear three of Mozart's finest works at one time and one place.

New this season will be the Pre-Concert Overtures. These informal dialogues and informative talks with the guest conductors are free to all ticket holders. They will take place in the Lodge adjacent to the Stanley Concert Hall beginning at 6 p.m. on the night of the concert. The guest conductor will be present between 6:30 until 6:45 p.m. A cash bar will be available.

Tickets: Individual concert tickets: $30 each. Tickets available at the door or in advance at Macdonald Book Shop, 152 E. Elkhorn Ave, Estes Park or at the Festival business office located at Hobert Office Services, 1140 Manford Ave., Suite A, Estes Park (970) 586-9519.

Watch for a preview of the music to be performed at each concert to appear in this newspaper the week before the concert.