FORT COLLINS — It’s going to take a strong second half of the season under first-year coach Mike Bobo for the Colorado State Rams to claim a third consecutive bowl berth.

That was one of the realities after Brett Rypien threw for 339 yards and one touchdown and ran for a second in a little more than three quarters of work to lead 25th-ranked Boise State to a 41-10 rout of the Rams on Saturday night at Hughes Stadium.

The loss dropped CSU to 2-4 overall and 0-2 in Mountain West play.

BOXSCORE: Boise State 41, Colorado State 10

The Broncos (5-1, 2-0) are the defending league champions and seem on track to claim the single “group of five” bid to a College Football Playoff access bowl for the second straight year. So this wasn’t embarrassing for CSU because the Rams lost to a suspect opponent — they didn’t — but the tendency to give up big plays and quarterback uncertainty, among other things, were repeat themes from CSU’s previous losses.

“We pretty much got whipped soundly in all three phases,” Bobo said. “You have to give Boise State credit. They were the better football team. We had a chance to grab momentum a couple of times in the game and couldn’t do it.”

Rypien, the nephew of former NFL quarterback Mark Rypien, was making only his second start after taking over for injured sophomore starter Ryan Finley, but the true freshman from Spokane, Wash., continued to look like a poised veteran.

Starter Nick Stevens played the first two series at QB for the Rams, and his only pass in that stint was incomplete. Redshirt freshman Coleman Key came on after that, and it turned out to be more than a one- or two-series cameo, but he didn’t light it up, either. Key was 5-of-19 for 56 yards, with a 13-yard touchdown pass to Joe Hansley, before Stevens returned late in the third quarter and ended up 8-for-10 for 60 yards for the night.

MORE: CSU coach Mike Bobo pulls QB Nick Stevens early

“We were going to play (Key) on the third series, going into the game,” Bobo said. “Then he had a little momentum there … so I decided to keep him in the game, and then we didn’t really execute from that point on offensively, except a short drive on a short field to get a field goal. We had some opportunities that we missed and went back to Nick just because of execution.”

After taking a 27-10 halftime lead and cruising, the Broncos ended up with 597 yards of total offense. BSU also had three long scoring plays in the first 16 minutes — Thomas Sperbeck receptions of 53 (on a pass from wide receiver Shane Williams-Rhodes) and 85 yards (from Rypien) and a Jeremy McNichols 56-yard run

“They’re a good team,” said CSU senior safety Trent Matthews. “They don’t miss plays. They play sound. They don’t make mistakes. That was a well-deserved win for them. They had three (long) runs and passes. We eliminate those, and this is (closer). We have to eliminate big plays.”

Said safety Kevin-Pierre Louis: “They just made plays, and we didn’t. We had a perfect defense called. We made mistakes, and they didn’t. That’s Boise. They aren’t going to hurt themselves. We hurt ourselves.”

BSU also drilled CSU in the second week of the season at Boise in 2014, but the Rams responded with a nine-game winning streak that got them to 10-1. This team probably will have to improve significantly, and quickly, to put together the run required to get to six wins and attain bowl eligibility.

PHOTOS: Colorado State no match for Boise State

Bobo characterized the Rams’ situation as “a big gut check. I expect out of everybody that’s involved in the program to come to work. Life’s not easy. Things aren’t handed to you on a timeline like you want. Change is hard, and right now we’re going through some change and it’s hard. The results aren’t where our players expected or our coaches expected. We have to regroup, and you have to play out the season. We have to figure out what we can do to give ourselves a chance to win. Because that wasn’t it tonight.”

The Rams next face Air Force at home, at 1:30 p.m. Saturday.

“We have an instate opponent next week and we have to come back and go to work,” Bobo said. “Playing an option team, we have to be disciplined. We have to eliminate explosive plays. We have to generate explosive plays on offense, and we have to figure out how to get some momentum on special teams. Right now, we’re struggling in all three areas, but there’s a lot of season left to play.”

Terry Frei: tfrei@denverpost.com or @tfrei

Game balls

Brett Rypien, QB, Boise State. True freshman threw for 339 yards and a touchdown, and he ran for a TD.

Thomas Sperbeck, WR, Boise State. Unfortunately for the Rams, Sperbeck was the most productive No. 82 on the field, making five catches for 178 yards and two TDs.

Jeremy McNichols, RB, Boise State. Had 17 carries for 104 yards and two TDs, plus six receptions for 77 yards.

Terry Frei, The Denver Post