Buy Photo The Tennessee Housing Development Agency builds housing for income-qualified people. (Photo: Larry McCormack / File / The Tennessean)Buy Photo Story Highlights The Tennessee Housing Development Agency builds housing for income-qualified people.

Help change the conversation on affordable housing by engaging others who might have the wrong idea.

TDHA builds affordable housing such as The Preserve at Metro Center, the Hallmark or Ryman Lofts.

If the economic troubles of the past decade demonstrated anything, it is the importance of the housing sector to the overall health of the economy.

Housing and economic development go hand in hand. To remind me of this, I keep a little sign in my office that reads, “Houses are where jobs go at the end of the day.”

If a community does not have housing that is affordable to the full range of people who live and work there, at some point that lack of affordable housing becomes a drag on efforts to attract jobs. Either that or you attract them and watch the workers commute home to the next county, taking their tax dollars and disposable income with them.

In my travels across the state, I am encouraged that more communities are giving thought to affordable housing, which is, after all, the mission of the Tennessee Housing Development Agency.

For many people, though, the words “affordable housing” bring to mind the kind of graffiti-covered housing project you might see in a particularly gritty episode of "Law & Order." As long as that’s the picture that comes to mind, we will a have hard time making the case for more housing that is affordable for working Tennesseans of modest means. I’d like to set the record straight, and to challenge you to join me in getting the talk right about housing that’s affordable.

The affordable housing we help build in Tennessee looks like The Preserve at Metro Center, or the Hallmark at Bellevue, or Laurel House in the Gulch or the Ryman Lofts downtown. A quick look at these buildings on Google or The Tennessean’s website can be a real eye-opener.

Because they were financed with the help of Low-Income Housing Tax Credits awarded by THDA, they are income-restricted and rent-controlled for up to 20 years. You have likely driven by some of these properties without realizing that, which is by design.

These are quality units. They haven’t driven down property values or scared off the neighbors. In many instances, they have been catalysts for other neighborhood improvements.

Ralph Perrey (Photo: Submitted)

Just as important as understanding what kind of housing we build is understanding whom we build it for — working people who don’t make a lot of money. A young person right out of school working their first job for $13 an hour is income-qualified to live in a tax credit property.

What kinds of jobs are these? Nursing techs at our hospitals. Pre-school teachers. Grocery clerks. Servers in your favorite restaurant. Housekeepers at all new hotels in town. In other words, people whose work is important to the life of our community.

We need to develop housing that is affordable because we need the people who need affordable housing.

When I ask you to help us get the talk right about affordable housing, that can be something as simple as speaking up when a neighbor, a colleague, a dinner companion or someone you worship with begins talking about how “we don’t want that stuff” or “we don’t want those people.” Remind them about what’s being built and who we are building it for.

A quiet word from you to someone who likes and respects you is going to carry far more weight than anything I can say in a speech or write in a newspaper. And it will help us get the talk right in Nashville and build those “houses where jobs go at the end of the day.”

Ralph Perrey is executive director of the Tennessee Housing Development Agency. This column is adapted from his speech to the Nashville Rotary earlier this year.

Synopsis

Help change the conversation on affordable housing by engaging others who might have the wrong idea.

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/1QNsf29