Asheville resident and community college pioneer Dr. Bob Barringer has been selected to receive The American Association of Community Colleges (AACC) “2015 Leadership Award.” He is one of only two individuals selected to receive the lifetime achievement honor. (Photo: SPECIAL TO THE CITIZEN-TIMES)

The Report Card issues grades A through F, and incompletes where necessary, to a variety of news items in this space. Got an idea that makes the grade? Send it to JBuchanan@CITIZEN-TIMES.com

Reader grades

F to the AC-T; why is there no coverage of the NCC women’s basketball championship game held April 7? How is it that A C-T covered the men’s championship played the night before, but now there’s no coverage of the women’s game? Disappointing that this is not the first time your paper has been slow to report on the NCAA Women’s Tournament; you did the same thing with the women’s bracket. Say what you will, but your continued actions make it clear you aren’t interested in the women’s tournament. Very sad in 2015 to see you repeatedly short-change women’s athletics this way. Time to get with it and do better.

Dr. Christopher Pratt, Asheville

F for the “Bus-riding ‘nuns’” (and the pubs and breweries involved) reported on Tuesday, April 7. I thought this must be a sick but belated April Fool’s joke but, no, it’s apparently just stock Asheville humor; crass, insensitive, ignorant and dim-witted. It’s time for Christians to show they are not fair game.

David Snell, Franklin

F to the writer who issued a “F” to the Citizen-Times for “shilling for the sex police” by, in his words, “perpetuating the lie that one in five college women is sexually assaulted during her college years.” In his very convoluted argument, he cites (in his words again) the “very limited,” “conceptually flawed,” “debunked” 2007 DOJ study that is “useful only in the feds’ and the left’s war against the rest of us” who “wants to put the government in our bedrooms.” He goes on to cite a 2014 DOJ survey that “interviewed a large national sample” and used a definition of rape and sexual assault that would make sense to most of us.” I would kindly like to ask the writer just what definition of rape and sexual assault would make sense to most of us.

Nancy Dillingham, Asheville

Staff grades

A to Asheville resident and community college pioneer Dr. Bob Barringer, who has been selected to receive The American Association of Community Colleges (AACC) “2015 Leadership Award.” He is one of only two individuals selected to receive the lifetime achievement honor. Barringer served as interim president of two North Carolina colleges, The College of the Albemarle and Mayland Community College. He served two other colleges — Community College of Baltimore County in Maryland and Brookdale Community College in New Jersey — as permanent president. He became a professional interim community college president and served 10 institutions in that role, where he often led institutions out of difficult times and transitioned them to more positive and stable circumstances. In his capacity of CEO of Gold Hill Associates (the community college presidential search firm that he ran for 20 years out of Asheville), he assisted 11 N.C. community colleges in searches for new presidents as well as the past three searches for statewide system presidents of the N.C. Community Colleges. Dr. Barringer will receive the award at the national community college conference on April 17 in San Antonio, Texas.

B to the news that the uninsured rate among U.S. adults has fallen to 11.9 percent, the lowest number since Gallup and Healthways began tracking it in 2008. That’s a huge drop of the 18 percent rate in late 2013, just before the Affordable Care Act went into effect. The Gallup report notes an improved economy may have accelerate the drop. We’d give an A here, but a B is warranted given the tenuous fate of the ACA, with factors from its sustainability to its survivability still very much in play.

D to Senate Bill 480, designed to ban school employees from political activities while on the clock. The North Carolina Association of Educators is worried the measure would have a chilling effect on political engagement in the education community. The bill’s sponsor, Sen. Andy Wells, R-Catawba, says it’s needed to combat misuse of public resources. The bill raises a slew of questions, including where the line will be drawn regarding “campaigning” — for example, is voicing legitimate concern about a budget proposal regarding schools campaigning? And considering so many educators work a tremendous amount of hours off the clock, where will the line be drawn there? While the motivation for this legislation may be pure, it does indeed seem to us that it will have a chilling effect.

Read or Share this story: http://avlne.ws/1FOeMhF