Ebola virus hits close to home

Brooklyn: We are told by news channels and the Centers for Disease Control not to panic that someone has entered the U.S. with Ebola, possibly infecting up to 20 others. But how do they expect us to follow through with that when, as soon as we turn on the news, we are shown a constant live stream of news regarding Ebola — with videos of people in hazmat suits in West Africa — and its rapidly increasing death rate? Aymon Faizi

Whitestone: Just remember that the southern border is as secure as the White House. If you like your doctor you can keep your doctor. There is not even a smidgen of evidence that the IRS is corrupt. A self-admitted militant Muslim who advertises such on his Facebook page and then goes out and cuts the head off of a middle-aged woman in Oklahoma did not commit a terrorist act. And there is absolutely no threat of Ebola spreading in the United States. Jake McNicholas

Cause for concern

Bronx: Over two months ago, Voice of the People published my letter about the seriousness of the now widely known Ebola virus. Although I’m a mere commoner with no expertise on this subject whatsoever, what I do have, along with most Americans, is something called common sense. Right from the start, everyone from the President on down should have prepared the country for protecting ourselves from the virus’ ravages. Now that Ebola is here, Americans are told the government has things under control. When a person walks into a hospital, says he just came from West Africa and is sent home to contaminate others, I would not call that “under control.” Two things for our President and Congress members to remember: One, every year we are told to be careful because it is easy to catch the flu, which is a virus like Ebola. Two, viruses do not discriminate. Matthew Galcik

Connecting the dots

Brooklyn: ISIS. Ebola virus. Coincidence? What’s next? Nikia Charles

Speak up

Scarsdale, N.Y.: Re Alton Nolen (“Beheader’s kin: Pray for ‘a good kid,’” Sept. 30): When teachers see troubling behaviors, they know that intervention is needed immediately. Teachers reach out to supervisors, guidance counselors and families for assistance. However, many children fall through the cracks. Early effective intervention can prevent some horrific incidents from happening in the future. When you see something, say

something. Phyllis C. Murray

No-clue Lupica

Manhattan: Mike Lupica out-stupided himself with “Nice try, Sox, but Jeter’s OUR Captain” (column, Sept. 29). I guess he saw a different game than most of us, missing all the Yankee fans wearing their team logo proudly in the stands and chanting “Derek Jeter!” And so what if Red Sox fans chimed in? It was a day for the baseball history books. Mary Jo Pane

Professional jealousy

Staten Island: If you read between the lines, Mike Lupica’s columns hint at the possibility that he was the last kid picked for games. That undercurrent broke the surface and gushed all over Derek Jeter in comments about “Jeter Inc.” and Jeter’s venture into the Players Tribune (“Suddenly, cat no longer has Derek’s tongue,” column, Oct. 2). Jeter took the scathing wrath not only because he’s a symbol of the athlete Lupica couldn’t be, but also a player who had the audacity to keep Lupica at bay. If, in Lupica’s view, Jeter never gave enough of himself, Lupica is conversely and unmistakably transparent. No need to read between the lines on that article. Glenn Ramanauskas

The final score

Manhattan: I salute Derek Jeter for all he’s done for the Yankees. Now, we start to hear about A-Rod. Is this all noise just to cover up the real issue — that the aging and expensive Yankees and their 84-78 record did not make the playoffs again? Felix Baez

Let me mourn in peace

Brooklyn: After hearing about the three retired NYC firefighters who died, one of whom was a close friend, I decided to visit the 9/11 Memorial. As I strolled around the reflecting pools and waterfalls, I encountered a very harassing security guard. This man was annoyingly reminding people that they could not lean on, or rest their hands on, or in any way touch the names engraved on the memorial. He went so far as to tell one elderly couple with canes that they couldn’t stop for a minute and catch their breath. When I asked him about this rule, the man intimidatingly said to me, “Sir, do you want to have a problem with me?” This is when I lost it. For years I have seen people make etchings of their loved ones’ names and knew this wasn’t prohibited. So I found a supervisor and said, “Sir, as I see my friends’ names, I stop and touch them and lose myself for a minute or so, reflecting about their lives. Is this wrong?” He looked puzzled for a second, shook his head and said he would have a talk with his men, which he did. My first visit to a solemn place of remembrance was ruined by an overzealous rent-a-cop. Has anyone else out there had this experience? Robert Fiorello

Win-win situation

Howard Beach: To Voicer Kaitlin Sullivan: Research has consistently shown that quality pre-kindergarten programs benefit not only individual students but school districts as well. Children who attend these programs score higher on reading and math tests. I find this to be true with my own two children. Carol Franklin

Health deform

Forest Hills: I was so happy to read Voicer Linda Smith’s letter regarding the Affordable Care Act. I was waiting to hear from someone like me who has employer-sponsored health care. My coverage also declined after the ACA was implemented. I went from having no annual deductible to a $6,000 deductible, plus out-of-pocket expenses. In addition, I pay for my family to be covered under my plan. So not only am I paying half of the premium, I have this huge deductible to meet. It has had a tremendous negative effect on my family’s budget this year and will only get worse when premiums go up. Libby Gurgis

Clarifying light

Forest Hills: To Voicer Jo-Ann Maginnis: I’m pretty certain the Empire State Building is never lit up in connection with religious events, persons or observances. That is a choice made by the private owners of the building. Linda Sperling

Overexposure

Verona, N.J.: My compliments on Linda Stasi’s piece “Grace and disgrace” (Oct. 1). What Stasi fails to include is the fact that writers like herself, and newspapers like the Daily News, continue to give undeserved fame to the “disgrace” of Kanye and Kim. Nancy Juniper Wands

Where the buck stops

South Amboy, N.J.: Let me start off by saying I am a huge Rex Ryan fan. But I heard him on “The Michael Kay Show” not answering a question on whether or not he makes the decision to take out a QB. What? If you are not making the decisions on the field, then what the hell are you doing there? Please, Rex, you are killing me here. Say it ain’t so. Lorraine Dietz

Watch the hands

Staten Island: To Voicer Michele Corelli: Perhaps you should look at the picture of President Bush saluting with his dog in his arms. Please notice that Bush is holding his dog in one arm and saluting with his other hand. Susan Esposito

Check the mirror

Manhattan: When I hear the left-wing media claim Republicans who criticize the poor performance of the Secret Service are doing so as a diversion to make themselves look good politically, I can’t help but feel that the left is, once again, projecting what they would be doing if the circumstances were reversed. Jim Bitros

Obama fatigue

Brooklyn: Maybe the Secret Service has finally grown weary of President Obama’s act, and they don’t care anymore. Just like the rest of the country. Tommy Mitchell

Part of the picture

Piscataway, N.J.: I have some news for citizens who like recording police officers: You may not like it, but the law says police have a right to use force to effect arrests or if they are being assaulted. My question to you is: Do you record when the civilian is spitting on or assaulting an officer, or do you start recording only when the officer is defending himself or herself, then claim police

brutality? Vincent Piano