Stokley Mae Babb-Raymundo arrives at 2:43 p.m.on New Year's Day

Jessica Babb-Raymundo and Erwin Raymundo hold their newborn daughter, Stokley Mae Babb-Raymundo, on Thursday, who was McKee Medical Center's first baby of the new year. ( Steve Stoner / Loveland Reporter-Herald )

First baby at Medical Center of the Rockies The first baby born in Loveland in 2015 was at Medical Center of the Rockies at 3:21 a.m. Claire Ferguson, born to Megan and Aaron Ferguson of Loveland, weighed 7 pounds, 10 ounces. The couple declined being interviewed or photographed.

Jessica Babb-Raymundo thought her daughter would arrive on her due date of Jan. 7, but she came early on New Year's Day.

Stokley Mae Babb-Raymundo arrived at McKee Medical Center at 2:43 p.m. and is the hospital's first delivery of 2015. She weighs 7 pounds, 2 ounces and measures 20 inches.

"I wasn't quite expecting her today," Babb-Raymundo said as she held Stokley, dressed in a black onesie with "Happy New Year!" in silver letters and wrapped in a striped blanket.

"But we'll take her," said Erwin Raymundo, Stokley's father.

Stokley's parents, both 30 and of Greeley, planned to be at a doctor's appointment in the same hospital room, but a week later, Raymundo said.

"I was expecting to watch football all day with the godfather. He's been sending me updates," Raymundo said about Ryan Reed-Baum of Loveland, who was in the hospital room, along with Babb-Raymundo's mother, Debbie Babb, and her sisters, Chelsea Babb, 25, and Holly Babb, 19.

Raymundo and Babb-Raymundo arrived at the hospital at 8 a.m. for the delivery, which took nearly seven hours. They chose McKee because Babb works there and that's where Babb-Raymundo and her siblings, including an older brother, were born.

"It's very exciting and overwhelming. It's probably going to be one of the best experiences that we've had," Babb-Raymundo said looking in her husband's eyes, just after he kissed Stokley on the head.

The baby is the couple's first child, and they plan to have anywhere from one to four more. The child is the third grandchild for Debbie Babb.

"When I was pushing, I was thinking I don't want to do this again," Babb-Raymundo said. "But I know we will."

Stokley Mae Babb-Raymundo rests Thursday in her mother's arms after being born on New Year's Day at McKee Medical center as the hospital's first baby of the year. (Steve Stoner / Loveland Reporter-Herald)

The couple named Stokley after Brandon Stokley of the Denver Broncos, Raymundo's favorite football player.

"He didn't have the best stats, but he always did the right thing," Raymundo said.

Raymundo plans on being a stay-at-home dad, while Babb-Raymundo will continue working in graphic design. Raymundo said he's looking forward to the quality time he'll have with Stokley and being her "protective papa bear."

Babb describes Stokley as "perfect."

"I can't want to see her develop and get her personality and how she'll be," she said.

Stokley's aunts argued about who will be the best aunt for Stokley.

"I love being an aunt, and I'll be the best aunt," Chelsea said.

"Holly is number one," Holly said.

"I'm definitely number one," Chelsea said.

"No, I am," Holly said.

Actually, Stokley was number one for 2015 at McKee. With that ranking, she received the New Year's baby basket of gifts, which this year included the onesie, a swaddle wrap, a baby blanket, a thermometer, baby shampoo, diapers, wipes and a book.

"We provide the family of the New Year's baby with a gift as a means of joining the celebration," said Paul Matthews, public relations director at McKee Medical Center.

The number of babies born at McKee Medical Center in 2014 was 822 and 59 in December. The monthly average January through November was 69. There were 812 babies born at McKee in 2013.

At Medical Center of the Rockies, the year-to-date total as of the morning of Dec. 31 was 1,375 births. The month-to-date total for December was 105 births, and the monthly average was 115 for 2014.

Shelley Widhalm: 970-669-5050, swidhalm@reporter-herald.com, twitter.com/ShelleyWidhalm