Action Points Just as researchers had earlier found an association between primary care provider visits and death from CRC, they now have found the same regarding incidence of colorectal cancer.

Note that higher levels of income reflected lower odds of CRC and those who had previously been screened for CRC were 25% less likely to receive a diagnosis of CRC.

Just as researchers had earlier found an association between primary care provider visits and death from colorectal cancer, they now have found the same regarding incidence of colorectal cancer.

Medicare enrollees who had from five to 10 visits to their primary care physician (PCP) in a 2-year span had significantly lower incidence of colorectal cancer compared with those with zero to one PCP visit (adjusted odds ratio 0.94, 95% CI 0.91-0.96), according to Jeanne M. Ferrante, MD, MPH, from Rutgers-Robert Wood Johnson Medical School in New Brunswick, N.J., and colleagues.

Those who frequented their PCP more often also had significantly lower colorectal cancer (CRC)-specific mortality (aOR 0.78, 95% CI 0.75-0.82), as well as lower all-cause mortality (aOR 0.79, 95% CI 0.76-0.82), compared with the reference index of zero to one visit, they reported online in the Oct. 1 Annals of Internal Medicine.

Ever receiving a "CRC screening test or polypectomy explained the association between primary care utilization and CRC incidence," researchers noted, adding that "the recommendation of a primary care physician is one of the strongest predictors of adherence to CRC screening."

Ferrante and colleagues had previously found an association with PCP visits and decreased mortality from CRC, but the study had no control so they were unable to determine the incidence of colorectal cancer, Ferrante told MedPage Today.

For the current study, they used the 2008 Surveillance, Epidemiology and End Results (SEER)-Medicare linked data set to design a population-based, case-control study comprised of people, ages 67 to 85.

They evaluated the data set for those newly diagnosed with CRC from April 1994 to December 2005. A total of 102,907 people represented incidence cases. The final total for CRC-specific mortality was 27,081 and the final total for all-cause mortality was 62,082.

Researchers chose controls from the SEER data set who were considered at risk for colorectal cancer, but did not have it. They included 485,350 people for the incidence analysis, 489,238 for CRC-specific death, and 303,120 for all-cause death.

The mean patient age was 76, which also was the mean age for those who received CRC screening.

Researchers found that those who had between five and 10 PCP visits had a 6% lower odds of CRC incidence. These patients also had a higher likelihood of having CRC diagnosed at an earlier stage and of having more proximal cancers.

"Our findings seem to be pretty robust because in the stratified analysis -- early versus late stage cancer, proximal versus distal, and years of Medicare coverage -- we found the same thing: a lower incidence of colorectal cancer was associated with more screening," Ferrante said.

The troubling aspect of the study, Ferrante said, was that more than 20% of the population had no visits or only one visit to their PCP during the 2-year period of the study, despite having universal Medicare insurance.

"Now with [the Affordable Care Act (ACA)], we expect to see more people enter the healthcare system and access to primary care services could get worse, which has the potential to increase the incidence of colorectal cancer and death," she said.

"We not only need to improve access to primary care but we also need to encourage elderly people to use primary care services," she added.

She noted that the ACA includes expanded coverage for preventive care and screening. In addition, Medicare recently started coverage of annual wellness visits that require no copay, which "may help emphasize the importance of PCP visits and preventive screening."

The researchers also found that compared with men, women had a 31% lower odds of CRC incidence. Compared with whites, blacks had an 18% increased incidence. Compared with the lowest tertile of education, those in the highest tertile were 17% less likely to be diagnosed with CRC.

Similarly, higher levels of income reflected lower odds of CRC, and those who had previously been screened for CRC were 25% less likely to receive a diagnosis of CRC.

The study was limited by its observational nature, by the use of administrative data, which made it difficult to identify potential confounders and prevented examination of the content of primary care visits, researchers noted. In addition, the cohort was predominately white.

Do you routinely recommend colorectal screening to your Medicare patients? How is their compliance? Share your experiences with us. -- Sanjay Gupta, MD

The study was funded by the American Cancer Society. The authors reported no conflicts of interest.

Reviewed by Robert Jasmer, MD Associate Clinical Professor of Medicine, University of California, San Francisco