By Dennis Seid

Daily Journal

TUPELO – Mary Cates Williams soon will award thousands of dollars in grants to communities in the Mississippi Hills National Heritage Area to help them tell their stories.

Williams, a Ripley native who lives in Oxford, was named executive director of the Mississippi Hills Heritage Area Alliance in early January. The Alliance is the coordinating organization of the 30-county area that is bordered by Tennessee, Alabama, Highway 82 and Interstate 55.

The Mississippi Hills is one of only 49 National Heritage Areas in the U.S., and one of three in the state.

Williams is the voice and face of the Alliance, with a goal to visit every community inside the Mississippi Hills footprint, to find out more about them and to see what the Alliance can do for them.

“We’re getting there,” she said. “Even tough we’re based in Tupelo, we cover all or part of 30 counties. … I’m setting up downtown tours, cultural heritage area tours … and what I’ve found is that so many people want to tell their stories. I’m glad we’re here to give them another outlet to do that.”

The Mississippi Hill Heritage Alliance wasn’t created to compete with or replace communities’ convention and visitors bureaus. Rather, it was designed to serve as a clearinghouse of information and to complement their efforts. And in the case of smaller communities that may not have resources to have a full-time CVB, the Alliance can in many ways help them get their messages out to visitors and tourists.

“My goal is to listen and see what we can do to benefit them and help the entire region,” Williams said.

Every community has its own sense of pride and identity, but many don’t know how or have the resources to share with others.

The Mississippi Hills National Heritage Area Alliance was created as a “cooperative and collaborative National Heritage Area that promotes heritage and cultural tourism,” Williams said.

Cultural and heritage tourism is a growing segment, and it is a lucrative one communities across the country are trying to tap into.

According to Williams, “78 percent of leisure travelers participate in cultural and heritage activities and these travelers spend more, stay longer and are more likely to take part in local activities – this is a growth market.”

And those leisure travelers are looking for places to visit. Larger communities with full-time staff can target those travelers far easier than smaller communities, which makes the grants even more important for them.

The grants naturally have garnered much interest from communities. For this year, $150,000 is available, but grant requests totaled more than $158,000.

That’s why it’s important to get more dues-paying members to join the Alliance.

Williams and other tourism officials call it leveraging – combining federal funding with state and local funding to increase the pool of grant money available.

“The membership dues are leveraged to produce maximum return on your investment by helping to match all federal funding made available,” Williams said. “From a community and economic development standpoint, National Heritage Areas leverage federal funds an average of $5.50 for every $1 of federal investment to create jobs, generate local revenue, and sustain local communities through revitalization and heritage tourism.”

Williams wants the Hills to have its own strong identity, much like the Mississippi Delta and the Gulf Coast.

“We need everyone’s input to help with our branding efforts and to highlight our cultural assets,” she said. “The Mississippi Hills National Heritage Alliance’s goal is to create a sense of place and identity for our region, make sure our stories get told, and show visitors all the wonderful things we have to offer – art galleries, Elvis’ birthplace, Rowan Oak, MSU’s Mitchell Memorial Library which hosts the Ulysses S. Grant Presidential Library, Tishomingo State Park, Brice’s Cross Roads – the list goes on and on. I think North Mississippi is the best kept secret, and I look forward to working with everyone to tell our stories.”

Civil rights, Civil War, Native American history and musical and cultural icons are the four main areas of emphasis the Alliance seeks to highlight, and the grant applications must fall within those categories. The grants are broken down into three grant categories, ranging from $1,000 to $25,000, with the larger amounts available to dues-paying members.

The grant winners will be announced March 15.

dennis.seid@journalinc.com

Twitter: @dennisseid