Role players produce to help Rams cruise past Arkansas-Fort Smith

Colorado State's Joe De Ciman, right, takes the ball to the basket in front of Arkansas-Fort Smith defender Alex Cooper in the first half Saturday at Moby Arena. ( Steve Stoner / Loveland Reporter-Herald )

FORT COLLINS — Aside from a sprained ankle suffered by Daniel Bejarano in the first half, Colorado State accomplished exactly it wanted to in Saturday's 88-60 win over Division II Arkansas-Fort Smith.

In extending its best start in program history to 10-0, which is also one win shy of the team's longest win streak ever, the Rams were able to get their handful of role players plenty of minutes and production.

Gian Clavell led all players with 17 points, all in the second half, while CSU also had three other players in double figures, with Joe De Ciman matching a career-best with 15 points, and Carlton Hurst adding 13 and J.J. Avila 10.

John Gillon and Marcus Holt also each scored nine points, helping the Rams to a season-most 48 bench points.

"I liked the way we beat them, particularly with mostly our backups," CSU coach Larry Eustachy said. "It was a good game for the guys who have paid the price in practice and haven't had a chance to play much."

Holt saw significant minutes for the first time all season, and he was active from the start, scoring eight points and grabbing three rebounds in the first half. Holt and Hurst — both Denver natives — were a combined 10 of 11 from the floor.

"I thought Marcus showed me something that makes you think," Eustachy said. "He's got length. It only adds depth to our team. That's the best he's played since I've coached him.

Advertisement

"It only adds intrigue to our team and adds to what I think is a team that's not nearly as good as I think they're going to get."

Coming off a huge win at Colorado on Wednesday, the Rams led the entire afternoon, but there were a few stretches that weren't pretty, particularly early.

But after the Lions got within seven on a free throw by DaVaunta Thomas with 4 minutes to play in the first half, CSU ended the frame on a 15-0 run to take a 40-18 lead at the break. CSU extended the run to 20-0 to start the second half to erase any doubt by going up 27.

Colorado State's Carlton Hurst, center, goes up for a shot between Arkansas-Fort Smith defenders Kenny Martin, left, and Blake Branham in the first half Saturday at Moby Arena (Steve Stoner / Loveland Reporter-Herald)

De Ciman, who has scored 15 now on four different occasions, continued his solid 3-point shooting, where he entered the day leading the team at 44.4 percent. The junior guard from Saskatchewan, Canada, was 3 of 5 from behind the arc, part of an efficient scoring day in which he was 6 of 8 from the floor.

"I'll give that to the unselfishness of the team," De Ciman said. "I'm getting wide-open looks, because people are penetrating and guys have to help, so it's to the unselfishness of this team."

As far as Bejarano goes, a team spokesperson said the sprained ankle the senior guard suffered midway through the first half wasn't serious. Bejarano, who leads the team in assists and is second in points and rebounds, landed awkwardly after taking a long jumper early in the first half. He remained down for an extended period of time, limped off the floor and did not return.

The good news for Bejarano and his teammates is that the Rams will finally get a couple welcomed days off following busy stretch the past few weeks. They'll take Sunday off, practice Monday, and then have Tuesday off as well with final exams coming up.

"We're just going to enjoy this time off," Clavell said. "Just get our rest, hydrate and just enjoy it. You don't get too many of those (days)."

After Tuesday's day off, though, it's right back at it to prepare for Friday's game at Denver, just the second road game of the team all season.

"We've got a huge game coming on Friday," Eustachy said. "That's the type of game we need -- a good team on the road."

Sean Star: 970-669-5050 ext. 512, sstar@reporter-herald.com or Twitter.com/SeanVStar