IT Trends | Viewpoint

Why Your University Needs More Student IT Workers

Student employees account for more than half of Southern Illinois University's IT staff. Here's why the benefits of student labor outweigh the risks.

My first day of work as CIO at Southern Illinois University included a sub-basement tour of our networking offices. I was struck with two questions: First, who knew that a basement could have a basement? And second, why is this basement packed full of students?

My previous employer, like most universities, used students to staff computer labs and perhaps some administrative duties within Information Technology. However, the IT department there had a small fraction of the student employees that I was seeing at SIU. That first day's tour revealed four full-time network engineers and 25 networking student employees crammed into cubicles like a Dilbert cartoon.

This use of students is certainly not typical for any university, much less for a research university like SIU. According to the 2013 Educause Core Data Survey, institutions, on average, use "16 percent student workers as a percentage of total central IT FTE." In comparison, SIU has 116 permanent central IT employees working approximately 4,350 hours per week. We also have 239 student employees working approximately 4,780 hours per week. These student employees account for 52 percent of our central IT FTE, which is more than three times the national average. Actually, most of our IT departments have an even higher percentage of student employees since a few of our departments don't use student labor at all.

Benefits

Upon my arrival at SIU I was skeptical of this student-heavy employment strategy, but over the last couple of years I have become a true believer due to the following benefits:

Cost-effectiveness. The students provide a very cost-effective alternative to traditional IT staffing. The average student hourly wage is often less than a quarter of the full-time employee wage. For a public university that has seen years of declining state allocations, this has proven essential to providing technology to the campus at a very low cost. Additionally, some of these students are employed through the work-study program, where they are paid out of federal funds instead of the Information Technology budget (read: free labor).

Experiential learning. The majority of our student employees come from the academic departments of Information Systems or Computer Science. Employment within the Office of Information Technology provides these students with hands-on experience where they can apply what they are learning in their classes. It also gives them real-world work experience, which is invaluable in helping them get their first job post-graduation.

Talent pool. Having students who are already trained in our work environments provides us with a tremendous talent pool from which to hire entry-level positions as they arise. We can hire former students who are not only fully trained but have already proven their value and work ethic. Our place in the "employer food chain" is to provide an entry-level opportunity for the talented graduates that our school is turning out year after year. In this way we are growing our own workforce.

Special skills. Our students often possess knowledge and skills that are otherwise not available in our regional job market. For example, according to a 2013 Dell SecureWorks presentation, there is only one qualified candidate for every 20 available information security positions. We use six student employees to supplement our full-time information security team of four employees. Some of these student employees are also members of SIU's "Security Dawg" team for Cyber Defense competitions. This team recently won the Illinois state collegiate championship. These students' deep security expertise would not be otherwise available in the talent pool of our rural area. In addition, we use students as developers for our mobile applications and have found that they bring a fresh perspective and highly innovative ideas.