Monterey >> On the fifth anniversary of President Barack Obama signing the Affordable Care Act into law, federal health officials on Monday touted a $7.4 billion decline in the amount of uncovered health care provided by America’s hospitals.

But in Monterey County and across California, hospital officials say the law has been a double-edged sword. Fewer people are coming in without health insurance and more have access to maternity care, laboratory services, prescription drugs, drug treatment and more —— but many hospitals say they aren’t being reimbursed enough for the millions of new Medi-Cal patients statewide.

“The goal was expanded coverage, so we’re achieving that,” said Jan Emerson-Shea, a spokeswoman for the California Hospital Association. “But because of our state reimbursement policies, we are still severely underfunded in the Medi-Cal program.”

The Affordable Care Act requires the purchase of health insurance, often with the help of a federal subsidy. It also gave states the option of expanding Medicaid-backed health care programs, with 28 states and the District of Columbia, including California, doing so.

One of the top arguments for the law was that it would cut down on “uncompensated care” costs. Under federal law, hospital emergency rooms are required to provide medical care to people who show up at their door, regardless of whether they have insurance or can pay their bills. If more people had health insurance, what is effectively an internal tax on the U.S. medical system — one often passed on to commercial patients — would be reduced.

The Department of Health and Human Services released figures Monday projecting uncompensated care declined from $34.7 billion to $27.3 in 2014, down 21 percent. That forecast is based on a model that does not take into account complete data, and most predict uncompensated care was about $50 billion in 2013 before starting to drop.

But while the amount of free “charity” care has gone down locally and across the state, the story is more complicated than that.

At King City’s Mee Memorial Hospital, about four in five patients are on public insurance. Located in the southern part of the Salinas Valley where unemployment is high, the hospital not only sees patients newly eligible for coverage under the Affordable Care Act, but also a high number who aren’t eligible because they aren’t U.S. citizens — a gap in coverage affecting 1 million Californians that the state has yet to patch.

Advertisement

Between October 2014 and January 2015, the hospital saw a $500,000 decline in uncompensated care spending compared to the same four-month window the previous year, hospital CEO Lex Smith said. But with more patients on low-paying Medi-Cal, the gap between what the hospital spends on care and what gets reimbursed has gone up $3.5 million, a figure that includes all forms of insurance.

“The overall impact for us is positive,” Smith said, “but the payment rates for those people that we’re getting payments for is a lot less than our costs.”

At Salinas Valley Memorial Hospital, uncompensated care costs declined in 2014 but are up overall since 2012, a trend driven by “bad debt,” or a patient’s inability to pay their bills. Between 2012 and 2013, the amount of bad debt written off by the hospital nearly doubled to $16.9 million, which a hospital official said is not due to the Affordable Care Act.

Charity care, where the hospital has no expectation of payment, dropped from 2013 to 2014, from $10.9 million to $7.7 million.

At Community Hospital of the Monterey Peninsula, the picture is mostly positive. The hospital’s underlying costs of charity care declined from $14 million in 2013 to $4 million last year. And bad debt dropped from $10 million to $3 million, CHOMP Chief Accounting Officer Matt Morgan said.

Figures for Natividad Medical Center weren’t immediately available.

Pending legislation in Sacramento would increase the Medi-Cal reimbursement rates in California, which are consistently among the lowest in the U.S. Emerson-Shea said hospitals typically get back 40 cents of ever dollar spent on a Medi-Cal patient.

“Ultimately, this is likely to be the subject of discussions on the state budget,” Emerson-Shea said.

That’s contributed to a situation where those newly-insured under the Affordable Care Act are still showing up at the hospital when they get sick or injured, because they can’t find a primary care doctor willing to take Medi-Cal.

“There’s not a lot of doctors that are actively taking new Medi-Cal patients, so those patients are finding their way into emergency rooms,” Morgan said.

Mee Memorial’s Smith concurred. The Affordable Care Act will be good for the hospital and the community, he said, particularly when patients get more preventative care through family doctors.

“But so far we haven’t seen that impact, because our emergency department is reaching record levels,” Smith said.

Jason Hoppin can be reached at 726-4363.