Declaring 2016 “the year of the manufacturer,” Gov. Rick Scott told reporters at the annual Associated Press pre-session media day that he would push for tax reductions that surpass last year's $400 million in cuts, additional funding for Enterprise Florida to woo businesses to the state and make permanent the manufacturing industry's sales tax exemption on equipment purchases.

Pointing to an average of 250,000 new jobs each year, Scott said “we're on a roll” and said more growth in manufacturing will help “diversify our economy.”

Florida Senate Minority Leader Arthenia Joyner, a state senator and Democrat from Tampa, offered a different point of view. Declaring it “just another day in Tallahassee,” Joyner criticized Scott and GOP leaders for rejecting Medicaid expansion to make a “political statement” against the Affordable Care Act and leaving millions uninsured.

She chastised them for violating the Fair Districts amendment — “violating the very Constitution that they swore on a Bible to uphold” — leading to a series of special sessions on congressional and Florida Senate redistricting.

She decried the tax incentives Scott wants increased funding for as “corporate welfare” and said much of the job growth the Governor touts are low-paying jobs, while GOP leaders reject efforts to substantially increase the minimum wage. And she chided Republican lawmakers for pushing issues such as guns on college campuses that do “next to nothing” for most Florida citizens.

Looking ahead, Senate President Andy Gardiner, R-Orlando, and House Speaker Steve Crisafulli, R-Merritt Island, both said additional tax cuts would be on the table this year. Striking a more cautious tone than Scott, Gardiner said $250 million would be the Senate starting point. He noted that the talk of increased cuts comes with a projected surplus of $630 million, but only $200 million of that is expected to be recurring.

“We want measurable goals and examples where we can see yes, this tax cut works,” Gardiner said.

Earlier this year, a special session on budget issues and health care funding ended in acrimony, after Scott and the House rejected a Senate plan that would use federal Medicaid expansion monies to give the poor financial assistance to buy private health insurance and require adults who are not disabled to either work, go to school or get job training and pay monthly premiums.

Crisafulli said health care access would again be an issue but said the House remains “steadfastly opposed to expanding Medicaid under Obamacare.”

He said they would instead look for “free market” solutions that use “innovation.” Some measures last session that passed the House but did not make it through the Senate included eliminating the certificate of need process for hospital construction, expanding the prescribing authority of nurse practitioners and the use of telemedicine, promoting direct primary care practices that take insurance companies out of the equation and allowing overnight stays at ambulatory surgery centers.

Gardiner said lawmakers “have to be careful” not to make priorities out of “second-tier proposals” that may be innovative but don't address problems with uncompensated care and a lack of health care coverage.

“If you don't have insurance, it doesn't matter how many new programs you create, you're still not going to have access.”

Scott said every family “has to have quality health care they can afford.”

He pointed to the committee he has formed on hospital funding and said he wants more transparency from hospitals on costs and “more competition.”

He criticized the Obama administration for saying it cares about health care for poor people and then reducing funding for and eventually phasing out the low-income pool, or LIP, that compensates hospitals with high numbers of uninsured patients.

But when the federal government granted a waiver in 2014 to fund LIP for one more year, instead of the three years the state sought, federal officials indicated they planned to stop funding the LIP.

Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services officials said they wanted the state, which also has a federal waiver for a managed care Medicaid system that relies on private insurers, to develop “sustainable, transparent, equitable, appropriate, accountable and actuarially sound Medicaid payment systems and funding mechanisms that will ensure quality health care services to Florida's Medicaid beneficiaries throughout the state without the need for Low Income Pool (LIP) funding.”

Gardiner and Crisafulli both said they expect the 2016 session to produce “comprehensive” water policy after failed efforts in 2014 and 2015.

Crisafulli said he expects the bill the House passed to be the starting point, but many environmental groups felt it did little to nothing to protect the state's springs and rivers.

With bills filed to allow people with concealed weapons permits to carry on campus, into public meetings at the Capitol and to carry openly, Scott sidestepped questions on guns multiple times.

He said he supports the Second Amendment “but I haven't seen the bills.” Asked if he supports guns on campus, he again said he hadn't seen the proposed legislation.

Gardiner said his committee chairs have discretion on which gun bills are heard and any gun bill that makes it through committee will go to the full Senate to “vote it up or down.”

Crisafulli also would not come down on either side on the gun bills, saying any legislation “will certainly have an opportunity to be vetted.”

Joyner was clear in her position.

“When you mix young people and education with drugs, with sex, with frivolity and youthfulness and guns, then you create a situation that could result in untold injury and death.”

Despite special sessions on health care and redistricting that ended in acrimony, Gardiner and Crisafulli both

said several times that they feel the two houses work well together on most issues.

Gardiner, who has a son with Down Syndrome, said increasing and improving educational, job and residential opportunities for children and adults with “unique ability” will be a priority in his last session in the Senate. Crisafulli said working with Gardiner on that is a priority for him, too.