ENLARGE The film ‘On the Town’ (1949) marked Gene Kelly’s directorial debut. Getty Images

When “On the Town” had its Broadway premiere in 1944, during the final months of World War II, it was at once retro and radical, quickly establishing itself as a milestone of American musical theater (and the basis for one of the all-time great Hollywood musical films five years later). The challenge for director John Rando, who is staging a revival of the musical that opens at New York’s Lyric Theatre on Oct. 16, will be in finding what is current and what is timeless in a show so specific to a unique period in our collective history.

“On the Town” grew out of an idea by choreographer Jerome Robbins. At the time, ballet was generally regarded as highbrow, invariably concerned with gods and goddesses or with dying swans. Robbins’s idea (inspired by a 1934 painting by Paul Cadmus) was to make ballet vital and topical by depicting three carousing sailors on shore leave in New York, boisterously competing with one another for the attention of girls in a saloon. That notion initially took shape as the ballet “Fancy Free” (1944) the first of many collaborations between Robbins and composer Leonard Bernstein, who had made his conducting debut with the New York Philharmonic in November 1943.

Following its April opening at the old Metropolitan Opera House in New York, “Fancy Free” was such a hit as a ballet that Robbins and Bernstein were approached to develop the idea into a full-scale Broadway show. Now the problem was how to combine Robbins’s classically informed dance numbers with musical-comedy theatrics, and Bernstein knew the perfect kids to write the book and lyrics: his former roommate Adolph Green and Green’s writing-and-performing partner Betty Comden, whose experience up to then consisted mainly of crafting original material for their nightclub act, The Revuers. Robbins was the only one of the four with any real Broadway experience—though as a dancer, not a dancemaker.

At first, Comden and Green couldn’t believe they were being asked to write a show about servicemen on leave. That was already a much-overused trope of Hollywood movies such as “Born to Dance” (1936) and “Seven Days Leave” (1942). But they quickly got the point: “On the Town” would draw its energy from the deliberately incongruous juxtaposition of the highbrow and the lowbrow. With Robbins’s ballet sequences and the comedy—both visual and verbal—of Comden and Green, the show was supposed to be a cross between George Balanchine and the Three Stooges.

“On the Town” was a sizable hit on Broadway, running for 462 performances. And it made stars of its backstage talent (Comden and Green were also on stage in prominent roles), doing the most to accelerate Bernstein’s rise as a formidable force in American music. As his centennial approaches, it is clear that neither Bernstein’s original classical music nor his purely instrumental jazz compositions are as overwhelmingly successful as his theater music. Bernstein, especially in his dance numbers, combined Prokofiev with Ellington—long, elegiac, sweeping, balletic lines that make knowing use of blue notes, saxophone solos and jazzy phrasing.

MGM immediately snapped up the rights to “On the Town” and put Comden and Green under long-term contract. The resulting movie was a sensation and remains a classic to this day—marking Gene Kelly’s directorial debut and one of Frank Sinatra’s most memorable movie roles. Yet the 1949 film is less of a masterpiece than it might have been had producer Arthur Freed not dropped most of Bernstein’s songs. Kelly’s primary motivation as one of the film’s stars was to dance to Bernstein’s superlative ballet music; as a first-time director, he apparently didn’t feel he had the clout to make the case for the rest of the original score. Neither did Comden and Green—who were importuned to write substitute songs with MGM stalwart Roger Edens—and, remarkably, neither did Sinatra. Betty Comden later told me, in 1994, “Frank said that the only reason he agreed to do the movie was so that he could sing ‘Lonely Town,’” a number that never made it to the film. (Some of the new Comden-Green-Edens songs are good, although when I told Comden that her 1949 song “Prehistoric Man” was even better than “Carried Away,” the 1944 song it replaced, she stood up dramatically, pointed toward the doorway, and demanded that I leave her apartment immediately. I suspected that she was kidding, at least to a degree, primarily because we were actually in Adolph Green’s apartment at the time.)

Thus the movie’s best moments are Kelly’s effervescent dances and the street-wise comedy that Comden and Green wrote for a game cast that also includes the brilliant dancers Vera Ellen and Ann Miller. But MGM missed out on such gemlike Bernstein ballads as “Lucky to Be Me” and, especially, “Some Other Time.” Many years later, Tony Bennett and Bill Evans would reveal to us the luminescent beauty of those two numbers, and Sinatra eventually recorded a definitive reading of “Lonely Town.” These are some of the most beautiful songs ever written for the American theater.

More than beautiful, these tunes are enduring. In addition to being regularly listed as one of the classic Broadway shows, “On the Town” is one of 16 whose books and lyrics are collected in the Library of America’s new “American Musicals” volumes. (Further, Sony has just reissued a 1963 London cast album featuring a young Elliott Gould as Chip.)

The MGM version cannot be considered a definitive document of “On the Town,” and the 1971 and 1998 Broadway revivals of the show were both short-lived. It is hard to imagine that any subsequent team could recapture the brash energy that Robbins, Bernstein, Comden and Green brought to their own material in 1944—an exact parallel to that of the three sailors who sought nothing less than to condense a lifetime’s worth of living, loving and laughing into a single day. “On The Town” is, more than anything, a product of its time, and now it is up to Mr. Rando to bring out the majesty of its music and dancing and to show contemporary theatergoers the work’s transcendent magic.

Mr. Friedwald writes the weekly Jazz Scene column for the Journal.