Healthcare companies are merging with their rivals, creating industry consolidation, which positions HIG for future acquisition opportunities and investor exit strategies.

Healthcare Industry Group, Inc. (“HIG”), a contract management and specialty healthcare solutions services provider, anticipates a successful national expansion campaign in 2015. Based on current and pending contracts, HIG is forecasting over $6 Million in sales for 2015, over $12 Million in 2016 and over $26 Million in 2017. The company is planning a public offering and listing in the second half of 2015.

John Lundquist, President of HIG, said, “There has never been a more profitable time than now to invest in healthcare. Over the past two years, the S&P 500 Health Care Index has gained 55%, outpacing a 32% rise in the S&P 500. HIG intends to capitalize on this demand and generate strong returns for its shareholders.”

The U.S. healthcare market suffers from endemic inefficiencies across the distribution chain, resulting in billions of waste and lower quality patient care. The implementation of the Affordable Care Act has increased the demand for healthcare solutions service providers that can navigate the regulatory landscape. Lundquist said, “With the U.S. healthcare market exceeding $3 trillion in annual expenditures, there is significant opportunity for HIG to establish itself as a leading customized healthcare solutions service provider.”

Lundquist said, “Healthcare companies are merging with their rivals, creating industry consolidation, which positions HIG for future acquisition opportunities and investor exit strategies. With our current negotiations for multi-million dollar contracts with our client base of institutional, assisted living, hospital, specialty pharmacies and wholesaler/distributor supply channels, HIG is on target for fast-track growth to achieve that.”

A Company Structured For Success

HIG’s multi-divisional platform provides a broad range of customized sales, logistical, market and technological solutions to client healthcare service providers. The Company is building out a healthcare spectrum structure, with each division adding to and strengthening the other. Clients and networks from each division are channeled into other division’s service models, creating cooperative revenue enhancement. It is an entrepreneurial driven structure with built in management and marketing incentives at all levels that will benefit HIG shareholders every step of the way.

RX Alliance is a national Contract Management Organization (CMO) building a high margin pharmaceutical/medical and surgical product sales brokering operation with for over 1,100 pharmacies, Rx, OTC participants.

RX Solutions is a wholesale distribution operation focused on distribution and 3PL services for independent pharmacies in all 50 states. It offers to its over 700 pharmacy network competitive medication pricing normally available only to large chains.

RX Results is focused on providing pharmaceutical, biotechnology, medical and healthcare providers with contracted management services. It develops innovative and effective strategies to increase competitiveness and expand market presence. RX Results is building out a nationally recognized roster of independent contractors, consultants and industry specialists that work with HIG’s experienced team thus lowering costs and increasing profits.

RX Analytics provides data collection management services such as dispensing, patent adherence/compliance and follow-along programs, patient outcome reporting systems and data mining/records retention. The Affordable Care Act (ACA) mandates healthcare providers meet and sustain patient care services for Medicare patients which is the immediate need for RX Analytics.

RX Genix is building out a pipeline of portfolio branded healthcare products and medical devises targeted at the most profitable segments of the worldwide market. It is an early-stage investor in companies and technologies for licensing, branding and private labeling opportunities. RX Genix has a private brand-line of sports cream products, anb FDA approved wound care product line and owns an interest in Snap Medical Industry which has developed Episnap for the epinephrine kit market.

An Investor Opportunity

John Lundquist, President of HIG said, “Healthcare stocks are a safe-harbor for investors in good and bad markets. Healthcare industry stocks led the market higher in 2014 and have started off the New Year avoiding the problems that are affecting other market sectors. We believe that this kind of out-of-the-box performance indicates another good year ahead for health care.

“HIG is projecting over $26 million in sales by 2016 with an EBITDA of $5.1 Million. Current healthcare service company multiples are between eight and twelve times EBITDA. Using an average of ten times multiple we believe that HIG will be valued at $50 million or more by 2017.

“We want all our initial investors to grow with us as we explore public listing options in 2015 in order to capitalize on the strong demand for quality healthcare stocks. Once listed, our focus will be on building shareholder value and acquisition opportunities and well-planned exit strategies that maximize each investor’s return.”

About Healthcare Industry Group, Inc.

Healthcare Industry Group, Inc. is a contract management firm specializing in providing customized growth solutions to healthcare providers across the distribution chain. HIG’s diverse platform services institutional, assisted living, hospital, specialty pharmacies and wholesaler/distributor supply channels. Website: http://www.healthcareindustrygroup.com

For More Information, please contact:

Christian Tedrow

Special Advisor to the President

407-921-7032

Forward Looking Statements

Safe Harbor Statement This release includes forward-looking statements, which are based on certain assumptions and reflects management's current expectations. These forward-looking statements are subject to a number of risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results or events to differ materially from current expectations. Some of these factors include: general global economic conditions; general industry and market conditions, sector changes and growth rates; uncertainty as to whether our strategies and business plans will yield the expected benefits; increasing competition; availability and cost of capital; the ability to identify and develop and achieve commercial success; the level of expenditures necessary to maintain and improve the quality of services; changes in the economy; changes in laws and regulations, including codes and standards, intellectual property rights, and tax matters; or other matters not anticipated; our ability to secure and maintain strategic relationships and distribution agreements. The Company disclaims any intention or obligation to update or revise any forward-looking statements, whether as a result of new information, future events or otherwise.