Last winter, officials of Elgin School District U46 warned of a possible "doomsday scenario" of slashed state aid, new pension costs and frozen property taxes that could hit the district this school year. But as U46 administrators presented the board of education with a proposed 2015-2016 budget on Monday, that plan had a far more optimistic tone, assuming that the state will provide even more aid to the district than last school year.

But with overall state finances still locked in a logjam between the legislature and Gov. Bruce Rauner, and with the impact of things like pension funding and a property-tax freeze still uncertain, an air of caution also surrounded this week's discussion. And many of the board members' questions centered around an apparent $6.8 million deficit built into the budget.

"We're pleased that the state education budget calls for more funding, but we know that more financial decisions loom over our state, including pension reform and the final general state budget," said Chief Executive Officer Tony Sanders. "We are proceeding cautiously as we make expenditure decisions that support our strategic plan and ensure all U46 students graduate prepared to succeed in college and the workforce."

The proposed budget envisions no increase in the overall property tax levy that will be collected next summer.

The public will get a chance to comment on the budget during a public hearing at 7 p.m. Monday, Sept. 14 at the Educational Services Center, 355 E. Chicago St., Elgin. Officials said the budget will be posted on www.u-46.org. The board is expected to approve a final version on Sept. 28.

The budget foresees $500.7 million in income and $507.6 million in spending. But when asked by board members whether that means the distinct would be $6.9 million in the red, Director of Financial Operations Dale Burnidge and Chief Operating Officer Jeff King said that really is a bookkeeping glitch. Last fiscal year, they explained, the district borrowed $40 million in working cash fund bonds that will be spent on various equipment buying and building maintenance projects over the next three years, and the first third of that will be spent in this fiscal year.

King compared the situation to an individual taking out a home equity loan last year to pay for a major home improvement, then taking some of the money out of his savings account this year to pay for the work.

"It's misleading to just look at this year," agreed Board Member Traci O'Neal Ellis.

"But we still borrowed what we're spending now and we will have to pay it back," said Board Member Cody Holt.

"We borrowed it for a reason — so that we could keep our buildings in decent shape rather than putting on Band-Aids," said Board President Donna Smith.

District leaders had feared that state aid could be cut drastically. But Rauner and the legislature did approve a bill extending state aid to school districts, and Burnidge said U46 can expect $112.9 million this year, which is actually more than the $97.7 million received last year.

However, Burnidge noted that even this increased state aid is 8 percent lower than U46 should be getting based on a formula prescribed by the Illinois Board of Education. "Since 2012 we have lost a total of $48 million" because of the state paying less than the formula calls for, Burnidge said.

The budget foresees no increase in the total amount of real estate taxes collected next summer. Besides borrowing that additional $40 million last spring, the district refinanced old debts it had used to pay for South Elgin High School, Kenyon Woods Middle School and other construction projects in the early 2000s. The refinancing was designed to ensure that the total levy for bond payments will remain the same as it was for this summer.

Board members must decide in December how much real estate tax to levy for other purposes to be collected next summer. But Burnidge noted that the Illinois tax cap law limits any such increase to no more than the Consumer Price Index increase, and that is expected to be very low.

That doesn't necessarily mean that every taxpayer will see no increase in real estate taxes. Kane County taxes were increased and DuPage County taxes reduced this summer to atone for a mistake made by the Kane County Clerk's Office that changed how the U46 tax burden was distributed between the two counties. And changes in an individual's assessed valuation could change one property's taxes compared to those on other properties.

Capital outlays in the budget include $13 million for building maintenance, $6.7 million to buy 87 new buses, and $5.6 million for more computer equipment.

The budget foresees 64 percent of total income coming from real estate taxes, 29 percent from state aid and 7 percent from federal aid. The latter includes a $2 million grant to pay for 10 additional preschool classrooms, five of which will be located in rented space in the Jayne Shover Easter Seals building in Elgin.

Employee salaries, based mostly on labor union contracts, are projected to go from $237 million to $258 million. But King said the exact number of employees whose jobs were eliminated due to last spring's "reduction in force" notices and subsequent callbacks won't be known for several weeks. That's when the final count of this year's students becomes available and officials decide whether they need to call back even more laid-off teachers or hire some new ones.

The cost of employee health insurance is projected to go from $46.4 million to $49.7 million. King said a committee that decides on what insurance plans to offer employees will analyze them to make sure some are not so generous they would expose the district to penalty payments under the Affordable Care Act.

King said one of the four plans offered now, the Family PPO Plan, probably would be considered a "Cadillac health plan" subject to the penalty if something isn't changed between now and 2018.

The district should receive four quarterly state "categorical payments," which reimburse for expenses such as transportation and special education, but the budget includes only three payments in order to provide some cushion should the state be late with payments.

dgathman@tribpub.com