Getty Images

The fundamental question facing the justices in the latest challenge to the 2010 Affordable Care Act has nothing to do with health care: how to interpret a tiny snippet – specifically, four words — embedded in the voluminous law.

First, some background: Congress in the law authorized the government to provide tax credits for insurance purchases by middle- and low-income people. The credits are vital to the program.

The law says that those who purchase coverage through an exchange “established by the state” are eligible for the credits. More than two-thirds of the states declined to set up their own exchanges. Currently, residents in 37 states can purchase insurance through HealthCare.gov, the federal exchange.

The key question for the justices: What is meant by “established by the state”?

The challengers argue that the credits are available only to those who buy coverage through one of the state exchanges, that is, exchanges “established by the state.” The Obama administration argues, however, that the language refers not just to the states that have set up their own exchanges, but also to the others, where exchanges are operated by the federal government.

The Internal Revenue Service, one of the agencies tasked with implementing the health-care law, sided with the administration’s interpretation.

When faced with differences over statutory language, the Supreme Court typically looks to one of its own rulings, a 30-year-old matter known colloquially as the “Chevron” case.

In Chevron, the court set up a two-step test to follow when confronting a dispute over an agency’s interpretation of a federal law. First, the court looks to see whether Congress’s intent is clear. If it decides that it is, then the matter is settled – both the court and the agency shall use that interpretation.

If it decides, however, that the statute is ambiguous, the court will defer to the agency’s interpretation so long as it’s based on a “permissible construction of the statute.”

The challengers in the case argue that the statutory language is perfectly clear: An “exchange established by the state,” is not one established by the federal government.

Supporters of the IRS’s interpretation, on the other hand, argue that an exchange established by the state refers to exchanges set up by either a state or the federal government.

For support, they point to other sections of the law. One, for instance, allows the federal government to step in and create “such” an exchange when a state decides not to. That provision, they argue, makes clear that an exchange established by the state is merely an exchange established within a state – which includes all exchanges.