Buy Photo Bob Mihalchik of Wappingers Falls, right, speaks with New York State of Health insurance navigator Wanda Ramirez during an information drive at the Poughkeepsie Galleria on Saturday. (Photo: Patrick Oehler/Poughkeepsie Journal)Buy Photo

A single father of two sons, Bob Mihalchik wants to be certain that his kids are covered if they ever get sick.

But that doesn't mean he's worried about his own health insurance.

"I don't ever use it, I don't go to the doctor," said Mihalchik, 41, of Wappingers Falls.

While health insurance is mandatory as part of the Affordable Care Act, commonly referred to as "Obamacare," it can still take a bite out of a paycheck, with the average family in Dutchess County paying several hundred dollars for coverage. The costs has forced many to rethink how they choose to be covered, and some consider forgoing coverage completely.

In New York, residents are required to purchase minimum essential health coverage, which can be obtained through their job or the New York State of Health Marketplace, or pay a fee based on how long they've not been covered.

After recently losing his job, Mihalchik met in January with Wanda Ramirez, a certified navigator and health insurance specialist for New York State of Health, to work out coverage for himself and his two sons. The costs worked out to $278 per month for Mihalchik and $18 per month for his two sons, but at this price, Mihalchik said he may not get coverage for himself.

"As of right now, it's up in the air," Mihalchik said.

Mihalchik's job at the time included health insurance, but the plan did not provide coverage for any local doctors. Rather than look further into the plan, Mihalchik opted for something closer to home.

Monthly costs for plans under the New York State of Health Marketplace vary based on income, age and other factors.

An individual making $33,594 annually, the yearly per capita income in Dutchess County according to 2013 census data, can obtain the lowest level of coverage for $151.27 per month, based on a Marketplace estimate.

For a family making $72,525 annually, the median household income based on 2013 census data, the monthly payments on the cheapest plan would be reduced to $653.63.

Young adults and recent graduates not covered under their parents are often eligible for low-cost plans, Ramirez said.

"Most likely they are going to get very inexpensive coverage," Ramirez said, adding that "options are there for them."

Employees with benefits can also opt for insurance through the Marketplace if their company's policy costs more than 9.5 percent of their monthly income.

People who don't have the minimum essential coverage must pay a fee for the time they are uninsured, but individuals with a health coverage exemption would not have to pay the fee, according to the health care website.

The fee is calculated as either 2.5 percent of household income up to a maximum of the "total yearly premium for the national average price of a Bronze plan sold through the Marketplace," or $695 per adult and $347.50 per child up to a maximum of $2,085. An uninsured person must pay whichever is the larger amount as part of his or her federal tax return for that year.

The uninsured rate for adults in the United States was 11.9 percent in the fourth quarter of 2015, 5.2 percentage points lower than the fourth quarter of 2013 "before the key provision of the health law requiring Americans to carry health insurance took effect in early 2014," according to Gallup.

Open enrollment for health coverage ended on Jan. 31, but people eligible for a special enrollment period, Medicaid or Children's Health Insurance Program can still apply. Special enrollment is possible depending on certain criteria, such as the death of a family member or a new child, Ramirez said.

Geoffrey Wilson: gwilson@poughkeepsiejournal.com, 845-437-4882, Twitter: @PoJoGeoffWilson

Read or Share this story: http://pojonews.co/1Xu58Jk