Next Tuesday, President Barack Obama will deliver his final State of the Union address. He's likely to spend much of his 60 or so minutes, pressing his case about the success of his presidential tenure and the historical nature of his policy legacy.

As such, he's sure to repurpose his "tick-list" of foreign policy successes (Iran nuclear deal, Cuban reengagement, the Paris climate deal and the trans-Pacific trade agreement) that he raised in his December press conference. He's likely to tout some of the economic numbers (job growth and unemployment), which were finally strong enough to give the Federal Reserve the security it required to raise short term interest rates last month.

He's further likely to note the ways in which he has advanced progressive policy priorities on immigration reform and gun control by liberally using his "pen" to take executive action. He may also raise the big constitutional wins on marriage equality and the Affordable Care Act that he and his administration enjoyed last year in the Supreme Court.



[GALLERY: Barack Obama Cartoons]

These achievements are real. Obama has moved the ball forward on a number of fronts. Political scientists and historians who construct presidential legacies will surely make note of these and other achievements (e.g., women being allowed to serve in combat positions and members of the LGBT community being able to serve openly in the military).

The problem is that the list Obama judges himself on isn't the one the public cares about.

As Gallup has shown, many Americans are dissatisfied with the current direction of the country and fewer trust the federal government to protect them from terrorist attacks. Much of this is likely the result of Obama's foreign policy decisions on Libya, Syria, Iraq and Afghanistan, which have often seemed short-sighted and ill-timed. As Fred Kaplan recently noted in Slate, "The problem with the president's list of foreign policy triumphs is that they're provisional, while the failures are all too tangible and threatening."



[VIEW: 2015: The Year in Cartoons]