Liberals and abortion advocates nationwide are targeting Indiana for protests after pro-life Governor Mike Pence signed into law a bill helping the state protect the religious rights of pro-life people.

Now, days after Indiana’s website was disrupted following the Religious Freedom Restoration Act (RFRA) becoming law, pro-abortion liberals have hacked the web site of the pro-life group Indiana Right to Life. At press time, an attempt to go to the Indiana Right to Life website yields an “Unable to connect” error and it does not load properly.

Hackers took Indiana Right to Life’s website offline Tuesday evening, possibly in retaliation for the organization’s support of Indiana’s Religious Freedom Restoration Act (RFRA), which the pro-life group strongly supported to protects the rights of pro-life medical professionals from having to be involved in abortions and to protect companies like Hobby Lobby from having to pay for abortion-causing drugs for their employees.

CLICK LIKE IF YOU’RE PRO-LIFE!

IRTL informed LifeNews.com that a Twitter user claimed responsibility, using the same hashtag – #Offline – as was used by the apparent hacker who disrupted the state of Indiana’s website on Friday.

“We face bitter opposition to our work protecting the unborn every day, but most who oppose our mission do so in the open,” said Mike Fichter, President and CEO of Indiana Right to Life.

Fichter told LifeNews.com: “This attack on our website is cowardly. We have been exercising our freedom of speech as we support the Religious Freedom Restoration Act, which is an important safeguard for pro-life Hoosiers against government directives supporting abortion. This attack appears to be in retaliation for that support. It’s disappointing that the level of discourse has been lowered by a party wishing to silence our voice.”

The president of the pro-life group said Indiana Right to Life is working with its web team to get the site back up and running.

Pence signed into law Indiana’s historic Religious Freedom Restoration Act, enabling new protections for pro-life persons, businesses and ministries from being forced to support abortion.

“Today I signed the Religious Freedom Restoration Act, because I support the freedom of religion for every Hoosier of every faith,” he said.

“The Constitution of the United States and the Indiana Constitution both provide strong recognition of the freedom of religion but today, many people of faith feel their religious liberty is under attack by government action.”

“One need look no further than the recent litigation concerning the Affordable Care Act. A private business and our own University of Notre Dame had to file lawsuits challenging provisions that required them to offer insurance coverage in violation of their religious views,” he added. “Last year the Supreme Court of the United States upheld religious liberty in the Hobby Lobby case based on the federal Religious Freedom Restoration Act, but that act does not apply to individual states or local government action.”

Fichter attended the bill signing ceremony as Governor Pence signed the Religious Freedom Restoration Act (RFRA), SB 101, into law. The pro-life group, in an email to LifeNews.com, applauded the governor.