In just two months, thousands of Native education advocates will head to Anchorage, Alaska for The National Indian Education Association’s 45th Annual Convention and Trade Show on October 15-18. The four-day Convention, taking place at the Dena’ina Civic and Convention Center in downtown Anchorage, will focus on strengthening NIEA’s mission of advancing comprehensive educational opportunities for American Indians, Alaska Natives, and Native Hawaiians throughout the United States. The theme of this year’s Convention is Building Education through the Generations and builds upon the theme of last year’s event, Building Education Nations & Communities, which took place in Rapid City, South Dakota.

NIEA President Pamela Agoyo noted that, “Being home to 229 federally recognized tribes, Alaska is rich in Native history and educational leadership at the tribal level, which makes it the ideal location to host our 2014 annual Convention. Anchorage hosted NIEA’s 2006 Convention and we are excited to return to the state with the most federally-recognized tribes to ensure equity for our students.”

The 2,000 teachers, school administrators, tribal leaders, and higher education faculty expected to attend NIEA 2014 will have daily agendas packed with more than 100 workshops focusing on advancing educational programs for Native students. Professional development workshops will be coupled with a three-day tradeshow, where more than 125 vendors from across the country will showcase Native art, career opportunities, and educational technologies. The Convention will also feature a variety of exciting cultural activities for attendees, including a powwow and cultural feast.

Native education stakeholders incorporated NIEA in 1970. The membership-driven organization has since been dedicated to the mission of advancing quality education for all American Indian, Alaska Native, and Native Hawaiian peoples. The Association’s 2,500 members work each day to strengthen Native educational opportunities while also preserving the unique cultures and languages of Native Americans.

For more information about NIEA 2014 or to inquire about attending the Convention as a member, sponsor, or tradeshow exhibitor, please visit NIEA.org.