BULLITT COUNTY, Ky. (WDRB) -- U.S. Sen. Mitch McConnell got the backing of the National Rifle Association Friday, for his re-election bid, even as the Senator is being targeted by some fellow conservatives.



As McConnell was honored for his long-time support of gun rights, he was attacked by some on the far right for not being conservative enough.



With some 68,000 members in Kentucky, support from the NRA is important for McConnell's re-election campaign. McConnell lumped gun control, Obamacare and the so-called "war on coal" as examples of the Obama administration's attempt to create what he called a "nanny-state."



"This is a big race," McConnell said. "What kind of Kentucky do you want to have? What kind of America do you want to have? Do we want Barack Obama's America or Kentucky's?"



McConnell made it clear he's not ready to accept the President's apology for broken promises about Obamacare.



"The President said if you have your health insurance plan and you like it, you can keep it," McConnell said. "What he really meant to say was, 'you can keep it if I let you.'"



Despite that kind of talk, some conservatives are taking shots at McConnell. A group called the Senate Conservatives Fund is running TV ads blaming McConnell for not working to defund Obamacare



"Conservatives asked Mitch McConnell to lead the fight against Obamacare," an ad for Senate Conservatives Fund states. "He didn't listen."



But McConnell's supporters are not buying the idea that he's not conservative enough.



"He's doing a great job for the state of Kentucky," said NRA board member Bill Carter. "He's doing a great job for the 5 million NRA members and this nation as a Republican leader."



McConnell would not comment, rushing away without answering reporters' questions. Not to be outdone, McConnell's Democratic opponent, Alison Lundergan Grimes released a photo of herself firing a weapon, inviting him to join her on a gun range. No word from McConnell on whether he will take her up on her offer, but a campaign spokeswoman issued a brief statement on the photo.

"The Annie Oakley routine is fun, but Kentuckians are wondering how that's consistent with Alison's anti-Second Amendment positions and the fact that her campaign is funded and supported by anti-gun activists," the statement read.



Copyright 2013 by WDRB News. All rights reserved.