ice skating rink (Photo: Getty Images/iStockphoto)

More than 80 people were taken to hospitals in December after they were sickened by carbon monoxide poisoning at a Lake Delton ice rink.

Officials discovered the culprits to be a propane-fueled ice-resurfacing machine and the lack of any carbon monoxide detectors in the ice rink.

Those sickened exhibited the normal symptoms of headache, nausea, dizziness, and one player was placed in a hyperbaric chamber at a Milwaukee hospital. Luckily, it appears everyone has recovered.

The outcome could have been worse. But it also could have been better. Much better.

The carbon monoxide leak could have been detected if Wisconsin had a law requiring detectors at ice rinks.

Michael Fatis, president of the Rochester, Minn., Ice Hawks, one of the teams sickened on Saturday, told the Rochester Post-Bulletin that the incident makes a good case for Wisconsin to adopt a law similar to Minnesota's, which states: "Owners or operators of indoor ice arenas must measure carbon monoxide and nitrogen dioxide air concentrations in each arena when internal combustion engine-powered ice maintenance equipment is used."

We couldn't agree more.

When you operate the combustion engine of an ice-resurfacing machine in an enclosed area, it seems a no-brainer to have a device that detects carbon monoxide and nitrogen dioxide leaks.

Many of us know of carbon monoxide poisoning, but nitrogen dioxide is also a danger.

Nitrogen dioxide, a gas produced when fuel is burned, was blamed when members of the Green Bay Notre Dame boys hockey team were sickened about a year ago at the De Pere Ice Arena.

Don Chilson, manager of the De Pere Ice Arena and Cornerstone Community Center in Ashwaubenon, said both rinks have detectors for carbon monoxide and nitrogen dioxide. At the time, the De Pere rink had detectors for both. It tested continuously for carbon monoxide but not nitrogen dioxide.

After that incident, several organizations came together to raise money for an electric-powered ice resurfacer at the rink. That alleviates the gas problem, but electric machines are more expensive than gas-powered ones, so they're not economically feasible for all facilities.

Since the incident, the Lake Delton ice rink has installed eight carbon monoxide detectors.

It shouldn't take an incident like this, or one with fatal results, for ice rinks to take action, but if such facilities won't install detectors, we call on the Legislature to compel them to do so. We don't like legislating common sense, but dozens of people at one of these events can be sickened, or worse.

Legislators should pass a law requiring detectors that will continuously monitor carbon monoxide and nitrogen dioxide levels.

It might not prevent all incidents, but the possible consequences of no action are chilling.

— Green Bay Press-Gazette

Read or Share this story: http://wdhne.ws/1zI7giB