SNc Channels:



Search

About Salem-News.com

Zip Weather





Weather Forecast

Jul-24-2014 20:30 TweetFollow @OregonNews Video: Oregon Planned Parenthood Giving Out Dangerous Sex Advice to Minors The undercover video by Live Action is the third installment is it's "SexEd" investigative series for youth.

A pro-life group says they have exposed an Oregon Planned Parenthood staffer in Clackamas, who told what she thought was a 15-year-old female that is normal for youth to be "spanked, hit, or whipped during sexual intercourse. Photo Courtesy: kff.org

(PORTLAND, Ore. ) - A pro-life group says they have exposed an Oregon Planned Parenthood staffer in Clackamas, who told what she thought was a 15-year-old female that is normal for youth to be "spanked, hit, or whipped during sexual intercourse. In the video, the staffer from the Clackamas office tells the under cover investigator that "it's very common to experiment with different things," including "being tied up" and "whipped" and "the baby thing, where they will put on diapers." The staffer goes on to say that there are "educational pornos out there" and recommends "female oriented porn." Live Action's president, Lila Rose, told Salem-News.com that no one can justify a counselor telling a fifteen-year-old girl that "some people like being spanked, or whipped, or hit." This is not sex education, but rather a disturbing and dangerous ideology consciously being pushed on our nation's youth, Rose said. Planned Parenthood is set to receive a large amount of additional funding through ObamaCare, including via PREP -- the Personal Responsibility Education Program -- a $75 million dollar sex education program funded by taxpayers through the Department of Health and Human Services. This is a bipartisan issue. Political ideology shouldn't affect parents' desire to protect their children. Whether you're liberal or conservative, or even pro-life or pro-abortion, tax-funded 'counseling' sessions directing kids to porn sites and sex shops, and teaching them how to beat and choke each other, are completely unacceptable, Rose said. She added that additionally, Planned Parenthood nationally receives over $500 million annually in taxpayer funds, plus more to be an ObamaCare “navigator.” Planned Parenthood Columbia Willamette continues to operate facilities in six locations in Oregon, including three others in Portland and one in the capital city of Salem. Planned Parenthood officials in Oregon refused to comment on this story, and the staffer seen in the video. Live Action is a youth-led movement dedicated to building a culture of life and ending the human rights abuse of abortion. The group uses new media to educate the public about the humanity of the unborn and investigative journalism to expose threats against the vulnerable and defenseless. WARNING: Video Contains Sexually Explicit Material and Language -- Viewer Discretion is ADVISED!

Oregon | Planned parenthood | Sex education | care | Live action | Most Commented on





Articles for July 23, 2014 | Articles for July 24, 2014 | Articles for July 25, 2014