Send Business Brief items to news@busjrnl.com.

Construction

Celebrating their 40th year of business in the North Bay, Petaluma contractor Wedge Roofing has been awarded the National Roofing Contractors Association’s first-place Gold Circle Award for outstanding workmanship in re-roofing for a spray foam roofing project at Small Precision Tools in Petaluma. Additionally, Wedge Roofing was the recipient of the 2016 Spray Foam Industry Excellence Award honoring their Petaluma roofing project as the Best Spray Foam Roof Nationwide under 40,000 square feet.

Education

Sonoma County Office of Education said winners in the elementary school bee attended Wilson School, Marguerite Hahn Elementary School, Luther Burbank School and West Side School. Districts with winners in the junior high bee included The Healdsburg School, St. Vincent De Paul School, Rincon Valley Middle School and Hillcrest Middle School.

Government

The Second Congressional District (Del Norte, Humboldt, Trinity, Mendocino, Sonoma and Marin counties) of Jared Huffman, D-San Rafael, was awarded more than $1.3 million for health centers in Huffman’s to improve and expand substance abuse medical services from the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services’ Health Resources and Services Administration. The funding, part of the $94 million awarded nationally through the Affordable Care Act, is aimed at combating opioid-use disorders in underserved populations.

Health Care

The Petaluma Health Care District, along with its community collaborators and health care partners, announced the official launch of the Petaluma Sober Circle (PSC), which has now been fully funded for its two-year pilot. Offering streamlined services for Petaluma’s chronically intoxicated homeless, PSC is designed to work to break the cycle of addiction, hospitalization and incarceration.

Hospitality, Tourism, Entertainment

Santa Rosa Symphony (srsymphony.org) has announced its 2016–2017 season. The new season marks the fifth year as resident orchestra at the Green Music Center. As Maestro Ferrandis conducts his final full season, he will conduct all seven classical series concert sets this season. The symphony’s 89th performance year begins with “The Magic of the Flute” in October.

In February, Weill Hall at the Green Music Center at Sonoma State University unveiled a new addition to the hall’s lobby and the center’s first-ever exclusive timepiece—a specially crafted Breguet clock modeled on the Breguet Tourbillion timepiece, patented in 1801, installed in Weill Hall’s Evert Person Lobby. The partnership reflects Breguet’s long-standing commitment to arts and culture and provides support to Weill Hall’s artistic and educational initiatives.