To say State Treasurer Ted Wheeler and Senate President Peter Courtney, D-Salem, have different oratorical styles is like saying that Portland and Phoenix have contrasting climates. Wheeler is a wonk's wonk, a human PowerPoint presentation. Courtney prefers old-style verbal flamboyance. Think Foghorn Leghorn. So, perhaps it's not surprising that they have completely different views of the best way to structure the Treasurer's Office and related investment operations so state pension managers can adapt to volatile financial markets in a timely manner.

It's easy to get lost in the arguments of two of the state's most influential, and verbose, political figures. But here are the most important points to consider. Oregon has a relatively small Treasury division, which contracts out most of its investment management. The state has a huge public pension obligation that will accelerate because of recent rulings by the Oregon Supreme Court. If returns from the state's investment portfolio decline – a distinct possibility given the length of the current bull market – schools and other public employers will be faced with even higher pension costs.

One of the few relatively risk-free ways to increase returns to is to reduce management costs. And that's exactly what Wheeler would like to do, by increasing his office's autonomy and bringing some investment functions in-house. Courtney counters that he's willing to increase Wheeler's staff, but forget the autonomy, which he says would remove the Legislature's oversight role. Both Wheeler and Courtney somewhat overstate their positions, but Wheeler makes the better case.

This is Wheeler's third attempt to obtain legislative approval to revamp his office. Senate Bill 134, and a related House bill, have been dubbed the Investment Modernization Act and would form the Oregon Investment Department, a public agency that would assume many of the investment activities currently contracted out by the Treasury division. The department would file annual reports to the governor and Legislature but would have much more autonomy than it currently does. Wheeler acknowledges the proposal has room for fine-tuning and he's open to that discussion. But Courtney instead wants to increase the Treasury budget, add positions that Wheeler has requested and keep structure and government oversight the same as they have been since the 1970s.

Beyond his typical verbal quips – "My tummy says don't try this" – Courtney's core argument against the changes contained in SB134 is that they are too risky. But the riskiest move of all would be to do nothing.

Consultants have told Treasury officials that the state has inadequate investment staff to oversee a portfolio as risky as the one it currently has. The alternatives: Increase staffing and flexibility or dial down the risk in the portfolio, which would decrease investment returns. Lower investment yields, in turn, would lead to increased pension costs for government employers.

Courtney points to the failed launch of Cover Oregon as an example of why he's reluctant to undertake an overhaul of something as important as the state's investment operations. But there are important differences in Cover Oregon and Wheeler's proposal. Cover Oregon was connected to the Affordable Care Act, an unprecedented expansion of government's role in U.S. health care. And Oregon tried to develop a website that would accomplish more than any other state dared to attempt. In contrast, SB134 simply attempts to reorganize work that already is being done, and the changes in Treasury operations would incorporate structures already successfully used in states such as Wisconsin, Arizona and Texas.

Increasing the Treasury staff, which Courtney has pledged to support, would be a step in the right direction. But it won't give the state's investment managers the best chance to keep returns high while also prudently managing risk in a volatile investment environment that requires more autonomy than they currently have. Wheeler estimates his proposal would pay off to the tune of $20 million a year by reducing costs and maintaining investment yields. Even if that estimate is high – and no one can precisely predict what financial markets will do – every dollar will matter as growing pension obligations exert increased pressure on state budgets in coming years.

Wheeler said he's open to ways to increase accountability in the new structure, such as a proposed amendment by Rep. Cliff Bentz, R-Ontario, that would create an advisory commission including members of the Legislature. Accountability is essential to ensure that the reorganized division operates as intended and wisely manages taxpayer money. But those are the types of details that need to be worked out by the Legislature and are the reason Courtney should encourage an open debate instead of resisting change. The current path eventually will lead to a place Oregon has visited too often: a financial cliff.

--The Oregonian/OregonLive editorial board