The wussification of America continues apace. A class-action lawsuit has been filed in a California federal court charging that Major League Baseball fails to protect fans from foul balls and errant bats.

It seems the new national pastime is frivolous lawsuits.

The lead plaintiff is Gail Payne, an Oakland A’s season ticket-holder. The “class” is every MLB season ticket-holder with an unprotected seat between home plate and the foul poles. Payne has never actually been bonked by a foul ball, so she may not even have standing to sue, since federal law requires that litigants in such suits have suffered a “concrete and particularized injury” — unless her anxiety over that prospect qualifies.

The remedy she seeks is a court order commanding every MLB ballpark to hang netting from “foul pole to foul pole” shielding fans along the first and third baselines all the way to the outfield walls. She cites a 2014 study by Bloomberg News claiming 1,750 spectators are injured each year at MLB games. (Yes, Bloomberg News is the creation of former New York City Mayor Michael Bloomberg, the same billionaire nannyist who imposed a limit on the size of soft drink cups in the Big Apple during his tenure.)

In 2014, 73 million fans attended MLB games. The 1,750 who are injured constitute two one-thousandths of 1 percent of that population.

So, the question is: “Even if this mandate saves only one injury, wouldn’t it be worth it?” I’d say, “Hell, no!” If safety is the sine qua non, your only concern that trumps everything else, you’ll disagree and find solace in the official statement on this matter from MLB spokesman Pat Courtney, who said safety is “our foremost goal” for fans at the ballpark. That was the obligatory, politically correct answer. A reasonable concern for safety is certainly in order, but MLB is first and foremost in the baseball business, which is mostly about fan enjoyment, winning a pennant and turning a profit.

For more than 100 years, U.S. courts have recognized the Baseball Rule in liability lawsuits, maintaining that spectators are well aware of the potential danger of flying projectiles and assume that risk when they attend games. Ballparks are only obliged to provide a reasonable number of netting-protected seats. The rows directly behind home plate between the dugouts have been deemed sufficient.

As a fan, I’d rather watch a game with my vision unfiltered by netting. And the thrill of catching a foul ball — or at least one that rolls to your grasp — is a constant quest. Players who pick them up from the field routinely toss them gently to kids (and adults) in the stands. Netting stretched from foul pole to foul pole would prevent that.

Recall the spectacular, highlight-reel catch made by Rockies Gold Glove third baseman Nolan Arenado earlier this year in San Francisco against the Giants, diving over the tarp to snare a foul ball and flying into the stands. If there had been netting in that spot, the force of his dive might have stretched it out and, on the snap-back return, might have boinged him airborne beyond second base and into the outfield. How about player safety?

When I go to a ballgame, I’ll take my (infinitesimal) chances on an injury or even death. And If I’ll risk my neck, I’ll certainly risk Gail Payne’s. If that’s too scary for her, she can watch the games at home worrying whether her TV will blow up.

As for inattentive fans, they should take personal responsibility for their own safety. Put down your cellphone and pay attention to the game. If a foul ball comes your way and you don’t want to catch it, you can always duck.

Freelance columnist Mike Rosen’s radio show airs weekdays from 1-3 p.m. on 850-KOA.

To send a letter to the editor about this article, submit online or check out our guidelines for how to submit by e-mail or mail.