Will bad weather block your view of Sunday’s super-rare Supermoon Lunar Eclipse? Or will you simply be unable to get outside on Sunday evening to observe the rare celestial phenomenon? In that case, the incredible lunar eclipse will be available to watch live online — which may not be quite the same as witnessing the spectacular eclipse with your own eyes, but at least it may be the next best thing.

Unlike the last lunar eclipse, which happened back in April and did not involve the “supermoon” phase of the moon, this eclipse will take place during prime time. The April eclipse started at around 3:15 a.m. This time the moon is being much kinder and gentler, with the eclipse beginning sometime after 8 p.m. United States Eastern Time.

What separates a “supermoon” from just the plain old, everyday Clark Kent moon? A super moon is a full moon or new moon that coincides with what asronomers call perigee — that is, the point in the moon’s elliptical orbit around the Earth when it passes closest to our planet’s surface.

As a result, the moon appears larger than normal — about 14 percent wider in diameter than a plain old, run-of-the-mill full moon.

Supermoons themselves are not especially rare. In fact, the Supermoon that occurs on Sunday night, September 27, will be the fifth one so far this year. After this supermoon, 2015 has one left, which will take place in October.

What is extremely rare, however, is when a Supermoon occurs at the same time that the Earth passes between the moon and the sun, casting its massive, disc-shaped shadow over the lunar surface, causing an eclipse.

Sunday’s event is a special one because the Supermoon Lunar Eclipse has happened only five times since the year 1900. The last Supermoon Eclipse came in 1982. Before that, 1910, 1928, 1946, and 1964 saw the spectacular phenomenon occur.

But if you miss Sunday’s Supermoon Lunar Eclipse, you’ll have to wait 18 years, until 2033, until the next one. To put that into perspective, kids who aren’t even born today will be starting college the next time we get one of these remarkable events.

In other words, don’t miss the Supermoon Lunar Eclipse, even if that means watching it live online — a possibility that was but a twinkle in some tech genius’s eye last time the Supermoon was eclipsed by Earth’s shadow.

NASA will live stream the Supermoon Lunar Eclipse at this link. The live online webcast will originate from the Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville, Alabama. But the NASA live eclipse stream also features views taken by cameras at the famed Griffith Observatory in Los Angeles, California. For that matter, the Griffith Observatory offers its own stream to watch the Supermoon Lunar Eclipse live online at this link as well.

[Image: Richard Heathcote / Getty Images]