Brandon, SD

Changes were made to clarify the scores are high compared to other public schools.

We first told you about the state's Smarter Balanced Test scores on Monday. We did a little digging into those results and found that some of the state's highest test scores are at Brandon Valley. Students there also score the highest on ACT tests when compared to other public school students.

You can't tell it just by looking at them, but there's something special about students at Brandon Valley High School. Senior Ethan Brown is among the brightest of the bright, scoring a 35 on his ACT, one point shy of perfection.

"Brandon is a great school, and I feel like the teachers here really prepared me to take those tests," Brown said.

So what’s the secret here?

"The secret, if there is one is having great people on staff, working with great students, great families in a very supportive community," David Pappone, Brandon Valley School District Superintendent, said.

Justin Lovrien teaches Biology and the ACT review course at Brandon Valley. He says it feels good to see his students excel.

"Of course, the kids realize that our ultimate goal is to get them ready for the next step, so a high ACT is just one of those things where absolutely everyone's winning," Lovrien said.

The average ACT score at Brandon Valley High School is a 24.5. That means a lot more students are ready for college.

School officials haven't made any major changes to lessons plans or the way they teach.

High test scores are nothing new to the district. School officials say Brandon Valley students have always performed exceptionally well.

"As a district, half of our schools finish in the top ten-percent on the school performance index report card," Pappone said.

Brandon Valley District also has one of the highest graduate rates. 97 percent of students graduate from high school in four years.

As for the next test, the students and staff here are already putting in the work needed to get equally high scores next year.

High School {{Title}} Remove Change News General Courts Web Only Crime Outdoors Events Center Non-Homepage Boredom Busters Pipeline Positively KELOLAND Technology Hunger Affordable Care Act Shops Flooding Remembering 9/11 Drought JazzFest Spring Storm Honor Flight Spencer Anniversary

DoApp Health News Business News Sports

Agriculture Markets Livestock Crops Politics

HealthBeat Cancer Children's Health Heart Health Wellness & Nutrition General Health Beat Women's Health RX Resources What's Going Around OTC Diabetes Recalls Dental Health Men's Health

Politics South Dakota Legislature Budget Congress Taxes General Local Campaign President US Senate New Laws US House Iowa Ballot Issues Local Races Minnesota Gubernatorial

Education Funding College Elementary High School Pre K School Supplies Middle School

Sports Professional College High School Sports Zone Headlines Summit League Tournament Olympics

Business Industry Your Money Matters Development Gas & Energy Legislation Economy/Stocks Employment General Health Care Technology Education Funding Tourism Banking/Finance Housing Transportation Insurance Meetings & Events Retail & Restaurants All Industries On The Move Shops Agriculture

Featured Stories Eye on KELOLAND Inside KELOLAND

Weather Snow Forecast Records Rain Flooding Drought WX Corner General

World News

Investigates GEAR UP

Sponsored Done

This article has been revised to reflect the following correction:

Changes were made to clarify the scores are high compared to other public schools.

© 2016 KELOLAND TV. All Rights Reserved.