Buy Photo Construction workers continue work on the new community auditorium Nov. 13 at Ashwaubenon High School, which was approved by school district voters in a referendum. A bill in the Legislature would further restrict when school district referendums. (Photo: File/Press-Gazette Media)Buy Photo

Voters in the Tigerton School District on Nov. 3 approved a referendum to exceed revenue limits for operating and maintenance costs by $2.5 million over five years. The vote wasn’t even close.

However, the vote would not have been held if a bill introduced in the Legislature within the last month were already law.

Assembly Bill 481/Senate Bill 355 would restrict when referendums to increase a school district’s revenue limits could be held. They would be restricted to the spring election (first Tuesday in April) or the general election, which “occurs in even-numbered years on the Tuesday following the first Monday in November.”

Since this is 2015, no vote would have been held.

Proponents of the scheduling restriction say they’re looking to hold referendums when turnout will be highest and prevent school boards from scheduling votes in, say, “the middle of January,” according to a hypothetical posed by Sen. Duey Stroebel to the Wisconsin State Journal.

For increased voter turnout and because school districts foot the bill for special elections, we think school boards would be wise in having their referendums coincide with spring and general elections, but we don’t believe it’s something that the Legislature has to prescribe.

That proposal is one of two in a bill from Republican legislators that are solutions in search of problems. The cost of these solutions is a loss of local control.

School referendums are democracy at the ground level. Elected school board members vote whether to hold a spending referendum. Approved spending plans then go to voters in the school districts, the very people who will be affected, and they vote “yes” or “no.” A simple majority is all that’s needed.

You can’t get much simpler than that.

The bill comes at a time when school districts have seen state aid decrease over the last five years. A referendum, then, is one of the only ways a school district can increase revenue.

AB481/SB355 would also restrict the frequency of referendums. If voters reject borrowing money or exceeding revenue limits, then the school board could not bring the issue before voters for two years, with exception for fire or natural disaser.

Backers of the bills want to prevent school boards from scheduling votes on slightly altered versions of the same referendum year after year and, in effect, wearing down voters. Again, this should be a local decision.

School district residents have the power to vote out school board members who don’t move on. Also, second and third votes give the board an opportunity to fine-tune and adjust a referendum to meet constituents’ needs.

More importantly, this provision “could have a significant impact on school district operations and could force districts to spend down cash reserves in order to meet operational costs before the next round of state aid payments,” according to a fiscal estimate from the state Department of Public Instruction.

That’s because the two-year prohibition would ban short-term borrowing that school districts use to manage cash flow that result from the vagaries of state aid distribution as well as receipt of tax levy revenue.

A public education is mandated in the state’s constitution. Cuts to state aid have left school districts with little recourse than the referendum route. Further restricting that avenue will hurt public education, plus it’s not needed.

Contact your local elected officials and tell them to scrap this bill.

CONTACT YOUR LEGISLATOR

The following are the Northeastern Wisconsin legislators who have signed onto the bill:

» State Sen. Frank Lasee, R-Ledgeview, (608) 266-3512, Sen.Lasee@legis.wisconsin.gov

» State Rep. Andre Jacque, R-De Pere, (608) 266-9870 or (888) 534-0002, Rep.Jacque@legis.wisconsin.gov

Read or Share this story: http://gbpg.net/1Hffvgp