The town of Stonewall came together as a community Sunday afternoon, to celebrate and remember the life of Jonathan Sanders. Sanders died last week, after an interaction with a police officer.

"We're just trying to get justice," Franklin Allen who is a friend of Sanders said. "It's not about black and white, it's just about right and wrong. We're just trying to bring Clarke County together as one."

Hundreds filled a ball park on River Rd. in Stonewall to gather for a celebration of the life of 39 year old Jonathan Sanders. It was a celebration that brought a community together.

"I do understand that God, He's got a perfect will for all of us," Pastor of New Jerusalem Temple of God Paul Walters stated. "God decided to pull one of his flowers from us."

Horses, motorcycles, four wheelers, and vintage cars adorned with signs that reflected his life filled every space available. Friends say those were things Sanders enjoyed and there was no better way to celebrate his life than doing what he loved.

"We as a community are here as one to celebrate and say that hey we understand that there are maybe some issues in our own community, but we are looking at our own community as a whole on how can we better ourselves," Clarke County NAACP President Lawrence Kirksey said.

People from all walks of life and races say justice is the answer they are striving for, when it comes to the death of Sanders, but that it's important to let the judicial system work it out.

"We're just looking for answers," Allen said. "I don't think it's no hatred or no attitude towards anybody, we want answers. Just do what's right, that's what's we are looking for justice. It will take it's course and everything will work out in the best that it could.

"It means a lot, it's not just the size," Horse Riders Club friend Quashaine Morgan said. "We have people from the community, not even of our race telling us that we will get justice and we will get justice for Jonathan, that's what we believe in."

As the sun begins to set at the end of the day, it's another day that the friends, family, and the community are waiting for answers to determine just what happened on the night that Sanders died.

"We know he's smiling down and we're smiling also, by just having this event here, in the town of Stonewall where he was born and raised," said Allen.

The case is still under investigation into the death of Jonathan Sanders. The Mississippi Bureau of Investigation is handling the case. Sanders body was taken to Jackson last week for an autopsy.