Pittsburgh's third-string QB has two TDs in beating Arizona

Pittsburgh Steelers quarterback Landry Jones (3) celebrates with tight end Matt Spaeth (89) after throwing a touchdown pass to wide receiver Martavis Bryant in the fourth quarter Sunday against the Arizona Cardinals. It was one of two fourth-quarter TD passes from Jones to Bryant as the Steelers rallied for the win at Heinz Field in Pittsburgh. ( Gene J. Puskar / Associated Press )

PITTSBURGH — The wide receiver with the seemingly unlimited potential but serious baggage flipped in joy. The third-string quarterback who spent two-plus years having to defend his roster spot jumped into the arms of one of his offensive linemen.

For Martavis Bryant, it was relief. For Landry Jones, it was validation. For the Pittsburgh Steelers, it was a win as unlikely as it was emphatic.

Dominated for a half, the Steelers rallied for a 25-13 over the Arizona Cardinals on Sunday led by two players who have spent portions of their young careers either buried in the doghouse or depth chart or both.

Jones threw a pair of touchdown passes to Bryant after relieving Michael Vick, the second a spectacular 88-yard catch-and-run that sealed the win with 1:58 to play. Bryant, active for the first time this season after being suspended four games for violating the league's substance abuse policy and missing another with a knee injury, somersaulted across the goal line in joy while Jones was thrust into the air by guard David DeCastro.

"I just can't believe I got in the game," Jones said. "I'm still kind of reeling from it."

So are the Cardinals (4-2), who overwhelmed the Steelers (4-2) in the first half but only had a seven-point lead to show for it. Once Jones replaced Vick, who completed just 3 of 8 passes for 6 yards before exiting in the third quarter with a right hamstring injury, Pittsburgh's offense looked like the one Ben Roethlisberger guided before spraining his left knee in Week 3.

Advertisement

Jones found Bryant for an 8-yard touchdown that put the Steelers in front, the second of five straight second-half possessions in which Pittsburgh scored.

Jones finished 8 of 12 for 168 yards and the two sco res. Bryant caught six passes for 137 yards, Bell ran for 88 yards and rookie Chris Boswell kicked four field goals as Pittsburgh steadied itself the moment Jones entered the huddle.

Carson Palmer threw for 421 yards with a touchdown and two interceptions. John Brown caught 10 balls for 196 yards, but the Cardinals collapsed in the second half to ruin Arians' homecoming.