By the end of 2016, Tyler residents will have another option for quick access to health care when something goes wrong.

From a broken arm to a heart attack, patients may go to a three-story, 60,000-square-foot freestanding emergency room that also doubles as a full-service inpatient hospital.

Mother Frances Hospitals and Clinics' newest health care offering will differ from urgent care centers in that most are designed only to handle simple, non-life-threatening medical complaints, often during regular or extended business hours.

In talking about the new venture, Mother Frances administrators note it is much more than a stand-alone emergency department. They call it a community hospital, or a micro-hospital.

Unlike freestanding ERs, a micro-hospital must meet stricter standards since they’ll provide inpatient care, which includes accepting Medicare and Medicaid.

“This concept though has inpatient beds and 24/7 call coverage and has the ability to move someone out of the emergency room and push them into observation or a short stay hospital environment without having to transfer them,” said Darin Szilagyi, chief strategy and business development officer.

The hospital is significantly smaller compared to Mother Frances’ larger facilities, with about 12 and 18 beds total, officials estimate.

It will be possible because of a joint agreement with Emerus, a physician-founded, for-profit company that makes investments in established hospital systems.

They’ve had joint ventures with 15 hospitals in the Dallas, Houston and San Antonio areas. They’ll soon open four hospitals in Colorado and are in discussions about others.

Ray Thompson, executive vice president and chief operating officer at Mother Frances Hospitals and Clinics, said there has been growth in all of Mother Frances’ emergency services, with 74,000 emergency department visits in a year at Mother Frances Hospital alone.

The new hospital will be at the northwest corner of Cumberland Road and Broadway Avenue. Thompson said the hospital bridges a gap of care that is needed in a highly populated area, also bringing some relief to the downtown flagship.

That area of Tyler has exploded in growth in recent years, and hospital administrators say it’s an appropriate location in that it lacks “ease of access.”

“(Emerus officials) felt that anything that was in that area close to Broadway would be a very good location to serve that growth in that part of town,” Thompson said.

“It was a very analytical approach used to make that determination.”

THE BUSINESS MODEL

Administrators say it’s time to consider new ways to deliver medicine as hospitals adjust to provisions in the Affordable Care Act and other changes in the industry.

“I think we’re on the leading edge — considering unique and different ways to provide high quality care to people,” Thompson said. “This is a way to bring health care to people all over America in a fashion that’s different from the past. In the future, there will be a lot more partnerships like this occurring. There will be a new model of health care.”

Mother Frances administrators have mulled over the idea of a new facility for about two years.

The joint venture will create a new company, which is so far unnamed. The agreement is a 51/49 partnership, with Mother Frances leading. Thompson said while they are not committed right now, their partnership gives them the ability to build similar facilities in the area in the future.

Hospital officials haven’t cited an estimated cost of construction yet but note the costs will be shared between Mother Frances and Emerus.

Szilagyi said they were attracted to Emerus’ attention to design, such as facilities that give staff the ability to wash their hands while facing the patient, and to its focus on reducing waiting times.

Emerus’ waiting areas are small, Szilgayi said, seating no more than about a dozen people.“They don’t want the patients out waiting,” Szilagyi said. They want to facilitate you back to a room as quickly as possible. Traditional hospitals think often about how do we keep people in a waiting room and move them back. That’s an old way of thinking about tit. The Emerus model is if you’re out there, you’re not being seen.”

Mother Frances Hospitals and Clinics’ officials received input from its emergency room physicians and surgeons before setting their sights on an Emerus partnership.

“One of the things that intrigued us is their patient satisfaction scores are high,” Szilagyi said. “They have a model that’s very much unlike traditional health care. It’s built around speed back to the room. It’s a patient-centric approach, customer service-oriented, almost like a retail industry.”

Lance Lunsford, vice president of strategic communication at the Texas Hospital Association, said partnerships among health care groups would continue to be a trend for years to come.

“These hospitals would be able to team up with someone who does this specialty of managing these types of facilities and expand their reach,” Lunsford said. “The trend is going to continue, and hospitals are going to be making investments to make sure they’re able to provide services for the same patients that some of the freestanding emergency departments are attracting.”

Whether to visit an emergency room, stand alone ER, urgent care center or a community hospital may be tricky for patients who need treatment fast.

“This is where people are getting confused,” Lunsford said. “The hospital of today is not like the hospital of the 50s or 60s. Not all hospitals are doing all things. In the past, hospitals worked as large, all-servicing monoliths. Today a hospital will develop, based on the needs of a certain population.”

He added, “A micro hospital or mini hospital makes a ton of sense, but that doesn’t mean that you’ll go there and get everything you need, and that’s by design. However, they’ll have a referral system and will service patients in one way, shape or form.”