They are the words no one wants to hear: You have cancer.

A diagnosis can be especially dire, considering, women diagnosed with breast cancer in Ohio are more likely to die than almost anywhere else in the U.S. according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention; Ohio has the fourth highest mortality rate in the country.

Carrie Bennett of Sunbury was determined not to be a part of those kinds of statistics. She learned of her breast cancer diagnosis in June of 2015.

“It was in several different areas of one side so I had a lot of decisions to make,” Bennett said.

Bennett had a bilateral mastectomy after pre-cancerous cells were discovered in the other side.

Her second surgery set for December couldn't be scheduled because she lost her Medicaid the month before in November.

Bennett was referred to Ohio's Breast and Cervical Cancer Project (BCCP); which provides cancer screenings, diagnostic testing and case management services at no cost to eligible women, who for some reason cannot get Medicaid.

The Missions team at Komen Columbus calls it a critical safety net.

“Imagine a woman has an abnormal test and has to make a decision about feeding her kids or paying her rent or having a biopsy to find out if she actually has cancer.” Julie McMahon, Missions Director at Komen Columbus said. “There are a lot of people who are working hard and have insurance but still are very low income and the cost of having a follow up test isn’t covered by their insurance and so this would allow them to use that program.”

The 2015 Review of Ohio Department of Health treatment programs shows enrollment peaked in 2010 and has been dropping since.

The report also cites the Affordable Care Act (ACA) for having had a significant impact on this program, helping to eliminate the gap BCCP was created to fill.

State Senator Peggy Lehner from Montgomery County is leading a push to preserve and modernize the program with legislation to expand coverage to include diagnostic testing after routine screenings, expanded access to women as young as 25. Right now it's closed to women under 40 and it would expand the income eligibility.

Women’s health advocates call it a smart move that would bring the program current and make it more effective.

“One of the great things is that for every dollar put into this program which Ohio only puts about $800 into this program we get three dollars from the CDC to help fight breast cancer and cervical cancer in Ohio,” McMahon said.

Meantime Bennett's fight continues with a relaunch of this “Go Fund Me” page to help as she says she’s paying high insurance premiums and high deductibles for her next surgery.

She told 10TV she was denied entry to the Breast and Cervical Cancer Project because she wasn’t enrolled prior to her diagnosis and she's younger than 40.

Despite her experience, Bennett believes the program still has a place.

"I think if they change the requirements more women could use it because it was frustrating for me because I needed it and couldn't use it," she said.