To prepare for important meetings, Robert Tomson, the owner of a women’s activewear company, has a secret weapon: an at-home two-step facial peel.

“It’s a perfect little pick-me-up,” said Tomson, who lives in Brooklyn. “It takes care of ingrown hairs and gives me the instant feel of getting a facial.”

Tomson, in his 40s, first tried a peel from his wife’s stash after he noticed the results on her. Now he jokingly compares himself with the Mel Gibson character in “What Women Want,” the ad man awash in products intended for women.

Men are unlikely to request peels (they just complain about their skin), but dermatologists, facialists and skin-care companies say they are selling more to men every year to treat a variety of problems.

“Men feel comfortable with peels because they work fast and there are no injections, so they don’t feel like they’re having work done,” said Dr.

Francesca Fusco, a dermatologist in Manhattan, who uses them to treat brown spots (the top complaint), fine lines, wrinkles, ingrown hairs and large pores (especially on the nose) and to address skin texture.

For men, there is the welcome side effect of a closer shave, she said, and skin-care professionals like that the peel has become a gateway drug to other cosmetic procedures.

“Men come in for that, and then maybe the next year they’re asking about skin tightening,” Fusco said. Men tend to stick to gentler peels, like those with glycolic acid (as opposed to, say, fraxal laser peels) because they’d rather not walk around pink and flaking.

Jim Massaro, a strength and conditioning coach in Nyack, New York, first went to a dermatologist because he was worried about the brown spots on his face and hands. (He sheepishly admits to rarely wearing a hat.) Now, about once a season, he has a peel (usually glycolic acid or trichloracetic acid, a relative of vinegar), which he says has reduced the spots about 90 percent.

“I didn’t want to do injections or laser because that might give you downtime,” he said. “I don’t want athletes making fun of me, thinking I’m getting Botox or something.”

Joanna Vargas, a facialist in Manhattan, has seen a steady increase in male clients, and she said she gives them peels because they’re a quick way to see results — and, most especially, because they make removing blemishes less painful.

“Women think it’s OK to suffer a bit for beauty, but men are a little more sensitive to extractions,” she said.

She avoids anything that smells like a woman’s product and opts for higher concentrations of fruit acid (men’s skin is thicker) mixed with paprika.

“They like the heat of the paprika,” Vargas said. “It’s invigorating.”