Should University Hill be one of only three neighborhoods where Boulder's occupancy limits are enforced? ( Jeremy Papasso / Staff Photographer )

Boulder City Council's proposed stricter "enforcement" of the present occupancy limit that prohibits more than three unrelated people from living together in low-density residential areas and more than four unrelated people in medium-density residential areas, regardless of the size of the house or the number of bedrooms, has gone from bad, to worse, to politically untenable.

First, the City Council proposes to single out only the Hill and Martin Acres as the primary geographic enforcement locations. On its face this is not good public policy. If the ordinance is clear, then enforcement should be carried out, not just in certain areas that the city arbitrarily decides should be targeted. I appreciate the fact that "students" are not a protected class for discrimination purposes.

Now the more recent conundrum for the city attorney's office is to enforce the current occupancy ordinance at the same time keeping illegal co-ops off limits; "We won't enforce the present ordinance against 'well-known' co-ops in the city that are 'legitimate' but not legal."

How can a co-op be illegal and legitimate at the same time? What does well-known even mean and who decides the fact? Also, when does a boarding house become a co-op or when does a co-op become a boarding house for code enforcement?

City Attorney Tom Carr was quoted as saying that his office always has wide prosecutorial discretion with the enforcement of the current ordinance. If that is the case why have we had all these public "enforcement only" discussions.

Advertisement

Carr himself stated "we have gotten mixed signals from council." He has been told to enforce occupancy standards at least in Martin Acres and on the Hill but at the same time turn a blind eye to illegal co-ops.

In fairness to the city attorney's office, it should not be put in this uncomfortable prosecutorial "lose-lose" situation. City Council needs to have more substantive policy discussions regarding the intent of the current occupancy limit ordinance before stricter enforcement begins.

As council member Lisa Morzel presciently said in the original hearing, "Maybe we need to bring back the whole occupancy ordinance." We all should agree with Morzel that the ordinance should be brought back before the new City Council. Besides, maybe we can put off hiring another code enforcement officer in next year's budget until we settle this issue.

To start strict code enforcement now after what has publicly been stated to be both an arbitrary and capricious geographic enforcement of a clear ordinance, and at the same time ask the city's attorney's office not to enforce the ordinance against well-known illegal co-ops, is fundamentally duplicitous and poor city policy. The current occupancy limit ordinance as written, in light of the need for co-op housing alone, warrants further council input before strict enforcement should begin.

If "Animal Houses" are that easy to identify among boarding houses, co-ops, or other houses, why are we even talking about this issue at all? Don't we have enough other ordinances to shut them down already. i.e. parking, noise, trash, public nuisance?

To enforce or not to enforce is the question and only the city attorney's office knows for sure.

Jim Martin is public trustee of Boulder County.