The National Institutes of Health would get an additional $1.1 billion in next year’s budget, while eliminating a popular agency, according to a House appropriations bill released this week.

The bill would mean $300 million more for Alzheimer’s research, and an additional $100 million for an initiative to combat antibiotic resistance. But it would also eliminate the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality, or AHRQ, and its $465 million allocated for this year. And it would include specific provisions to defund “Obamacare,” according to a statement released by the House Appropriations Committee.

The funding is “targeted to proven program with the most national benefit,” according to Rep. Hal Rogers, the chairman of the House Appropriations Committee.

“This legislation continues our efforts to reduce wasteful spending, to stop harmful and unnecessary regulations that kill jobs and impede growth, and to make wise investments in proven programs on behalf of the American taxpayer,” said Rogers.

Despite the overall increase in funding, the AHRQ elimination provision has drawn some serious opposition.

“Without AHRQ we wouldn’t know one baby (is) born every 25 minutes with drug withdrawal – a $1.5 billion problem,” said Stephen Patrick, a neonatologist at Vanderbilt University, via Twitter.

“Don’t let the politics of no destroy the science of why and how,” said the University of Utah’s Department of Biomedical Informatics, in another tweet.

Rep. Lucille Roybal-Allard (D-Calif.) proposed a reinstatement of the AHRQ funding on Wednesday at the Labor and Health and Human Services House subcommittee meeting, she said in a statement.

“It makes no sense to wipe out this unique and vital agency,” the congresswoman said. “No other HHS agency shares AHRQ’s mission: AHRQ is our only federal agency focused on researching and sharing evidence-based information that can be used to increase the quality and safety of American health services, and make our health care more accessible, equitable, and cost-efficient. AHRQ’s funding represents only 0.01 percent of all health care spending, but this small investment has huge returns for the American people, promoting better health outcomes and practices that make us healthier and improve the quality of care we receive.”

House legislators also attempted to eliminate the AHRQ three years ago, but failed.

The bill is expected to go to a full committee vote next week, when the Senate version is expected to be released.

The new funding controversy follows the battle over the American Competes Reauthorization Act, which House members touted as improving science – amid widespread opposition from the scientific community.