Senate Republicans were preparing to force through a repeal of major components of Barack Obama's health care reform law and defund Planned Parenthood on Tuesday, a tactical move that has no chance of winning the president's approval but one they hope will clear a path for efforts to block Syrian refugees from the U.S.

With just 10 days until Congress must pass an omnibus funding bill to keep the government open, the vote is intended to keep the Affordable Care Act and Planned Parenthood away from the larger spending debate. Instead, Republicans will attempt to keep the focus on their demands for stricter security measures intended to slow the resettlement of refugees following the attacks in Paris last month.

The president has threatened to veto a bill passed last month in the House that would dramatically increase the barriers to entry for Syrian refugees – an effort supporters say is meant to ensure Islamic State group fighters don't infiltrate themselves into the refugee population in an attempt to sneak into the U.S.

But thanks to the support of a number of Democrats, who voted with Republicans to put the measure near a veto-proof majority, the refugee legislation can end up included in the omnibus spending bill, so long as spats over Obamacare and Planned Parenthood don't stymie negotiations.

[READ: Highway Deal Includes Ex-Im Reauthorization]

That led Majority Leader Mitch McConnell to call for a separate consideration of those issues as part of a budget reconciliation bill.

"The Republican leader has an obsession with the Affordable Care Act," Minority Leader Harry Reid, D-Nev., said Tuesday. "I'm sure he's going to come and talk about what a great victory it was on this reconciliation."

"It will pass and go to the president, and he'll veto it in about 10 seconds," he said. "And, of course, the veto will certainly be sustained."

McConnell, R-Ky., presented a revised plan to his conference at a meeting Monday night that would phase out Medicaid expansion over two years, eliminate the subsidies that help low-income consumers pay for insurance premiums, and roll back a medical device tax and the so-called "Cadillac tax" on high-cost plans.

The measure, which would require 51 votes to pass, would also defund Planned Parenthood.

"This week we finally have a chance to vote to end Obamacare's cycle of broken promises and failures with just 51 votes," McConnell said Tuesday. "In other words, the president can't be shielded from the weighty decision he'll finally have to make when this measure lands on his desk."

"He may well decide to stick to his rhetoric that the law is working better than even he intended and veto the bill," McConnell said of Obama. "But he should instead decide to finally stand with the middle class that suffered enough from this failed law. It's a choice the president has never faced before."

While the exact language of the reconciliation has yet to be finalized, it's an attempt to grant Republicans a chance to vote in favor of two items popular among their constituents – Obamacare repeal and defunding Planned Parenthood – while also easing the election-year concerns of moderates, including those who come from the 30 states that have expanded Medicaid eligibility up to 138 percent of the federal poverty level. Senate GOP leaders at Monday's meeting assured members the two-year drawdown would allow the next president to put a replacement plan in place so the newly insured did not lose their coverage.

A previous version of the bill, which passed the House in October, was derailed when the Senate parliamentarian determined some of the measure's components were ineligible to be considered under the rules of reconciliation. The reconciliation process allows the Senate to bypass cloture requirements that essentially force every measure to collect 60 votes to close debate or face the possibility of a bill-killing filibuster. The process is limited to laws that deal with spending or the budget.

The previous House measure had been criticized by conservatives for not going far enough in repealing the Affordable Care Act. Several Republican senators, including presidential candidates Ted Cruz of Texas, Marco Rubio of Florida and Rand Paul of Kentucky, plus Mike Lee of Utah, had threatened to vote against it. Their opposition would have been enough to sink the bill, but they have warmed to the new version.

"I'm very encouraged," Lee said, after Monday's meeting.

[ALSO: Senator Slams Spending on Silent Shakespeare, 'Federal Match.com']

Consideration was expected to begin as early as Tuesday afternoon, and a vote could take place as soon as Thursday. The House would then need to consider the Senate's version of the bill to send it to the president's desk.

It's unclear if conservatives will be satisfied with the procedural sleight of hand. House GOP leaders have repeatedly refused to rule out riders on the omnibus spending bill, including a version of refugee legislation that passed the House last month or a measure defunding Planned Parenthood, that would also draw a presidential veto.

House Majority Leader Kevin McCarthy, R-Calif., declined to speculate on potential riders, downplaying the likelihood of a government shutdown in a conversation with reporters Monday.