A successful merger of health care giants requires hard decisions. Roles of people and departments will change. Some will be eliminated.

People are loyal to an entrenched CEO, and vice versa.

That can pose problems in a merger, such as the one planned by Penn State Milton S. Hershey Medical Center and PinnacleHealth System, where the merged entities will be expected to find cost-saving efficiences and alter or cut positions and programs.

In light of that, it might be best for Penn State Hershey to find a new CEO – one capable of representing the interests of a medical school while dealing with the business realities of a merger, and lacking baggage of personal relationships.

"I think having an outsider come in, with dual skills in those areas, is ultimately going to be a good thing," said Dr. Jaan Sidorov, a Harrisburg-area based health care consultant.

The departure of Dr. Harold Paz, the CEO of Penn State-Hershey and dean of its medical school, makes that possible. Paz, who has held the positions for eight years, announced this week he will go to work for heath insurer Aetna.

Sidorov once wrote an analysis of the failed merger of Penn State-Hershey and Geisinger Health System, which began in 1997 and fell apart within three years. He concluded personal ties and loyalties were among the factors that prevented leaders of the merged entity from making business decisions on matters such as the fate of programs offered by both entities.

"Whenever a disagreement developed, two camps – based on historical affiliations with either Geisinger or HMC – quickly emerged. The CEO, chief academic officer, and other system leaders then found themselves being lobbied by opposing constituencies," Sidorov wrote in the 2003 analysis.

As a result, separate and competing services were allowed to continue, undermining the financial goals of the merger, concluded Sidorov, who was a medical director for Geisinger Health Plan when he published the analysis.

Still, the board of Penn State-Hershey and PinnacleHealth may have already headed off such problems. Early on, they agreed the Penn State-Hershey CEO will head the merged organization. In the case of the Hershey-Geisinger merger, the ultimate leader "wasn't clearly defined," and that led to inability to make decisions and solve problems, Sidorov said.

Paz will leave in late July. His departure was announced just two weeks after the proposed merger became publicly known. Board members knew of his possible departure before the merger agreement was finalized, PinnacleHealth board member George Grode said this week.

Another analysis of the Hershey-Geisinger merger noted that many of the participants later concluded both CEOs should have been replaced.

The author, William Mallon, quoted one as saying, "We made a mistake of keeping both CEOs ... It created tension between the two with groups of loyal subjects who supported their person and their person's view and who were convinced that the person on the other side did not understand their problems."

The approval process for the Pinnacle-Hershey merger is expected to take about a year and involve reviews by entities including the Pennsylvania attorney general's office and the Federal Trade Commission. Those reviews will focus on matters such as whether the merger might significantly limit choice and drive up prices for consumers; the departure of Paz won't have an impact.

Brian Quinn, an expert on mergers at Boston College Law School, said, "More likely, the unexpected departure of a key executive might create challenges in the process of post-closing integration. Without the designated CEO success with respect to integration will depend on the depth of the bench at both companies and the degree to which there is a shared vision across both firms."

Penn State University, which oversees the medical center, said it will conduct a national search for a replacement for Paz. The interim replacement with be Dr. A. Craig Hillemeier, who is the head of the children's hospital, and who briefly held that post before Paz arrived in 2006. PinnacleHealth CEO Michael Young was previously named president of the merged entity. He will report to the CEO and oversee most patient care aspects, including the merged entity's four hospitals.

The two systems will operate separately until the merger receives outside approval. The actual process of merging of their respective functions – and some might be left unchanged – is expected to take several years.

Grode, the PinnacleHealth board member, said Paz felt, because of career and family considerations, he couldn't commit to staying that long.

Sidorov said he wouldn't surmise his departure reflects any uneasiness about the merger. He pointed that all health care organizations – from hospital systems to insurers to pharmaceutical companies – are in a state of upheaval due to factors including the Affordable Care Act and pressure to lower costs and improve quality. That has coincided with high turnover among successful executives, who often move to take advantage of the many opportunities now available.

Asked whether Paz might be leaving a troubled ship, Sidorov said: "I just don't see that with this guy and this organization under these circumstances. It's going on all over. People are shuttling in and out all the time."

Sidorov also predicted that the departure of Paz will hammer home to employees of Penn State-Hershey that "this is really happening," and they must face the loss of comfort and security that comes from a familiar CEO.