ENLARGE Florida State quarterback Jameis Winston during the Seminoles' spring game on April 12. Getty Images

Florida State University has ruled that two football players who were with star quarterback Jameis Winston on the night he is alleged to have sexually assaulted another student won't be suspended or expelled, people familiar with the ruling said Wednesday.

Suspension and expulsion from school were the strictest penalties the two players faced after a May 20 code-of-conduct hearing. The two students, Chris Casher and Ronald Darby, remain on Florida State's football team, a school spokesman said.

Casher and Darby told police they witnessed Winston, the Seminoles quarterback and Heisman Trophy winner, having sex with the alleged victim on Dec. 7, 2012, according to police documents. Casher recorded parts of the sexual encounter with his phone but later deleted the video and discarded the phone, according to police documents.

The woman subsequently accused Winston of sexual assault. Winston has said through an attorney the sex was consensual.

Winston, Casher and Darby weren't criminally charged in connection with the alleged incident.

In the school ruling, Casher was found responsible for two of three alleged violations of Florida State's student code: acts that invade the privacy of another person, and the recording of images without consent, according to a person familiar with the matter. Casher received one year of probation, the person said. Further violation of the code of conduct during probation puts a student at risk for suspension or expulsion, according to the code.

Casher was found not responsible for conduct of a sexual nature that creates an intimidating, hostile, or offensive environment for another person.

Darby was found not responsible on two code-violation charges—intimidating/hostile conduct and acts that invade the privacy of another person—said his attorney, Tico Gimbel. "He's happy to put all this behind him and just move on," Gimbel said. "It's the right outcome."

Punishments for violations under Florida State's code of conduct range from verbal reprimand to expulsion.

The hearing did not address the allegation against Winston. His attorney, David Cornwell, said of Florida State's ruling: "The discipline would suggest a conclusion that whatever the circumstances were, that they were not serious or substantially hostile."

John Clune, one of the attorneys representing the alleged victim, said his client was surprised but "generally satisfied" by the result. "All that our client wanted was for the process to take place and these issues at Florida State not continue to be swept under the rug," he said in a statement. "The fact that both had to answer for their behavior at the hearing, they both apologized to our client, and at least one of them will have consequences is a good outcome."

Casher, Darby and Winston could not be reached for comment through Florida State representatives.

Under new federal guidelines, U.S. colleges are required to adjudicate sexual-misconduct complaints regardless of whether police pursue criminal charges. On campus, such complaints are also judged by a different standard. In their disciplinary decisions, schools must use the lower standard of a "preponderance of the evidence," according to the guidelines, rather than "beyond a reasonable doubt," the standard used in criminal cases.

A state prosecutor in Florida said in Dec. 2013, a year after the alleged sexual assault, that he wouldn't pursue criminal charges against Winston, citing a lack of evidence. Winston won the Heisman Trophy, awarded to college football's top individual player, that month. The Seminoles won the sport's national championship in January and are favored to defend their title next season with Winston at quarterback.

Write to Rachel Bachman at rachel.bachman@wsj.com and Ben Cohen at ben.cohen@wsj.com