Customized TV Listings are available here: www.latimes.com/tvtimes

Click here to download

TV listings for the week of Nov. 16 - 22, 2014 in PDF format

This week's TV Movies

SERIES

The Pioneer Woman In a new Thanksgiving-themed episode, host Ree Drummond reveals the sides she serves as accompaniments to the main dishes on her holiday table. 9:30 a.m. Food

Hell on Wheels Cullen (Anson Mount) struggles with Ruth's (Kasha Kropinski) decision in this new episode. 9 p.m. AMC

Atlantis As the second season opens Ariadne (Aiysha Hart) sits on the throne of Atlantis, yet her country is at war and on the brink of collapse. 9 p.m. BBC America

The Missing Ten years after his 5-year-old son disappeared during a family vacation in France, British dad Tony Hughes (James Nesbitt) continues a desperate search for the boy in the premiere of this international production. 9 p.m. Starz

Transporter: The Series In the first of two new episodes Frank (Chris Vance) is hired to transport a beautiful, young woman. In second new episode he discovers that the package he's been hired to deliver to Paris, is a bomb. 9 and 10 p.m. TNT

Saturday Night Live Woody Harrelson hosts this new episode with musical guest Kendrick Lamar. 11:29 p.m. NBC

MOVIES

Northpole Robert Wagner and Jill St. John, star as Santa and his wife in this new holiday fantasy set in the Clauses' magical hometown, where most of the residents are too busy to appreciate the Christmas season, so a reporter and her son (Tiffani Thiessen, Max Charles) try to rekindle the yuletide spirit. 8 p.m. Hallmark

Aaliyah: The Princess of R&B This new biopic chronicles the life story of the Brooklyn, N.Y.-born music sensation (Alexandra Shipp), from her discovery on the TV show "Star Search" when she was 10 to her death in a plane crash, at age 22. 8 p.m. Lifetime. The special "Beyond the Headlines: Aaliyah" follows at 10.

WEEKEND TALK

SATURDAY

Good Morning America (N) 7 a.m. KABC

McLaughlin Group (N) 6:30 p.m. KCET

SUNDAY

Today Mario Armstrong. (N) 6 a.m. KNBC

Good Morning America (N) 6 a.m. KABC

State of the Union With Candy Crowley Sen. Richard J. Durbin (D-Ill.). Immigration: Rep. Xavier Becerra (D-Los Angeles) former Attorney General Alberto Gonzales. Net neutrality: Sen. Al Franken (D-Minn.). Panel: S.E. Cupp; LZ Granderson; Penny Lee. (N) 6 and 9 a.m. CNN

CBS News Sunday Morning (N) 6:30 a.m. KCBS

Fareed Zakaria GPS A film depicting the story of journalist Maziar Bahari detained by Iran: Director Jon Stewart ("Rosewater"); author Maziar Bahari. China: Elizabeth Economy; David M. Lampton. Massive Open Online Course: Anant Agarwal; Stuart Butler. (N) 7 and 10 a.m. CNN

Face the Nation Former Gov. Mitt Romney (R-Mass.). Sen. Claire McCaskill (D-Mo.); Sen. Mike Lee (R-Utah); Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu. The return of Americans detained in North Korea: Director of national intelligence James R. Clapper. (N) 8 a.m. KCBS

Meet the Press Affordable Care Act; Keystone XL pipeline; immigration; 2016 prospects: Gov. Bobby Jindal (R-La.). Supreme Court's Affordable Care Act case; healthcare enrollment; immigration: Sec. of Health and Human Services Sylvia Mathews Burwell. Healthcare: Neera Tanden ; Avik Roy; Dr. Toby Cosgrove; Panel: Carly Fiorina; Reid Wilson; Helene Cooper; Chris Matthews. (N) 8 a.m. KNBC; 11 a.m. MSNBC