No. 1 Clemson will face No. 2 Alabama in the CFP National Championship on Monday. The Associated Press

The College Football Playoff National Championship on Monday will pit No. 1 Clemson against No. 2 Alabama. For the second championship in the still young playoffs, this is the best game college football fans could have asked for from this season.

Last year's game — Ohio State versus Oregon — drew in 33.4 million viewers for ESPN, according to Forbes. This year's game will likely be no different. These broadcasts deals, coupled with endorsement packages and ticket revenue, generate many millions for the top schools. The games give players a chance to show their skills on a national stage and compete for highly lucrative NFL contracts. For many students and alumni, there's nothing better than slipping on a jersey and cheering on the team.

But for all the benefits, monetary and otherwise, of college football, there are downsides — the high costs of the programs, fees paid by students, injuries to players and one new concern from a recent study: increased sexual assault on college campuses.

Already, school administrators have garnered criticism for the amount of money some universities spend on football. In some cases, schools spend more on football than they make from it.

At many schools, football coaches are paid the most of any university employee, including the college president. University of Alabama paid its head coach, Nick Saban, nearly $7 million in 2015. For comparison, in the 2013-2014 school year, the Alabama college president, Robert Witt, made $745,000. Schools like Clemson University, which runs a deficit on its football program, are nonetheless spending millions of dollars on perks for players. The players themselves, who are unpaid, increasingly suffer injuries on the field.

The movie "Concussion" staring Will Smith has popularized the threat of chronic traumatic encephalopathy, which is a degenerative brain disease. Recent research also shows the health effects of football collisions can have an impact long before college.

The new research released in December by economic researchers Jason Lindo, Peter Siminski and Isaac Swensen, offers a troubling look at a little-known aspect of college football: Division 1 football games increase daily reports of rape among 17- to 24-year-old victims by 28 percent.



Daily reports of rape with 17-24 year old victims on weeks with Saturday football games and weeks without football games. Lindo, Swensen, Siminski



Sexual assault has already been in the news during the last few years. First came the bombshell from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention that about 1 in 5 women are raped in their lifetimes. Next, a report said that nearly a quarter of undergraduate women experience unwanted sexual contact during college. The Obama administration also made sexual assault on college campuses a focus of the administration, launching the "It's On Us" campaign in September 2014. Meanwhile, college sexual violence complaints submitted to the Department of Education skyrocketed, prompting the administration to investigate 55 colleges and universities for their handling of sexual assault.

The increase in those rapes and assaults isn't directly attributed to the sport of football, but to the spikes in drinking and partying on college campuses that accompany football games, especially big wins. Previous research has linked alcohol to sexual assault. In a Kaiser Family Foundation survey of college students, 62 percent of victims said they had been drinking alcohol just prior to the assault.

"These are events which very clearly intensify partying and drinking," Lindo says. "Trying to understand the causal pathways that lead to increased rape is really important in a general sense for us to try to reduce the incidence of rape."

Lindo's study used the National Incident Based Reporting System data collected by the FBI, as well as football schedules and game outcomes, for the calculations.

The research found that home games increase reports of rape by 41 percent, while away games increase reports by 15 percent. Per year, that means there are between 253 and 770 additional rapes per year across the 128 schools participating in Division 1A because of the spikes in partying that accompany football games. The wide range is due to how the researchers weighed increased partying, more people in town for the game and more policing attention in the statistics.

The largest increase came after an upset win. Upset wins also increased arrests for drunkenness, DUIs, liquor law violations and public order offenses.

In an earlier study, Lindo investigated the relationship between non-athlete academic achievement and college football wins at the University of Oregon. That research found the football team's success significantly reduced the grade point averages of male students.