By Deena Winter | Nebraska Watchdog

LINCOLN, Neb. – U.S. Senate candidate Ben Sasse will launch the first salvo in the air war by dropping his first TV advertisement during the Bowl Championship Series game Jan. 6 on ESPN.

A source in the Sasse campaign confirmed they will make a $14,000 Nebraska buy that will air statewide during the national championship game between Auburn University and Florida State University.

That’s not a huge buy but it was enough to get the attention of the Shane Osborn campaign, which immediately responded Friday by sending an email to supporters saying, “Breaking! Attack ads coming my way.”

“My opponent just bought time on TV and that means I need your help now more than ever,” he wrote.

Asked whether it’s an attack ad, Sasse’s campaign manager, Tyler Grassmeyer, said, “Ben has crisscrossed Nebraska, running his campaign the Nebraska way, with a positive conservative message. Everywhere Ben goes, his anti-Obamacare, anti-establishment message is resonating with Nebraska voters. Ben will be Nebraska’s anti-Obamacare warrior in the Senate and we are happy to have Fred Davis, one of the most creative ad guys in the business, helping us deliver Ben’s message — in only a way Fred Davis can.”

We’ll take that as a “No.”

Well-known California media consultant Fred Davis , who helped produce the ad, is known for his unorthodox TV ads such as Christine O’Donnell’s “I am not a witch… I’m you” ad. Davis also helped produce a racially charged Super Bowl TV ad last year for a Michigan Republican.

Osborn took the opportunity to ding Sasse again for getting the support of outside groups.

“Unfortunately, money can make or break an election – and with special interest groups in D.C. trying to influence our election here in Nebraska, your support is more crucial than ever,” Osborn’s email said.

A greater percentage of Osborn’s campaign cash has come from outside Nebraska than Sasse’s — just over half of Sasse’s money came from Nebraskans, compared to 30 percent for Osborn — but Osborn’s campaign has derided Sasse for playing the inside Washington game by snagging several endorsements from outside groups. Sasse has been endorsed by the Club for Growth and Senate Conservatives Fund, while Osborn has been endorsed by the Tea Party-affiliated FreedomWorks.

The other Republican candidates are Omaha banker Sid Dinsdale and Omaha attorney Bart McLeay. Independent cattle rancher and restaurant entrepreneur Jim Jenkins of Callaway is also running.

Contact Deena Winter at deena@nebraskawatchdog.org. Follow Deena on Twitter at @DeenaNEWatchdog

Editor’s note: to subscribe to News Updates from Nebraska Watchdog at no cost, click here.