CLEVELAND, Ohio – On Monday, Democrat Michael Wager and Libertarian David Macko debated U.S. Rep. Dave Joyce at the City Club of Cleveland in their bids for the Ohio 14th Congressional District seat.

The debate was moderated by City Club CEO Dan Moulthrop, who asked the candidates what they would do about the prison population, which he said has increased by more than 500 percent over the past 30 years, to about 2.2 million prisoners.

Wager said the country imprisons too many people for drug offenses and must re-examine its drug laws. Macko said all federal drug laws are unconstitutional and must be repealed, and that only acts against persons and property are crimes.

Joyce said Congress should address overpopulation in prisons by giving judges more leeway in sentencing and doing more to help the mentally ill so they don't end up incarcerated.

The candidates discussed several other issues, including:

Protection of the Great Lakes. Joyce last year co-sponsored The Great Lakes Ecological and Economic Protection Act – which sought to provide $600 million for lake preservation – but also voted for a bill that would stop federal agencies from expanding the Clean Water Act.

Moulthrop said the two bills seem to contradict each other. He asked Joyce to explain.

Joyce said the Great Lakes are national treasures that must be protected. However, he said the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers wants to classify tiny backyard streams as navigable rivers, and that's going too far.

Wager said the health of the Great Lakes is important for the environment and business. However, the legislation Joyce has proposed is too incremental. He said algae blooms last summer on western Lake Erie showed that "massive investment" in lake protection is needed.

Macko said lake protection is one area where federal involvement is necessary because it affects commerce, and the U.S. Constitution contains a commerce clause.

Immigration. Macko proposed building a wall to stop illegal immigration – which he characterized as an "invasion problem" — from Mexico. He said President Barack Obama encouraged illegal immigration and should be impeached because of it and other offenses.

Joyce said the country must secure its borders, especially in the south. He said the federal government must allow governors in southern states to call in the U.S. National Guard if necessary and possibly increase the number of border agents.

Wager said he supports border security but not a wall. He wants to see immigration reform because more than 11 million immigrants are living "in the shadows of our economy." He said he backs the Development, Relief and Education for Alien Minors Act, which would allow permanent residency for some immigrants.

The Affordable Care Act. Moulthrop asked the candidates what they would do to improve the Affordable Care Act, commonly called Obamacare. He said Obamacare is probably not going away.

Joyce – after Moulthrop told him he wasn't answering the question several times – finally said Obamacare does nothing to bring down prices for medical care and that must change.

Wager said there are things about act that he embraces but it provides coverage for only 30 million Americans. He said he favors universal healthcare.

Macko said the Constitution does not authorize Congress to become involved in the healthcare of citizens and the Bill of Rights prohibits it.

"Trying to improve Obamacare is like trying to improve Ebola," Macko said.

National debt. Macko said if the country abides by the Constitution, it would spend 40 percent of what it now spends on the military and 10 percent of what it's spending on domestic programs.

Joyce said the country is wasting $85 billion annually and must reduce spending. He said entitlement programs will soon consume the nation's resources.

Wager said Congress can cut spending, but without growth – through smart tax policy and investing – nothing will change. He said the country must stop "foreign engagements" with no end strategy.

Negative campaign ads. A Wager ad called Joyce "just another greedy politician" who voted to "give taxpayer funded healthcare for life to congressmen while wanting to cut Social Security and Medicare."

That claim referred to a measure, which Joyce supported, to repeal the Affordable Care Act, which placed Congress on new health insurance policies.

An audience member – former Pepper Pike Mayor Bruce Akers – said the Wager ad was false, but Wager said Joyce has voted to repeal Obamacare several times.

Joyce said his aim is to always tell the truth. Macko said Congress receives too many benefits and is eating away at the liberties of the American people.