Lack of affordable housing contributing to homelessness in Northern Inland

Posted

A housing affordability report conducted by the charity Anglicare shows many rental properties are out of reach for those living on welfare payments or the minimum wage.

For the first time, the Northern Inland region has been included in Anglicare's annual Rental Affordability Snapshot report.

The organisation conducted a survey of available rental properties on the weekend of the April 11 and 12.

Of the 472 private rental properties available in Tamworth, Armidale, Inverell and Moree, only 72 were affordable and appropriate for people living on income support payments.

It found none were affordable or appropriate for a single young person on Youth Allowance or Newstart.

There were also no suitable properties for a single person with two children, living off a parenting payment.

For a couple with no dependent children living on an age pension, there were 62 affordable and appropriate properties.

For a single person with one dependent child, just three properties were deemed suitable, while someone on a parenting payment could reasonably afford nine of the available properties.

Just under half of the available rental properties are affordable and appropriate for a couple with two children, living on the minimum wage.

Anglicare Northern Inland CEO Larry Apthorpe said the lack of affordable housing is contributing to increasing homelessness.

"We have had reports of people living in their car, other people living in a tent in different locations," he said.

"We probably run into the biggest percentage in terms of looking at the program we operate which is the Partners in Recovery program, we're in a consortium for that, and we support people with severe and persistent mental health issues and for them this sort of thing is a real issue."

Mr Apthorpe said there's a need for more social and affordable housing.

"It adds to the issues for the people that are coming to see us, because we work with people on a whole range of issues in terms of our counselling and other programs," he said.

"[Housing] is just one other problem or one other issue that they have to deal with."

Topics: housing, homelessness, tamworth-2340, armidale-2350, moree-2400, inverell-2360