Just a guess, but I feel like Landry Jones is going to have some trouble reclaiming the Steelers starting quarterback job.

This big guy, No. 7, came in after Jones hurt his foot on the second possession Sunday against the Cleveland Clowns and threw for 379 yards and three touchdowns on the day the Steelers finally found an AFC North Division team they could beat.

The Clowns.

Ed Bouchette and Gerry Dulac break down Steelers' win over the Browns Ed Bouchette and Gerry Dulac talk about the Steelers win against the Browns this afternoon at Heinz Field. (Video by Peter Diana 11/15/2015)

Normally there’s nothing to be gained by being so vituperative, but in losing for the 13th time in the past 15 games, Cleveland really outdid itself Sunday, clown-wise, committing 12 penalties that pushed itself backward and the Steelers forward a total of 188 yards, not including four penalties that were either declined or offset that would have vaulted the self-flagellation beyond the almost unimaginable 200-yard mark.

That Ben Roethlisberger, who came out of the bullpen for the first time since his very first NFL game (with Tommy Maddox in the house no less), shrunk the game plan to his own no-huddle liking and blew apart the Cleveland secondary in the process is undeniable, as is the plain truth that said secondary was without starters Joe Haden and Donte Whitner and without No. 1 draft pick Justin Gilbert on a defense that started four rookies.

So Ben put up a season-high 379 on 22 completions. His wife would have put up 350. Landry Jones was 3 for 4 before Marcus Gilbert stepped on his foot.

“It kind of surprised me and everyone else because I was in a boot; on Monday, my foot was basically black and blue,” Roethlisberger said after his sunny baseball-cap day on the sideline got cancelled not four minutes into the game. “It’s more than just me. It’s the training staff — John Norwig and the doctors and everyone. We were tireless in our rehab and in trying to get ready. It was a day-to-day process and I was just telling Coach how I felt.”

Mike Tomlin’s explanation for dressing Ben as the backup was that his injured franchise quarterback “perked up late,” in the week, that Jones was far better practiced in the game plan, and that in a emergency they could always go no-huddle and let Roethlisberger orchestrate the offense based on some rather extensive experience.

I bought it, because it was a good ol’ Picksburgh BOGO — buy one get one. If you bought that explanation, you also got the unspoken implication that Michael Vick is perfectly useless and probably should never have been signed.

So there’s that.

The most relevant quarterback news from the Steelers’ 12th consecutive Heinz Field win against the Browns came from the visiting locker room anyway, where Johnny Manziel might finally have put together the kind of 60-minute performance that could stabilize both the franchise and himself.

“It was trusting the read,” said still-the-Browns-coach Mike Pettine about Manziel’s Sunday surge. “When you say, ‘trust the read,’ it’s implied that if the read is there, hit your plant and throw it. I thought he did a good job of understanding what they were in, knowing where the ball had to go, and knowing if he had to move in the pocket to get the lane to throw it. I think he took a big step forward in that sense.”

After being counted along with Gilbert among Cleveland’s raft of failed first-round picks over the past two years, Manziel had spent more weeks in rehab than as the club’s starting quarterback. Sunday he completed 33 of 45 passes for 372 yards, fired from the pocket an oh-so-pretty touchdown pass to tight end Gary Barnidge, and fled the pocket with a patented spin that took him to very near the Steelers goal line late in the third quarter. He was the Browns’ leading rusher with 17 yards.

“I was seeing things a lot better than I did last week,” Manziel said. “I don’t know if it was a concerted effort [to throw from the pocket]. I’m going to come out and play my game. My game is to come out and try to win the game and go through my progressions just like any other quarterback. When things break down, I think I have a chance to make some plays here and there.”

The Browns simply wouldn’t give him the chance to be successful. After he ran out of the grasp of Jarvis Jones and put the Browns first-and-goal at the 1 late in the third quarter, a holding penalty on rookie guard Cameron Erving nullified a touchdown run by Isaiah Crowell, an illegal formation flag then moved the ball back to the 16, and Ryan Shazier’s sack put it all the way out at the 25.

Manziel forced them back to the 7, but his fourth-down pass was picked off by Mike Mitchell, and right tackle Mitchell Schwartz was holding on the play anyway.

So other than the 16 penalties they committed (two on the same play twice), the half-dozen passes they dropped, the extra point they missed, the 3,000 or so missed assignments, and the ongoing ruination of one of the best traditional uniforms in the NFL, the Browns held up pretty well this week.

If they can provide Manziel with five more Sundays of high-intensity experience between here and when they meet the Steelers in the season finale, and if the NFL doesn’t slap a suspension on him for that post-rehab kerfuffle with his girlfriend, who reportedly attempted to leap from his speeding Nissan, things could work out.

We’ll find out Jan. 3 in Cleveland.

Expect No. 7 to start for the Steelers.

Gene Collier: gcollier@post-gazette.com and Twitter @genecollier.