ColaDaily.com is your source for free news and information in Columbia and the Midlands.

Students in Lexington-Richland School District Five will see many of the same substitute teacher faces this year, but the way those teachers are notified of a school’s need will change starting in the spring.

Lexington-Richland Five school board members agreed during their Monday board meeting to enter into a contract with Kelly Educational Staffing, a branch of Kelly Services. The company is the same approved by Lexington School District Two last March.

District officials said the primary reason is a financial one.

Districts are having to track part-time employees’ hours to ensure they remain under the cap of 30 hours to comply with the Affordable Care Act. Those who work more hours are eligible to receive benefits, and the school district could incur financial penalties if they don’t extend required benefits.

Chief Finance Officer Len Richardson said the district likely would have to hire someone to track hours if substitutes’ benefits weren’t taken care of by a larger company like Kelly Services.

“This will help us avoid big costs down the road with health insurance,” he said.

Richardson said the district also would not have to pay workers’ compensation for substitutes.

Superintendent Stephen Hefner said utilizing Kelly Services will widen the district’s pool of available, certified substitutes.

Irmo High teacher Peter Lauzon came to the meeting representing a contingent of district teachers who requested the board table its vote on the contract until more information was available. He said he and other teachers were concerned their classrooms wouldn’t have consistent substitutes and substitute coordinators wouldn’t have say over where a sub is placed in their school.

“We are willingly giving up our local control,” he said.

Julie Gerts, regional sales manager with Kelly Services, said principals will able to maintain control over who is sent to their school since Kelly Services will ask for a list of existing, preferred teachers. Principals also can submit a list of substitutes they do not want.

Gerts said those who already substitute in the district and are added to the preferred list will be grandfathered into Kelly Services’ system. New hires in the district must go through substitute-teacher training before being sent to a Lexington-Richland Five school.

Teachers will have access to a 401K program through Kelly Services in addition to other benefits, although the company isn’t part of the South Carolina retirement system.

Lauzon also asked about the possibility of losing access to the district’s permanent subs. Hefner said those teachers are employees of the district and aren’t affected by the new contract.

Richardson said he would like to see the system in place in late April or early May. Lauzon said he was concerned about making that large of a change during the late, busy time of the school year would be stressful on the teachers.

Lexington-Richland Five officials can terminate the contract if administrators aren’t satisfied with the process.

Comments