The victim of a home invasion robbery is speaking out after the crime.

Before this weekend, Jeff Mattingly says police had only been out to his house on north Green street once before and they weren't looking for him.

"In April we had a detective come by asking for a man named Justin and we didn't think anything of it at the time,” Jeff Mattingly said.

Sunday, someone else came to his house looking for Justin, two men armed with guns.

"The only thing that I was really thinking at the time was 'this is it.' The older gentleman had made it clear that he didn't want anyone left in the house alive,” Mattingly said.

The robbery happened just before three AM.

"I heard something in the living room and I opened the door and saw two men kneeling in front of my television set,” Mattingly said.

Both men ran away but before Jeff could even dial 911, they were back. This time they had their guns drawn.

"Keep your head down, lay down on the floor and they kept the gun to my face and the knife to my throat to make sure I didn't move,” Mattingly said.

Jeff says the whole time, they kept asking where Justin was and where a safe was. Jeff didn't have any answers.

"That angered them quite a bit,” Mattingly said.

In order to stay alive, Jeff says he stayed calm and did everything they asked.

"As they were finishing up he said count backwards from 100,” Mattingly said.

As soon as he heard them walk into the hallway, he ran to a neighbors' house and asked them to call the police.

He says he's thankful to be alive but even more thankful that he was alone. Just the night before, his one year old son spent the night at his house.

"That was the first thing that went through my mind after the police officers left. I was so glad my son wasn't here,” Mattingly said.

Mattingly is asking anyone who has any information that could help find the two men who robbed him to call the police. He didn't get a good look at the men because they made him keep his head down. Neither man has been caught.