"Mike is well-known and well-respected as a political journalist," said Sean McLaughlin, vice president of news for Scripps. "He will track down the stories that matter most to our local markets. He has deep knowledge of the national political scene and will follow the national races closely. Mike also is a sensitive journalist who will provide context and impact for our audiences all across the country."

Sacks will report for The Now, a Scripps original program produced locally in 11 markets. His stories also will appear in other Scripps markets and across online and mobile platforms. As part of the 100 minutes of political coverage, Scripps will continue its partnership with PolitiFact focusing on accuracy of claims and ads in both presidential and U.S. Senate races. Scripps coverage also includes digital segments inviting audience engagement:

"You ask the questions" – on TV station Facebook page the public can ask questions of candidates.

The "Hot 5 Issues" series will cover how the local vote will impact the top issues in each of the Scripps markets.

"The Battlegrounds" – a series of stories highlighting the biggest issues on Main Street in key battleground states.

Mobile audiences will have access to all of the coverage including candidate interviews and profiles.

Coverage will include live debates and town hall meetings in many markets.

Scripps has an impressive footprint in key battleground states. There are eight Scripps stations in the pivotal states of Florida, Ohio, Wisconsin and Colorado. Political attention is high in these states and Scripps intends to maximize political advertising opportunities as well as be the market leader for political coverage.

About Scripps



The E.W. Scripps Company (NYSE: SSP) serves audiences and businesses through a growing portfolio of television, radio and digital media brands. Scripps is one of the nation's largest independent TV station owners, with 33 television stations in 24 markets and a reach of nearly one in five U.S. households. It also owns 34 radio stations in eight markets. Scripps also runs an expanding collection of local and national digital journalism and information businesses, including multi-platform satire and humor brand Cracked, podcast industry leader Midroll Media and over-the-top video news service Newsy. Scripps also produces television shows including "THE LIST" and "The Now," runs an award-winning investigative reporting newsroom in Washington, D.C., and serves as the long-time steward of the nation's largest, most successful and longest-running educational program, the Scripps National Spelling Bee. Founded in 1878, Scripps has held for decades to the motto, "Give light and the people will find their own way."

To view the original version on PR Newswire, visit:http://www.prnewswire.com/news-releases/scripps-hires-mike-sacks-to-lead-100-minutes-of-tv-political-coverage-campaign-300257717.html

SOURCE The E.W. Scripps Company