On Jan. 1, New York will become the first state to allow women to sign up for the state’s health exchange at any time during a pregnancy. (Photo: Getty Images/iStockphoto)

ALBANY - Pregnant women will soon get more flexibility to receive health insurance coverage in New York state.

Beginning Jan. 1, New York will become the first state to allow women to enroll in an insurance plan through the state-run marketplace at any point during a pregnancy, not only during the three-month annual enrollment period for the general public.

The change was made in a bill signed into law last week by Gov. Andrew Cuomo after state lawmakers approved it in June.

Under the new law, pregnancy will join milestones like marriage, birth and gaining citizenship on a list of “qualifying life events” that allow an insurance seeker to enroll at any point during the year.

“This legislation will help expectant mothers get access to essential prenatal care and help build a stronger and healthier New York,” Cuomo said in a statement.

The change applies to insurance plans offered through New York State of Health, the state’s insurance marketplace set up under the federal Affordable Care Act. Previously, women could enroll in an insurance plan after a birth, but the new law allows it at any point during the preceding pregnancy.

About 2.1 million people have enrolled in insurance plans over the past two years through the marketplace, which is the state’s tool for connecting providers with those seeking coverage. The vast majority — about 1.4 million — have been enrolled in Medicaid plans.

The pregnancy measure was hailed by women’s organizations and pro-choice groups, with NARAL Pro-Choice New York calling it “groundbreaking.”

“This legislation will expand access to maternity care, including prenatal visits, labor, and delivery, and improve the health of women and children throughout our state,” said Andrea Miller, the group’s president.

The state marketplace’s open-enrollment period is currently ongoing, with insurance seekers having until Jan. 31 to enroll in coverage for 2016.

The bill was sponsored by Sen. James Seward, R-Milford, Otsego County, and Assemblywoman Aravella Simotas, D-Queens.

Seward said the new law “rectifies yet another major gap in the federal Affordable Care Act,” which many refer to as “Obamacare.”

“This legislation will erase at least one concern and provide moms-to-be with some peace of mind,” he said.

JCAMPBELL1@gannett.com

Twitter.com/JonCampbellGAN

Read or Share this story: http://on.rocne.ws/1OvpC3X