Summit County wins this year’s Pro Challenge.

While the strongest cyclist won’t be crowned until the peloton sweeps through Denver in the fifth Colorado-traversing USA Pro Challenge bike race, Summit County is already celebrating its victory as a four-day host of the seven-stage race this summer.

“It’s a Summit County extravaganza this year,” said Rick Oshlo, the co-chairman of the local organizing committee that is guiding Breckenridge’s fifth year hosting the celebrated professional bike race.

Pro Challenge officials Tuesday announced the specifics of the 616-mile route for this year’s Aug. 17-23 race, which will bring three stage finishes and two stage starts, including the time trial, to Summit County.

This means all of Summit County’s communities — Blue River, Breckenridge, Dillon, Frisco, Heeney, Keystone and Silverthorne — will see racers pass through during four days of racing.

The Aug. 18 Stage 2 will race 103 miles from Steamboat Springs to Arapahoe Basin ski area, climbing up through Silverthorne, Dillon and Keystone. Athletes and race crews will stay at Copper Mountain that night before the start of Stage 3 near that resort’s Burning Stones Plaza.

Stage 4 will see the world’s top cyclists climbing up and over Independence Pass out of Aspen, through Buena Vista and Fairplay before climbing Hoosier Pass into Breckenridge.

The 126-mile Stage 4 — the longest of the race — includes a loop around Breckenridge before the downtown finish.

The Aug. 21 Stage 5 time trial, which loops 8.5 miles around Breckenridge, will feature the start of the Pro Challenge’s first-ever women’s racing before the cycling circus moves down to the Front Range.

Arapahoe Basin and Copper Mountain are freshman hosts of the race, but both resorts are no strangers to throwing parties.

Arapahoe Basin is planning camping, music and festivities to welcome the racers at the end of Stage 2. Copper will have a day-long festival Aug. 19, with music and events in the resort village. And Breckenridge, which joins Aspen as the only community to host the race for all five years, is planning a week-long cycling bender with concerts, citizen races and events that fit around the host ski resorts’ parties.

Race officials estimate the race delivers an economic impact of about $130 million, with spectators flocking to high-country downtowns and mountain passes to cheer the passing cyclists. The route selection has evolved over the years as organizers seek to concentrate visitor spending in regions instead of spreading the impact across a wider swath of hosts.

It’s already working for Breckenridge.

The resort town has used the Pro Challenge to trumpet its vibrant biking scene, helping to bolster its summer business. The town has seen taxable spending by visitors in August climb to $32.12 million in 2014 from $19.78 million in 2011, the first year it hosted the Pro Challenge.

“We hope to be the place where spectators can come and set up a base camp to see most of this year’s race,” Oshlo said.

Jason Blevins: 303-954-1374, jblevins@denverpost.com or twitter.com/jasonblevins