Facebook and Twitter revealed that “Hillary Clinton and Ted Cruz together accounted for 40 percent of the discussion on Facebook and nearly half — 47 percent — of mentions on Twitter among 10 top presidential possibilities in the past three months” though neither of them were on the ballot during the November election, according to POLITICO this morning.

From the report:

Of the 27 million Facebook posts, comments and content likes related to the potential White House candidates between Aug. 22 and Nov. 22, Clinton and Cruz each were mentioned in 20 percent of the posts, according to Facebook’s data scientists. Clinton topped Cruz though in the number of people talking about her with 2.3 million people making 5.6 million interactions, while Cruz had 1.8 million users referencing him in 5.6 million interactions. (POLITICO provided the list of contenders to Facebook and Twitter.) Of the 15.9 million mentions of candidates’ names or Twitter handles between Sept. 1 and Dec. 1, Cruz snagged 4.6 million mentions, or 29 percent, while Clinton garnered 2.9 million mentions, or 18 percent.

A former digital director for President Obama’s 2012 campaign noted, “Imperfect as it is, [Facebook] is probably the biggest trove of data of what actual human beings outside of Washington, D.C., are talking about day to day and that makes it intrinsically important, and these platforms are actually important for reaching people and motivating them.”

The Beltway-obsessed media usually concocts its own narrative with little regard for the issues on which everyday Americans are focused. The stupid firestorm the D.C. press kicked up about a now-former Hill staffer’s Facebook comments about President Obama’s daughters is a pretty good example of that.

And though both Clinton and Cruz were mentioned on social media more than the other top eight 2016 presidential contenders, not all of that was positive.

The mentions cut both ways, including negative comments as well as positive ones. But they reflect the extent to which Clinton, a long-standing subject of debate, and Cruz, who casts himself as a conservative renegade, have dominated the conversation at a time when others are trying to gin up some grass-roots energy.

For example, one of Hillary Clinton’s social media spikes was near the end of October when she attempted to walk back “Don’t let anybody tell you that, you know, it’s corporations and businesses that create jobs.” Certainly, there weren’t a lot a positive responses on social media to her remarks.

Cruz’s largest spike on social media was when he called net neutrality “Obamacare for the Internet.”

Wisconsin Governor Scott Walker and Texas Governor Rick Perry tied for second place with 11 percent of the total interactions during the three-month period, while Kentucky Senator Rand Paul and Massachusetts Senator Elizabeth Warren came in third.

Josh Perry, the man behind Senator Cruz’s digital media strategy, told POLITICO:

“Our main strategy is to be as engaging with our content as possible, whether that’s by thinking of ways to generate comments, likes, or shares - this all helps boost the appearance of our posts in people’s timelines. Of course, that all begins with having a clear and direct message about something people care about, whether it is about the economy, national security, healthcare or any other issue.”

These numbers show grassroots support (and, sometimes, opposition) for Cruz and others heading into 2016. It’s important for their respective campaigns to generate shareable content that engages and entertains users. To that end, Senator Cruz has done an exceptional job doing that.