haw |

Sgt. Alexandria Adkins

Tripler Army Medical Center

HONOLULU — Breastfeeding in any workplace can be stressful.

The Army has implemented a policy to be incorporated into Army Command Policy AR 600-20, supporting active duty Soldiers who are breastfeeding.

For active duty Soldiers, the mission always comes first, but this new policy means Soldiers do not have to sacrifice breastfeeding as part of their infant care.

“Army Directive 2015-43, 10 November 2015, (Breastfeeding and Lactation Support)” includes new guidance on workplace lactation support for postpartum Soldiers. To develop the new policy, Army Deputy Chief of Staff, G-1, leveraged the clinical support and expertise of Army Medicine subject matter experts to conduct a comprehensive review of current Army guidance, services’ policies/best practices, and current civilian health care postpartum literature to develop the policy.

The directive will be incorporated into the next revision of AR 600-20.

Breastfeeding is already law under the U.S. Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, which has specific provisions requiring businesses to implement basic lactation support. This support includes reasonable break time and a private place, other than a bathroom, for nursing mothers.

Extensive medical research has shown that breastfeeding has significant health, nutritional, immunologic, developmental, emotional, social and economic benefits for both mother and child.

It is important for Soldiers to understand their options when they become pregnant by becoming familiar with AR 635-200, Active Duty Enlisted Administrative Separations.

Commanders also have responsibilities for notifying all Soldiers of the breastfeeding and lactation support policy within the regulation. The commander will counsel all pregnant Soldiers as required by regulation, to include information regarding the TRICARE policy that covers breast pumps.

Commanders must also provide information to Soldiers about breastfeeding and lactation support via the work plan memorandum during the initial pregnancy counseling. That counseling will address the command providing a private, designated space, with locking capabilities that includes an electrical outlet, access to a safe water source and a sink for breastfeeding Soldiers.

Commands should be is as supportive as they can be when it comes to breastfeeding. The real issues breastfeeding Soldiers face are old military buildings and operational taskings that do not account for breastfeeding. When that happens, keep the current mission in mind, do what you can and drive on.

The Army is beginning to understand that breastfeeding Soldiers have improved postpartum weight loss and miss work less often. One-day absences to care for sick children occur more than twice as often for mothers of formula feeding infants.

New mothers are encouraged to seek support from their command, read the regulations and the law, and make an informed decision if they choose to breastfeed their infant.

(Editor’s note: Adkins is a TAMC 68W health care specialist and has worked in the OB/GYN clinic and Company B of Troop Command. She recently gave birth to a daughter at TAMC and has experienced, firsthand, breastfeeding while serving on active duty. Jim “Goose” Guzior, TAMC PAO, contributed to this article.)

Category: Health, News