Players receive season awards

One of the many gifts the five seniors of the Brush softball team took home after the end of season banquet on Thursday night (Brandon Boles / Fort Morgan Times)

BRUSH — After a season where the Brush Beetdiggers made it to the quarterfinals of the 3A State playoffs, the team came together on Thursday night at the Carroll Building for their season ending banquet to recognize their achievements on the season.

All the girls were recognized by Head Coach Tom Odle on a strong season for the Beetdiggers. All the girls took home awards.

In all, 16 players received a varsity letter for softball, with many earning one of many letters already received. After all the players were honored for their participation and letters, Odle spoke on all five of his seniors on the team.

Aubre George was a newcomer to the team, but was respected for her hard work ethic brought every day to the team. Mariah Brown was a player who had the wow factor on the season, and was fun to watch in games. Christina Frick was known for her great, bubbly attitude as well as for her strong play on the field for the team. Makenzie Griffith was deemed the toughest girl on the squad, while also being recognized for being coachable. Finally, Lauren Staley was a girl that did what was asked of her to do, and took on a leadership role for the team.

In addition to being recognized by Odle for their time in the program, the five seniors also received some cool gifts from the boosters club, the freshmen class, the junior class, as well as their parents as memorabilia for the time they played for the Beetdiggers.

Many team awards were also handed out at the banquet Thursday. Staley and junior Amy Blake took home the offensive player of the year awards, while Griffith and junior Cali Bills took home defensive player of the year. Juniors Lauren Berg, Kelly Griffith and Alex Odle each won awards as well, with Berg winning the award for most hits on the season, Griffith for having the most stolen bases Odle for drawing the most walks at the plate.

Five players were honored by the coaches in all of 3A as all-conference members. Receiving honorable mention was junior Alicia Grauberger, who played catcher and batted .333 with 16 RBI's on the season.

The other four players were recognized on the all-conference team. Lauren Berg was named for her play at first base, but primarily her offensive performance, where she got a hit in all but one game on the season for a .421 batting average and a team-high 22 RBI's. Alex Odle was the team's leading pitcher in innings pitched, while also holding a strong fielding percentage and batting .339 on the year.

Christina Frick played both shortstop and pitcher for the Beetdiggers, leading the team in earned run average on the mound and batting .351 at the plate on offense. Finally, Lauren Staley was recognized for her play at third base and at home plate, and also earned the opportunity to play at the all-state game at the end of the season.

During the night, there were plenty of laughs shared, some tears shed, and smiles on everyone's face as coaches, parents, and players each enjoyed being reunited and receiving honors for their season.

Brush went 12-11 on the season and finished fifth in the tightly contested Patriot League with a 5-9 conference mark. The team took second at the La Junta regional, and then won 14-5 in the first round of the State playoffs before their quarterfinal exit to Valley.

For most of the girls, the team will look to continue their athletic careers in the winter, while looking to get back at it for softball with preparation in the winter and spring otherwise. As for the five seniors, they were remembered for everything they had brought to the program, and will be a stepping stone for the rest of the girls coming back to the program in 2015.

Brandon Boles: 970-867-5651, sports@fmtimes.com and Twutter @FMT_Sports