Last Sunday's Democratic debate and the attendant scrum surrounding his single-payer health plan crystallized for me my problem with Bernie Sanders' presidential campaign. There's the willful lack of understanding of how the political system works, the ideological certitude and the simple straw-man villain.

The Vermont senator has a whiff of the tea party about him.

Let me be clear on what I mean: Obviously Sanders is for the most part the ideological antithesis of the tea party and is someone with whom I broadly agree ideologically. And there is no fully developed tea party analog on the left. The movementarian right has spent years basting in its own sense of grievance and betrayal, nursed by a media ecosystem less encumbered with achievement than with achieving ratings. The Democrats' progressive base has only occasionally flirted with tea party-esque purge politics (see Blanche Lincoln, 2010) and lacks the all-encompassing establishment antipathy that characterizes the right – so, for example, Sanders' attack on the Democratic "establishment" this week turned into a Clinton campaign talking point.

[READ: Hillary Clinton's Bizarre Attack on Bernie Sanders' Health Care Plan]

And this is not to suggest that Hillary Clinton is an ideal candidate. As Roll Call's Stuart Rothenberg wrote this week, her "assets are at the same time serious liabilities; her name recognition and lengthy experience in and around power, her service as secretary of state and her support within the Democratic establishment." Specifically on health care, her attempt to paint Sanders as a repealing revanchist was amateurishly dumb – more than being simply not credible, it was transparently so to the point of being insulting.

But to come back to Sanders, he and the tea party right share an underlying unwillingness to acknowledge the realities of our political system. And health care is a perfect illustration.

Recall that the 2013 government shutdown was about repealing Obamacare, conservatives – most prominently Texas Sen. Ted Cruz – insisting that the repeal was realistic, never mind that it would require the just re-elected president to approve the elimination of his signature achievement. Popular sentiment would force President Barack Obama to fold, the argument went. The only potential obstacle remained the one that always bedevils the conservative movement: systemic corruption as embodied by the Republican establishment and its insidious insistence on betraying the movement and stymieing the will of the people.

Never mind that Obamacare, while unpopular, was not as much as Cruz and company proclaimed and neither was repeal as popular as they supposed. Given those factors, and also history, the odds of Obama feeling the pain of a shutdown backlash were insignificant. But none of this mattered; the plan was to charge hard and then celebrate the inevitable, glorious victory.

The same mentality is visibly operating in Sanders' drive for a single-payer health care plan, an idea that is politically unworkable at best and toxic at worst. He willingly denies the obvious and unarguable: A single-payer plan is a political nonstarter. Clinton made the argument clumsily in the debate Sunday night but it's true: When Democrats had a 60-vote – in other words filibuster-proof – majority in the Senate they couldn't even manage a vote on the so-called public option (a government sponsored health insurance plan to compete with the private sector offerings).

In the Sanders world-view this is due to the systemic corruption as embodied by money dominating the political process. Overcoming that singular obstacle would, thus, pave the way for the people's will to be done – in this case passage of a single-payer health care plan.

[SEE: Editorial Cartoons on the 2016 Presidential Elections]

But this not only misreads the public – there's no single-payer groundswell outside of liberal activist circles – it misreads the national political system. Economist Paul Krugman – hardly a corporate media shill – last weekend did a nice job of laying out the three main obstacles, and while moneyed power is one of them there are others.

Yes, the campaign finance system is a problem as is political corruption. But to suggest those are the sole or even main obstacles to a U.S. socialist utopia is naïve. It assumes a national ideological dominance and cohesion – that the U.S. has become a predominately progressive country unable to so express itself because of moneyed interests – that simply isn't true.

To go back to the specific case of the Affordable Care Act, recall that in order to achieve what they did, Democrats needed a 60-vote majority in the Senate that stretched ideologically from Sanders to the likes of Ben Nelson of Nebraska and Blanche Lincoln in Arkansas. There's no possibility of a 60-vote majority that's composed of 60 Bernies (or, for that matter, 60 flavors of Ted Cruz either).

Sanders advocates argue that if he wins it will be because he has remade U.S. politics and brought about the revolution that even he acknowledges is necessary to enact any of his agenda. (And pause for a moment and ponder the wisdom of supporting a candidate whose path to victory requires a full-on political revolution.) But what would a Sanders Senate look like?

Look at it this way: There are 22 states that Obama lost in both 2008 and 2012 – years in which he became the first president in a half-century to win at least 51 percent of the vote in consecutive elections. It seems fair to characterize those as solid red states. That's 44 senators from red states; not to say that Democrats can't win some of those seats. But it does mean that the Democrats who are elected in those states will be in the Joe Manchin, Claire McCaskill, Heidi Heitkamp mold. They won't be bearing the single-payer standard any time soon and it's not because they're favoring their corporate patrons over their constituents – it's because they're listening to their constituents.

[PHOTOS: The Big Picture – January 2016]

The most galling thing is that, as Michael Cohen pointed out in The Boston Globe this week, Sanders understands the realities of accommodating local politics: He cast votes favorable to the gun industry because of Vermont's gun culture. But in other cases he refuses to acknowledge such accommodations for other legislators. "It's as if in Sanders' mind, parochialism, ideology, or politics plays no role ... in politics."

The fact of the matter is that ideologically we're a diverse and often incoherent country. That doesn't mean you can't accomplish something substantial – Obamacare is, as a wise man once said, a big flipping deal. But it does mean that you need a politician who is able to acknowledge the limitations of the system in order to figure out what is achievable.

Mickey Hirten, the former editor of the Burlington Free Press, who basically agrees with Sanders on the issues, recently wrote of him that he is ideologically inflexible: "The rigid, uncompromising ideology of the Orwellian-named Republican Freedom Caucus in the U.S. House of Representatives has helped paralyze government. Its members won't even compromise with the more pragmatic members of the party, preferring no loaf rather than a half. ... Add a president as unyielding as Sanders to the political mix and we may look back at the current Congress as the good times."