On the eve of the first Republican primary debate, state party leaders across the nation say the 2016 contest is in a state of flux, as unpredictable and wide open as any they can remember.

A sprawling field of contenders, no clear front-runner, still-unsettled primary election dates and rules, the combustible presence of Donald Trump — all have top GOP officials scratching their heads over which direction the nominating fight is going and how it all might end.

Story Continued Below

That’s according to a survey of 50 Republican state party chairs from across the country, more than half of whom spoke with POLITICO ahead of Thursday’s Fox News debate in Cleveland, a prime-time spectacle already infused with chaos and drama surrounding which candidates will qualify for a slot onstage.

“I’ve never seen this number of candidates,” said New York State Republican Party Chairman Ed Cox, noting he’s been involved in Republican politics since 1968. He credited the backlash to Obamacare in 2010 with generating an unprecedented wave of top-tier Republican politicians, from Wisconsin Gov. Scott Walker to Ohio Gov. John Kasich.

“I was doing fundraising calls … to a bunch of former chairs going back to the mid-1960s and almost all of them agree that people are holding out longer than usual in making their selections and settling on a candidate,” said Jeff Kaufmann, the GOP chairman in Iowa, an early state already inundated by candidates. “With 17 Republicans now in the race, I really think the polls are nearly meaningless in terms of predictability for [the Iowa Caucus date of] Feb. 1. I think it’s going to be fluid until late fall.”

For all of the Republican National Committee’s best-laid plans to have a streamlined and efficient primary process after a lengthy and bruising 2012 primary season, the size of the 2016 field — the largest in modern presidential campaign history — is working to unravel those efforts. Many chairs expect that it will be well into the spring of 2016 before the field is seriously winnowed, even though few expect all 17 candidates to still be in the contest by early next year.

The absence of an obvious front-runner is an observation that many state chairs made. While Donald Trump has opened up a lead in recent polls and sucked up oxygen from other candidates, few state chairs expect him to be the nominee — though, for the most part, they’ll say so only privately.

It might not be the orderly procession the RNC envisioned, but the chairs aren’t exactly watching with alarm. If anything, they view the sprawling field as a positive.

“I don’t have a sense of dread about where things are,” said John Hancock, chairman of the Missouri GOP. “I’m very optimistic that we’ve got some phenomenal candidates who are going to wear very well as they get more and more exposure.”

The chairs expect the deep GOP presidential bench to inject energy into the party and force campaigns to visit often-ignored states under the assumption that the nominating contest will be prolonged well beyond the traditional early voting states.

“There are no clear front-runners,” said Diana Waterman, chairwoman of the Maryland GOP. “In a field of 16 or so candidates, it’s really hard to have a strong front-runner.”

Another factor contributing to the general uncertainty is the fact the primary rules are still being written and some dates are still being finalized.

To win the Republican nomination, candidates will have to amass enough delegates to ensure victory at the party convention in July. But many states that are typically primary afterthoughts are still in the process of revising the methods by which they allocate delegates, in part because they expect an extended nomination process — and they view the wide open 2016 primary as a unique opportunity to capture attention from delegate-hungry candidates.

Nebraska, for example, is considering a shift to a winner-take-all system that could enhance the impact of the sparsely populated Midwestern state’s May primary. Chairman Dan Welch said his state is accustomed to being overlooked but might get more attention this time if the rules are altered. Similarly, Minnesota Chairman Kevin Downey noted that his state updated its rules to bind convention delegates to the results of a March 1 straw poll — unlike last time, when the state’s delegates went to the 2012 GOP convention unbound. That change adds heft to the party’s caucuses and addresses concerns that erupted in 2012, when several states saw delegates veer from the choice of their party’s voters.

The already complicated patchwork of rules — some states award all delegates to the winner, others assign them proportionally, and those in a third group use a hybrid approach — will continue to be tweaked over the next two months. States are under orders from the RNC to finalize their rules for awarding delegates by Oct. 1, and several are seeking approval and support for their updated plans.

Expectations are running highest in the South as candidates eye March 1, the date of the so-called SEC primary, when a host of often-overlooked states in that region will vote on the same day.

“The move to an earlier primary has sparked interest by many of the candidates,” said Doyle Webb, the Arkansas GOP chairman. “We’ve had at least 10 of the announced candidates contact us directly for information [on how to file, the filing fee, the process]. We’re excited to see all the candidates, but we’ll wait and see who files in Arkansas.”

Added Tennessee GOP Chairman Ryan Haynes, “We anticipate that Tennessee is going to get a lot of attention … Tennessee is a relatively easy state to get on the ballot, and campaigns are starting the process much earlier than they have in prior presidential elections. They’re reaching out to the state party about what the process is, how to get the delegates lined up. The process seems to be starting much earlier this time than four years ago.”

The Republican Party of Virginia, which also chose to compete on March 1, has already disseminated detailed ballot information to all of the campaigns, said Chairman John C. Whitbeck Jr., something that “reminded [campaigns] strongly to get started now on their work.”

Other states are still sorting out when to host their primary or caucus, and how to position themselves to attract the maximum number of candidates. For example, Kansas didn’t decide until the end of last month on the caucus date (now set for March 5).

“We’ve been contacted by almost all of the campaigns, and ones we’ve seen have been a lot more active in Kansas,” said state Chairman Kelly Arnold, who says Ted Cruz is organizing effectively in Kansas, and that Scott Walker’s Midwestern appeal is resonating there. “It is early — it’s not one of the first few states, it’s only 40 delegates — but we’re becoming a strong state on the national stage.”

Cox noted that New York state just agreed to set its primary for April 19, a week ahead of Pennsylvania and five weeks later than the pivotal contest in Florida. He argued that the move positions relatively late-voting New York — typically an afterthought despite its trove of 95 delegates — to win considerable attention from candidates, since few other states are holding contests in the intervening weeks. It’s all predicated, he noted, on a slew of viable candidates remaining after those early contests.

New York isn’t the only big state looking to cast a bigger-than-usual footprint this year as a result of the contours of the 17 candidate field.

“Just by the number of candidates running … Texas will be a player in this,” said Lone Star State GOP Chairman Tom Mechler. “We’re delighted. We always felt like the strongest Republican state in the union should have some impact on the nomination — and, in this election, we think that will be the case.”