ORANGE, Calif.--(BUSINESS WIRE)--Quotit® Corporation, a leading national provider of Internet sales and marketing technology solutions for the health insurance industry, is now officially connected with the Federally Facilitated Exchange (FFE) marketplace after working collaboratively with the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS).

Quotit was certified by CMS as a Web Broker Entity (WBE) in September 2013, and connectivity between Quotit and the FFE officially confirms the successful transfer of data between the two entities. Quotit is one of the first CMS-approved WBEs in the country to establish this connectivity.

“We are one step closer to providing a functioning on-exchange enrollment portal, so brokers can meet the needs of individuals and families looking for affordable health coverage and potential subsidy eligibility. This is a huge step forward in helping meet the needs of Americans as they shop for individual health insurance coverage,” says Chad Hogan, senior vice president at Quotit.

“It’s also important because we are sharing Quotit’s code to integrate with the federal eligibility hub with other certified WBEs, even our competitors, at no charge,” notes Hogan. “We feel providing tools to help consumers enroll in the federal exchange marketplace is important, and making our code available will enable more online brokers to help meet consumers’ needs,” concludes Hogan.

“HealthCompare, a sister company to Quotit, is one of more than 40,000 insurance brokers and agencies nationwide who depend on Quotit’s technology,” says Kyal Moody, senior vice president at HealthCompare Insurance Services. “We’re very excited to be a partner with Quotit to power our website to help consumers find and enroll in a health plan that meets their specific needs and satisfies the Affordable Care Act individual mandate.”

“Quotit will help brokers present and enroll consumers in both on- and off-exchange health insurance options,” adds Hogan. “In fact, nearly one-third of the current CMS-contracted Web-based brokers either rely on Quotit technology or are in the process of evaluating it to facilitate connectivity to the FFE. That’s because we empower them to help their clients make more informed decisions, while also helping the exchange marketplace succeed. It is part of our commitment to ensuring licensed brokers continue to play a vital role in helping to insure America.”

Quotit’s track record of success during the past 18 months includes delivery of health quotes to more than 13.5 million individual American consumers through a coast-to-coast network of community-based and national licensed insurance professionals.

For more information about how to access the Quotit code enabling federal hub connectivity, certified and contracted WBEs, contact Chad Hogan at chad.hogan@quotit.com.

About Quotit® and The Word & Brown Companies

Quotit® Corporation’s proprietary Internet applications simplify the insurance search and enrollment process by connecting brokers and consumers to more than 300 insurance carriers representing approximately 40,000 plan designs in the health, life, dental and vision insurance markets.

Quotit is part of The Word & Brown Companies, which provide insurance services nationwide through more than 50,000 brokers to hundreds of thousands of consumers and approximately 60,000 employers with nearly 6.5 million eligible employees.

The Word & Brown Companies also include the Word & Brown® General Agency, with divisions focused on group benefits, individual and family insurance, and Medicare coverage; HealthCompare and Joppel by HealthCompare, which help consumers easily research, compare, buy and enroll in the right health insurance or Medicare Advantage, Medicare Supplement (Medigap) or Prescription Drug Program plan at the right price; CHOICE Administrators®, the nation’s leading developer and administrator of private group health insurance exchange programs; and CONEXIS, the nation’s first outsourcing provider to offer benefits administration on a single, Web-based, fully integrated system. For more information, visit http://wordandbrowncompanies.com.