Even if you didn’t know that author Ed Klein has been thoroughly discredited and has come up with outrageously unbelievable claims about the Clintons in the past, any halfway intelligent American would have reason to doubt his declaration on the Hannity show last night that Bill Clinton hates President Obama “most in the whole world” because Obama is working to make sure Hillary doesn’t get the nomination. But Sean Hannity ate it up.

Klein, who has a new anti-Hillary book out, has become a regular Hannity guest of late – despite the fact that Hannity’s own Fox News colleagues questioned Klein's credibility. But even if you don’t know that Klein’s previous writings contain the kind of laughable allegations that Chelsea Clinton was conceived when Bill raped Hillary, you’d have to take what Klein alleged last night with a shaker of salt.

During the discussion, Hannity “revealed” that “a very prominent person” who had been watching Klein on Hannity the previous week had confided that, “Everything that Ed Klein says that Bill Clinton said, he has said to me. Multiple times. Bill Clinton does not like Barack Obama. He loathes him.”

Now, what kind of “very prominent person” (so prominent that Hannity said it twice) who would have that kind of inside information about the Clintons would also spill the beans to the likes of Hannity about it: Chelsea Clinton? John Kerry? Or was it Clinton “bestie” Dick Cheney? Don't make me laugh.

Whoever it was must have the same kind of Clinton pipeline as Klein. He agreed:

(Clinton) has called him the man he hates most in the whole world. …Bill has been checking with state chairmen, Democratic state chairmen all across the United States about what Obama is up to. And he’s come to the conclusion that Obama’s looking for a Mini-Me, a clone of himself to make sure that Hillary doesn’t get the nomination. So Bill feels that his biggest enemy is Barack Obama.

If Obama is Clinton’s biggest enemy then why did Bill Clinton do such a tremendous job helping to re-elect President Obama? Why would Bill commend Obama over ObamaCare? Why would Hillary agree to become Secretary of State in the Obama administration? I have no doubt Obama and Bill are not close but there’s a big difference between that and the kind of enmity Klein and Hannity described.

And again, who in a position to know would be talking to Klein?

“Unbelievable,” Hannity responded to Klein’s “revelation.”

Which may be the one true thing said in the discussion.

I fully expect Klein to be offered a job at Fox if Hillary Clinton runs.

Watch Hannity and Klein claim to have sources among the Clintons below.