Chicago private-equity firm GTCR knows what to do in an overheated market: Sell.

The buyout firm, among the biggest in Chicago, has sold about a third of its portfolio in the past seven months, Managing Director Craig Bondy said during a panel discussion yesterday in Chicago.

Indeed, GTCR sales this year include San Bruno, Calif.-based pharmaceutical company Cord Blood Registry for $700 million; Franklin, Tenn.-based acute-care hospital company Capella Healthcare for $900 million; and Lake Mary, Fla.-based property and casualty insurance brokerage AssuredPartners for an undisclosed amount.

Buyers are taking all the risk right now, Bondy said, alluding to the high prices in the market.

“We're selling everything we've got,” he said tongue-in-cheek during the discussion, sponsored by trade publication Mergermarket and Chicago-based printing and media company R.R. Donnelley & Sons.

LOW RATES, LOTS OF CAPITAL

His comments reflect a market in which low interest rates have made borrowing for acquisitions less expensive. That combined with plentiful investment capital is driving prices higher, creating a seller's market. Other private-equity and investment banking professionals on the panel echoed his sentiments in describing a market where sellers are driving the terms and buyers are paying premiums for acquisitions, especially for targeted companies.

Last year, the value of worldwide merger and acquisition activity rose to $3.66 trillion, its highest level since 2007, when it logged $4.6 trillion in deals, according to New York-based research and software firm Dealogic. Through mid-August this year the total climbed to $3.04 trillion, putting it on track to top last year.

GTCR spent significantly, especially in health care, after the 2008 recession and a credit crunch cut market prices. In recent years, those assets' values have been buoyed not only by the economy's recovery, but also in some cases by a rise in health care spending related to Obamacare. Some of the companies GTCR sold recently it didn't own for long. For instance, it bought Cord Blood Registry in September 2012 and sold it last month.

Contributing to the surge in acquisitions is a big appetite from global corporations with a “surplus” of cash, said Daniel Daul, a managing director at Chicago-based financial services firm William Blair who also spoke on the panel. Buyers are carefully picking the industry sectors where they're willing to bid, but when they do make offers they “play hard,” he said.

Buyers like Downers Grove-based Dover know they can't make as many demands in their dealmaking so they're focusing during due-diligence exams on those items that are most important to them, said Stephen Sellhausen, Dover's senior vice president of corporate development and strategy. For Dover, that means adamantly avoiding situations where asbestos claims might be an issue, he said.

MORE DISCIPLINED BUYING

Other companies GTCR sold this year include New York-based Fundtech for $1.25 billion and British financial services firm Premium Credit for about $700 million, as well as Romeoville-based security alarm company Protection 1 and Oak Brook-based sterilization services company Sterigenics International for undisclosed amounts, though it kept a minority stake in Sterigenics.

On the flip side of the coin, Bondy said GTCR is more disciplined than it was in 2006 and 2007 about making acquisitions. The firm, which raised an 11th fund last year with $3.85 billion to invest, has announced just two investments this year: Ocoee, Fla.-based pharmacy management software company Transaction Data Systems and Greenville, S.C.-based outdoor advertising firm Fairway Media Group.

Chicago private-equity firm Madison Dearborn Partners is being smarter about its purchases, too, said Richard Copans, a managing director at that firm. Madison Dearborn made some heady buys just before the market crashed in 2008.

The firm is avoiding acquisition battles with industry operators that bid up prices, Copans said. Such strategic buyers, which typically own a company for the long term, can extract more value than shorter-term owners like private-equity firms that typically sell companies within three to seven years.

There has been no shortage of buyers willing to pay the higher prices, despite the recent volatility in the public markets, Copans said, and he expects that trend to continue.