“The whole aim of practical politics is to keep the populace alarmed and hence clamorous to be led to safety, by menacing it with an endless series of hobgoblins, all of them imaginary.” ~H. Mencken

Our Republic was designed to fail the minute the federalists and the anti-federalists reached a truce in the battle to divide our rights. What started as a legitimate disagreement between two distinct factions turned into a badly scripted, pseudo-war between big and small government combatants.

Today this has become a bad comedy routine that would not rate showing as a grade C movie at the Mayberry Theater in South Carolina. If these guys were members of SAG they’d pull their union cards. “Things are more like they are now than they have ever been.” Gerald Ford)

Law making in this country has always been a contentious struggle to convince the citizens what politicians want is what is best for them whether they want it or not. And they usually don’t.

The marvelous selling job they did on Obamacare proved that. And one of the most ludicrous, dubious oxymoron’s in the legislative process is their criticism for the initiative and referendum!

Politicians can’t imagine that a government by the people for the people can write better laws than they can! It is absurd to think we can walk and chew gum at the same time yet all they can do is find ways to juggle dollars to support social programs. Think of all the money we’d save spending our own money?

”I am not worried about the deficit. It is big enough to take care of itself.”~Ronald Reagan

There is no mystery why the politicians hide from the initiative process like a cat in a room full of rocking chairs in a nursing home. They claim that it disrupts party loyalty although they are the ones who do that!

In the 19th century the two major political parties had defined roles people clearly identified with. Back then a voter could actually tell the difference between an ass and elephant. Both worked with conviction to represent their constituents.

They controlled elections, organized Congress and had government offices in DC where they really worked. And you could talk to a real person and get a real answer if you took the initiative to contact them. But now they have given us the impression that “If voting changed anything, they’d make it illegal.” (E. Goldman)

Political bosses condemn direct democracy claiming it alters their ability to pass partisan legation and control government. They tell us to “trust them” when it comes to making law. Just ask any teenage girl who has been to lover’s lane how well that turned out nine months after her boyfriend had told her, “You just have to trust me”!

Nowadays town hall meetings and constitute interface is limited strictly to campaign season. The brainchild of the political party itself has adopted the philosophy that it is far better to keep citizens completely out of “the affairs of their” government and law making: Because “The smarter you are, the more things can scare you.” (K. Paterson)

This transformation from a government of the people to a government of the politicians did not happen overnight. Following Reconstruction, through the turn of the 20th century, America experienced a Gilded Age.

We experienced unparalleled industrialization, urbanization, and a burgeoning middle class. Congress and the presidents, let business and industry drive the economy. And they indeed did a far superior job at this than the government who was no match for inventors like Edison, Westinghouse, and Alexander Graham Bell. And of course all of them took credit for this unprecedented economic growth during these years of opulent prosperity.

Then naturally when they blew up the economy during the Great Depression some years later, they blamed industry and commerce? After all,

“Truth is not determined by majority vote.” ~D. Gwyn

Voter participation in government was at an all-time high and elections we very competitive during the boom years. People actually took an interest in who was running for office. And the beauty of this was political parties did not do much of anything.

While Congress debated things like tariffs, currency, and the naming of bridges, industry flourished! We found a way to stop government interference and our nation survived. As you know it has always been common knowledge “The mystery of government is not how Washington works but how to make it stop!” (P. J. O’Rourke).

But things changed rapidly after the events of Black Tuesday: The crash of Wall Street ushered in the Great Depression. And when the economic health of our nation failed, so did the citizen’s participation in government.

Instead of contributing they started taking and asking for more. And as they increased their dependence on government, the political parties seized the opportunity to increase power and distanced themselves from citizen participation in the legislative process. They knew, as long as they threw them a bone, they could do most anything they wanted. And they did.

After the War ended though, as many patriotic defenders returned to the motherland, a new sense of loyalty, allegiance and nationalism was born. There was a rebirth of civic pride for many Americans.

The economy was strong; people were working, concerned about the country, and for a time since the Depression there was a re-investment in citizen democracy. Veterans expected to be treated fairly for their contribution to the war effort.

And they were concerned about rebuilding a peace time economy and took the initiative to get involved in the process. And the politicians who had been running the show during the War, welcomed this about as much as a dog does fleas.

“A lot has been said about politics; some of it complimentary, but most of it accurate.” ~Eric Idle

By now, both parties were using professionals to run their campaigns and had little need for help from the citizens. The only ones who gave them big bucks wanted big favors. And this is when the average citizen realized that an “Act of Congress” means nothing.

If they wanted to get anything done they must do it themselves. And by now over half of the US states had some form of the initiative and referendum established.

It was embraced by patriotic citizens, and successfully used to write law that their elected officials would not pass for them. They realized that “Unless someone like you cares a whole awful lot, Nothing is going to get better. It’s not.” (Dr. Seuss)

The successful drive of citizen driven democracy was fueled by tremendous economic growth and prosperity. But when the economy went sour so did the people. As government dependency increased, the politicians gained more control over the legislative process.

And today, what used to be a vital tool to bring issues to the public for civic debate is going the way of the incandescent light bulb. And the only one who uses it effectively is the same special interest groups that donate big dollars to their political buddies.

And the politicians have no fear of apathetic, dependent citizens since “To sin by silence, when they should protest, makes cowards of men.” (Ella Wilcox)

“You can’t understand Twenty-first-Century Politics with an Eighteenth-Century Brain.” ~G. Lakoff

Throughout our history we have seen citizens who have done great things that the government would never have done for us. Enterprising patriots who cared took the initiative to get involved in the writing and passing of laws. They used the tools we provided for them to be legislators; to do the people’s work, not the politicians. They learned “Get up, stand up, don’t give up the fight.” (Bob Marley)

Because when the politicians fear the people, we win. When we fear them they always win: Politicians know; “It is better to be feared than loved, if you cannot be both.” (Niccolo Machiavelli)

William Haupt III William Haupt III is a retired professional journalist, citizen legislator in California for 40 plus years, and author. He got his start working to approve prop 13. More Posts

RELATED ARTICLES

COMMENTS