Tax time can be a stressful part of the year for anyone, but seniors may be feeling the pressure more than others. Constant changes to the U.S. tax code, keeping on top of exemptions and credits, and the changes to both Medicare and the health care industry in general on the heels of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act can leave older adults struggling to keep their heads above water.

Fortunately, though it may seem daunting, filing taxes doesn't have to be a major event. Here are a few things to keep in mind to help seniors make it through the filing process worry-free:

1. Know the basics

Seniors who are familiar with the basic filing process, as well as those who have a handle on what their filing obligations are, already have a leg up when it comes to navigating the sea of paperwork come tax time. While DailyFinance noted that in general Social Security income isn't taxed, there may be exceptions that seniors should be aware of to avoid potential complications. While individual circumstances may be different, as a general rule of thumb if you have any income over and above your Social Security benefits, it's likely you'll need to file a return, even if that income isn't taxed.

2. Work with an expert

It's true that seniors have been filing tax returns all their lives, but whether you're 25 or 75, going through the process with a professional is advisable. Seniors in particular may be eligible for tax credits and special deductions that most people may not know about, but that accountants and other tax professionals can help find. For example, the U.S. Internal Revenue Service offers a tax credit for elderly and disabled persons that significantly reduces the amount of tax that must be paid on income - for those over 65 this can greatly increase the amount of income they can hang on to.

3. Have all the information needed

Especially for those with multiple sources of income, such as retirement accounts, pension plans and Social Security benefits, it can be tricky to keep track of all the information needed to completely complete a tax return. The best way for a senior to avoid finding him or herself in a position where a crucial tax form is missing come filing time is to keep tax documents organized throughout the year. Any IRA, 401(k), pension or other retirement accounts should offer statements on a monthly or quarterly basis - it's highly recommended that seniors keep these in addition to any tax documents received. If a person is unsure as to what information they need, suggest that they contact a tax preparation center for clarification.

4. Avoid scams

Sadly, there are those who spend their days trying to make a living by taking advantage of others, and seniors can often find themselves in danger of such scams. The IRS highlighted a list of some of the more recent tax-related scams targeting seniors. In many cases, these con artists will call or email seniors demanding that they provide their Social Security number, bank account information or other personal financial details so that an alleged outstanding balance can be paid. One of the most important pieces of advice you can offer as a senior care professional is to never, under any circumstances, provide such information. The IRS will never solicit such data from a person over the phone or by email, so any correspondence that attempts to do just that should raise an immediate red flag. If seniors do need tax advice or help filing, ensure that they only seek assistance from designated IRS-affiliated sites, or from a verified professional organization.