Sioux Falls, SD

A multi-million dollar project near the Sioux Empire Mall should ease traffic flow on Louise Avenue and help prevent future flooding in the area.

Crews are widening Solberg Avenue from 49th Street to 57th Street and making a detention pond near I-29 bigger.

It's one of the city's biggest construction projects this summer. When it's finished, Solberg Avenue will go from two lanes to four north of 57th Street and a giant storm sewer detention pond on the southwest side of the Empire Mall will have a bigger capacity.

"I like it. I'm glad it's being increased in size. Very happy," Marlin Westra said.

Westra has managed the South Hampton apartments nearby for 13 years. He's seen flooding in the area twice during that time.

Sioux Falls Principal Engineer Joshua Peterson says these new improvements should fix the issue. Originally, the pond could hold enough runoff to flood 61 football fields in one foot of water.

"We're going to add about 10 more feet to that. So it would be about 71 football fields a foot deep or one football field 71 feet deep," Peterson said.

On top of the pond, the new four-lane road will feature a new traffic light at 49th and Solberg, next to the mall.

"I have waited many minutes to get onto 49th," Westra said.

With a new light and more lanes, Solberg Avenue should become a main corridor on the west side of town.

"It will really help that traffic and maybe take some of that pressure off of Louise which is a very busy street for us," Peterson said.

The $3.5-million project should finish in October.

News

General {{Title}} Remove Change News General Courts Web Only Crime Outdoors Events Center Non-Homepage Boredom Busters Pipeline Positively KELOLAND Technology Hunger Affordable Care Act Shops Flooding Remembering 9/11 Drought JazzFest Spring Storm Honor Flight Spencer Anniversary

DoApp Health News Business News Sports

Agriculture Markets Livestock Crops Politics

HealthBeat Cancer Children's Health Heart Health Wellness & Nutrition General Health Beat Women's Health RX Resources What's Going Around OTC Diabetes Recalls Dental Health Men's Health

Politics South Dakota Legislature Budget Congress Taxes General Local Campaign President US Senate New Laws US House Iowa Ballot Issues Local Races Minnesota Gubernatorial

Education Funding College Elementary High School Pre K School Supplies Middle School

Sports Professional College High School Sports Zone Headlines Summit League Tournament Olympics

Business Industry Your Money Matters Development Gas & Energy Legislation Economy/Stocks Employment General Health Care Technology Education Funding Tourism Banking/Finance Housing Transportation Insurance Meetings & Events Retail & Restaurants All Industries On The Move Shops Agriculture

Featured Stories Eye on KELOLAND Inside KELOLAND

Weather Snow Forecast Records Rain Flooding Drought WX Corner General

World News

Investigates GEAR UP

Sponsored Done

© 2016 KELOLAND TV. All Rights Reserved.