This is Mariano Medina's fort, located north of the Big Thompson River and west of present-day Namaqua Road. It was originally constructed with a flat roof that was later replaced when the structure was converted into an ice house. ( Loveland Museum/Gallery )

Spanish-speaking Mariano Medina established a small settlement west of Loveland that was named Namaqua in 1868 after a post office was established. Medina was the first permanent settler in the Big Thompson Valley, but also its first businessman. (Loveland Museum/Gallery)

If you go Nothing remains of Mariano Medina's home or his fort along Namaqua Road. Namaqua Park, which includes several graves, is the closest public location. The fort was on the north side of the Big Thompson River and the west side of present-day Namaqua Road.

Born in Taos, New Mexico, Mariano Medina became the first permanent settler in the Big Thompson Valley.

Spanish was Medina's native tongue, but he knew some English. He may have known a little French because of his close association with the area's French trappers. No doubt, Medina also knew a few Indian dialects he learned from his Indian wife.

George Andrew Jackson, one of the early Colorado prospectors, met Antoine and Nicholas Janis and Jose de Mirabal in Fort Laramie during the summer of 1858.

These men traveled south and stopped along the Big Thompson River. They built a few cabins and apparently spent the winter trapping.

Medina joined this party, but unlike these temporary visitors, he began to work on establishing a permanent settlement.

In 1860, the Rocky Mountain News took note of Medina's place calling it Miraville at the crossing of the Big Thompson River. It was also called Big Thompson or Mariano's Crossing.

Medina recruited several Mexican families from his hometown of Taos to help him work the land and build up the population of the small village.

Advertisement

To provide some income, Mariano constructed a sturdy toll bridge over the Big Thompson River. The bridge was well above the level of the river even during flood stage, and Medina built substantial cribbing on either side. The bridge sat on pilings driven into the river bottom. He charged $1 to cross the bridge, and the toll was probably higher when the river was at flood stage.

In 1861, the Ute Indians drove off 60 of Medina's best horses. He and his men trailed the Utes for 25 miles. Mariano shot one of the Utes using his trusty muzzle-loading Hawken rifle while the remaining Indians fled.

The Indian raid prompted Medina to construct a small 15-foot by 25-foot stone fort on the north side of the Big Thompson River. To allow defenders to shoot in any direction, the fort included six gun ports. The walls were 18 to 20 inches thick, and the roof was flat and built of sturdy hand hewn logs. The roof was covered with sandstone slabs, and the slabs were covered with a foot of earth.

In 1862, Ben Holladay moved his overland stage route from Wyoming south into Colorado to take advantage of the growing Denver market. The route north from Denver followed what was generally known as the Cherokee Trail, which ran along the foothills through LaPorte. Mariano's place was now a stage station.

In 1868 a post office was established at Medina's place and the first postmaster named it Namaqua. The name stuck until the settlement was abandoned. By this time, the threat of an attack by Indians had passed, and Medina's fort was converted into an ice house.

The old log buildings were occupied up until the 1920s and then fell into ruin. The land owner eventually cleared the site, and Namaqua and its stone fort passed into history.

Kenneth Jessen has been a Loveland resident since 1965. He is an author of 20 books and more than 1,600 articles. He served on several Loveland boards and was an engineer for Hewlett-Packard for 33 years.