Boulder campus awards 1,707 degrees

In the spirit of the holidays, University of Colorado winter graduates Grace Sanders and Caitlin Hernandez decided to gift wrap their caps.

Using gold and black ribbon — and bows with the CU logo that they found in the campus bookstore — the two graduated in style at the university's winter commencement ceremony at the Coors Events Center on the Boulder campus.

Sanders and Hernandez received two of the 1,707 degrees awarded by CU Saturday, including 1,194 bachelor's degrees, 340 master's degrees, 10 law degrees and 163 doctoral degrees.

"It's a few days away from Christmas, we figured we might as well make them look like presents," Hernandez said.

"Yeah, make them festive," Sanders added.

Monica Cappelli, right, is the proud mother of a University of Colorado graduate, Christina Cappelli, after the 2014 CU Winter Commencement earlier today at the Coors Events Center in Boulder. (Cliff Grassmick)

Though there are fewer graduates than in the spring — and fewer creatively decorated caps — a jovial crowd turned out on a brisk but dry Saturday morning.

Graduates and their friends and family members heard from Robert Anderson, a professor in the geological sciences department and the Institute of Arctic and Alpine Research.

His message was simple: make your life stand for something.

"Look up," Anderson said. "Live a life in which you are truly engaged. There is no sleepwalking through life.

"Look away from your cell phones. Listen not to the ear buds, but to the occasional cacophony and the even more occasional quiet of the real world. Look up and keep asking questions."

In a speech that touched on politics, the environment and personal experience, Anderson described a scene he witnessed on a recent Sunday at the Boulder Reservoir, when a gaggle of geese rose from the ground in chaos to form neatly spaced "V" shapes.

"Take the time to revel in the beauty of this world and let it ask questions of you," he said.

Dan Koppe sat among the graduates, proud to have finished his bachelor's degree in history at age 31.

Though not the picture of a traditional undergraduate student, Koppe said he's feeling a mix of relief, accomplishment and excitement as he heads into the job market.

"Excitement and anxiousness," he said. "Obviously excited it's going to be done but anxious because that next step is there. What is that next step going to be? Especially since I feel like I'm a little bit behind the curve career-wise. I'm still happy it's done because I hope (my degree) opens some new doors for me."

As a graduation gift, his extended family got together to help pay off some of his student loan debt. Koppe said he's leaving CU with between $4,000 and $5,000 in debt.

On average, CU-Boulder students graduated with $25,173 in student loan debt in 2013, the most recent data available from the Colorado Department of Higher Education. That puts the Boulder campus somewhere in the middle of all Colorado higher education institutions.

Three years after graduating, alums of CU-Boulder in 2011 had a default rate of 4.7 percent, according to the most recent data from the U.S. Department of Education. Nationally, that rate was 13.7 percent, and 15.3 percent in Colorado, according to the department.

That's encouraging for many university leaders, who are confident CU-Boulder students are finding full-time work after graduation.

Many winter graduates, including Alexandra Vandeboogaard, already had full-time positions lined up, though some were still searching.

Wearing a bedazzled cap with the words "The tassel was worth the hassle," Vandeboogaard said she'll be working for J.P. Morgan in Denver after receiving her degree in finance and economics.

"Most people seem to have a plan," she said. "A lot of my friends are in finance and I find that a lot of finance people have had a pretty OK time finding jobs."

Sarah Kuta: 303-473-1106, kutas@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/sarahkuta