Michael Drewniak, chief spokesman for New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie The Associated Press

New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie’s top spokesman and longtime confidante is leaving the administration as the governor eyes a 2016 bid for the presidency.

Michael Drewniak, an often fierce defender of Mr. Christie, began working with Mr. Christie in 2002 at the U.S. Attorney’s Office in Newark. He was known for having a personal line to Mr. Christie and dealing with many of the administration’s most challenging crises, though his involvement in handling fallout from lane closures at the George Washington Bridge brought him into controversy.

The governor’s office did not comment on Mr. Drewniak’s departure. It was unclear if he had accepted another job.

Several key officials in Mr. Christie’s orbit have left since 2014, including his chief of staff Kevin O’Dowd, Port Authority Chairman David Samson and Bill Stepien, a longtime strategist.

Mr. Drewniak, 53 years old, has said he was not interested in working on a presidential campaign. People who had spoken with him said he was increasingly tired of day-to-day battles with reporters after months of fallout from the George Washington Bridge scandal. His last day is Friday.

In recent months, much of his work had been transferred to Kevin Roberts, 29, who is expected to replace Mr. Drewniak.

Mr. Drewniak, a former reporter at the Star-Ledger, was often more than a spokesman for Mr. Christie, lobbying legislators on the governor’s agenda, advising Mr. Christie on tough issues and sometimes playing the role of a fixer for Mr. Christie.

The spokesman was known for his yelling matches and sometimes caustic emails with reporters, though he had appeared to lower the volume since profane emails he sent about officials and reporters emerged in the aftermath of the George Washington Bridge Scandal.

His office walls were decorated with pictures and mementos from his time with Mr. Christie. In 2012, he married Nicole Drewniak, a fundraiser for the governor.

Mr. Drewniak became known outside Trenton in 2014, after he became a figure in the bridge scandal.

As the administration sought to handle fallout, Mr. Drewniak met with David Wildstein for dinner two days before he resigned, prompting questions. Mr Wildstein served as director of interstate capital projects at the Port Authority, a Christie appointee.

One month later, emails emerged that indicated Mr. Wildstein and Bridget Anne Kelly, Mr. Christie’s deputy chief of staff, planned the lane closures in Fort Lee for political retribution.

Mr. Drewniak testified in front of the legislative committee investigating the closures and appeared in front of a grand jury but has not been accused of wrongdoing.

After a Wall Street Journal reporter reached Mr. Wildstein on his cell phone, Mr. Wildstein consulted with Bill Baroni, another Port official who has since resigned.

Mr. Baroni’s reply: “Jesus. Call Drewniak.”