It’s about a 3½-hour drive through Montana from Dehler Park in Billings to Centene Stadium in Great Falls, if you wrap the short route around Lewis and Clark National Forest.

It’s Big Sky country. And the space between towns is enough to drown a driver in thought.

“I feel like I’m on the moon right now,” Rockies outfielder Michael Cuddyer said by phone Friday from Montana’s Highway 200. “I’m somewhere in the fields. And there’s absolutely nobody else on the road. It’s really kind of tranquil.”

Cuddyer’s journey from Minnesota Twins mainstay and American League all-star to National League batting champion in Denver was even longer. The 35-year-old is playing out his 14th major-league season.

But Cuddyer, driving this week between rookie-level Pioneer League towns on an injury rehabilitation stint, may also be between career stops.

In a contract year — nearing the end of a three-year, $31.5 million deal with the Rockies — Cuddyer is not only rehabbing a broken bone in his left shoulder. He’s perhaps auditioning for his future.

“You never want to go into an offseason weighing on your mind if you’re healthy,” Cuddyer said. “I just want to go out there and know I’m healthy and I’ll be back with five to six weeks left in the season and get back to being me.”

After five games with the Grand Junction Rockies — he went 5-for-7 with three doubles, three RBIs and three runs in his first two rehab starts — Cuddyer will skip up to Double-A Tulsa on Tuesday for four games with the Drillers. He is looking to have about 40 at-bats to get back into game shape. If all goes well, he should rejoin the Rockies this coming weekend for a series at home against the Cincinnati Reds.

The Rockies have indicated they want Cuddyer back next season, but it’s not clear at what price.

“I would like to figure out a way to keep him,” club owner Dick Monfort said in July. “He brings value to this team.”

The Rockies’ outfield, if it stays intact, looks crowded in 2015, with all-star Charlie Blackmon in center, Carlos Gonzalez in right and hot-hitting Corey Dickerson (.320 batting average, .381 on-base percentage) bidding to be the full-time left fielder.

Cuddyer was hitting .317 through 31 games before breaking his shoulder diving for a groundball at third base, where he was filling in for an injured Nolan Arenado.

For now, Cuddy is working back to full health. And that means returning to the lower-level leagues.

“For me, I almost have fonder memories of being in the minor leagues than I do in the first few years of the major leagues,” Cuddyer said.

On his way up through the Twins’ farm system in the late 1990s, Cuddyer skipped rookie ball and jumped straight to the Single-A Midwest League to play for the Fort Wayne Wizards.

“The camaraderie is different — you go through the grind together. Everybody is in the same spot. It’s a lot of fun to see how close they are — in proximity in the clubhouse and personally.

“That’s where you form your understanding of baseball.”

Cuddyer remembers 16-hour bus rides between Midwest towns, with the only stops at gas stations for dinner.

“There were many, many times when my dinner was tuna fish out of a can on crackers,” he said.

Cuddyer could have rehabbed with batting practice and groundball work at Coors Field. But he chose to get back by joining the bus leagues.

“I chose to go play games for the reason of getting my legs back in shape,” he said. “There’s no substitute for running out a double or going from first to third on a hit or advancing on passed balls. You can train or take BP all you want. But there’s no substitute for games.”

Cuddyer said he feels no pressure to prove himself down the stretch, either for free-agent suitors or Rockies management. While he’s rehabbing, he wants to make an impact on the teenagers learning the game in Colorado’s farm system.

Forrest Wall, the Rockies’ 18-year-old first-round draft pick (35th overall) in June from Maitland, Fla., who now is playing second base for Grand Junction, took his tips after Cuddyer skipped a pregame prep to join the team’s hitters’ meeting.

“Being a first-year guy, to have Michael Cuddyer, batting champ, around for advice is really special,” Wall said. “I talked to him about approach. He’s big on preparation, what he does before a game. Then once it’s game time, just have fun.”

Nick Groke: ngroke@denverpost.com or twitter.com/nickgroke