The Broncos have outdone themselves in ways inconceivable in training camp. They can’t run the football. They average only 2.6 yards per attempt, worst in the NFL. This makes no sense for a team coached by Gary Kubiak.

His teams average a 10th-place ranking in rushing yards over the past 20 seasons. Wolves howl, suns set, Kubiak’s teams run the ball well.

Figuring out why the Broncos aren’t doing that has become an increasingly interesting topic. The obvious explanation is poor offensive line play. But listening to Kubiak and offensive coordinator Rick Dennison last week, it’s obvious they see a layered problem. They blame themselves, always first pointing the finger at teaching and practicing.

And the offensive linemen share responsibility, something they readily admit. Nobody can say with a straight face that the group is clicking. The pass protection improved dramatically last week, an encouraging sign for a team trying to keep its 39-year-old quarterback upright. But the ground game went nowhere, and two plays left C.J. Anderson and Juwan Thompson injured.

Better coaching, better execution from the grunts, and, yes, improved performance from the backs is needed. It didn’t take a decoder ring Friday to realize Kubiak is not pleased with his running backs.

There is clearly a chicken-and-egg issue percolating. Are the running backs not gaining yards because the linemen aren’t blocking? Or are the running backs failing to break tackles and undermining the blocking?

Kubiak wants to see more from his runners, starting with Anderson, who is clinging to his starting job.

“When you’re evaluating the running game, we’re talking about being better up front, getting more creases. That’s a coaches thing. We’ve got to get space for these guys,” Kubiak said before adding, “Then you go to the backs and you say, ‘Sometimes you’ve got to create your own space.’ C.J.’s worked really hard this week, and responded in practice. Sometimes as a back, you’ve got to do a little more. You’re in this league to make some plays that nobody else can make. We’re calling on those guys to do some of that.”

If you don’t believe the Broncos hold the backs to a high standard, think about the final cuts. Montee Ball made it for 24 hours, then was jettisoned for a tight end. Ball performed poorly in the preseason. The blocking created few holes. And he’s no longer in Denver. That’s telling, when you consider how the Broncos’ coaches grade the overall running game. Ball didn’t have much to work with, but he didn’t make anyone look better. He couldn’t turn graffiti into a Monet. He lacked explosion and burst, which clearly the rest of the league witnessed because he remains unsigned.

The offensive line remains a focal point with Ryan Harris switching to left tackle and untested Michael Schofield manning right tackle in his first NFL snaps against Minnesota on Sunday. The running backs, though, have been put on notice. This system produces yards and plays no favorites.

Anderson (a Pro Bowler), Ronnie Hillman and Thompson are proud, motivated and tough. They will embrace the challenge and block out the outside noise. Ideally, they will receive a few blocks and make a few cuts to spring loose, creating a new debate on who deserves the most credit for reviving the running game.

Troy E. Renck: trenck@denverpost.com or @troyrenck

Spotlight on …

Julio Jones, wide receiver, Atlanta Falcons

What’s up: When Demaryius Thomas signed his five-year, $70 million contract, which guarantees $43 million, he said his goal this year was to break Calvin Johnson’s NFL season record for yards receiving. So far, the threat to that record is Jones, not Thomas. Jones continues to wreck game plans and break hearts. He has 34 catches, the most in NFL history by a player through his team’s first three games. He has 440 yards receiving and 23 first downs.

Background: Jones was the NFC offensive player of the month for September and could become a league MVP candidate. A wide receiver is unlikely to win the MVP award, but Jones creates reason for debate. He arrived with huge expectations in 2011. The Falcons traded five picks to Cleveland, moving up from the 27th slot to sixth overall to draft Jones, a former Alabama star. He has become the Falcons’ best player, receiving a $71 million contract that includes $47 million guaranteed.

Renck’s take: Bold moves bring huge risks. The Falcons needed someone to play catch with Matt Ryan every weekend. Jones is on pace for 2,346 yards receiving. Johnson holds the record with 1,964 yards. There’s no reason to think the brutish yet speedy Jones can’t reach 2,000. Each time Jones catches a touchdown pass, it’s a reminder of one of the worst deals in Browns history. No player attached to the acquired picks remains in Cleveland, including running back Trent Richardson, who was a bust.