Donald “Cowboy” Cerrone — a “mental crazy loon,” his words — claims he has never turned down a fight. And he can prove it.

Cerrone, a Denver native and mixed martial artist ranked No. 3 in the Ultimate Fighting Championship’s lightweight division, will fight for a seventh time in 14 months Sunday night in Boston.

And he’ll do it just 15 days after his last fight — a rare, dangerous quick turnaround for a professional fighter. Cerrone will go against Colorado Springs native and fifth-ranked Benson Henderson on short notice on the UFC’s Fight Night card in Boston, airing nationally on Fox Sports 1.

“I could sit back like every other fighter and sit and wait, but I’m not every other fighter,” Cerrone said. “I’m my own guy, and I don’t (care). Bring the fights on.

“If I’m going to be the champ, I’ve got to beat everyone anyway. So what is sitting and waiting and holding my position do?”

Cerrone (26-6) is riding a six-fight winning streak, tearing through the 155-pound division and climbing back into title contention. He last fought for a title in 2010 — a loss to Henderson for the World Extreme Cagefighting title.

“He’s one of the best out there,” Cerrone said of Henderson (21-4), a jiu-jitsu specialist born in Colorado Springs before moving to Washington.

Henderson held the lightweight title in 2012-13 and defended it three times, including a split-decision win over Frankie Edgar at UFC 150 in Denver.

“It’s not like I’m taking a filler fight against some bottom-25 guy,” said Cerrone, a former kickboxing champ. “If you want to be the best, you’ve got to beat the best. The only problem is when I get that belt, who’s going to be left to fight? That’s what I want to know.”

Cerrone, who trains in Albuquerque with coach Greg Jackson, agreed to fight Henderson just two days after his unanimous decision win over Myles Jury this month at UFC 182.

A victory may propel Cerrone to a title shot against Anthony Pettis later this year. Henderson, too, wants back in the mix after a knockout loss to Rafael dos Anjos in August.

When Cerrone boasted he wanted to fight six times in 2014, Jackson advised against it.

“I hope he doesn’t,” Jackson said last April. “But once Cowboy makes his mind up on something, he’s one of those amazing guys – whatever he decides to do, he does it all the way.”

“I wouldn’t take this fight on short notice unless, one, I wasn’t completely bat loony,” Cerrone said. “And, two, if I didn’t think I couldn’t beat Ben.”

Nick Groke: ngroke@denverpost.com or twitter.com/nickgroke