PEORIA — State Sen. Darin LaHood easily won his party’s nomination in the 18th Congressional District special Republican primary election by more than a 2-to-1 margin.

With final results in from all 19 counties, the Peorian led with 31,319 votes, or 69 percent of the vote. Next in line was political writer Mike Flynn, a Quincy native, with 12,559 votes, or 28 percent.

They were trailed by Donald Rients of Benson, a technical worker at State Farm, with 1,231 votes, or 3 percent, in the sprawling district.

A crowd of several hundred greeted LaHood when he made his appearance at his campaign victory party at the Lariat Steakhouse — just inside the 17th Congressional District that splits the city with the 18th — with a host of local GOP luminaries in the crowd including LaHood’s father, former U.S. Rep. Ray LaHood.

“Central Illinois is very fortunate to have a family who has been giving back to our community for a long, long time,” Peoria Mayor Jim Ardis said in introducing Darin LaHood to the crowd.

Now his party’s official nominee, LaHood thanked his supporters for all that they did, from donating to knocking on doors asking for support.

In his victory speech, with his wife and three children standing by his side, LaHood said: “When you think about central Illinois and this district, it’s people who work hard. Play by the rules. Strong faith in God. They love their community. But they’re not real happy with the federal government. … How do we have someone who goes to Washington, D.C., that represents those values, to try to make America a better place. That’s what’s driven me in public service. That message has resonated out there.”

And he returned to a message he’s emphasized since first entering the race during a March 30 announcement at the Lariat.

“It’s important to stay grounded and remember who you work for and remember the community that we live in,” LaHood said. “I’m trying to strive for that. If I’m fortunate enough to win in the general election, I’ll carry those same values forward to proudly represent you in this district.”

Earlier in the evening, one of the campaign’s youngest volunteers extolled the virtues of LaHood as a candidate.

“I just really fell in love with Darin and his family,” said Jacob Schlosser, 21, of Springfield, a senior at Valparaiso University. “He’s got a really great family and he’s a solid conservative candidate.”

The three GOP candidates essentially competed throughout the campaign on who was most conservative, and they lined up closely — broadly speaking — on conservative issues in the contest to replace U.S. Rep. Aaron Schock after his resignation at the end of March.

The seat is open for only the third time since Rep. Bob Michel’s 1956 election.

LaHood, 46, has rested most of his campaign upon his experience in the state Legislature, where he has served since being appointed in 2011. He’s argued that his record of supporting conservative causes and legislation should garner him support, as should his ties to the community at large — a subtle slap at Flynn, who has lived outside the district for several decades.

Flynn, 47, however, pointed to his family’s century-plus history in the area and listed his time working first in Springfield and then in the Washington, D.C., area on conservative issues as pluses. He argued that his policy know-how would help him attack problems at the Capitol.

Rients, 51, labeled himself the anti-politician in the race and has said he’d make many decisions based upon his Christian values.

Each of the candidates opposes abortion, favors gun owners’ rights, opposes same-sex marriage and believes the Affordable Care Act should be repealed. None is a great fan of federal regulation, particularly the Environmental Protection Agency. All had agreed to limit the number of terms they serve in office.

LaHood starts off the campaign for the Sept. 10 special general election with an advantage at the polls and in terms of fundraising. The district stretching from the Mississippi River near Quincy to northeast of Bloomington-Normal was drawn to favor Republican candidates, as voting patterns have proven in the 2012 and 2014 elections. LaHood also had a distinct cash advantage, with more than a half-million dollars remaining in the bank at the close of the last financial reporting period, according to Federal Election Commission records.

LaHood will face Democrat Rob Mellon in the Sept. 10 election. Mellon had little cash available, according to FEC records.

Chris Kaergard can be reached at 686-3135 and ckaergard@pjstar.com. Follow him on Twitter @ChrisKaergard.