ACA Latino Week of Action Starts Saturday in Nevada



Health advocates are making a big push to enroll Latino Nevadans before the Jan. 31 deadline for coverage through the Affordable Care Act.(kathyyeulet/iStockphoto) Health advocates are making a big push to enroll Latino Nevadans before the Jan. 31 deadline for coverage through the Affordable Care Act.(kathyyeulet/iStockphoto)

January 8, 2016

LAS VEGAS - Nevada has about 350,000 uninsured residents, by some estimates, and close to 40 percent of them are Latino. So, health advocates are launching the National Latino Week of Action, starting Saturday, with insurance enrollment events to be held around the state.



Anne Filipic, president of the nonprofit Enroll America, said they're reaching out to hourly workers, particularly those in the fields of agriculture, construction, retail, hospitality, manufacturing and health-care social services - industries that employ large numbers of Latinos.



"Four out of five Latinos don't know that financial help is available to reduce their monthly premiums," she said, "even though 85 percent of people who enrolled during the second enrollment period received financial assistance to make their health insurance more affordable."



People can get more information online at NevadaHealthLink.com. Last year, the state exchange helped 73,000 Nevadans find coverage.



Health and Human Services Secretary Sylvia Matthews Burwell offered a national perspective.



"Since the ACA's provisions have taken effect and before this open-enrollment even began, an estimated 17.6 million Americans have found health coverage," she said. "That includes 4 million Latinos. Nationally, with this progress, we've reached the lowest levels of uninsured on record."



She said the Latino community still suffers from higher rates of asthma, diabetes and certain cancers compared with the general population. Advocates hope that increased access to primary care and cancer screenings will level out these disparities.



More information is online at NevadaHealthLink.com.

Suzanne Potter, Public News Service - NV