One of U.S. Marshals Service 15 Most Wanted fugitives was extradited from Mexico today.

Convicted child Killer Edward Salas was returned to Curry County, New Mexico to serve the remainder of his prison sentence for murder.

“Salas‘ crimes were horrendous and his potential for continued violence made his arrest a priority for the U.S. Marshals Service” said U.S. Marshals Service Director Stacia A. Hylton. “His capture is both significant and rewarding, and we thank our state and local partners and Mexican officials for their tireless persistence in bringing this fugitive to justice.”

Mr. Salas was arrested by Mexican authorities on October 4, 2012 after a U.S. provisional arrest request for his extradition was issued.

He escaped from the Curry County Detention Center in Clovis, New Mexico, in august 2008, and was added to the Marshals’ 15 Most Wanted fugitive list in December 2011.

Mr. Salas was serving a life sentence plus 56 years for his role in the murder of 10-year-old Carlos Perez.

He and his brothers Orlando Salas and Demetrio Salas along with two other individuals, planned to murder Ruben Perez, reportedly in retaliation for an argument that occurred the previous day the Clovis High School. Instead, his younger brother Carlos was killed while he was sleeping in the same bedroom. The child was murdered the day before his 11th Birthday.

“When a child suffers at the hands of a killer, the pain is endured by the family, community and our entire society and when this tragedy strikes, the law enforcement communities come together as an unyielding force until those responsible face justice for the horrific crimes committed,” said Conrad E. Candelaria, U.S. Marshal for the District of New Mexico.

“Due to the tireless efforts of many law enforcement professionals, spanning many years and hundreds of hours of investigation from agencies throughout the State of New Mexico, the United States Marshals Service for the District of New Mexico, and the Marshals Service International Investigative Branch, partnering with Mexican authorities, fugitive Salas will face justice long awaited.”