Buy Photo Iowa businessman John Pappajohn, shown at left with Gov. Terry Branstad at the Prometheus Awards in April, is the largest stockholder in American CareSource Holdings, a publicly traded health care firm. (Photo: Bryon Houlgrave/Register file photo)Buy Photo

John Pappajohn is no fan of Obamacare. But the venture capitalist knows a good opportunity when he sees it.

Pappajohn believes urgent care clinics will boom, thanks in part to the Affordable Care Act. One of his companies is buying clinics in the South, preparing for a potential flood of new patients seeking quick care.

He's not new to the "doc in a box" game. Before Pappajohn became known for his philanthropy in Iowa, he invested in a San Diego-based urgent care company 35 years ago and saw rapid growth before the company merged with another.

Pappajohn sees another winner in Dallas-based American CareSource Holdings. He is the largest stockholder in the publicly traded health care company, which announced it was entering the urgent care business in April. Pappajohn invested an additional $1.15 million last month and now owns a stake worth about $6.5 million in the company, according to documents filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission.

Following him in American CareSource's $2 million fundraising in May were fellow board members Matt Kinley, executive vice president at Pappajohn's Equity Dynamics, and Mark Oman, former head of Wells Fargo's Home and Consumer Finance Group in West Des Moines.

Adding to the Iowa crowd: Principal Financial Group is the company's largest institutional investor.

The urgent care centers can handle a range of services, from providing X-rays and shots of Botox to providing sports physicals and workers compensation services. Plus, the clinics are part of the trend of treating and managing patients with chronic conditions such as hypertension and diabetes.

"We can do a lot of things we didn't do 35 years ago," Pappajohn said. "Lots of things that can create revenue."

The company has purchased clinics in Atlanta's suburbs and has its eyes on other rapidly growing areas in Southern states. The company wants to own 50 clinics in the next three years, said Richard Turner, who has managed previous companies for Pappajohn and was named CEO of American CareSource in April.

"You'd have to be pretty myopic to not see the opportunity," Turner said.

Several factors have led to the demand for walk-in clinics. More people are expected to be insured under the Affordable Care Act, and many don't have a previous relationship with a doctor. To cut costs, employers and insurers are pushing employers and insurance companies to go to urgent care clinics rather than emergency rooms. As more attention is focused on waiting times at Veterans Affairs hospitals and elsewhere, urgent care clinics will vie to fill the gaps.

The urgent care market is expected to grow from $14.5 billion in 2013 to $18.8 billion in 2018, according to IBISWorld market research firm.

Many other companies see the opportunity, too, ranging from CVS pharmacies to Tenet Healthcare, which are expanding clinics. To Pappajohn, that's good news, because it means more future buyers for his clinics.

The clinics can generate a healthy profit by serving more than 100 patients a day. But Turner said the company wants to attract loyal patients through personal, empathetic care. It's retaining many of the physicians at the clinics it is purchasing.

"You never want anybody to feel that we treat 'em and street 'em," Turner said.

Pappajohn said he hasn't decided whether to enter the Iowa market, saying he likes the demographics and health-care-friendly regulations in Southern states. But he made it clear he loves hunting for deals.

"I'm working a little too hard," said Pappajohn, who turns 86 in July. "But I'm having too much fun to stop."

Ambassador Quinn, action movie hero?

Ambassador Kenneth Quinn's life should be portrayed in a movie. Or two.

Quinn, the president of the World Food Prize and former U.S. ambassador to Cambodia, was honored with the Iowa Award on Friday for his valor and service at home and abroad.

Charles Larson, former U.S. ambassador to Latvia, recounted how Quinn escaped execution in Lebanon after a Palestinian Liberation Organization official discovered he was an American.

"If you have seen the movie 'Argo,' you can imagine, this is what Ken did. And I do think if Ben Affleck wants to have a sequel to 'Argo,' this is the story it would be," Larson said.

Iowa State Sen. Matt McCoy followed by calling Quinn "Iowa's version of Forrest Gump."

"Ken always managed to find himself square in the middle of all the action," McCoy said. "I've often pondered why that was. Does Ken follow the action or does he create it?"

Moves: Ray Cole, president and chief operating officer of Citadel Communications, has stepped down from the board of governors of the ABC Television Affiliates Association. Cole was honored for his "dedicated leadership" during the association's annual meeting in Burbank, Calif. He served on the board from 2004 to 2014. Previously, Cole oversaw WOI-TV in Des Moines until its sale to Nexstar Broadcasting in March.

Birthdays

Shannon Cofield, Drake University's senior counsel to the president for strategic partnerships, is 50 today. Wednesday's birthdays include Bike World owner Forrest Ridgway, who is 57; Greg Edwards, chief of the Greater Des Moines Convention and Visitors Bureau, 59; golf store owner and retired state Sen. George Kinley, 77; retired Meredith chief Bob Burnett, 87; and Al Leiserowitz, 93, who still works six days a week at photography supplier H.B. Leiserowitz Co. On Thursday, Iowa Lottery chief Terry Rich will turn 62, and Bankers Trust's John Ruan IV will be 41. Eric Lohmeier of NCP Investment Banking will be 41 on Monday.

Read or Share this story: http://www.desmoinesregister.com/story/money/business/biz-buzz/2014/06/03/biz-buzz-pappajohn-healthy-investment/9898927/