MIDDLETOWN >> Lt. Gov. Nancy Wyman kicked off the first Connecticut Lions Clubs Women and Family Symposium on Saturday by encouraging women to take care of themselves, in the era of the “Panini generation,” where they put a priority on caring for their spouses, children and aging parents.

Her main advice to the some 75 attendants at Wesleyan University in Middletown was that they should get involved and help change things that need to be changed.

The federal Affordable Care Act has helped 550,000 people, the majority of which are women, said Wyman, who chairs the board of Connecticut’s Access Health insurance exchange.

“Finally women are going to get preventive care,” she said, which men have been much better at getting. “We have to bring women up.”

Advertisement

When a woman is offered a job she accepts the $35,000 salary, she said.

“A man says,’ I can’t live on that. I have a family,’” said Wyman. “Our granddaughters have to learn how to speak out on this. I see what they do with sports and everything at school, but I also see they sometimes don’t speak out.”

The minimum wage debate is also an issue important to women, said Wyman.

“What you are doing here today is fantastic,” she said, and thanked the Lions Club for their leadership in this new direction.

As she did 30 years ago by gaining a seat on the Tolland Board of Education, Wyman encouraged people to get involved in politics. She told the story of three women asking her to run for the school board, but three months after winning a seat she had not heard from them. She called them on it.

“Where are you?” she asked them.

Politicians want support during elections, but that’s not where the public’s support should end, she said.

“Don’t let them get away between that time,” she said. “If things are wrong and you’re unhappy, pick up the phone and call them.”

She invited the audience to visit her office.

“Come and visit me at the lieutenant governor’s office. It’s your building,” she said.

Women and family issues are not just about women, said Wyman.

“There’s no such thing as a women’s issue,” said Wyman. “It’s everyone’s issue.”

The symposium offered 12 sessions on topics such as empowerment for women and teens, diabetes, health and fitness, autism, investments and eye health and screenings.

Colette Anderson, LCSW, executive director of The Connecticut Women’s Consortium, a training and advocacy organization in women’s health in Hamden, conducted a workshop on how to empower teenagers to make responsible decisions, which develops over time and with guidance.

The five key components of empowerment, preparing them to make decisions in adulthood, include trusting teens, helping them to solve problems rather than doing it for them, offering advice when they ask for it, let them take responsibility for their actions and allowing them to make their own decisions, said Anderson.

Trust teens from the start, but if they break that trust, they will have to earn it back, she said.

Let teens solve their problems.

“If we always give them an answer, they’re not going to be an empowered teen,” said Anderson.

Give advice when the teens ask for it and work it into the problem-solving process, she said.

Let teens take responsibility for their actions, allow them to fail, she said.

“Don’t undermine their ability to solve a problem on their own,” she said. “Teenagers will learn from their experience,” right or wrong.

An important part of becoming an empowered individual is resiliency, said Anderson, who said two people can come from the same backgrounds and yet one will give up while another will never quit on their goals.

There are some basic concepts that make people resilient, including a sense of competency, confidence, connections to people in their communities, character or clear sense of right or wrong, a feeling they can contribute to their community, using good coping skills and feeling a sense of control, said Anderson.

Among her advice was not to compare the abilities of children in the same family, give them budgeting skills, and provide sincere praise so they have realistic expectations. She also encouraged family time together, as well as time when the teens have downtime in their busy lives.

“We did get a lot out of it,” said Wendella Benjamin, president of the Bloomfield Lions Club, who attended the symposium and said her group is active with a lot of youth.

Lion Club leaders and district governors Kathy Patterson, Mike Wilcox and Nanette Burdick organized the event, partially paid through a grant from Lions Club International.

The Lions Clubs, an international organization begun in 1917 by Chicago businessman Melvin Jones, is the world’s largest service organization, with more than 46,000 clubs and 1.37 million members of men and women.

It’s known for its work in vision health, but also works in the area of environment, feeding the hungry, aiding seniors and the disabled.

The Middletown Lions Club meets the second Tuesday of the month at the Cypress Grill at 1265 South Main St., at 6:30 p.m. For more information, call Debbie French at 860-346-2692.