How much are hospitals worth to the state's economy? Nine percent of the total, according to the Connecticut Hospital Association.

The association issued a report this week saying its 29 acute care institutions accounted for $21.9 billion of economic activity in Connecticut last year, which is about 9 percent of all the goods and services produced in the state.

Here's the arithmetic: In 2014, the hospitals paid $5.5 billion in direct payroll for 55,000 jobs, or $100,000 per job. They bought $4.2 billion of goods and services. They spent $782 million in buildings and equipment.

That's a total of $10.5 billion in direct spending. The rest, $11.4 billion in activity, came from the so-called multiplier effect, as the money wended its way through the system.

We can quibble about a few billion here and there but the numbers are large, as hospitals are often the biggest employers in their communities; the figure is up from $20.4 billion the association reported last year.

That 55,000 number for jobs is full-time equivalent positions, as reported to regulators by the hospitals. In real people, it's a few thousand more, as they don't all work full time.

It's the same number as last year at this time. A year ago, the association also reported that its members had announced 1,400 layoffs in 2013, a number that appears to have declined significantly in 2014.

But flat employment is not good in a sector that has been a bright spot in the economy, association Vice President Stephen A. Frayne said.

"Going back six or seven years, on average the number of people employed by hospitals was growing by 2,000 to 2,500 a year," he said.

The association's point: The hospitals are an economic engine that the state should nurture, not cut. The report, coming soon after a $400 million takeover of five hospitals fell through, singled out a $350 million state tax on hospital services, enacted a few years ago as a ploy to bring in more Medicaid money from the feds.

At the time it was enacted, all of the tax money was returned to the hospitals, and then some. Gov. Dannel P. Malloy and the legislature cut out most of that rebate to the hospitals, so the tax now costs hospitals $254 million a year, which the association said "adds $123 every year to the cost of care for each person with commercial insurance."

Malloy's budgets also flattened Medicaid reimbursements even as Medicaid caseloads grew under Obamacare. The governor argued that the hospitals are in better shape because there are fewer people without insurance, among other reasons.

Now the hospitals want that tax phased out and they want an increase in Medicaid payments, which come from both the state and federal governments.

"We understand that there's lots of budget pressures but there's always lots of budget pressures," said Frayne, a longtime Capitol veteran.

"We're holding our breath and waiting to see what will come out on the 18th," he said, referring to Malloy's scheduled budget release next Wednesday. "We have no reason to be pessimistic."

One good reason is a $1.3 billion projected shortfall in the 2015-16 state budget. Significant relief for hospitals is unlikely to happen at the Capitol this spring.