It’s enough to give you a headache.

Mastering the ins and outs of Obamacare open enrollment can be painful.

Fortunately, the Daily News has your critical questions answered by Seth Diamond, chief operating officer at MetroPlus Health Plan, which is offering plans on New York State of Health.

Q. Why should I enroll?

A. Health insurance is extraordinarily important to your family’s health and overall well-being, and will keep you healthier.

Also, there is great peace of mind in knowing that you and your family are covered not just for routine preventive care but also against catastrophic injury or illness.

Unexpected medical bills are a leading cause of financial stress. And if you don’t sign up for health insurance, under the law you may have to pay a penalty.

Unexpected medical bills are a leading cause of financial stress. And if you don’t sign up for health insurance, under the law you may have to pay a penalty. (monkeybusinessimages/Getty Images/iStockphoto)

Q. Am I eligible to enroll through New York State of Health?

A. To enroll for health insurance through the state marketplace, a consumer must live in New York and must be a U.S. citizen, national or lawfully present immigrant (different immigration rules may apply for people eligible for Child Health Plus or Medicaid). Enrollees also cannot be currently incarcerated.

Q. I already enrolled at New York State of Health last year. Do I have to sign up again?

A. People who enrolled last year in a Qualified Health Plan and have not had any changes to their personal information will be automatically reenrolled in the same plan.

Many people who were enrolled in insurance in 2014 were automatically reenrolled for 2015. If you were not, you may need to update your information.

If you do need to update your information or aren’t sure, you should go to the state health insurance marketplace at nystateofhealth.ny.gov and log into your account.

Q. What will health insurance cost?

Many people who were enrolled in insurance in 2014 were automatically reenrolled for 2015. (Carlo Dapino/Getty Images/Hemera)

A. Many New Yorkers enrolling at New York State of Health can qualify for tax credits to help pay for monthly Qualified Health Plan insurance premiums. An individual may qualify for tax credits if he or she earns up to $45,900 a year; a family of four can qualify while earning up to $94,200 a year.

In addition to tax credits, residents may also be eligible for assistance for co-pays, deductibles and other out-of-pocket costs.

The marketplace website will also help determine if you qualify for free or low-cost coverage from Medicaid or Child Health Plus.

Q. How can I apply?

A. You don’t need a computer. Consumers are encouraged to apply online, at the site nystateofhealth.ny.gov, but they can also apply over the phone or in person.

The marketplace has a helpline open Monday to Saturday at (855) 355-5777.

Marketplace-facilitating enrollers, navigators, brokers, agents and assistors are available to help people enroll in the exchange in many different languages.