If people have more money to spend, they could spend it with you.

A fast-food worker gives a customer her order. (Photo: Getty Images) Story Highlights 3.6 million Americans earn minimum wage or less, don't have enough to cover basic needs

52% of fast-food workers receive some form of public aid, which means we subsidize their pay

These workers' lack of buying power depresses economy as a whole, shortchanges your company

How many of your customers own yachts? Private jets?

I'm guessing not many.

STORY: 13 states raising minimum wages

STORY: 8 states with highest minimum wages

How many of your customers work for a living? Virtually all of them.

If you own a small business, your income depends on people making enough money to buy your goods or services. If you want more of them, one critical step is to increase the federal minimum wage.

Adjusting for inflation, the minimum wage right now is lower than in it was in the 1960s, '70s and '80s. The current rate of $7.25 translates to $4.88 in 1996 dollars.

A few months ago, McDonald's issued financial advice for its workers. An employee working two jobs — a total of 60 hours at minimum wage paying a meager and unrealistic $600 for rent and $20 for health care — would have $30 a day left for food, gas, clothing, child care, school supplies, heat or air conditioning, and every other necessity.

In other words — even working two jobs, a parent earning minimum wage needs food stamps or other government assistance to just survive and not starve in our great America.

Frankly, that's a disgrace.

It also hurts your business. Minimum-wage workers can't buy your products or services, eat at your cafe, use your salon, stay at your hotel, shop in your store or download your app.

Protesters demonstrate outside a McDonald's restaurant Dec. 5, 2013, in Oakland, Calif., where the state minimum wage rose to $9 on Jan. 1. (Photo: Ben Margot, AP)

With 3.6 million Americans earning minimum wage or less, their lack of buying power depresses the economy as a whole.

The issue of raising the minimum wage has strong political momentum.

Some politicians will tell you that doing so will kill small businesses. The opposite is true: Not raising the minimum wage threatens our small businesses.

"Wait a second, Rhonda," I can almost hear you argue. "It's one thing to talk about the middle class in general, but if I'm forced to raise wages, my bottom line suffers. I'll be forced to cut jobs, and then everyone loses."

An increase in the minimum wage is unlikely to result in your having to reduce jobs. In 1992, New Jersey substantially raised its minimum wage while neighboring Pennsylvania did not.

Officials expected New Jersey would lose jobs. It did not. New Jersey gained more jobs than Pennsylvania and more businesses expanded.

Here are some of the most important reasons small businesses should support raising the minimum wage:

1. To stop subsidizing our competitors. You know that big-box discount store or fast-food outlet down the highway from you?

Well, you're helping pay their workers. A large percentage of workers at companies you compete with get government assistance: 52% of fast-food workers receive some form of public aid.

A sign directs customers to the drive-thru at a McDonald's restaurant in Des Plaines, Ill., where the state minimum wage is $1 higher than the federal minimum wage. (Photo: Scott Olson, Getty Images)

McDonald's alone costs taxpayers about $1.3 billion a year. In many states, Walmart's employees are the largest group of food stamp and Medicaid recipients.

If these big corporations had to pay a fair wage, their employees could get off government assistance, and you wouldn't be underwriting your competition.

2. To get more customers. People earning minimum wage can't afford to be your customers, my customers, or your customers' customers.

Raising wages for a large number of Americans means more potential customers — and likely would improve the economy for all of us.

3. To enhance the quality and longevity of your employees. Small businesses need good, stable employees.

Paying decent wages reduces turnover, cuts training costs, and enables us to grow our companies.

4. To protect America's long-term stability. As America's middle class shrinks, the potential for unrest grows.

We have not had such a huge gap between the rich and working people in our country since right before the Great Depression.

Demagogues and despots are far more likely to be able to seduce someone who works 60 hours a week and doesn't have enough money to put food on the table, leading to labor and political unrest. A person without enough money in his pocket is also more likely to turn to crime.

5. It's the right thing to do. America has made a basic contract with its workers: If you work full time, follow the rules, be careful with your money then you can have a roof over your head and food on the table.

That contract is being violated. We need to fix big corporations' part of the contract.

I'm no Pollyanna. I run my own business and have to make payroll.

But my business is also dependent on a strong America and a healthy economy. And the minimum wage should be raised to protect both.

Rhonda Abrams is president of The Planning Shop and publisher of books for entrepreneurs. Her most recent book is Entrepreneurship: A Real-World Approach. Register for Rhonda's free newsletter at PlanningShop.com. Twitter: @RhondaAbrams. Facebook: facebook.com/RhondaAbramsSmallBusiness.Copyright Rhonda Abrams 2014.

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1dX0s5R