COLUMBUS, Ohio -- A proposal in Gov. John Kasich's budget would eliminate Medicaid coverage for three programs available to some women, raising concerns from an advocate for women's health and abortion rights.

The state, however, says the changes are needed as a result of Medicaid expansion in the state and the impact of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act.

The changes would affect three subsidized insurance programs now available to women earning up to 200 percent of the federal poverty threshold.

Those three programs involve coverage for family planning, breast and cervical cancer service and health and well care coverage for pregnant women.

The reason they would be defunded is that they have been made unnecessary by the ACA, also known as Obamacare, and the subsidized insurance on the federal exchange it provides, as well the expansion of Medicaid to cover Ohioans with incomes up to 138 percent of poverty, the state said.

"Now, with extended Medicaid coverage and the presence of the federal marketplace, all individuals have an avenue to acquire health care coverage," said Sam Rossi, communications director for the Ohio Department of Medicaid. "We feel these changes are required to further modernize the Medicaid program to fit in this new landscape."

Kellie Copeland, executive director for NARAL Pro-Choice Ohio, while acknowledging that women not covered by Medicaid should have insurance through another source, such as the federal exchange, said the fear is that some won't and they'll fall through the cracks.

That, she said, could lead to more serious and expensive health issues in the long run.

"A single, pregnant woman without children can currently get care up to an income level of $31,460. Cut these programs and she only qualifies if her income is under $21,707," Copeland said. "How many pregnant women will fall through that gap?"

Insurance through the health exchange is only available through the open enrollment period and about 11 percent of the population remains uninsured, Copeland said.

"Inadvertently what they're doing is if a woman gets pregnant and is not in the exchange, she would have to wait until an open enrollment period."

Without coverage, a pregnant woman might not be able to afford prenatal care for her unborn child, Copeland said. The lack of insurance also could complicate treatment for serious health issues the mother could face, such as gestational diabetes or preeclampsia.

The proposed changes, if included in the budget that must be approved before July, would not take effect until next January. People in the programs for pregnant women or for breast and cervical cancer would be grandfathered in and continue their Medicaid coverage until it expired under current rules.

Those in the family planning program should be covered under either expanded Medicaid or the federal exchange. According to the state, enrollment in that program has been declining as people have obtained insurance from one of those two sources.

The state estimates the change would save $7.4 million in its share of the Medicaid costs in 2016 and another $31.4 million in 2017.