President Barack Obama's gambit to financially entice more states to follow Louisiana's lead and expand Medicaid coverage will be facing a tortuous climb through Congress in the coming weeks.

The third-ranking Republican in the House of Representatives, Majority Whip Steve Scalise, R-Jefferson, said in a recent interview that he doesn't see the president's most recent offer standing much chance of passing either GOP-led chamber.

"For the president to suggest that Congress give him billions of more dollars that just don't exist, to keep funding a broken system, isn't a viable answer. And I don't see much support in Congress to change that law," Scalise said Friday (Jan. 22). "If anything, there's clearly strong support to repeal (Obamacare) and work on strong reforms that actually lower costs and put patients back in charge of their health care."

Obama proposed in Baton Rouge earlier this month that the federal government cover all the costs of expanding Medicaid for three years, starting as soon as the holdout states agree to the program. It's a deal that reflects the terms given to those states that signed up for Medicaid expansion at its onset in 2014. The White House has said Obama plans to send his proposal to Congress on Feb. 9.

Louisiana became the 31st state to agree to expand Medicaid under the Affordable Care Act when Gov. John Bel Edwards agreed to it the day after taking office.

Scalise raised several objections Republicans often cite when arguing against the expansion of Medicaid and so-called "Obamacare" laws in general: that the Medicaid expansion not only drives up health care costs for participating states, but also that it leads to misuse of the traditional hospital system.

"The president's proposal to try to force millions more people on it is misguided because it's ultimately going to result in a lot more people going to the emergency room," Scalise said. "In fact, in the states that have done it, they've seen increases in emergency room visits because the people that have gotten on the expanded Medicaid, for the most part, can't get a doctor to treat them."

Visits to emergency rooms appear to have increased under the Medicaid expansion in other states, but reasons as to why vary among the health care system's interest groups.

The American College of Emergency Physicians reported an uptick in emergency room visits last year as a sign that too few primary care physicians are willing to treat Medicaid patients because of low reimbursement rates. Without the expansion, the average federal payment for Medicaid costs to states is about 57 percent, with wealthier states receiving less and poorer states more. Louisiana gets a little more than 62 percent.

It may be true that more people are using emergency rooms -- or emergency departments, as hospitals prefer to describe them -- under the Affordable Care Act. But there has been a steep drop in the number of uninsured patients passing through those automatic sliding doors, too, said Adam Searing of Georgetown University's Center for Children and Families.

"They are still coming into the emergency room, but suddenly, they can pay their bills," he said.

The problem now shifts to one of education, Searing continued.

"The challenge has been that you want to educate people that now have coverage that they don't need to show up at the emergency room -- that they shouldn't go to the emergency room -- but that they go to their primary care (provider)."

The Kaiser Family Foundation found that enrollment in states that expanded Medicaid jumped 18 percent last year, and costs associated with that rose 17.7 percent, on average. But that same study found that state Medicaid costs grew at about half the rate in expansion states than it did in those that refused the program — a product of the federal match.

Should Obama's proposal fail, Louisiana will still pay far less for patients under the Medicaid expansion than it does presently for recipients. At most, the state would be on the hook for 10 percent of the cost of the expanded part of the program. State lawmakers last year passed a bill crafted by the Louisiana Hospital Association that requires hospitals to pool their money to cover the state's share.

It's possible Louisiana could see additional savings should some current Medicaid recipients qualify under the terms of the expansion, which is an option for families with a median household income up to 138 percent of the national poverty rate. That translates to an annual salary of $33,465 for a family of four.