If it was up to me, I would dump the elephant as the GOP mascot and adopt the dinosaur instead. The Grand Old Party lives in an era when men believed that women weren’t smart enough to make their own medical decisions and when women were less valuable economically than men. And Republicans wonder why so few women vote for them.

Last Tuesday was Equal Pay Day, and President Obama used the occasion to issue an executive order that businesses doing business with the federal government couldn’t punish their employees for sharing information about salaries. The next day, the Senate had the chance to extend the requirement to all businesses and came up empty when every single Republican member of the Senate voted to block an up or down vote on the Paycheck Fairness Act.

[See a collection of political cartoons on the Republican Party.]

Keep in mind that the Paycheck Fairness Act did not require businesses to pay women at the same rate as men who do the same jobs. The legislation only kept businesses from punishing employees for sharing salary information. Strangely, self styled libertarian Sen. Rand Paul, R-Ky., voted against the bill to give workers more freedom.

Data from the U.S. Census shows that women make only 77 cents for every dollar a man makes. And that isn’t likely to change much unless Congress acts to make sure our daughters, sisters and mothers get paid on the level of men who do the same work. The private sector hasn’t moved an inch in the last 20 years to right this wrong. The ratio of female pay to male pay has been struck in the 70 percent range since 1992. Somebody had to do something and that’s what 53 Senate Democrats tried to do last week.

The headlines after the vote were not pretty for the GOP. The Washington Post headline was “Senate Republicans Block Equal Pay.” And if you think it was only the “liberal media” that dumped on the GOP, the conservative Wall Street Journal ran the same header.

[Read blogger Peter Roff on the GOP's tone deafness on women's issues.]

Hey guys! This is what your wives, sisters and children can look forward to because of Republican obstruction: Based on calculations made by the National Women’s Law Center from the Census data, women can expect to earn lose nearly half a million dollars ($464,314 ) due to the pay gap over the course of a 40-year work life. Education doesn’t help either. Women with college or post graduate degrees earn only 71 percent of the money that their male counterparts are paid.

Last week, the Republican minority leader in the Senate, Mitch McConnell, criticized Majority Leader Harry Reid for calling “show” votes on issues like equal pay. McConnell also described Democratic efforts to secure equal pay as “blowing wet kisses to women.” McConnell voted against similar legislation in 2010 and 2012. McConnell may be the most vulnerable senator up for re-election this year and his formidable challenger is a woman, Kentucky Secretary of State Alison Lundergan Grimes. That should be fun to watch. If Grimes does unseat the minority leader, she will be one of the lucky women who earn the same salary as men do.

[See a collection of political cartoons on Congress.]

If the GOP was a TV show, it would be “The Flintstones," “your average stone age family.” Along with last week’s vote by the GOP-dominated House to cut spending on child care and nutrition assistance for women and infant children, the GOP is well on the way to losing its own war against women.