JOLIET, Ill. — With a daring drive through the middle, Brad Keselowski showed how badly he wants to win another NASCAR series championship.

Keselowski used a three-wide pass of Kyle Larson and Kevin Harvick at Chicagoland Speedway on Sunday to win the opening race of the Chase for the Sprint Cup championship. The victory automatically advanced Keselowski into the second round of the 10-race Chase, which will eliminate four drivers every third race under NASCAR’s new format.

As his Team Penske team celebrated Sunday in Victory Lane, Keselowski moved his name on a bracket-type Chase grid into the next round.

“Man, the next two weeks are going to be a lot of fun, knowing we don’t have to worry too much and we are going to move up,” said Keselowski, who opened the Chase as the top-seeded driver.

As Larson and Harvick staged a hold-your-breath, side-by-side race for the lead following a restart with only 19 laps remaining, Keselowski charged through the middle to grab control of the race.

He easily pulled away from the field while Harvick and Larson had their hands full trying to hold off longtime star Jeff Gordon.

“I saw Kyle and Kevin racing each other really hard. They were aggressively side drafting. I was waiting for an opportunity to strike, and it came,” Keselowski said. “The car stuck and everything came together.”

Contact between Danica Patrick and Ricky Stenhouse Jr. set up one final restart with six laps remaining, but Kese- lowski had no trouble as he surged to the front for his second consecutive victory and Sprint Cup Series-leading fifth win of the year.

How Martin Truex Jr. fared

• The first-year driver for Denver’s Furniture Row Racing team took advantage of a late caution to finish 14th.

• Truex was hovering around the mid-20s and was down two laps when the caution flag flew up on the 231st lap. With other cars pitting with about 50 miles to go, crew chief Todd Berrier encouraged Truex to stay on the course as long as possible before making his final pit.

• “Once we got back on the lead lap, that gave us an opportunity to gain track position,” Truex said.