Guitar legends Steve Vai, Zakk Wylde and John 5, along with drum powerhouse Mike Portnoy, bass icon Billy Sheehan and keyboard phenomenon Derek Sherinian are joining forces to play a benefit concert for guitar and keyboard virtuoso Tony MacAlpine, who was recently diagnosed with colon cancer.



The benefit for Tony MacAlpine will take place at the Wiltern Theater in Los Angeles on December 12 at 7:00 p.m., featuring performances from JOHN 5 & THE CREATURES, Zakk Wylde with Mike Portnoy, Billy Sheehan and Derek Sherinian; Steve Vai and band, and culminating in an all-star jam with house band Portnoy, Sheehan, Sherinian, and featuring special guests. Eddie Trunk will serve as master of ceremonies for the night.



In addition to this extraordinary musical event, Steve Vai, John 5, Paul Gilbert, Joe Bonamassa, Steve Lukather, Steve Stevens, and Joe Satriani have all graciously donated personal guitars to be auctioned during the event. In addition, Rudy Sarzo has offered private lessons as an auction item, and Simon Phillips has donated a signature snare. Tony's gear manufacturers Ibanez, Hughes & Kettner, EMG, Ernie Ball, Source Audio and Voodoo Lab have also generously donated equipment to be raffled.



Tony's cancer diagnosis comes on the heels of his wife's diagnosis with breast cancer in June, making the situation even more trying for Tony and his family.



"Tony is a dear friend, an absolutely sweet human being and one of the most talented musicians I've ever worked with," says Mike Portnoy. "We are coming together to help raise money and awareness to help him fight his battle and come out on top!" Adds Steve Vai: "It's a great privilege to take to the stage with my friends Zakk, John, Mike and Billy in support of our dear friend Tony. Tony has always been blessed with an exceptional talent and more so, he's an exceptionally cool guy. It's a great cause and will be a magical evening of guitar extravaganza."



"Tony has been such an inspiration to me," says John 5. "He is an incredible musician and an unbelievable talent. Please let's all come together and beat this!"