If implemented strategically, alternative care delivery models such as accountable care organizations (ACOs), patient-centered medical homes, and integrated delivery networks can improve patient outcomes while reducing costs. Until now, these models have made the greatest inroads into commercial and Medicare populations, but increasingly, they’re being employed within the Medicaid space.

While forming risk-based entities among Medicaid providers could be an effective way to better manage the care of low-income populations, the risk of unintended consequences cannot be ignored. A key hedge against these consequences is better use of patient data.

Payment and delivery reform in the safety net

One of the most important provisions of the Affordable Care Act has been the expansion of health coverage to low-income families through the Medicaid program. As a result, some 29 states, as well as the District of Columbia, have grown their Medicaid programs. Not surprisingly, alternative delivery models are beginning to penetrate the expanded Medicaid marketplace in the form of PCMHs, Medicaid health homes, and Medicaid ACOs.

BazinskyMany patients seeking medical care from safety net providers have complex medical and social needs, low levels of health literacy, and priorities—like housing and food—that compete with taking care of their health. And because Medicaid populations often have heavy burdens of physical and mental illness, these alternative delivery models could have a dramatic impact on healthcare cost and quality.

Already, there are some notable examples of these experiments, including one of the first Medicaid ACOs in the country—the three-year-old Federally Qualified Health Center Urban Health Network (FUHN). FUHN is a coalition of 10 federally-qualified health centers operating at 40 sites across Minneapolis and St. Paul, Minnesota. Its adult patients have chronic disease burdens that are typical for a Medicaid population—with 26% suffering from a depressive condition, 17% with asthma, and 12% with diabetes.

Next: The opportunity for Medicaid ACOs