Topics: 23andMe, DNA, Genetics, Privacy, Technology News, Life News, News

On Nov. 22, 2013, the FDA sent a now-infamous letter to the genetic research startup 23andMe, ordering the company to stop marketing some of its personal DNA testing kits. In its letter, the agency told 23andMe that it was concerned about the possibility of erroneous test results, about false positives and false negatives. The FDA warned that false positives – for example, being told that one has a high risk of breast cancer when really one doesn’t – might lead customers to seek expensive testing or medical treatment that they don’t really need. False negatives – which are just the opposite – might lead customers to ignore serious health problems or deviate from a prescribed treatment regime. The company had been out of contact with the FDA since May of 2013, and had not filed the required information to allay the bureau’s concerns.

When word about the letter got out, the ever-ready machine of Internet journalism whirred quickly to life. Defenders of the genetic research firm argued that the information, if used properly and with a physician’s supervision, is not only a wondrous tool for protecting health and prolonging life, but a fascinating look into the mysteries of one’s genetic code. Besides, they continued, the technology is here to stay; fighting it will be like lashing the sea to stop the tide. Critics, however, shared the FDA’s worries that the company’s products might drive a frenzy of self-diagnosis and hypochondria. In their view, putting unfiltered diagnostic information in an anxiety-prone person’s hands could be dangerous – better to leave it to the trained judgment of a licensed doctor. Neurologists have reported, for example, that otherwise healthy twenty-somethings, upon getting back their 23andMe results, have marched into their clinics demanding MRIs to check for signs of Alzheimer’s.

But how does 23andMe’s process actually work? Upon receiving a saliva sample from a customer, 23andMe draws statistical inferences about that person’s likelihood of having certain diseases based on what are called “single nucleotide polymorphisms” or “SNPs” (pronounced “snips”). A SNP is a genetic mutation at a single, specific location along a person’s DNA strand. Rather than the base pair that the vast majority of the population has for a given location, an individual with a SNP has a different base pair, which can lead to anomalies in the production of amino acids (i.e., proteins in the body). When 23andMe finds certain SNPs in someone’s DNA, it then cross-references its vast databases of medical literature, which contain findings from thousands of studies showing correlations between certain SNPs and certain diseases. To guard against misinforming its customers, 23andMe maintains precise standards about which studies make it into its databases. The political fight about the company, thus, is drawing the troops into a swamp – into the muddy marsh of arguing over whether consumers are intelligent enough to process this sort of sophisticated statistical and epidemiological information on their own. The question quickly becomes not about 23andMe’s little kits, but about government paternalism more generally.

Legally speaking, however, the entire argument is moot. There is no need to wade into the muck of one’s feelings about big-government paternalism or the perils of new technologies – at least not right now. And that is for a simple reason: The FDA is right. According to the law, 23andMe’s kit is a “medical device,” which federal law defines as any product useful in diagnosis or treatment, which means that the kit is subject to the FDA’s regulations about the marketing of medical products. Those regulations require 23andMe to provide the FDA with information about its statistical methods, to conduct studies of its products’ effects, and to address the agency’s concerns about the risks of erroneous test results. It hasn’t done so. In the real world, thus, 23andMe will have to comply the FDA’s guidelines, and it will have to find some way of reassuring the government that its brightly-colored little kit is not actually Pandora’s box. From a legal perspective, that is the end of the discussion.

Which is not, of course, to say that it should end the discussion. There is another aspect of 23andMe’s business, one which has received less attention from the media (with the exception of an excellent writeup in Scientific American by Charles Seife), but which is, in actuality, both equally troubling and equally fascinating. The company also houses a sizable research wing. 23andMe intends to aggregate the genetic information it receives and correlate that information with self-supplied data from customers about their biological traits – for instance, whether they clasp their hands with left thumb over right or vice versa; whether black coffee tastes bitter to them; or, more seriously, whether they have Parkinson’s disease. According to its website, the company hopes to use this information to find new ways to predict the incidence of disease in the population.

If the project is successful, 23andMe’s roof would shelter a veritable warehouse of genetic information, mapping correlations between phenotypes, SNPs and diseases across a huge swath of the population (albeit not a particularly diverse swath, given the company’s likely market demographics). To date, 23andMe says that it has received saliva samples from approximately 500,000 people – a figure many times the size of those employed in most large-scale genetic studies – and the company has only existed since 2006. Once it clears its name with the FDA, the amount of genetic information available to the firm’s research arm will only grow. “The long game here is not to make money selling kits, although the kits are essential to get the base-level data,” said Patrick Chung, a 23andMe board member. And the company’s privacy policy, it’s worth noting, makes no promises that it will not share aggregate-level genetic data with its vendors and affiliates, such as the company that manufactures the chips used in processing saliva samples.

In a dashed-off writeup, Ezra Klein blithely opined that the company’s research wing is simply “an experiment in big-data genetics.” Citing Harvard political science professor Daniel Carpenter, who recently published a lengthy history of the FDA, Klein argued that new technologies like 23andMe’s might provide a salubrious occasion to reevaluate how the law deals with cutting-edge bioinformatics. (How exactly the rules should change, though, Klein shrewdly declined to say.) There might be something to the point, but saying that we might possibly want to eventually give some consideration to maybe letting the political process (in consultation with appropriate experts, of course) arrive at some new rules about how such products might or might not be regulated is, ultimately, not to say much at all. It is almost as if Klein sees that there is a steep cliff off which he might take a sharp plunge into a sea of difficult and frightening questions, and decides instead simply to gesture offhandedly in its general direction.

But the only way forward is downward. Whatever happens to 23andMe, the idea of aggregating and cross-referencing huge amounts of genetic information is now a cultural reality. A private corporation, backed by some of the largest tech companies in the world (including Google), is planning to do genetic research through statistical modeling on an unprecedented scale. The implications of such a venture are profound, but the national conversation about the company has focused almost exclusively on what consumers will do with the information. This is not to say that it is not perfectly reasonable to have such a conversation. In fact, it is even reasonable to slosh around in the muddy waters of the swamp – the battle over paternalism and the authority of the medical establishment. But if we dare not ask, for example, whether an advanced, large-scale statistical model of human genetics might not be used to make predictions about, say, criminal behavior, or academic success, or lifetime income, who will? Let us dare to dive into the sea.

To be clear, at present, 23andMe’s databases are used for properly epidemiological purposes. And the company seems to be quite serious about protecting the privacy of customer data and fostering trust. Identifying information, for example, is encrypted and stored separately from genetic material. I am not, that is, accusing them of wrongdoing – of conspiring to create a genetic dystopia like the ones envisioned in films like “Gattaca” and “Minority Report.” Rather, I am suggesting that the idea of a massive genetic database holds all the ominous potential, if not used with extreme circumspection, to lead exactly there.