WASHINGTON — The U.S. Supreme Court on Monday declined to intervene in the legal struggle over Jim Thorpe's remains, dealing a blow to the athlete's sons and Oklahoma tribe that sought to relocate them to the state.

In the first day of its new term, the court also rejected review of an Indian gaming case originally filed by Oklahoma Attorney General Scott Pruitt to block a casino in Broken Arrow.

And Chesapeake Energy Corp. won the final round against an institutional investor that claimed the company should have disclosed more information in public statements about some financial

transactions.

The high court typically rejects dozens of cases on the first day of the new term without comment. Justices accept a very small percentage of the cases presented for review.

Thorpe case

Among those cases on Monday was an appeal from a federals appeal court in Pennsylvania regarding Jim Thorpe's remains.

Jim Thorpe — who was born in Indian Territory, what is now Oklahoma, and was a member of the Sac and Fox Nation — is considered one of the greatest athletes of the 20th century; he won gold medals in the decathlon and pentathlon in the 1912 Olympics and played professional baseball and football.

Thorpe died without a will in 1953, and his wife made a deal with two merging small towns in Pennsylvania to have his remains buried there. Thorpe had gone to college in Pennsylvania but had no connection to the towns, which became the Borough of Jim Thorpe.

In recent years, the Sac and Fox Nation and Thorpe's sons have fought a legal battle — revolving around the Native American Graves Protection and Repatriation Act — to return Thorpe's remains to his tribal homelands in Stroud.

The tribe has had a broad range of influential allies, including the Native American Rights Fund and the Becket Fund for Religious Liberty, which represented Hobby Lobby in its successful challenge to the Affordable Care Act.

Last year, the federal appeals court in Pennsylvania ruled against the tribe and Thorpe sons, saying the Native American Graves Protection and Repatriation Act “was intended as a shield against further injustices to Native Americans ... It was not intended to be wielded as a sword to settle familial disputes within Native American families.”

Tulsa attorney Stephen R. Ward, who represented the Thorpe brothers and the tribe, expressed disappointment on Monday that the Supreme Court declined to review the appeals court decision and said it apparently ends the legal efforts to apply the federal law on American Indian graves to the Thorpe situation.

“The Borough of Jim Thorpe has attempted to use these remains for more than 60 years as a commercial attraction, for economic development, and as a kind of mascot, and this is precisely the kind of disrespect for American Indian people's rights and beliefs that NAGPRA was intended to remedy,” Ward said.

The tribe's principal chief, Kay Rhoads, said Monday: “The denial of Jim Thorpe's stated request to be buried on Indian land within the Sac and Fox Reservation is remembered in our tribe and elsewhere in Indian country as a serious injustice. For now, it appears we will have to continue living with this memory, and without tools under the law to remedy this abuse of our human and religious rights.”

The mayor of the town did not respond to a request for comment.

Gaming case

The court's rejection of the gaming case won't have any immediate impact. The Kialegee Tribal Town abandoned its proposal to open a casino in Broken Arrow after the National Indian Gaming Commission disapproved it in 2012.

But Pruitt wanted clarification from the Supreme Court about the legal steps states can take when they believe a tribe's casino plans violate federal law. Pruitt argued that the federal appeals court in Denver had misapplied the Supreme Court's guidelines in the casino case.

Chesapeake case

The United Food and Commercial Workers Union Local 880 Pension Fund, which represented several investors suing Chesapeake Energy, did not win at any level of the U.S. court system.

The pension fund contended that Chesapeake failed to adequately disclose its hedging strategy to deal with volatile natural gas prices and former CEO Aubrey McClendon's margin loans using most of his company stock as collateral.

A district judge in Oklahoma City ruled for the company, and the federal appeals court in Denver upheld that ruling.