Kansas hospitals and health care advocates pointed to an Indiana plan as a possible way to expand Medicaid, but a spokeswoman for Gov. Sam Brownback shot it down quickly.

Jeff Korsmo, president and CEO of Via Christi Health System in Wichita, said Indiana is an example of a Republican-led state that came up with its own solution for the Medicaid coverage gap. People need insurance to receive the “right care at the right time in the right location,” he said. The Kansas Health Foundation hosted a seminar on the Indiana plan at the building it shares with Kansas Leadership Center in Wichita on Tuesday morning.

“We know it has to be a solution that works for us,” he said.

The Affordable Care Act, also known as Obamacare, included a provision that would expand Medicaid to people earning up to 133 percent of the federal poverty line. The Supreme Court made the expansion optional, and Kansas hasn’t decided to do so. Some states have submitted alternative plans to the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) for approval.

In Kansas, Medicaid, also known as KanCare, is open only to adults earning 32 percent of the poverty line or less if they are pregnant, disabled or have a child. Requirements are looser for low-income children. Adults with incomes between 32 percent and 138 percent of the poverty line fall into the coverage “gap” because they make too much to qualify for Medicaid, but not enough to qualify for tax credits that make it affordable to purchase insurance through the exchange.

Doug Leonard, president of the Indiana Hospital Association, told an audience in Wichita that the Indiana program includes premiums on a sliding scale or copayments for most people. The monthly premiums range from $4.32 for an individual with a monthly income of $216 to $40.42 for a family of four with a monthly income of $2,021. Copayments were $4 for outpatient services, $75 for inpatient services and up to $25 if a person visited an emergency room for a nonemergency.

“That was critically important to (Indiana Gov. Mike Pence), that people who were covered show personal accountability,” he said.

Other provisions that aren’t part of traditional Medicaid included referring covered people for workforce services if they didn’t have jobs and raising provider payments, Leonard said. Payments have been a long-term sticking point, with some doctors declining to take Medicaid because of its low reimbursement rate.

Indiana paid for the state’s portion of the expansion by raising the tobacco tax and contributions by hospitals, which benefited from lower rates of uncompensated care, Leonard said. It also included a provision to ensure the state wouldn’t be left with the bill if the federal government decided not to continue funding at least 90 percent of the cost of expanding Medicaid, he said.

“We have a feature built in where the plan will terminate if the federal government falls below that 90 percent,” he said.

Eileen Hawley, spokeswoman for Brownback, said the plan would be a nonstarter for the governor.

“Indiana’s policy is not right for Kansas as it does not include a work requirement for able-bodied adults, a plan to first provide services to disabled citizens who are already eligible for additional assistance, and depends upon an unreliable funding source,” she said.

Four members of the Legislature participated in a panel following the Indiana presentation: Sen. Jeff King, R-Independence; Sen. Michael O’Donnell, R-Wichita; Rep. Dan Hawkins, R-Wichita; and Rep. Jim Ward, D-Wichita. About 25 other members of the Legislature attended. Hawkins expressed skepticism of the odds of getting an expanded version of KanCare through federal authorities.

“CMS is a very difficult organization to work with,” he said. “CMS never gives you anything you want.”

Ward and King expressed optimism the Indiana plan could be a starting place for crafting a Kansas plan, though both acknowledged a traditional Medicaid expansion would be politically impossible.

“I’m very optimistic and hopeful what I’ve heard from Indiana,” King said. “We have to address that gap. We have to find creative ways to do it.”