The idea is simple enough. Bring together a bunch of women with a love of sewing and quilting. Have them share their skills with one another and build a supportive social atmosphere.

But Sew Loved is much more than your typical sewing circle. "It's transformative," says Vicki Miles, the nonprofit's founder and director. Miles started the group in late 2012, offering sewing and quilting classes to underserved women in South Bend's near west side 46601 ZIP code.

Since its creation, Sew Loved has grown quickly, registering as a nonprofit in 2015 and now having almost 30 members. But the goal has never changed: to provide a hands-on program to enhance the lives of women by nurturing self-confidence and self-esteem, Miles says.

And if you sit down and chat with the women who make up Sew Loved, you'll understand how through the art of sewing and quilting, a group of women can have a profound affect on each other's lives.

Eileen Wade's eyes light up when she talks about the tight-knit group. Wade jokes she became part of Sew Loved because she was nosey, always walking by seeing the group of women, curious about what they were doing.

One day she finally decided to walk in, she says, and was welcomed with open arms.

"We are like a family," Wade says. "It's very special."

Quilting for her, she says, is a way to relax and it gives her a chance to bring out her inner artist. And what Wade says really gives her joy is that what she's doing will help others.

Many of the quilts the women make are donated, either directly to places like homeless centers or churches, or to things like auction fundraisers. That's what makes Sew Loved even more special, says Miles. Not only do the women participating benefit, but others benefit from their work.

And like many of the women who join Sew Loved, Wade says, she was a beginner at sewing and quilting. Thanks to Miles and other experienced volunteers who pass on their skills, though, Wade can't count the number of quilts she's made.

"She's our mother hen," Wade says of Miles.

Since starting Sew Loved, Miles says she can't believe the changes she has seen in people. There are women who were introverted and didn't work well with others, she says, who are now mentors to newer members, patiently teaching them their skills.

"The sewing for us is the tool," Miles says, "but it's not the end. It's about speaking love. Giving them friends and support."

But today, Sew Loved is celebrating its new location with a ribbon cutting at 103 W. Wayne St., in downtown South Bend.

The group became so popular, it grew too big for its previous space. For about eight months the women weren't able to meet while Miles searched for a new facility. Their new space couldn't be better, Miles says.

They started renovating and moving into the space in January, and now there's room for about 25 women to be working at a time, all in an open, bright environment.

Since women don't typically come to every session, Miles says she's doesn't foresee having more women than the space can serve. And any woman who wants to join is welcome, no matter what level of experience. Those who know how to quilt can bring their own projects and help others when needed, or women can come to learn the art and become part of the family, Miles says.

The next focus, though, will be serving a younger crowd. Starting in August, Sew Loved will provide an elective sewing class for the nearby South Bend Crossing school. It will start out small in the beginning, but Miles says she hopes to expand it into multiple levels of classes.

Though Miles jokes the girls will be hanging out with a group of grandmas, the class will allow students to build supportive relationships.

"Beyond teaching them to sew, it's having someone they can trust who they can talk to," she says.

Lincoln Wright's column runs on Wednesdays and Sundays. Contact him at LWright@sbtinfo.com or 574-235-6324. You can also talk retail at Facebook.com/thebasket and at Twitter.com/marketbasket.

Learn more

To join Sew Loved, learn more or donate to the nonprofit, visit www.sew-loved.org or Facebook.com/sewloveinc.