More than 1,600 patients had to wait 30 days or more for their first appointments at the Denver VA hospital, according to the Veterans Affairs Department.

An audit of 731 VA hospitals and large outpatient clinics across the country found that more than 57,000 patients are still waiting for initial medical appointments at VA hospitals and clinics 90 days or more after requesting them, the Veterans Affairs Department said Monday.

An additional 64,000 who enrolled in the VA health care system over the past 10 years have never had appointments.

Among sites flagged for further review and investigation are the Colorado Springs Community Based Outpatient Clinic, and a facility in Cheyenne, Wyo.

“Where misconduct is confirmed, appropriate personnel actions will promptly be pursued,” according to the audit.

Colorado legislators roundly condemned the agency’s shortcomings and promised to improve it.

Democrat Mark Udall, said the audit shows the need for reform at the VA.

“I am committed to ensuring that the VA system works for Colorado’s veterans,” Udall said in a statement. “That means bringing new leadership to the department and passing the bipartisan VA-reform bill to allow veterans to promptly receive the care they’ve earned and confront the problems at facilities in Grand Junction, Colorado Springs and elsewhere across the country.”

Republican Rep. Scott Tipton said he was outraged by the findings, and reflect complaints he had heard from constituents.

“It is deeply troubling that ailing vets have been forced to wait so long to receive the care they were promised or discarded altogether, enduring additional pain and suffering and even losing their lives as a result. The problems facing the VA are systemic and need to be addressed immediately,” he said in a statement.

“We cannot relent in pressing the agency to correct these problems,” Democratic Sen. Michael Bennet said in a statement. “The VA must do better, and soon. It needs to be more responsive, more transparent and more efficient. And it needs to improve its process for building new facilities – like the one in Aurora. Our veterans have earned that.”

Republican Rep. Mike Coffman, a Marine Corps veteran who sits on the House Veterans Affairs Committee, said the findings are unacceptable.

“It will take a lot of work to change a culture of bureaucratic incompetence and corruption that is ingrained in the VA. “I look forward to finding a bipartisan solution,” Coffman said in a statement.

The audit found that the agency’s complicated appointment process created confusion among scheduling clerks and supervisors, the department said.

The audit said a 14-day goal for seeing first-time patients was unattainable given the growing demand among veterans for health care and poor planning. The VA has since abandoned that goal.

At the Grand Junction veterans hospital, 115 patients waited 90 days or more for their first appointment.

New patients waited an average 44.64 days for an appointment at Denver compared to 3.47 days for an established patient.

The audit said 13 percent of VA schedulers reported supervisors telling them to falsify appointment dates to make waiting times appear shorter.

Tom McGhee: 303-954-1671, tmcghee@denverpost.com or twitter.com/dpmcghee