Huppke: Joe the Plumber more of an Everyman than ever

You remember Joe, right? He's the baldheaded Ohio everyman who asked a presidential candidate named Barack Obama about his tax plan back in 2008, prompting Obama to say, "I think when you spread the wealth around, it's good for everybody."

Like most patriotic Americans, I've been a fan of Joe the Plumber ever since Fox News told me I should be a fan of Joe the Plumber.

Joe Wurzelbacher, also known as "Joe the Plumber," stands onstage at a campaign rally in Ohio in this file photo taken on Oct. 30, 2008. (Brian Snyder, Reuters)

That off-the-cuff comment confirmed everyone's fear of Obama as a socialist hellbent on destroying America. And it propelled Samuel "Joe the Plumber" Wurzelbacher to fame as an honest, straight-talking American who should be taken very seriously.

He became a fixture during the 2008 campaign, and I loved him because he was pro-America, pro-freedom and anti-union. Not only did Joe not belong to a plumbers union, he wasn't even a licensed plumber. Take that, big government!

In 2009, he barnstormed Pennsylvania in opposition to the pro-union Employee Free Choice Act, which he boldly did not read or understand, telling a blogger, "I know a little about a lot of things; I don't know a lot about everything."

And in 2011, he stood before an anti-union crowd in Madison, Wis., saying, "Unions don't deserve anything. You work for it yourself; that's what America is about!"

I became a major Joe the Plumber fan-boy, scooping up Joe T-shirts, bumper stickers and coffee mugs and evenly distributing them among my friends and family members.

So you can imagine how crushed I was this week when I learned that my hero has taken a job at a Chrysler plant that requires workers to join — ack! — a nasty, Democrat-loving union. On his humble website, JoeForAmerica.com, Mr. the Plumber wrote: "In order to work for Chrysler, you are required to join the Union, in this case UAW. There's no choice — it's a union shop — the employees voted to have it that way and in America that's the way it is."

Those dastardly liberals have gotten to him.

He later writes "It's an American worker's right to unionize for sure" and "Anyone who knows me would never dare disparage all members of unions because they know I'd rip into them." Then why didn't you rip into you back in 2011 when you were saying unions don't deserve anything?!?!

Once again, it seems a hero has fallen. Much like my favorite governor, Sarah Palin, who suddenly decided to stop governor-ing. And my favorite almost-president, Donald Trump, who decided not to run for president so he could devote more time to tweeting nasty comments from atop his solid-gold toilet.

Come to think of it, even my favorite villain has been disappointing. People like Joe and Sarah and Donald promised me that Barack HUSSEIN Obama would turn America into an apocalyptic nightmare, with children sent to socialist reprogramming camps and people marrying cats and Christianity outlawed in favor of something terrorist-sounding.

But everything still looks pretty much the same. Nobody came for my guns, even though I stocked up and stored them in my official Joe the Plumber, Obama-proof gun cabinet.