ALEXANDRIA, Va., Aug. 4, 2015 /PRNewswire/ -- Phase One (www.pocg.com) announced today that Raymond J. Vogel, Jr., M.H.S.A., has joined the global IT firm as the Director of Healthcare Development to support new and existing healthcare clientele in both government and private sectors. Vogel leaves the Department of Veterans Affairs as Deputy Director for Development within eBusiness Solutions, VA's eCommerce unit, which conducts more than $3B in Electronic Data Interchange (EDI) Transactions.

"For his entire career, Ray has driven strategy and solutions in support of population health management -- his experience and track record across key segments within the industry allows us to expand our ongoing focus on healthcare," says Jerad Speigel, CEO of Phase One.

Vogel will be responsible for developing healthcare client solutions in Phase One's managed care, healthcare provider, and pharmaceutical segments. From market and performance metrics to digital health content and delivery, the common value for clients remains measurable, improved population health outcomes through more effective use of information and technology.

"Their strategic focus on population health solutions and their current, proven capabilities are what make Phase One ideal for me, personally," says Vogel. "Uncertainty related to reimbursement and regulation, particularly the conversion to the ICD-10 code set, landmark provisions of the Affordable Care Act, and increasing cybersecurity threats all confront today's healthcare industry. My role will immediately support and develop Phase One's consulting and system solutions which help clients attain their goals despite these risks."

Vogel has held various senior- and executive-level positions across long-term care, acute care, managed care, and federal beneficiary population health industries. He has worked for MultiCare, Holy Cross Health System (now part of Catholic Healthcare East/Trinity Healthcare), United Health Group, and the Department of Veterans Affairs. He also founded AristaCare, a next-generation Accountable Care Organization serving Managed Medicare beneficiaries.

Vogel holds a Master's degree in Health Services Administration from the George Washington University and a Bachelor of Science in Biology from Wheeling Jesuit University.

ABOUT PHASE ONE

Phase One is a global provider of technology solutions that seeks to radically change the way IT is planned and deployed. Today's IT application technologies have greatly changed the way solutions can enable services to citizens and empower commercial enterprises. As a leader in IT planning, Agile development, and platform-as-a-service (PaaS) applications, Phase One is focused on implementing modern technologies that enable modern societies.

Media Contact:

Collin Klamper

(703) 888-4865

cklamper@phaseonecg.com

Logo - http://photos.prnewswire.com/prnh/20150611/222627LOGO

SOURCE Phase One