By Bobby Harrison

Daly Journal Jackson Bureau

JACKSON – The Mississippi Adequate Education Program, the subject of a litany of legislative fights over the last 12 years, will be much easier to fully fund if changes proposed by Lt. Gov. Tate Reeves come to fruition.

It would take $80 million less to fully fund the Adequate Education Program if it is funded based on the average cost of operating A and B districts, as Reeves has suggested. The current formula uses the average cost of operating C-level districts.

State Superintendent Carey Wright recently provided details of how various potential changes made to the funding formula would affect the amount of money the local school districts receive from the state. Wright said the calculations were requested by members of the Legislature.

“I think they are genuinely trying to come up with a formula that makes everybody happy,” said Wright, adding legislators were trying to ensure all districts were using “best practices.”

The Adequate Education Program is the mechanism used to provide the state’s share of funds needed to pay for the basic operation of local school districts. It covers items ranging from teacher salaries, to utilities, transportation and more. MAEP was passed into law in 1997 and was fully enacted in 2003. It has been fully funded only twice and has been underfunded $1.7 billion since 2008, including $200 million for the current fiscal year.

Numerous legislative battles have occurred through the years over the funding of the program. In general, Democrats have supported more funding for the program while Republicans have said the state cannot afford additional funding.

Initiative 42 that was rejected by voters in November was an effort to reach full funding of MAEP over a period of years.

The Adequate Education Program is designed to provide all school districts with the money needed to operate a C-level, or adequate, school district. That amount of money, by state law, is determined by the state Board of Education by identifying those average school districts and by figuring the average amount of money per pupil they are spending.

Under the formula, it is the responsibility of the state to ensure that each school district receives that average amount of money per pupil. But there is a catch. That cost is split between the state and the local school district with the state providing more of the cost in property-poor school districts and less funding in wealthier districts.

No school district, though, is required to use local funds to pay more than 27 percent of that base student cost, and many poor districts pay much less than that.

The local communities have the option, of course, to contribute much more in local funding toward the operation of the districts and most do. Many say they are forced to because of the perennial underfunding of state funds through MAEP.

Reeves has proposed changing the formula to do the calculations based on the spending level of A and B districts.

Legislators are expected to look at various potential changes to the formula during the current session. For instance, if the formula was changed to calculate the spending level on B-level districts only, it would produce $91 million less for the local school systems, based on information provided by Wright.

Reeves said it makes sense to examine a formula that has been in effect for so long.

“Mississippi should base spending on how effective districts spend tax dollars and incorporate those practices into the formula,” said Laura Hipp, a spokeswoman for the lieutenant governor. “That is why he wants to consider how A and B districts spend money in the formula rather than utilizing spending habits of the average C district.

“It is a fact that A and B districts spend more money in the classroom and less on administration than you find in the C, D, and F districts.”

It is true, based on information provided by the state Department of Education, A and B districts spend less on administration than do C districts.

C districts spend on average $3,007 on instructional costs and $1,003 on administrative costs, while A and B districts spend $3,103 on instruction and $798 on administration, based on information from the 2014-15 school year.

The belief of some is that there is a correlation in that higher performing school districts also are more efficient in their expenditure of funds. Others, though, maintain that the higher performing districts are in many cases larger suburban districts that can perform certain tasks cheaper because of an economy of scale.

At any rate, Sen. Hob Bryan, D-Amory, one of the architects of the Adequate Education Program, says the formula is not producing too much money for Mississippi schools. He pointed out that Mississippi is near the bottom in education spending per pupil.

“The notion that the formula is overfunding education is just plain non-sense,” Bryan said.

Another proposed change legislators requested that the state Department Education run the numbers on was to mandate local school districts to contribute more toward the basic operation of the schools. Based on the amount of the required local match, it could cost the state $100 million less per year to fully fund the program.

bobby.harrison@journalinc.com

Twitter: @BobbyHarrison9