More reasons to smile.

More reasons to smile.

According to the survey, the proportion of working-aged adults without insurance dropped from 20 percent in the late summer of 2013 to 15 percent in the late spring of 2014, a period that corresponds roughly to the beginning and end of open enrollment in the Affordable Care Act’s marketplaces. To put that in more concrete terms, there are still a lot of Americans walking around without health insurance today. But there are about 9.5 million fewer of them than there were last fall, almost certainly because so many people have enrolled in the newly expanded Medicaid program or purchased subsidized insurance through the Obamacare marketplaces.

What was more surprising is that people who got the new coverage were generally happy with the product. Overall, 73 percent of people who bought health plans and 87 percent of those who signed up for Medicaid said they were somewhat or very satisfied with their new health insurance. Seventy-four percent of newly insured Republicans liked their plans. Even 77 percent of people who had insurance before—including members of the much-publicized group whose plans got canceled last year—were happy with their new coverage.

Republicans, still flailing in their efforts to come up with their own healthcare plan, are also going to be flailing when it comes to finding a coherent argument for getting rid of Obamacare in the first place. Their arguments against the law keep being shot down by the reality of its successes. Here's another success: There are 9.5 million fewer uninsured people now, according to a new Commonwealth Fund study.In January, 20 percent of the population under age 65 was uninsured. Now it's 15 percent. So, sorry, Republicans, the law is helping people who were uninsured. But here's another killing data point for their arguments—people who got this new insurance really like it . Even Republicans.Damn, that's impressive, particularly when considering that most of those people have actually used their insurance and it's working for them. About 60 percent of them have been to the doctor alreadyor gotten a prescription with their insurance. In this group, 60 percent say they wouldn't have been able to afford this care if they didn't have their new insurance. No wonder they're happy with it.

That's a lot happily insured people—a lot of people who would be very, very unhappy to see it all taken away by Republicans. So good luck with that one in November, GOP.