Ellen NicKenzie Lawson sits Thursday morning with her dog, Barnaby in Thompson Park in Loveland. Her book, "Smugglers, Bootleggers, and Scofflaws: Prohibition and New York City," is coming out in December. An e-book version of the book already is available. (Shelley Widhalm)

Loveland author Ellen NicKenzie Lawson had to think outside of 90 boxes, literally, when she wrote "Smugglers, Bootleggers, and Scofflaws."

The retired historian researched U.S. Coast Guard records of seized ships and boats to tell the untold story of liquor smuggling in New York City during Prohibition. She wrote the first three chapters of her 158-page book about the vessels, which she found fascinating, but she realized to others "boats are just boats."

"This is a story about human beings, not boats," said Lawson, who moved the stories of those boats to the 16 pages of footnotes at the end of the book

Her book, published by State University of New York Press in Albany, came out in e-book in September and will be in print in December.

Lawson spent three months researching unstudied Coast Guard records from 1920 to 1933 for the New York City area that are stored in boxes in the National Archives. She originally wanted to find information for a book she was writing about the history of Cape Cod, where she spent three summers and learned about the rum running era.

"I was fascinated. Oh, this is fun," Lawson said about her 1998 visit to the National Archives. "It's like reading police blotters of search and rescues."

Change of Focus

Lawson, who has a doctorate in American history, turned her book project, after a falling out with her publisher, into a couple of magazine articles. Her daughter, also a historian, suggested she continue researching the records, but this time for New York City.

Advertisement

She spent another three months on the records, organized alphabetically by vessel name, to study smuggling operations along the coasts of Long Island, the Long Island Sound, the Jersey shore and the Hudson and East rivers, she said.

"Many scholars are merely amused that Prohibition ever existed, embarrassed that the (18th) Amendment was ratified, appalled that it gave a boost to organized crime, and relieved that it was repealed," Lawson said in "Smugglers, Bootleggers, and Scofflaws: Prohibition and New York City."

The 18th Amendment intended to dry up the nation by forbidding the production, transportation and sale of liquor, but did not prohibit the consumption of alcohol, Lawson said in her book. The idea of Prohibition was to solve the perceived abuse of liquor and alcoholism and to ensure a sober workforce, she wrote.

"Excessive drinking became the norm in New York City during Prohibition," she said in the book.

Research Areas

Lawson examines the development of rum row smuggling; explores the emergence of the Broadway Mob from smaller smuggling syndicates; and studies the city's scofflaw population, or the patrons of 30,000 speakeasies and 500 nightclubs. These three groups-- the smugglers, or suppliers; the bootleggers, or middlemen; and the speakeasies, or customers -- represented an informal resistance to the 18th Amendment, which was repealed in 1933 by the passage of the 21st Amendment.

A speakeasy could be as simple as a table, two chairs and a bottle of liquor to something as complicated as an underground drinking club with secret codes, Lawson said in an interview.

"It's kind of staggering the government tells people, 'You can't drink,'" she said.

Over the years, Lawson worked in market research, served as an academic dean and taught history, including at Colorado State University and the University of Colorado after she moved to Colorado in 2004.

She spent seven years off and on writing her book on Prohibition, her fourth published book.

"What I like about writing is revision," she said, adding that she avoids writer's block because she knows she will revise.

As for the research, she likes the creative process and being transported to a different time and place.

"Every time I went to the National Archives, I was transported to the past," Lawson said.

Shelley Widhalm can be reached at 669-5050, ext. 531, or swidhalm@reporter-herald.com. Follow her on Twitter: @ShelleyWidhalm. Read her blog: shelleywidhalm.wordpress.com.