Oh America, you do love a good baseless conspiracy.

The latest? That this year’s flu vaccine doesn’t work. The truth, as usual, is somewhat more nuanced.

It’s anyone’s guess where our nation’s unhealthy distrust of science comes from.

Is is simply a healthy skepticism?

Is it a sign of our historical attachment to relatively intransigent and unforgiving religions (just ask Galileo, who was “pardoned” only a few years back for his crime of suggesting that the earth rotated around the sun, and not the other way around)?

Or has the Republican party’s fixation on fallacy so jaded the American public that no one trust anything any more, least of which scientific “truths” that come from the god-awful guvmint.

We’ve written before about the rather-vocal fringe that claims that vaccines are tools of the devil guaranteed to give your child autism. (Hint: They’re really not, and they really don’t.)

But back to the matter at hand. Dr. Katz over at HuffPo explains that while this year’s flu vaccine may not be the perfect vaccine at preventing the rather-nasty strain of the flu that’s going around, that doesn’t mean that the vaccine is entirely worthless. In fact, the vaccine still may lessen your symptoms even if you do get sick.

And boy is this a nasty strain going around. My cousin, his wife and their kid all got sick. Apparently it’s a nasty 104F fever along with a nasty cough that doesn’t go away for month. My nephew, who’s staying with us, also has it now, and as I have asthma, in addition to some meetings I can’t miss next week, I’m going to get a prescription of Tamiflu, which may, or may not, help either prevent catching the bug, or at least help it not be as severe if I do get it.

I did a little research on Tamiflu, and I won’t say the jury is out on it. But the jury is mixed. While some poo-poo its effectiveness (Tamiflu works by suppressing viral replication), from what I’ve gleaned it does seem to work to a degree. The only question is the trade-off between the risks of the drug vs the benefits. It seems there’s more consenus about using the drug for someone who’s already showing symptoms than for someone who is has been exposed to the virus.

Anyway, I’m on my Tamiflu, as are mom and dad. And flu-ridden nephew is going to get his shortly. So, time will tell. But what a nasty flu this is.