Although the timing of John Boehner's decision, announced Friday, to step down as House Speaker and to resign his congressional seat at the end of October caught many by surprise, his resignation was not entirely unexpected. The impending budget showdown over whether to fund Planned Parenthood highlighted the deep-seated tension at the heart of the modern speaker's role – a tension that Boehner evidently found too difficult to resolve.

Simply put, speakers play two critical but not necessarily compatible roles: They must maintain the House as a governing institution, but they must also ensure that their party retains its electoral majority so that it can enact its policy agenda. In an era of deeply ideologically divided parties and increasingly nationalized elections, those two roles have grown more and more incompatible.

In his press release explaining his resignation, Boehner touted the record of his Republican House party majority in pushing conservative goals during his time as speaker, but he made it clear that maintenance of the House took priority: "The first job of any Speaker is to protect this institution that we all love. It was my plan to only serve as Speaker until the end of last year, but I stayed on to provide continuity to the Republican Conference and the House. It is my view, however, that prolonged leadership turmoil would do irreparable damage to the institution."



[SEE: Congress Cartoons]

The precipitating cause for Boehner's resignation, of course, was the opposition from conservative House Republicans to passing a budget that included funding for Planned Parenthood, the organization that has come under scrutiny due to a controversial video purporting to show a member of that organization discussing the harvesting and selling of fetal tissue. Since the video surfaced to become a topic of political discussion, the House voted on almost straight party lines to defund Planned Parenthood in the upcoming 2015-16 budget, although efforts to take up this bill were blocked in the Senate, which failed to muster the 60 votes needed to invoke cloture and prevent a filibuster. Had the Senate passed the bill removing the $500 million in funding for Planned Parenthood, President Barack Obama had promised to veto it anyway, and Republicans lacked the votes to override Obama's action.

In the absence of a new budget, the government is set to run out of money by Sept. 30, the end of the current fiscal year. Despite the fact that there is almost no chance that Planned Parenthood will be defunded, some congressional Republicans are willing to risk a government shutdown rather than pass a new budget that would continue to fund the organization, even though polls suggest most of the public opposes such a move. However, conservatives in Congress – many of whom were swept into office in the aftermath of the 2010 midterm "shellacking" that gave Republicans a House majority – hope that the threat of a shutdown will force Obama and Democrats to make further concessions at the budget negotiating table.

This was but the latest clash between Boehner and Republican House conservatives dating back to his selection as speaker after the 2010 midterms. Since becoming speaker, Boehner has struggled to resolve a succession of crises, from raising the debt ceiling in 2011 to defunding Obamacare in 2013 to the current debate over the continuing budget resolution. In most cases Boehner – sometimes with the help of Democrats – was able fashion a short-term resolution to the impending crisis that, while ensuring that the government continued to function, did nothing to remove the underlying source of tension between Tea Party conservatives advocating for smaller government and more moderate Republicans, to say nothing of Democrats.



[SEE: Republican Party Cartoons]

In 2013, however, those tensions led to the federal government partially shutting down for two weeks when the House and the Senate could not agree on a continuing resolution that included funding for Obamacare. Boehner reportedly regretted forcing the shutdown and was evidently determined to avoid repeating it.

This past January, at the start of the current congressional session, Boehner won re-election for a third term as speaker despite unprecedented defections within his own party caucus. But rumors continued to circulate that conservative House members intended to pursue an effort to remove Boehner if he did not push for defunding Planned Parenthood. Boehner, who opposed another shutdown, was reportedly pursuing an alternative legislative strategy that would allow a separate vote to defund Planned Parenthood independent of the vote on a continuing budget resolution. Conservatives rejected the maneuver because they thought it was not enough to bring Obama to the bargaining table.

By announcing his impending resignation, Boehner has likely made it easier to pass a short-term continuing budget resolution, by drawing on Democratic votes if necessary, that will keep the government funded into December. But his resignation does nothing to resolve the tension that made his tenure as speaker so controversial. His successor, who is likely to be current House Majority Leader Kevin McCarthy, will still face the essential conundrum that afflicted Boehner, and which has bedeviled House speakers dating back at least to Newt Gingrich's tenure beginning in 1995: How can the speaker help their party retain its majority while still ensuring that the House can govern?



[READ: Boehner Will Be Missed]

Gingrich, it will be recalled, stepped down as speaker after Republicans' poor showing in the 1998 midterm elections. As Boehner's resignation shows, however, compromising with Democrats to avoid a government shutdown can also cost the speaker support.

Half a century ago, when "all politics was local," to borrow the aphorism made famous by former House Speaker Tip O'Neill, and when the two political parties shared overlapping ideologies, the tension between serving the interests of the House's majority party and serving the House's interests as a governing institution was far less pronounced. It was easier for a speaker like O'Neill, or the legendary Sam Rayburn, to pursue a legislative agenda that drew bipartisan support.

Alas, those days are long gone. Today's speaker often finds that the interests of more ideologically-extreme party members clashes with a desire to actually govern by finding common ground with moderates and even members of the opposing party. In the short run, to avoid Boehner's fate, his successor may be willing to work more closely with conservatives to pursue their legislative objectives. But if that precipitates a government shutdown, the new speaker runs the risk of damaging the party's brand name and its electoral fortunes.