Business owners who live or operate a business in New York City can now start applying for a “.nyc” domain name.

From August 4 until October 3, New Yorkers with a physical residential or business address in one of the five boroughs can go to OwnIt.nyc to apply for a “.nyc” domain name.

After the application period, domains that were only requested by one person will be available for that person to purchase. Domains that got multiple requests will get put into an online auction and go to the applicant who makes the highest bid.

When the reservations are all sorted and the application process is over, New Yorkers will be able to purchase the domain name through the typical fashion, checking to see if it is available and then purchasing it if it is.

For businesses that are located in New York, this could be a good branding opportunity.

A 2013 survey by Wakefield Research showed that 49% of small business owners were not completely satisfied with their current domain name. Fifty-five percent of the survey respondents believed that they lost business because of settling on an inferior domain name.

Since having a strong domain name can help with search engine optimization and marketing efforts, this could be a good opportunity for New York entrepreneurs to consider while writing their business plans.

In a press release on Monday, Mayor Bill de Blasio said that offering “.nyc” domain names to New Yorkers can help expand the city’s place on the “digital map.”

“The new .nyc domain presents a unique opportunity for New Yorkers, our small businesses, and organizations throughout the five boroughs to brand their identity, showcase their affiliation with the City—and to ‘own’ who they are online,” de Blasio said in the press release.

Get Free Updates! Stay in the loop with a weekly newsletter, with all our news from the previous week. We will never give away, trade or sell your email address. You can unsubscribe at any time.

Please follow and like us:

Please Leave A Comment

comments