Artwork, electronics, vintage photographs, computer components and more were available for swap or sale Saturday during the Art + Tech Swap Meet at 712 Innovations, 712 S. Kansas Ave.

“For me, this is about getting people who like art and technology to meet in Topeka,” said Jared Starkey, executive director of 712.

The swap meet began at 10 a.m. and was expected to end at 3 p.m., Starkey said.

Booth space was available for $20, and visitors were asked to donate $5 at the door. However, everyone received a souvenir coin, which was cut on 712’s laser cutter.

712 Innovations includes a shared office space and a “makerspace” with tools for building things with materials from wood to electronic components, according to a previous Topeka Capital-Journal article. Members receive a key fob so they can drop in whenever they want. There is a cost for membership.

Jared Mollenkamp, of Topeka, was on the “technical side” of the swap meet, offering up spare AV connectors, a Harmon/Kardon speaker system and a Microsoft Windows 3.1 sign from the 1990s.

“It’s a social event,” Mollenkamp said. “It’s about meeting people and seeing new people.”

There was a similar swap meet last year at Central Park Community Center to help raise funds for the makerspace, Mollenkamp said.

Next to Mollenkamp’s booth, Kathy Scritchfield, of Beattie, was displaying her artwork.

“I didn’t think I would be here today because of the weather,” Scritchfield said.

But temperatures in the 40s allowed her to make the 90-minute trip to Topeka. Her daughter, Lisa Mena, lives in the capital city. Mena was a model for some of Scritchfield’s oil-on-canvas pieces.

At another booth, Shirley Darby was displaying a variety of vintage pieces — everything from 1921 through 2000 A&W Root Beer mugs to Victorian photographs and art prints.

“I’ve been a collector of various things for some time,” Darby said. “I’m downsizing my collections. For me, the fun was in the chase. Finding things I liked and showing them off.”