TALLAHASSEE – More than one million Floridians remain without health insurance as a result of the state’s decision not to expand Medicaid coverage under the federal Affordable Care Act.

Florida is the second largest state in the nation to opt out of the expansion of the federal-state program that provides health care to the state’s poorest and sickest residents. And the decision will result in the loss of $66 billion in potential federal funding – the most in the nation – over the decade running through 2022, according to a study by the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation and the Urban Institute.

But the door is not completely shut.

There is a growing belief that new developments are convincing state leaders to at least seriously debate Medicaid expansion in the 2015 Legislature, with an eye toward finding a middle ground that the Republican majority can accept.

Those factors include:

• Beginning this month, federal mandates could cost Florida businesses more than $250 million in penalties if they employ 100 workers or more and do not provide health-care coverage for the full-time employees. The fines can range up to $3,000 per worker.

• Florida hospitals will lose $22.6 billion over a decade as the result of cuts to fees they receive for treating Medicaid and Medicare patients. The cuts were expected to be offset by the expansion of health care coverage under the ACA.

• A federally funded $2.2 billion Low Income Pool (LIP), designed to annually reimburse hospitals for treating uninsured patients, is set to expire July 1.

The issues facing employers and hospitals could be at least partially resolved if Florida expanded its Medicaid coverage up to 133 percent of the federal poverty level – $27,310 a year for a family of three. It would mean health care coverage would be more available to low-income workers and hospitals would see an increase in insured patients.

There is one certainty this year. Republican legislative leaders will not embrace an “all or nothing” approach to expanding Medicaid.

Instead, lawmakers, hospitals and business lobbyists are looking to expand Medicaid outside the traditional requirements of the federal-state health care program.

One initiative, called “A Healthy Florida Works,” is being advanced by a coalition that includes the Florida Hospital Association and a number of businesses, including Associated Industries of Florida, a key business lobby in Tallahassee.

“Florida has an opportunity to show the nation that health care can be delivered based on a free market framework and on conservative principles,” said AIF CEO Tom Feeney, a former House speaker.

Among its “free market” proposals is the requirement that participants pay a premium – ranging from $3 a month to $25 – and participate in job training and education programs. It would provide coverage initially to 816,000 Floridians, rising to 979,000 by 2020 at a cost of $1.4 billion in state funding.

But the advocates say the program would save the state more than $3.1 billion over that time by reducing the need for other state programs like the Medically Needy, which now pays for low-income Floridians who earn too much to qualify for Medicaid. It would result in a net savings of $1.7 billion.

The Florida Chamber of Commerce, another major business lobby, has also signaled that it would support a modified form of Medicaid expansion if the federal government will back coverage that includes such things as private market insurance, managed care and requiring “personal accountability” for participants through the use of co-payments. Coverage would be limited to Floridians who are working or are participating in job-training or education programs.

“The perceived ‘all or nothing’ policy on expanding coverage is chief among our state’s reasons for not accepting federal taxpayer dollars,” Florida Chamber CEO Mark Wilson said in a letter to the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services last month.

But the question remains whether the federal government will approve an expansion plan that includes requirements such as making Floridians who earn less than the poverty level pay for a portion of their health care coverage.

Jennifer Fennell, a spokeswoman for the “Healthy Florida” coalition, said the group is “optimistic” about advancing the plan this year, including winning federal support for some of the modifications.

“We’re seeing a lot more willingness from them to be flexible,” Fennell, noting other states with Republican governors and legislatures have been approving expansion plans.

Indiana, which has a Republican governor, has asked the federal government for approval of a Medicaid expansion similar to the “Healthy Florida” plan that requires participants to make financial contributions to their coverage and a has a work requirement.

Arizona and Iowa have won approval for expansion plans that allow the participants to use the funding to acquire private insurance. Michigan has plan that includes the use of health savings accounts _ similar to what is being proposed by the “Healthy Florida” coalition.

For those reasons, top lawmakers say they are likely to renew the debate over Medicaid expansion this year, which was barely debated in the 2014 session.

“We are willing to have that discussion,” Senate President Any Gardiner, R-Orlando, said last month, noting the Senate has previously approved a Medicaid expansion plan, although it died in the House.

Another major player is Gov. Rick Scott, who made no mention of Medicaid expansion in his second inaugural address earlier this month.

But Scott has not backed off his 2013 pledge to support Medicaid expansion if the federal government picks up the entire cost. Under the ACA, the federal government will pay the full cost of the expansion through 2016, with federal support lowering to 90 percent by 2020.

“While they spend 100 percent, I’m not going to stand in the way of the federal government doing something,” Scott said during his re-election campaign last fall. “What I’m not willing to do is put Florida taxpayers on the hook.”

Opponents of Medicaid expansion, including former House Speaker Will Weatherford, R-Wesley Chapel, have questioned the reliability of creating a program based on the federal government’s promise of future funding.

A final factor in this year’s debate is the coming demise of the $2.2 billion LIP fund, which reimburses Florida hospitals for treating uninsured and underinsured patients.

Florida applied for a renewal of the LIP funding, seeking an increase to $4.5 billion a year. Yet at the same time, the state Agency for Health Care Administration, which oversees the Florida Medicaid program, asserted there is “no connection” between the LIP funding and whether or not the state expands its Medicaid program.

In a new report released Friday, a consulting firm hired by the state outlined the impact of the demise of LIP, showing it could cause the loss of $1.3 billion in matching federal funding.

The report from Navigant Consulting showed the end of the LIP fund would result in the loss of $728 million in federal funding to 23 public hospitals and $577 million to 190 private hospitals.

The consultants offered a number of options for continuing a revised version of a LIP program, but they also said one of the key questions remains whether Florida will embrace a Medicaid expansion.

“Are the citizens of Florida ready to move forward with a Medicaid expansion?” report said. “Medicaid expansion in Florida as afforded by the ACA could significantly help offset the costs incurred by the state’s hospitals in caring for uninsured and under-insured, but would come with additional cost to the state.”

By the numbers: Medicaid expansion

• Florida is one of 23 states that have not expanded Medicaid programs under the federal Affordable Care Act.

• Twenty-seven states have opted to expand Medicaid to residents who earn less than 133 percent of the federal poverty level – $16,105 for an individual and $27,310 for a family of three.

• The federal government will pay 100 percent of the cost of the Medicaid expansion through 2016, with federal support dropping to 90 percent by 2020.

• An estimated 1 million Floridians could receive health care coverage if Medicaid is expanded in the state.

• Florida could gain some $66 billion in federal funding through 2022 with state matching funds of $5.36 billion, according to the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation and the Urban Institute.