Union bosses gave an overview of their big-government agenda for 2015 at a launch event this week for labor coalition AFL-CIO’s “Raising Wages” campaign.

The summit in Washington, D.C. featured speeches from AFL-CIO President Richard Trumka, U.S. Secretary of Labor Tom Perez and U.S. Sen. Elizabeth Warren, a Massachusetts Democrat. AFL-CIO plans to hold similar events in Iowa, New Hampshire, Nevada and South Carolina in the coming months.

To bolster the summit’s call for higher minimum wage mandates and more government spending, AFL-CIO let several members of its affiliate unions speak. American Federation of Teachers President Randi Weingarten, who was paid $557,875 taken from teachers last year, shared a photo of herself with a speaker from the Detroit Federation of Teachers.

Detroit educator Lakia Wilson talks abt struggles of making ends meet on educator salary #raisingwages pic.twitter.com/ziLbOUCbH6 — Randi Weingarten (@rweingarten) January 7, 2015

“You follow in the best traditions of the American labor movement for more than a century, always fighting for working people union and non-union,” Warren told the crowd during her speech bemoaning insufficient redistribution of wealth.

Warren criticized tax cuts, and called for more federal spending although America’s national debt has increased by more than $7 trillion — more than $1 billion every seven hours — since President Obama took office six years ago.

“Trickle-down had a second part to it, and that is cut taxes for those at the top: cut them when times are good, cut them when times are bad,” Warren said. “And when that meant there was less money for road repairs, less money for medical research, and less money for schools, and that our government would need to squeeze kids on student loans, trickle-down advocates said, ‘So be it.'”

“And look at the result,” she continued. “The top 10 percent got all the growth in income over the past 30 years. All of it. And the economy stopped working for everyone else.” America’s corporate income tax rate is among the highest in the world.

Warren lives in a 3,700-square-foot home worth approximately $2.4 million, leftist news outlet PolitiFact explained in an October column. She and her husband estimated their net worth at $14.5 million on a 2012 financial disclosure form.

AFL-CIO bosses loved Warren’s speech, calling it “amazing.” AFL-CIO also applauded Perez, the top labor official in the Obama administration, for his “amazing” speech.

Perez called for a federal minimum wage hike, a message the Department of Labor shared using AFL-CIO’s Twitter hashtag for the event.

"20 states saw an increase in minimum wage but you shouldn't have to win the geographic lottery to be prosperous." –@LaborSec #RaisingWages — US Labor Department (@USDOL) January 7, 2015

AFL-CIO quickly turned another quote from Perez’s speech into a union recruiting graphic.

The words 'collective bargaining' mean we can work for our collective good – @LaborSec today at #RaisingWages Summit pic.twitter.com/35zvoZIR0Q — AFL-CIO (@AFLCIO) January 8, 2015

Trumka, meanwhile, called Perez a “(g)reat leader and friend” in one of several posts promoting the Raising Wages Summit. Trumka was paid $322,131 taken from workers last year, but called on workers to show solidarity with AFL-CIO.

We have to organize around a common purpose. That's what #RaisingWages is all about. — Richard L. Trumka (@RichardTrumka) January 7, 2015

Families do NOT need to hear more about income inequality. They need more income –@RichardTrumka #RaisingWages — AFL-CIO (@AFLCIO) January 7, 2015

Trumka also told summit attendees to support union organizing campaigns Fight for 15 and Organization United for Respect at Walmart.

Want to see us on Election Day? Stand with @fightfor15 @ForRespect workers and @Fairpoint strikers! – @RichardTrumka #RaisingWages — AFL-CIO (@AFLCIO) January 7, 2015

AFL-CIO did not respond to a Watchdog.org inquiry about how leaders’ “common purpose” rhetoric fits with the six-figure salaries they take from workers.

During the summit, union think tank Economic Policy Institute shared research showing slow wage growth for all but the wealthiest Americans. The solution to this problem, EPI suggested, is increased unionization.

Strengthening collective bargaining will grow wages. http://t.co/aYXNlwVker #raisingwages pic.twitter.com/MG23i0vgXd — Economic Policy Inst (@EconomicPolicy) January 7, 2015

Unions use EPI research in fights for bigger government and against labor reform. Since 2005, EPI has received more than $15.6 million from AFL-CIO, AFL-CIO affiliates and other unions based on disclosures filed with the Department of Labor.

EPI’s board of directors is chaired by Trumka. In addition to Weingarten, the EPI board also includes the presidents of the following labor unions: