Georgia Senate candidate David Perdue (R) is putting crying babies into voters' living rooms with his first TV ad, parodying his GOP primary opponents as whining infants who can't change Washington.

Perdue calls his opponents "childish," as crying babies wearing T-shirts with his opponents' names flash across the screen, in an ad first obtained by The Hill.

ADVERTISEMENT

"It's hard to believe my opponents have been in office for 63 years," he says in the ad. "I've spent my life learning to deal with large, complex situations like I found at Reebok and Dollar General. If these politicians had any understanding of the free enterprise system and knew how to make a difference, wouldn't they have done it already? Help me change the childish behavior up there. If we want different results in Washington, we have to send a different type of person to Washington."

The babies representing Reps. Paul Broun (R-Ga.) and Phil Gingrey (R-Ga.), both doctors, have stethoscopes. Bespectacled Rep. Jack Kingston (R-Ga.)'s baby holds glasses. Former Georgia Secretary of State Karen Handel (R), the only woman in the primary, is represented by a baby wearing pearl earrings and necklace.

Perdue's campaign says it's part of a "substantial" six-figure ad buy. A source from another campaign tracking the buy says the ad is running in the Atlanta, Albany and Macon markets and initially has about $170,000 behind it, not a ton of money in the expensive state.

The ad is produced by infamous Republican ad maker Fred Davis, who is known for his eye-catching and controversial commercials, and features footage from a five-minute biographical video Perdue's campaign released on Tuesday.

Davis's "Celebrity" ad for Sen. John McCain's (R-Ariz.) presidential campaign slamming then-candidate Barack Obama won plaudits. But some of his more recent ads have drawn ridicule, including Delaware Senate candidate Christine O'Donnell's (R) infamous "I'm not a witch" ad and California Senate candidate Carly Fiorina's (R) "Demon Sheep" ad in 2010, and a Michigan Senate ad from 2012 that many viewed as racist.

Perdue, the wealthy former CEO of Dollar General and cousin of former Georgia Gov. Sonny Perdue (R), is seeking to paint himself as the outsider in the race. He's trailed his opponents in early polling, though the crowded field is very unsettled and his ability to self-fund is likely to make him a major player in the race.

Democrats are bullish about their chances at the seat and have rallied around former charity executive Michelle Nunn (D).