In just a couple weeks, Kansans will be paying more every time they spend money at the store.

This comes after lawmakers approved a tax plan in effort to balance the state's budget deficit. With the governor's signature, sales tax will spike from 6.15 to 6.5 percent.

While it's pennies on the dollar for your trip to the grocery store, this increase can really add up for big purchases like buying a car.

"When we came out vehicle shopping today I really didn't think about that being a factor," says Bill Felix of Wichita.

Felix is looking at a brand new $30,000 Jeep Grand Cherokee, a price tag that will come with an extra $105 dollars in taxes if he decides to buy after July 1.

"It's just something we just have to live with and I don't think it's something that's going to stop me from buying something or speed me up in buying something," he says.

Customers and the Davis Moore dealership don't think the increase will impact business.

"Most people finance so you're talking a small amount, you're talking a couple bucks a month on a monthly payment and that doesn't seem to affect people's desire to get a new car," says Davis Moore Vice President Sean Tarbell.

For smaller purchases, roughly a third of a cent tax hike won't make much of a dent in your bank account. For a $40 pair of jeans it's going to cost you 14 more cents. $100 spent at the grocery store will be an extra $0.35.

Tarbell says he wouldn't be surprised if some people try to dodge an extra $100 or so if they're on the market for a new car.

"I think there will be some people that are just real thrifty that say 'hey if I'm going to do it I might as well get it in before July and save a couple bucks," adds Tarbell.

Despite the extra money he'll spend Felix says he's happy with the decision to raise taxes instead of cutting funding for things the state really needs.

"You want that money there for education, you want it there for law enforcement, you want it there for emergency services, roads," says Felix. "If you have to raise money somewhere I guess that's a good place to get it from."

Cigarette smokers will be feeling the tax hike starting July 1. Cigarette taxes will go up 50 cents a pack to $1.29. For those who smoke a pack a day that adds up to $182.50 over a year, $26 for those who smoke a pack a week.