Middle schoolers compete to see which area school will have the most runners

If You Go What: Turkey Trot 5K run/walk. When: 8:30 a.m. Thursday. Registration begins at 6:30 a.m. Where: McKee Conference Center, 2000 Boise Ave. Cost: $26 for adults and $16 for children 12 and under. Race day fees are $35 for adults and $20 for children 12 and under. Team registration of three or more are $20 each before Wednesday and $30 after. Info: Register at active.com, print out a registration form at McKeeFoundation.com and mail it in, register in person at Altitude Running, 150 E. Harmony Road in Fort Collins or Runner's Roost, at Harmony and Ziegler in Fort Collins.

Aubrey Woodard, in sixth grade at Lucile Erwin Middle School, hopes her school will be the biggest group to sign up for the family-friendly McKee Turkey Trot from a middle school. If their group is the largest, PE teacher Janette McCahan will let her help design a T-shirt to be passed out at school.

The Turkey Trot starts at 8:30 a.m. Thursday morning. Race day registration is at 6:30 a.m. Aubrey's school is part of a middle school challenge by McKee that invites Loveland or Berthoud middle schools to send the most participants from their schools to the race for the chance to win a $250 grant courtesy of the McKee Medical Center Foundation. Lucile Erwin won it in 2012 and teachers hope to keep the honor this year.

Advertisement

"This is a great way to get kids active and get them involved in fun activities," said Dawn Paepke, events coordinator with the McKee Medical Center Foundation. Families of all ages are encouraged to participate in the run/walk. Last year, 2,300 people participated. Individuals don't even need to run. Paepke said at least 50 percent of participants enter as families to enjoy the day rather than compete for the win. "It's turning into a tradition for a lot of families. It's nice to work in the middle school challenge and get siblings involved. It's a good, fun, family event," Paepke said.

This year, the run is also part of something bigger. McKee has teamed up with BSX Athletics to be part of the nationwide "Turkey Gobbler," which is working to break a Guinness world record for the most participants in a multi-venue event. The number to break countrywide is 116,086 according to Paepke.

Aubrey Woodard loves beating her time and hopes to turn last year's 35-minute 5K race into 30 minutes this year. She runs two miles a day on a small track near her home. "I think it's important (to exercise) because you'll get stronger and it will keep you from getting obese and it will teach your kids," she said.

Her sister designed a school T-shirt when Lucile Erwin Middle School won the $250 grant in 2012, so she hopes to continue the family tradition this year.

Lucas and Allison Westbrook will be running in the race with their family. "It supports our school and I really like running," Lucas, a seventh-grader, said. He enjoys running because it doesn't involve picking up basketballs or anything.

"And it gets us extra exercise before we eat all this food," Allison said. She is in sixth grade. They both plan to run the entire thing if they can. The whole family, including a younger sister, Molly, will turn out on Thanksgiving Day to celebrate the tradition of exercising together before the big day of food.

Health and physical education teacher Janette McCahan at Lucile said that they had about 80 people participate in 2012. "That's kind of the cool thing, it's not just the kids. It becomes more of a community and family affair," she said.

She said that the race fits in nicely with setting life long fitness goals, which they teach at school

"With a lot of other sports you need equipment. This is a perfect fit for kids to be able to go out and just run," she said. "And you reap a lot of health benefits from one activity." The PE teachers ask students to set fitness goals with action steps to fulfill those goals.

If they win, the grant money will be used for school projects.

Jessica Benes can be reached at 669-5050, ext. 530, or jbenes@reporter-herald.com. Follow her on Twitter: @JessicaBenes. Read her blog at jessicabenes.com.