Photo

When Rita Wilson told Larry David, her co-star in the Broadway play “Fish in the Dark,” that she had breast cancer and needed to take a month off for a double mastectomy, he sank down into the sofa and put his head in his hands.

“He went, ‘Oh God, Oh God, Oh God,’ ” Ms. Wilson recalled, laughing. “He practically went white. I told him, ‘Larry, I’m going to be absolutely fine.’ ”

And she was. On Tuesday, Ms. Wilson — cancer-free and right on schedule — returned to the play and to her part as Brenda, Mr. David’s wife. (Glenne Headly had filled in for her.) It was scary but exhilarating, she said, to be onstage again after such an odd, life-changing period.

“It felt surreal in the sense that all these changes had happened,” she said Wednesday morning, “and yet it felt like it was yesterday.”

On Tuesday afternoon, dressed in jeans, a fringed-suede jacket and a pair of sky-high, back-in-business heels before her re-debut, Ms. Wilson, 58, spoke with wry, humorous candor about her roller coaster of a winter. Though she belongs to one of the highest-profile couples in show business, having been married for 27 years to Tom Hanks, Ms. Wilson says she normally shies away from such openness.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

“I’m in public because of the nature of what I do,” she said, “but I don’t feel it necessary to let the world know what I’m thinking, where I’m eating. I’ve always liked being on the periphery of things.”

She was ambivalent about this too. Among other things, talking openly about mastectomy seems to invite everyone to stare at and speculate about one’s postoperative breasts, and who wants that? (“But I guess people always look at women’s breasts anyway,” she said.)

There was also a message that Ms. Wilson was eager to convey. The cancer diagnosis came after she had to serve essentially as her own health advocate. An early test had come back negative, but something did not feel right, she said. Only after she demanded a second opinion was the cancer discovered.

“For me, this is about telling people, ‘You can get a second opinion — your insurance will pay for it, even Obamacare, God bless it, will pay for it,’ ” she said. “It’s so easy to say, ‘I’m just being paranoid,’ but you should trust your gut.”

She said she had been astounded and touched by the warmth of people’s response. In her Manhattan apartment building, neighbors she had barely met sent up little gifts — cookies, flowers, body cream. All four of her and Mr. Hanks’s children came to visit.

And before and after the surgery, the couple hunkered down at home, laughing, crying and watching movies. Luckily, they had a pile of Academy Award screeners in enticing DVD cases, begging to be viewed.

Neither she nor Mr. Hanks had ever been seriously ill before, so it was new territory. “Who knew it would make you even closer?” she said.

Photo

“You never know how your spouse is going to react in a situation like this,” she added. “I was so amazed, so blown away by the care my husband gave me. It was such a normal, intimate time.”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Ms. Wilson’s cellphone rang. It was Mr. Hanks, calling for a FaceTime chat from Florence, Italy, where he is filming “Inferno,” based on the Dan Brown book. Told that his wife was saying nice things about him in an interview, he flashed a cheesy grin and called out from the screen, “Make sure you print them all!”

Ms. Wilson’s friends have smothered her with love and distraction. One friend, hearing that her return date was May 5, said, “Oh, you’ll be back on Cinco de Drinko,” and promised to spring for margaritas. Others came, sat with her and gossiped.

Led by the publicly splenetic but privately mushy Mr. David — “You don’t think of Larry David as a person who would be this way, but he’s incredibly empathetic,” Ms. Wilson said — the “Fish in the Dark” cast kept in close touch, she said. One actor sent humorous “nightly reports” about how the play had gone, featuring details about a moment, for instance, when a plate meant to be picked up instead stuck to the table, throwing off an actor and “distracting him from his exit.”

“To be exposed to this amount of goodness — ” Ms. Wilson began. “I’m just incredibly grateful.”

Not that it has been easy. Though the cancer was detected early and she did not need chemotherapy or radiation, Ms. Wilson still feels exhausted. Her body is not what it was. Although Hollywood is practically ground zero for women with breast implants, Ms. Wilson had never gone that route.

“Let’s face it — it’s an amputation,” she said, of the mastectomy. And for people who do not know this, there is an interim step between a mastectomy and reconstructive surgery, in which a device called a tissue expander is inserted into your chest to make room gradually for new breasts.

Right now, the expander feels hard and weird and looks nothing like what breasts should look like, Ms. Wilson said. She can’t wear a proper bra. For the time being, she is sticking to loose tops and layers.

But she is hardly at the muu-muu stage of life. When she does have the reconstruction, Ms. Wilson said, “I think it’s going to look awesome.”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

“Fish in the Dark” ends in mid-July, and Ms. Wilson, who is also a singer, is releasing a new album in the fall, after which she has tentative plans to go on tour. Meanwhile, she is reprising her role as Marnie’s narcissistic mother on “Girls”; has a part in a Lorne Michaels-produced film, “Brothers in Law”; and is scheduled to produce “My Big Fat Greek Wedding 2.”

On Tuesday, Ms. Wilson said she was worried about what she called “anesthesia brain,” in which for a time after an operation you feel fuzzy-headed and not quite as sharp as normal. “I’m running lines like mad,” she said. But when the time came to perform, she said later, it all flooded back, almost as if the part had been baked into her mind.

Before the performance, the cast showered her with cards and flowers, and there was applause when the curtain came up and she was onstage.

“It was so much fun,” she said. “I had adrenaline coursing through me like never before. In a way, it was like a second opening night.”