The Eye

14 More Tracks From Madonna's New Album 'Rebel Heart' Leaked

SIGN UP TO RECEIVE THE LATEST NEWS FROM FASHION&STYLE

(Photo : Getty Images/Jason Merritt) Madonna's "Rebel Heart" album suffers a third leak and poor iTunes sales.

Fourteen more tracks from Madonna's new album "Rebel Heart" have been released onto the Internet without the veteran artist's permission, according to Billboard.



The latest massive security breach, culminating with release of the songs on December 23, follows last week's leak of 13 early demos for the same album, an act the pop superstar has denounced as "artistic rape" and a "form of terrorism" on Instagram.



As in the last time, Madonna took to the photo-sharing website and wrote "Real Rebels think for themselves! Real Rebels respect ART!" to protest the leak.



The new batch of leaked songs includes a collaboration with Pharrell Williams titled "Back That Up (Do It)."



In the wake of unauthorized release of the first batch of tracks, Madonna spoke with several media outfits to air her frustration.



"It's thrown us all into overdrive. We're having to think outside the box. Think on our feet. I didn't plan to put my record out this way," she told Billboard.



"Obviously there is a person, or a group of people, behind this that were essentially terrorizing me," she said. "I don't want to sound alarming, but certainly that's how I felt. It's one thing if someone comes into your house and steals a painting off your wall: that's also a violation, but, your work, as an artist, that's devastating," she told The Guardian.



"I'm an artistic person, I'm very expressive. I'm sorry if words alarm people, but that's what it felt like. It was not a consensual agreement. I did not say 'hey, here's my music, and it's finished.' It was theft," she continued.



In response to the first leak, Madonna released six official tracks from "Rebel Hear" last week. The 56-year-old entertainer plans to release the album in full in March 2015.



According to Idolator, the following are the titles of the tracks that were leaked this week:



Iconic

Veni Vidi Vici

Beautiful Scars

Freedom

God Is Love

Hold Tight

Best Night

Inside Out

Tragic Girl

Nothing Lasts Forever

Back That Up (Do It) ft. Pharrell

Holy Water

Graffiti Heart

Body Shop



SIGN UP TO RECEIVE THE LATEST NEWS FROM FASHION&STYLE

© 2015 Fashion & Style.com All rights reserved. Do not reproduce without permission.