A new freeway is shown against a background of modern buildings in Tokyo in February 1964. The 1964 Tokyo Olympics, the first held on Asian soil, are remembered as an event that represented Japan's reacceptance to the international community, and which triggered a building and transportation boom that transformed the city's infrastructure. Associated Press …

Engineers work on blueprints of the 1964 Tokyo Olympic project in a room of the Tokyo Olympic Organizing Committee building, Jan. 1962. Associated Press …

The first of Japan's high-speed 'bullet' trains, the 'Shinkansen,' had its launching ceremony at the National Railway's Tokyo Station on Oct 1, 1964, just nine days before the Olympic Games began. The Tokaido Shinkansen service connected Osaka and Tokyo. Getty Images …

Japanese runner Yoshinori Sakai, the final carrier of the Olympic torch, is pictured lighting the Olympic Cauldron during the opening ceremonies of the Summer Olympics in Tokyo on Oct. 10, 1964. Mr. Sakai was born in Hiroshima on Aug. 6, 1945, the day of the atomic bombing of that city, and was chosen for the role to represent Japan's recovery from the ashes of war to a peaceful nation. Agence France-Presse/Getty Images …

Mr. Sakai lit the Olympic Cauldron during the opening ceremonies of the 1964 Summer Olympics in Tokyo. Associated Press …

Crown Prince Akihito and Crown Princess Michiko watch the opening ceremony of the 1964 Summer Olympics in Tokyo. Associated Press …

Ian O'Brien of Australia set a world record when he won the 200-meter breaststroke gold medal at the 1964 Tokyo Olympic Games. Associated Press …

Japanese featherweight weightlifter Yoshinobu Miyake succeeded in lifting a 145-kilogram bar bell for a new Olympic record during competition in 1964. Miyake became the first gold medal winner for Japan, with a total lift of 397.5 kilograms. Associated Press …

Journalists worked the Agence France Presse desk at the 1964 Olympic Games. Agence France-Presse/Getty Images …

Osamu Watanabe (top) of Japan and Paul Alberto Romero of Argentina in action during the freestyle featherweight wrestling event. Watanabe went on to win the gold medal. Associated Press …

The Japanese women's volleyball team competes against the Soviet Union at the women's volleyball finals. Japan beat the Soviets to win the gold medal. The 1964 Olympics marked the first time volleyball and judo were included in the Games. Associated Press/N. Masaki …

Japan's Isao Inokuma, right, throws Canadian Doug Rogers during the final of the Olympic heavyweight judo contest. Inokuma's victory brought him the gold medal. Associated Press …

Willi Holdorf of Germany, after breaking down as he finished the 1,500-meter run that capped his gold-medal decathlon performance, got help from two fellow competitors—Estonian Rein Aun, who took silver for the Soviet Union, and fellow German Horst Beyer, who finished sixth. Associated Press …

An unidentified pole vaulter clears the bar. Associated Press …

The U.S.'s Bob Hayes, far right, crosses the finish line ahead of the Ivory Coast's Gaoussou Kone, far left, Cuba's Enrique Figuerola, second from left, and Germany's Heinz Schumann (196) to win the men's 100-meter dash final. Associated Press …

Abebe Bikila of Ethiopia circles the half-way mark set up at Tokyo's Koshu Highway during the Olympic marathon race, which he won. Bikila, a 32-year-old guard at the palace of Ethiopian Emperor Haile Selassie, ran the 26 miles, 385 yards in 2 hours, 12 minutes, 11.2 seconds and became the first athlete to win the marathon twice. Associated Press …