Shopping for health insurance should be more like shopping for a car and less like gambling.

Shopping for health insurance should be more like shopping for a car and less like gambling. Consumers need to know what they are buying and what it will cost; Clear Health Analytics is on a mission to make sure that they do. The Clear Choice plan selector, which can be found at http://www.clearhealthmarket.com, uses Clear Health Analytics' innovative, patent-pending, machine-learning program to harness the power of big data to help consumers understand what they are buying and how much it will cost. Based on answers to a few questions, the Clear Choice plan selector offers a personalized estimate of total cost for each plan, allowing consumers to pick the best plan in minutes without overpaying.

Clear Choice predicts medical utilization for over 30 of the most common illnesses and conditions, modified for individual characteristics including age, gender and overall health. Clear Choice allows each consumer to personalize utilization and cost estimates based on their unique characteristics and health care needs. Users are presented with information about the type of medical services they are likely to need such as specialist visits, labs or imaging tests as well as the quantity of each service they are likely to need. Users can adjust values as they see fit for a more accurate cost estimate.

Clear Choice does the math. The cost of each medical service is instantly modeled against insurance plan provisions for all available plans, taking into account both deductibles and, where applicable, subsidies and cost share reductions. Consumers can cut through the complexity and confusion of different health plans designs to make better, faster and smarter decision about their health insurance based on a comparison of total cost for each available plan as well as other significant factors such as availability of preferred in-network doctors and preferred prescriptions (coming soon).

CEO of Clear Health Analytics, Jennifer Sclar said: “Picking a health insurance plan should not be like purchasing a lottery ticket. Under the Affordable Care Act, consumers are now required to purchase a very complex financial product each year. How can consumers possibly begin to evaluate their choices? Our mission is to empower consumers to make smarter health insurance decisions by providing clear, unbiased cost comparison information.”

About Clear Health Analytics; Clear Health Analytics is a consumer-focused data analytics company. Clear Health Analytics’ insurance decision support software reflects the core values of our Company; we value people, healthcare, good information, and clarity. Our software helps individual consumers and families select an insurance plan that will provide the coverage they need without overpaying. Our software is fast and simple to use and empowers consumers to make better decisions about one of the most important purchases they will make this year. Consumers can feel confident that they are making an informed decision.

Clear Health Analytics, Clear Choice, and Clear Health Market are trade names of Clear Health Bill, LLC, a Delaware limited liability corporation d/b/a Clear Health Analytics.

For more information please contact Jennifer Sclar, Jennifer(at)clearhealthanalytics(dot)com, 917-722-1181.