Conservatives have an opportunity to present a clear alternative to the consequences of failed liberal policies that have become part of everyday life to Americans, Louisiana Gov. Bobby Jindal said Friday.

Jindal, a Republican presidential hopeful, elaborated on the theme during an extended segment of a question-and-answer session at the Ideas Summit hosted by the National Review Institute in Washington, D.C.

The governor’s riff began with a criticism of President Obama’s leadership but morphed into something more as he warmed up in front of a receptive crowd.

“The president has done a great job—and I don’t mean this as a compliment—but I think he has done a great job of dividing the country,” Jindal said. “He divides us by gender, by race, by geography, by age, by income.”

What got Jindal going was the subject of the Baltimore riots that followed the funeral of a young black man who suffered a fatal injury while in police custody. The governor was careful not to minimize the sadness of the case or the need for local law enforcement to gather the facts and act accordingly.

Then he said:

Let the Democrats divide us with special interest groups. We should be speaking of universal aspirations. I believe every mom or dad wants their child to have a better education, have a better-paying job and live the American dream like my parents wanted for me.

Jindal, 43, is the son of parents who came to America from India. He told a favorite story of a young mother who, like her mother before her, had a baby while still a teen. She thanked the governor for a state program that made it possible for her daughter to get a scholarship to a parochial school in New Orleans.

The second-term governor, still pondering a White House run, quipped that he didn’t think she voted for him, except perhaps “by mistake.”

While on the subject of children, he boasted that on his watch Louisiana concentrated on private-sector growth to reverse a population drain and add residents in each of seven years. His administration “made tough choices so our kids would come back,” he said.

“Where I think voters are today is that after six and a half or seven years, they’ve seen this president’s policies don’t work,” Jindal said. “You don’t need a bunch of numbers to tell them … Their kids are still living on their couch after [graduating] school. They can’t pay back their student loans, health care premiums didn’t get cut $2,500. All the things we were told were going to happen didn’t happen.”

Jindal’s conclusion: