Each week HuffPost Gay Voices, in a partnership with bloggers Liz Margolies and Scout , brings you a round up of some of the biggest LGBT wellness stories from the past seven days. For more LGBT Wellness, visit our page dedicated to the topic here .

1 Cancer and the Looming Open Enrollment Deadline Getty Images/Tetra images RF

While nearly 2/3 of young people put off healthcare in the previous year because they couldn’t afford it, 27-year-old Andrew Cray was fortunate to have had insurance coverage through his employer when his cancer was found. In a compelling op-ed he strongly encourages his peers to get insurance during these last days of open enrollment in Obamacare.

2 Bisexual Health Month Spotlights Sexual Health BRC

March is Bixexual Health Awareness month and each week the Bisexual Resource Center focuses on a different topic. This week they are spotlighting a dozen new resources on sexual health.

3 Michigan LGBT Tobacco Study Shows It’s About Community Shutterstock / ChameleonsEye

The Michigan Department of Community Health, Affirmations, and the Kalamazoo Gay and Lesbian Resource Center collaborated to conducted focus groups exploring the role of tobacco in the LGBT communities. They report the primary reasons LGBT people smoke were to create community, ease social anxieties and meet people. Quitting was more difficult because of those same community influences and because few knew of the existence of the state quitlines at 1-800-QUITNOW

4 Myth Busting: Trans Health Care Isn’t Bad for Business YouTube

HRC and Pride At Work released a new video debunking the myth that trans inclusive health coverage is bad for businesses. Read about their larger trans health video series here and see their first video debunking the myth that all trans people want surgery here

5 Top HIV Doc Moves to Create Historic Gay & Bi Wellness Initiative Shutterstock / kurhan

One of Time Magazine’s 100 most influential people of 2012, Dr. Robert Grant, has moved from his university post to San Francisco AIDS Foundation. His first task there will be to create the first-ever home for gay and bi health and wellness, pivoting the response to HIV/AIDS from the traditional sickness and disease model.

6 Sexual Minority Youth May Have Notably Greater Cancer Risk Getty Images/Fuse

Researchers created a profile of youth risk behaviors along three cancer-related metrics: substance use, sexual risk and diet/activity. They report sexual minority youth started displaying higher risk behaviors in all three metrics very early, as well as across gender and racial/ethnic categories, raising concerns about the aggregate impact of these behaviors over their lifetime. In better news, other researchers found youth attending high schools with a Gay Straight Alliance had lower alcohol, tobacco and illicit drug use.

7 Transgender Health Care Discrimination Persists Despite Obamacare Provisions EVA HAMBACH via Getty Images