Less than two weeks after Rocklin Unified School District was hit with a federal lawsuit for the alleged physical, verbal and emotional abuse of special education students, Roseville City School District has found itself in a similar position.

The families of two special education students in Kaseberg Elementary School’s preschool program filed a complaint for damages Tuesday, accusing former teacher Theresa Joan Vanwagner of routinely slapping, hitting and screaming at their children over the course of two months before the district fired her Nov. 25, 2013. The two children named in the complaint were 3 and 4 years old at the time of the alleged abuse.

In addition to Vanwagner, the complaint names Roseville City School District, Assistant Superintendent Jerrold Jorgensen and Preschool Program Coordinator George Rooks for neglecting to report Vanwagner to police sooner. The plaintiffs include Duane and Kimberly Beecham of Roseville, their 4-year-old daughter, and Oliver and Jennifer Vergara of Roseville and their 3-year-old son.

According to the complaint filed May 12 with the U.S. District Court’s Eastern District of California, Roseville Police Department opened an investigation on Vanwagner in December 2013, days after Rooks reported Vanwagner to police. However, court documents indicate that several teachers’ aides had started reporting Vanwagner’s abusive conduct to Rooks and Jorgensen as early as September 2013.

In the police report, investigating officers said they explained to Jorgensen that he needed to notify parents of the victims as soon as possible, and while court documents show that RCSD quickly notified parents of Vanwagner’s students that she had been let go, the district said nothing about the allegations against her.

The Placer County District Attorney’s office charged Vanwagner in June 2014 with three counts of child abuse but did not notify the parents of that either.

It wasn’t until September 2014 that the parents of students named in the criminal complaint had reason to believe their children were victims of abuse, as they received a protective order explaining that Vanwagner was not allowed to have contact with their children. Still, neither RCSD nor the district attorney’s office would explain the reason for the protective order, so the Beechams and Vergaras hired attorneys. It wasn’t until November 2014 – a full year after Vanwagner’s termination – that they finally obtained a copy of the police report detailing the abuse.

Oliver Vergara told the Press Tribune that while his son is now in a classroom with Lisa Teal, who is “very caring, loving and collaborative,” he found it disconcerting that he received almost no concrete information or reason for concern until 10 months after Vanwagner’s termination.

Kimberly Beecham said she felt betrayed.

“We want to get the message out there that this is happening far more often than it should… It’s just heartbreaking altogether,” she said. “(Parents should) pay close attention and ask as many questions as you can. I grew up in Rocklin, I know this area very well, and I know that Roseville and Rocklin are the best school districts around… so you think you’re in good hands and they’re guiding you in the right direction… and it’s a really big blow to our family.”

The Beechams and Vergaras are represented by the same attorneys prosecuting the child abuse case against Rocklin Unified School District – Peter Alfert of Hinton, Alfert & Kahn, LLP out of Walnut Creek, and Todd Boley, Zoya Yarnykh and Justin Young of Todd Boley Law out of Alameda. In 2014, Alfert and Boley settled a series of school-based child abuse cases against two school districts in Contra Costa for $17 million.

Alfert told the Press Tribune that cases like these are alarmingly common nationwide, in part because school district employees either don’t understand or don’t fulfill their mandatory duty to report child abuse to police without hesitation.

“We keep seeing a reluctance on the part of administration of these districts to actually make the mandatory report once they learn of these incidents. They try to keep them quiet rather than take the aggressive action required by the law,” he said. “Between the lack of training of (teachers’) aides and the reluctance of these districts to report, these things go on and on. They could be stopped… as soon as they begin if people report it. In this instance, (the RCSD case) could have been stopped two and a half or three months earlier, instead of these children going to school every day being abused for those three months.”

In an email, RCSD Superintendent Derk Garcia declined to comment beyond stating the following:

“I sincerely apologize. However, I am unable to comment on pending litigation. The preschool teacher in question has not been an employee since November 2013,” the email read. “We take allegations of mistreatment extremely seriously and will continue to ensure student safety is our No. 1 concern.”