A new law for school bus drivers is presenting some challenges as the new school year gets under way in Louisiana. The law deals with where drivers can pick up and drop off kids along their routes.

Councilwoman LaToya Cantrell met with school leaders and community members Wednesday afternoon to discuss school transportation issues and hazards that are potentially putting children's lives at risk.

“The time is now. Kids are back and we need to take precaution,” said Cantrall.

The push from to do something about children's safety from city and state leaders comes after a tragic accident earlier this year. In February 6-year-old Shaud Wilson was hit and killed while walking to school. During the recent legislative session, some laws were passed to prevent this accident from happening again. Now bus drivers cannot drop off or pick students where the kids will have to cross traffic lanes. And cell phone use is prohibited in school zones.

“Those are definitely important improvements,” said Naomi Englar, with the Tulane Prevention Research Center. “But there is certainly more that needs to be done.”

The Tulane Prevention Research Center did a study looking at walking conditions around 50 area public schools. It showed that some improvements have been made to area sidewalks and crosswalks since they were looked at in 2010, but some work still needs to be done.

“More than 60 percent of schools that we audited in this report, we scored them as hazardous, meaning that they had missing sidewalks or broken sidewalks. The curb ramps for accessibility were broken or missing as well,” said Englar.

The prevention center has plans to work closely with the city to continue to make improvements to problem areas. Meanwhile Cantrall said parents need to do their part to make their child's journey to school a safe one.

“If you're walking your child to school or to the bus stop, walk them to the bus stop,” said Cantrall. “Not half way...all the way.”

Cantrall said they will be working on some other things to make travel between home and school safe for kids. She said that includes increasing the number of monitors on buses, having more crossing guards and having safe routes that the city can document.