Sioux Falls, SD

The threat of severe weather closed down Friday night's JazzFest earlier than expected. The decision to evacuate Yankton Trail Park around 10:45 p.m. was a cooperative effort between JazzFest officials and the evening's featured talent as well.



Headliner Boz Scaggs played for about an hour before cutting the party short for 30,000 fans.

"When we made the announcement, it was maybe about three or four minutes and then the wind started to blow, so people kind of realized that there was some threatening weather," JazzFest Director Rob Joyce said.

JazzFest Director Rob Joyce says the evacuation was a collaborative effort between event officials and the performers, who he says have a contractual right to not play in severe weather. Although fans were disappointed, Joyce says it was the right decision to make.

"When we did have our second stage tent, which is a large, large tent, it did go airborne, it did get picked up and it landed and it was torn and it was a hazardous opportunity for people to get hurt," Joyce said.

Thankfully, the park had been evacuated by this time, and no one was hurt.

Jill Heesch was at Jazz Fest last night, and she says her and another family member knew it was time to leave, even before Boz Scaggs made the announcement.

"We came back here and said, we need to pack up, and they all laughed at us, and so 15 seconds later, they said, 'yep, you guys have to go now,' and don't doddle,' I think is what they said, and there was no mass chaos at all, we just walked as fast as we could,” Heesch said.

Heesch says she thinks it was a good call to evacuate the park. David Colberg agrees.

"I think the well-being and safety of the people is a lot more important than continuing a concert where somebody could possibly get hurt,” Colberg said. “I think they did the right thing keeping everybody, their well-being in mind."

With clear weather in the forecast for Saturday night, Joyce says he's expecting a large crowd for the last evening of the 24th JazzFest.

Joyce says in addition to making a formal announcement, his organization was also relaying the evacuation notice through the Sioux Falls JazzFest App.

News

General {{Title}} Remove Change News General Courts Web Only Crime Outdoors Events Center Non-Homepage Boredom Busters Pipeline Positively KELOLAND Technology Hunger Affordable Care Act Shops Flooding Remembering 9/11 Drought JazzFest Spring Storm Honor Flight Spencer Anniversary

DoApp Health News Business News Sports

Agriculture Markets Livestock Crops Politics

HealthBeat Cancer Children's Health Heart Health Wellness & Nutrition General Health Beat Women's Health RX Resources What's Going Around OTC Diabetes Recalls Dental Health Men's Health

Politics South Dakota Legislature Budget Congress Taxes General Local Campaign President US Senate New Laws US House Iowa Ballot Issues Local Races Minnesota Gubernatorial

Education Funding College Elementary High School Pre K School Supplies Middle School

Sports Professional College High School Sports Zone Headlines Summit League Tournament Olympics

Business Industry Your Money Matters Development Gas & Energy Legislation Economy/Stocks Employment General Health Care Technology Education Funding Tourism Banking/Finance Housing Transportation Insurance Meetings & Events Retail & Restaurants All Industries On The Move Shops Agriculture

Featured Stories Eye on KELOLAND Inside KELOLAND

Weather Snow Forecast Records Rain Flooding Drought WX Corner General

World News

Investigates GEAR UP

Sponsored Done

© 2016 KELOLAND TV. All Rights Reserved.