Resurrection Christian volleyball caps perfect season with 2A state championship Cougars survive Yuma in semis, sweep Lutheran in finals

The Resurrection Christian School volleyball team celebrates winning the 2A state championship Saturday at the Denver Coliseum. ( CLIFF GRASSMICK ) DENVER - Championships aren't supposed to be easy. But the Resurrection Christian School volleyball team sure made it look that way. The Cougars capped their undefeated season Saturday night at the Denver Coliseum with a sweep over Lutheran in the 2A state championship final (25-18, 25-19, 25-13), giving RCS its first-ever girls state title. js"> "The only thing better than that is it couldn't have happened to a better group of girls. They love each other," said RCS coach Caleb Howard, his team finishing the season a perfect 29-0. "A lot of these girls have been playing together since they were in fifth, sixth, seventh grade and always dreamed about winning a state championship. So I'm just so very happy for them." Resurrection Christian volleyball players Abby Skipworth and teammates celebrate a point during their sweep over Lutheran in the 2A state championship match. (CLIFF GRASSMICK) After sweating out a five-set win over Yuma in the semifinals, Rez saved its best for last. Other than an early three-point edge by Lutheran in the first set, Resurrection Christian led the entire championship match. The Cougars were particularly dominant to start games, jumping out to leads of 6-0 and 8-2 in the second and third sets. "We've been dreaming about it all year. Since the day that we lost last year, we wanted to be back here again. It's really just a dream come true for every single one of us," said junior setter Madison Webb, who had 31 assists in the title match. "It's just amazing that we peaked at exactly the right time in the state championship." No matter where the Lions hit, it seemed the Cougars were there to scramble for a key dig, with Abby Skipworth leading the way defensively with 17 digs, while Carly Whitham had 11. Offensively the Cougars were clicking on all cylinders, as junior Preston Lienemann piled up 15 kills and Skipworth nine. "It's just a really big relief. This was our goal. We go to Nebraska every summer, and this was our goal since the summer," Lienemann said. "We wanted to be undefeated throughout the whole season, and it's just such a blessing to really make it happen." The Cougars advanced to the state title match by holding off No. 9 Yuma 3-2 (25-19, 25-22, 21-25, 26-28, 15-12) in the semifinals after sweeping Ridgeway (25-17, 25-14, 25-21) in a pool play match to begin the day. Rez controlled the first two sets against Yuma - winning its seventh and eighth straight sets of the tournament - but had a tough time putting the Indians away until the fifth set. "We actually thought that they would be the hardest team," Lienemann said of the Indians. "We were really nervous before that game, but then we were like, 'You know what, all we do is play for Him.'"The Cougars stuffed the stat sheet in the five-set semifinal thriller. Skipworth totaled 20 kills and Lienemann 16. Lienemann also had 29 digs and Whitham 27, while Webb dished out 60 assists. After surviving Yuma, the title match looked like a breeze for the Cougars. Of course it always helps when everything comes together at the perfect time like it did for Rez. "Definitely we played one of our best games the whole season," Webb said. "We came out and we were ready to go. We knew that we were ready and just went after it." Sean Star can be reached at 669-5050, ext. 512, sstar@reporter-herald.com or on Twitter @seanvstar