Will Kentucky go 40-0 and win the national championship? (Andy Lyons/Getty Images)

Midwest

Second-round upset: No. 12 Buffalo over No. 5 West Virginia. This one should be fun to watch, with both teams featuring a top-40 scoring offenses. The Bobby Hurley-led Bulls ended the season on an eight-game winning streak, while West Virginia lost three of its past four games.

Sweet 16 sleeper: No. 7 Wichita State. The Shockers have plenty of tournament experience, with Ron Baker and Fred VanVleet both playing a big part in that Final Four run in 2013. Before falling to Illinois State in the Missouri Valley semifinals, Wichita State was ranked No. 8 in the AP poll so this is a little harsh of a seeding.

Final Four prediction: No. 1 Kentucky. Can the Wildcats handle the pressure? When Willie Cauley-Stein and Kentucky played the No. 2 seed in this region, Kansas, earlier this year, it won by 32 points. Their biggest challenge may come against an offensively efficient Notre Dame team in the Elite Eight.

West

Second-round upset: No. 11 BYU/Ole Miss over No. 6 Xavier. The Musketeers went 9-9 in the Big East before a run to the conference title game fooled the selection committee into believing this is a No. 6 seed. In nonconference play, Xavier lost to UTEP, Long Beach St. and Auburn.

Sweet 16 sleeper: No. 7 VCU. An injury to point guard Briante Weber appeared to derail the Rams, but coach Shaka Smart got them back on track in time to win the Atlantic 10 tournament. This defense is never fun to see in March.

Final Four prediction: No. 4 North Carolina. Marcus Paige has been on a tear, averaging 18 points in his past five games, and the emergence of freshman Justin Jackson could key a deep run. With Wisconsin and Arizona in this region, this might be the toughest to pick.

East

Second-round upset: No. 12 Wyoming over No. 5 Northern Iowa. Neither of these teams can score, so the first team to 40 might win. Wyoming had a midseason slump after Larry Nance Jr. was diagnosed with mono. But with its leading scorer back, the Cowboys won the Mountain West.

Sweet 16 sleeper: No. 6 Providence. Kris Dunn, the Big East co-player of the year, does a little of everything for the Friars. He’s averaging 15.8 points, 5.6 rebounds and 7.6 assists a game.

Final Four prediction: No. 7 Michigan State. If Justin Anderson gets healthy, Virginia could win this region. And Villanova hasn’t lost since Jan. 19. But let’s go with Tom Izzo, who always has his team playing its best in March. Branden Dawson had a huge Big Ten tournament and Denzel Valentine is a matchup nightmare.

South

Second-round upset: No. 10 Davidson over No. 7 Iowa. Before losing to VCU in the A-10 semifinals, the Wildcats had a 10-game winning steak and were one of the hottest teams in the country. They share the ball (third in the NCAA in assists) and can score with ease (79.9 points per game).

Sweet 16 sleeper: No. 6 SMU. The last time coach Larry Brown was in the NCAA tournament, he was leading “Danny and the Miracles” to a national title with Kansas in 1988. His SMU squad went 25-3 after losing three of its first five games of the season.

Final Four prediction: No. 1 Duke. Led by Jahlil Okafor, the Blue Devils are the most complete offensive team in the country. On the bottom of this region, Gonzaga and Iowa State also have plenty of balance.

Read more from Express Sports:

NCAA tournament: Virginia, Maryland and Georgetown’s path to the Final Four

Maryland’s Melo Trimble, Wisconsin’s Frank Kaminsky are different but effective

Maryland still trying to get to know players, coaches of the Big Ten

Do top high school prospects go on to win championships in the pros?

Virginia, Maryland take a similar path to reviving their basketball programs