For millions of Californians, our staggering poverty rate is more than a statistic; it is an exhausting, demoralizing, daily struggle. Nearly one in four California residents lives in poverty, struggling just to secure basic standards of food and shelter.

Each year on Mother's Day I think about hard sacrifices my mother made raising me and my two sisters. I'll never forget the toll hard physical labor and the stress of living without adequate child care took on my own mother.

She was a hard-working immigrant with little formal education but a determination to provide for her family, even if it meant working around the clock.

The long bus ride home from the upscale neighborhoods of La Jolla, where she worked as a housekeeper, to the San Diego barrio where I grew up, no doubt felt even longer as my mother worried about her children. She often had no choice but to leave us home alone as she worked.

It is for mothers and families like mine that Senate Democrats will make strengthening and reinvesting in our child care system a priority this year.

High quality and affordable childcare offers peace of mind for parents in low-wage jobs striving to climb the ladder of economic opportunity. This is a fundamental first step to breaking a cycle of poverty that is shredding our social fabric as a state and a nation.

Advertisement

Unfortunately, during the financial crisis, we eliminated subsidies for more than 100,000 child care spaces. Since only a very small proportion of eligible infants and toddlers from low-income families were able to access California's child care and development system to start with, those reductions have huge implications for the future economic and social well-being of this state.

SB 548, the Raising Child Care Quality and Accessibility Act, which I introduced this session with Assembly Speaker Toni Atkins and the Legislative Women's Caucus, will begin to address some of these concerns by increasing the availability of subsidized child care spaces for the state's poorest families.

As many low-income jobs are increasingly outside the standard 9-to-5 work-hour time frame, an increase in these voucher-based child care slots would allow parents to choose child care settings that best meet their families' needs.

Our child care system is only as strong as the early care and education professionals who administer it.

Right now, child care providers in home-based settings look a lot like my mother -- women of color who do some of the state's hardest work but who receive little recognition or respect.

With stagnant wages and increased costs and requirements, their take-home pay is below poverty level. My bill gives family care providers a long-overdue seat at the table with the state of California so they can more effectively advocate for training and improvements to the system, ensuring that every child gets the best early education possible.

While it is encouraging to see that Gov. Jerry Brown has spearheaded policy changes that dedicate greater resources to schools with lower-income families, he cannot lose sight of the fact that many of these kids will spend their lives trying to catch up because they lack the early education that would enable them to start school at full speed.

For decades, California has sent a mixed message to mothers: they're told not to leave their kids at home alone, even as they can't possibly afford quality child care with low-wage jobs. They're lectured about pulling themselves up by their bootstraps, yet with no access to child care we've essentially nailed those boots to the floor.

We need to ensure a level playing field for women to enter and succeed in the workforce, and we need to give our children quality child care for the best opportunity to succeed in life.

Sen. Kevin de León is president pro tempore of the California Senate.