The wrong word is being used to describe the debate over lobbying and campaign finance laws, state Rep. Stephen Webber said Thursday night at the League of Women Voters’ legislative town hall meeting.

“I think we need to stop referring to them as ethics bills and start referring to them as anti-corruption bills because that is what they are about,” Webber said. “It is not about ethics; it is about stopping corruption. I define corruption as public policy that is different with campaign contributions than it would be without campaign contributions.”

You must login to view the full content on this page. Screen Name or Email Password Forgot? Remember me on this computer Login Screen Name or Email Now I remember! Or, use your facebook account: facebook Need an account? Create one now.

How to revise the laws policing political campaigns and the relationship between lobbyists and public officials is one of the biggest questions facing lawmakers this year. Missouri has no limits on political contributions or lobbyist-paid meals, entertainment and gifts.

Some lawmakers want strict caps on both; others argue that faster, more precise reporting is enough.

The fate of ethics legislation was the first question posed to Webber and state Reps. Caleb Rowden, R-Columbia, and Kip Kendrick, D-Columbia, during the meeting, which drew about 75 people to the Columbia Public Library.

“Campaign finance and campaign finance limits dominate everything else as the overriding concern of any ethics or anti-corruption bills in Missouri,” Webber said. “If we do not stop that, if we do not address the issue of million-dollar checks, then everything else is window dressing.”

Rowden has filed several bills addressing ethics issues. His legislation would ban lobbyist gifts, stop the “revolving door” of legislators taking jobs as lobbyists immediately after leaving office and open the books of not-for-profits involved in campaigns to reveal their donors.

Six former House members who left office in December or January, including Kendrick’s predecessor, Chris Kelly, are now working as lobbyists.

“I don’t inherently believe that there is corruption. I don’t believe that votes are being bought,” Rowden said. “But I do believe the public perception that says there is something that needs to be done to shore up the confidence our constituents have in us as representatives.”

Kendrick, who has been in office for about a month, said he already sees the need for stronger ethics laws. “We have to stop the major donations that are happening,” he said. “It has eroded the trust of the general public.”

The wide-ranging forum touched on many issues pending before lawmakers.

Webber and Kendrick endorsed, as they have before, using federal funds provided by the 2010 Affordable Care Act to expand Medicaid eligibility. Rowden, who has not explicitly endorsed expansion, said he’s willing to discuss it, unlike many GOP lawmakers.

Kendrick and Webber were strongly opposed to right-to-work legislation being pushed by many Republicans, while Rowden said he had not decided how he would vote. “I don’t believe in any way that right-to-work is a silver bullet,” Rowden said.

With dominant majorities in both chambers, Republicans can pass any legislation over Gov. Jay Nixon’s vetoes if they remain united. Rowden said Republicans would prefer to write major legislation so it can become law with Nixon’s support. Nixon has promised to be more engaged and to work more closely with the General Assembly, Rowden noted.