Reuters

How might state Medicaid programs cope with a new and equally expensive hepatitis C treatment from Gilead Sciences? A new report released just as the FDA late last week approved Harvoni, which will cost $94,500 for a 12-week regimen, may offer some insights, at least according to a trade group for the state programs.

Sovaldi, you may recall, costs $1,000 a pill, or $84,000, for a 12-week regimen and the price tag has become a flash point in the national debate over the rising cost of prescription medicines. State Medicaid programs and pharmacy benefit managers call the drug a budget buster.

It is worth noting that the average price for Harvoni may be $80,000 to $83,000, depending upon the length of treatment. Why? Gilead priced its newest drug at $63,000 for an eight-week regimen and as many as 45% of patients may qualify for the shorter duration. The trade group argues Harvoni will be equally disruptive, because Harvoni is widely expected to displace Sovaldi as a treatment of choice.

For one, the newer treatment is a fixed-dose combination pill that does not require that patients simultaneously use other medicines. And many physicians have been ‘warehousing’ patients, a way of saying that doctors have been waiting for Harvoni to be approved before writing prescriptions. This suggests that Harvoni will be used to treat a larger patient population than Sovaldi.

So if Sovaldi is something of a shooting star, why should this new report matter? The results “portend what states will be doing with Harvoni,” says a spokesman for the trade group. “Harvoni is, essentially, son of Sovaldi. States are having a hard enough time with Sovaldi, so imagine what it’ll be like with Harvoni. We expect that all these state coverage decisions will be applied to Harvoni.”

What did the report find? Many state Medicaid programs have been moving to restrict access to Sovaldi. Right now, prior authorization, a process in which a payer will first review the prescription before automatically covering the cost, is required by 35 states for the treatment, according to the report distributed by the Medicaid Health Plans of America.

In addition, several states require patients to meet a set of clinical or related criteria for prior authorization, according to the report. And most, if not all, states that require prior authorization for Sovaldi also require patients to undergo a liver biopsy to determine the severity of their disease before treatment can begin.

The report offers a few examples of prior authorization requirements: Alaska requires patients to abstain from illicit drug use and alcohol for at least three months and undergo a verifying urine test; Illinois requires patients to meet 25 different criteria; and in West Virginia, only a board-certified infectious disease physician, gastroenterologist or hepatologist may prescribe Sovaldi.

And of 17 states that have placed Sovaldi on its so-called list of preferred drugs for which reimbursement is available, 14 states require prior authorization. And of those 14 states, seven also places limits on the frequency, quantity and duration of prescribing. Some states, such as Arizona, have a ‘once-in-a-lifetime rule that allows Medicaid patients only chance at treatment.

“Couple the higher price with the expanded patient population that an all-oral med is intended to grab and you’ve got a double whammy of unsustainability,” the trade group spokesman says.