TAMPA — The job market just keeps getting better in the Tampa Bay area.

The unemployment rate for the Tampa-St. Petersburg-Clearwater metro area dropped almost a full percentage point in September, compared to a year ago, and Hillsborough County’s rate was even lower.

The Tampa metro area reported an unemployment rate of 5 percent in September, down from 5.3 percent in August and from 5.9 percent in September 2014, according to the state Department of Economic Opportunity, which released its monthly report Friday.

Hillsborough County fared even better than the region as a whole, with a 4.8 percent unemployment rate in September, down from 5.1 percent the previous month and down from 5.8 percent in September 2014.

Gov. Rick Scott, who announced the state’s unemployment figures from the DS Services plant in Lakeland, said the Tampa metro area is No. 1 in Florida for current job openings in September with 49,695. The metro area was also first in the state in demand for high-wage, high-skill science, technology, engineering and math occupations, with 14,750 openings in September.

The Tampa metro area added 28,000 jobs in the past 12 months, Scott said, calling the figure “great news.” The industries with the largest gain in jobs over the year were leisure and hospitality with 12.900 new jobs and education and health services with 8,600 new jobs, the highest in the state for that industry, state figures show.

Pinellas County continues to stay just ahead of Hillsborough, with a 4.7 percent jobless rate in September, compared to 5 percent in August and 5.6 percent in September 2014. Pasco’s rate continues to drop at 5.6 percent last month, compared to 5.9 percent in August and 6.5 percent in September 2014.

Hernando and Polk counties, while both showing slight progress, continue to struggle with unemployment. Hernando had a 6.5 percent jobless rate in September and Polk had 6.1 percent, down from 7.7 percent in Hernando from a year ago and down in Polk from 7.3 percent in September 2014.

Scott said the state’s unemployment rate of 5.2 percent in September is the lowest in seven years. The state’s rate in August was 5.4 percent. The unemployment rate has dropped by 0.6 percent in the last 12 months. The Lakeland home and beverage delivery company where Scott made the announcement recently opened a new call center with plans to hire 400.

“Overall, my impression was that this is a very positive [jobs] report,” said Mekael Teshome, Florida economist for The PNC Financial Services Group. “It’s consistent with a series of reports we’ve been getting now for most of this year that Florida’s economy is at cruising speed. Our major drivers are consumer spending, we’ve got a lot more construction and housing and we have in-migration, which you can’t pick up from this report, but it makes for a very solid foundation for growth.”

Florida’s unemployment rate remained higher than the national rate of 5.1 percent in September, according to the U.S. Department of Labor’s Bureau of Labor Statistics.

Nationwide, the number of people unemployed for less than five weeks increased by 268,000 to 2.4 million in September, partially offsetting an August decline. The number of long-term unemployed (27 weeks or more) stayed about the same as it was in August, at 2.1 million, nationally.

The state created 8,700 private-sector jobs in September and a total of 941,000 since December 2010, according to the governor. Scott said many of the unemployed found jobs through CareerSource Tampa Bay and the state’s other 23 regional workforce boards.

The number of people employed just part time — and not by choice — declined by 447,000 to 6 million nationally in September, according to the Department of Labor. These individuals were working part time because their hours had been cut or they were unable to find full time employment.

The state of Florida does not break out the number of people involuntarily working part time in its monthly jobs reports.

Teshome said he has seen a trend toward hiring more part-time employees for years, probably at least partly a result of the Great Recession. “It’s nothing new. If you go back years, well before the Affordable Care Act, the share of part-time jobs increased over time.”

Despite that, Teshome said PNC conducted a survey of small to mid-size businesses, which it published two weeks ago. The survey found that entrepreneurs in Florida are “fairly optimistic and reflect a willingness to hire workers and boost pay. That’s consistent with the favorable momentum we are seeing in Florida’s economy.”

yhammett@tampatrib.com

Twitter: @Yvette_Hammett

(813) 259-7127