Despite being rescued from the dumpster, this feral cat was in a foul mood. (Courtesy photo/Town of Mead Animal Control)

When Town of Mead Code Enforcement and Animal Control Officer Ismael Aldana received a call Monday morning about a cat stuck in a dumpster, he knew the cat was in trouble.

"It looked like this cat had been there a minimum of 48 hours," Aldana said. "It was pretty dehydrated and exhausted. It was trying to get its head out."

Aldana said the cat stuck her head in a drain hole on the commercial-sized dumpster to get at the food inside, probably pizza and fries, and couldn't get her head back out.

He added that the man at the scene who reported the cat had placed a box under the cat's feet, because she was basically hanging out of the hole.

Mead animal control officers were able to rescue this feral cat that got its head stuck in a hole in a dumpster. (Courtesy photo/Town of Mead Animal Control)

Aldana contacted Longmont Friends of Feral and Abandoned Cats, who agreed to take the cat. He also called the Town of Mead Public Works Department, so they could come up with a solution.

"We put our brains together to see what we were going to do," he said.

Solution — electrical grease.

"My biggest issue is it was going to fight when we tried to get it out," he said. "It was exhausted, but animals will still fight."

Another solution — call the Mead Veterinary Medical Center to come out and sedate the cat.

Aldana said once the cat was sedated, he rubbed grease onto her neck and was able to get her head out of the drain. He named her Catillac.

"I got that from the old cartoon 'Heathcliff,'" he said. "I was a big fan of that cartoon."

Tonni Loutzenhiser, Executive Director of Longmont Friends of Feral and Abandoned Cats, said Catillac is tired but appears to be healthy. She said Catillac is feral, but her organization is going to try to tame her.

Loutzenhiser said if they can't tame Catillac, they will try to find her a barn home, but she believes they will be able to tame her because she is still young.

Aldana said Mead is a small town, so Catillac's rescue was a big deal for the animal control department.

"I don't think that cat would have made it if he stayed there for the rest of the day," he said.

John Bear: 303-684-5212, bearj@timescall.com or twitter.com/johnbearwithme