PARENTS desperate to adopt and foster children in need of stable homes will all be winners under moves to relax adoption laws.

Families Minister Pru Goward will go to cabinet in the coming weeks with proposed changes to the Care Act aimed at boosting the number of adoptions in NSW "by hundreds".

With only 78 local adoptions across the state last year, prospective parents frustrated by our tough regulations are increasingly turning overseas to areas such as China, Africa and South America to find children.

The new rules would cut red tape and give courts more power to consider adoption as a permanent solution for neglected kids, instead of putting them in foster care.

Ms Goward said she wanted the changes debated in parliament by next month and hoped they would stop childless couples and prospective parents looking overseas to adopt.

COMMENT: Tell us your experience or give your opinion below

"There are children who need permanent, happy homes in Australia - you don't need to go searching through the backblocks of China, they are in our own backyard," Ms Goward said.

"We need to say to people you can adopt an Australian child and we invite you to become part of the foster care system and we can make sure that process is as expeditious as possible."

There are more than 18,000 children in the foster care system seeking a permanent home. About a third of these have been uprooted at least three times and placed with new foster families, depriving them of permenancy and a stable environment.

Only 78 children in foster arrangements were able to be adopted into permanent homes last year and it's hoped the changes will see that number rise significantly, Ms Goward said.

According to the her department's figures, there are 715 children on the waiting list for adoption.

"The number of adoptions are not going up enough," she said, adding her target for the future would be "in the hundreds".

The changes will see adoption made a priority in court cases where children are removed from their parents.

Under the present rules, magistrates are restricted to giving the children back to their parents, a relative or putting them in the care of the Minister until they are 18.

Leading foster carer group Barnados Australia has backed the changes, saying it hoped the moves would make adoption quicker and easier.

"Previously the Care Act looked at long-term foster care - children were under the care of the minister until they were 18 years old," Louise Voigt, CEO of Barnardos, said.

"That's not a satisfactory situation if you're looking toward adoption.

Hurdles to adoption torn down

"Children in NSW need more access to adoption and this legislation will bring that about."

For couples looking to adopt a child the process involves lengthy assessments by authorities, which are then followed up with formal proceedings in court.

Many cases fail due to the resistance of the birth parents involved, even when they are incapable of raising the children themselves.

The new scheme will be different because it will focus on "open adoption", meaning the child will be raised with another family but their biological parents will always maintain a relationship and connection to them.

Ms Goward said there was a stigma around adoption, due to the secrecy and shame of the Stolen Generation, that was only now being broken down.