I know him as an award-winning Hamilton police officer.

A high-profile, innovative constable who had 34 years on the job before recently retiring.

Perry Mason spent much of his career as a school liaison officer, tackling issues such as bullying, sexting, drug and alcohol abuse, and hazing.

He was one of the few Hamilton cops allowed to be the public face of the service, doing media interviews regularly. He was honoured by the Canadian Association of Chiefs of Police for pioneering the use of traditional healing circles with youth offenders.

Mental illness has traditionally been viewed as a weakness. A flaw. Often, those struggling remain silent.

I've known his ability to connect with kids — particularly, troubled kids — comes in part from his relationship with his own daughter, who wrestles with serious mental health issues. They have often shared her story publicly.

But until now, I didn't know Perry, 53, also has a story.

A story that climaxed when he parked his cruiser in a remote lot and looked down the barrel of his service weapon.

"It was loaded," he says softly. "I could see the rifling of the barrel."

Few people in Perry's life know of that precarious moment.

He is sharing it now because he believes it is the right time. He is no longer a police officer. There can be no career repercussions.

But also because one month ago, Staff Sergeant Ian Matthews shot himself in the head in the locker-room at central station. A brilliant investigator. A caring cop. A loving father.

Our city's police service is reeling.

Mental health issues. Suicide. Police. It is time to talk about it.

All the stigma that surrounds mental illness in society is even more profound within the police culture. Cops are supposed to be warriors. Invincible. In control. Fit, in every way.

Mental illness has traditionally been viewed as a weakness. A flaw. Often, those struggling remain silent.

That critical moment in Perry's life, a dozen or so years ago, was many dark days in the making.

He joined Hamilton police as a cadet when he was 18 and put 15 or so years in without difficulty.

Then his marriage blew up and he was the subject of 10 investigations, most of them criminal, some of them Police Services Act related, he says. All but one were related to his domestic meltdown. He was cleared on all of those.

The other — threatening a fellow police officer — landed him in custody for 23 hours. He pleaded guilty and was demoted two ranks.

"I went through a brutal time. I lost contact with pretty much all of my family. When a police officer gets into trouble, you find out who your friends are pretty fast. You're like a leper."

Perry was assigned a new partner at work, a cop who would be a good influence on him during a difficult time. Who would not judge him for what he had done, but rather would focus on the potential of what he could be.

That cop was Ian Matthews.

Meanwhile, Perry secretly started going to a psychiatrist. He did not tell the police service.

"An active police officer cannot disclose anything close to weakness," he says. "I was in a brutal depression. I had high anxiety. I couldn't function very well at all."

The psychiatrist used to be in the military and so "he had understanding of the subtleties of our work. I trusted him."

But not enough, he admits, to tell him about the night with the gun. That happened while he was seeing the psychiatrist, and yet Perry didn't mention it to him.

"I thought of my kids that night," says Perry, knowing just how close he came.

With psychiatric care and time, Perry got better.

"It is survivable," he says.

He and his career survived. Thrived, in fact.

"We need to take care of the people who take care of us," says Perry, who has known seven officers during his career who died by suicide. "Everyone is so concerned about our outer armour. Who cares about our inner armour?"