Health-care training school finds Danbury home









Photo: Photos By Carol Kaliff / Hearst Connecticut Media Image 1 of / 3 Caption Close Image 1 of 3 Buy photo Leonardo Guerra of Danbury is the director of Training Direct, a new school on Main Street in Danbury that focuses on health care careers. Photo Tuesday, Sept. 22, 2015. Leonardo Guerra of Danbury is the director of Training Direct, a new school on Main Street in Danbury that focuses on health care careers. Photo Tuesday, Sept. 22, 2015. Photo: Photos By Carol Kaliff / Hearst Connecticut Media Buy this photo Image 2 of 3 Buy photo Training Direct, a new school on Main Street in Danbury, focuses on health care careers. This room is for lab work. Training Direct, a new school on Main Street in Danbury, focuses on health care careers. This room is for lab work. Photo: Carol Kaliff / Hearst Connecticut Media Buy this photo Image 3 of 3 Buy photo Leonardo Guerra of Danbury is the director of Training Direct, a new school on Main Street in Danbury that focuses on health care careers. Leonardo Guerra of Danbury is the director of Training Direct, a new school on Main Street in Danbury that focuses on health care careers. Photo: Carol Kaliff / Hearst Connecticut Media Buy this photo Health-care training school finds Danbury home 1 / 3 Back to Gallery

DANBURY — Recognizing growth in the health care field in the Danbury area and the career opportunities that are available, Training Direct, a Bridgeport-based health care training school, recently opened a location on Main Street.

“For years we’ve been getting inquires from Danbury area residents who were looking to attend our school in Bridgeport,” said Mark Chesney, the vice president of Dorsey divisions, the parent company that owns the school. “Once we started doing some research, we realized that the Danbury area has some great health care facilities and it was a perfect fit.”

The school, on northern Main Street near the Sikorsky Credit Union, offers several programs including for certified nursing assistants, phlebotomy technicians, medical billing and coding. Tuition for the programs start around $1,200 for careers that can have a starting salary of up to $15 per hour.

Careers in the health care field have been expanding in the past few years due in part to the Affordable Health Care Act, which resulted in there being more people in the state covered by insurance.

“The industry needs more workers to help fill the need for the new insured patients who are coming into the system,” said Leonardo Guerra, the director of the Danbury facility, which includes several classrooms, as well as a laboratory and a computer room for certification testing. “Our students can take their test right here on our premises and know immediately if they passed. Usually, they are doing cartwheels through the room when it happens.”

Guerra noted that the courses provided by the school can help launch area residents into a new career that is ripe with advancement possibilities as additional certification is obtained.

“Even during bad economic times, there is always a need for more health care workers,” he said.

According to the state Department of Labor, more than 13,179 Danbury area residents were working in the health care industry last year. That’s a more than 13 percent increase since 2009, when the department reported that about 11,639 people in the area worked in health care.

Workers in the field can expect an average salary of about $54,870, according to the department. Nationally, the need for phlebotomists alone is expected to increase by 27 percent during the next 10 years, while the need for nursing assistants is expected to grow by about 21 percent during the same time period, according to national labor statistics.

“Within a relatively short period of time, people can train for a new career that will continue to be in demand for many years to come,” said Chesney. “It’s a great way to get into the profession.”

dperrefort@newstimes.com