Local officials are tamping down their skepticism about a new way of organizing mental health services for tens of thousands of Iowans.

Front-line administrators had worried that the statewide reorganization would lead to cuts in programs, but such fears are easing as the new plan takes hold.

"It's been a very positive experience so far," said Jamie Cashman, government relations manager for the Iowa State Association of Counties.

MAP: Iowa's new mental health regions

The state's 99 counties used to be responsible for their own mental health systems unless they voluntarily partnered with neighbors. They now have joined 15 regional authorities, which formally took control Tuesday.

"They've moved full-steam ahead and have come together very, very quickly," Cashman said.

Local administrators said the new system, coupled with an influx of federal and state money, is helping them add services. The programs include efforts to keep people from deteriorating to the point where they wind up hospitalized or jailed because of behaviors related to mental illness.

The shift has been in the works for several years. State leaders wanted to get away from having Iowans receive different mental health services depending on where they lived. The county-by-county system stemmed from the days when many such residents lived in "county homes," but critics said it made no sense now.

Supporters of the shift noted that many counties had already partnered with neighbors for some services. They said shifting to a regional system would let counties pool resources and trim administrative costs while maintaining some local oversight. As an incentive, the state promised to pick up some costs that had been borne by taxpayers.

Many county administrators worried that any effort to make mental health services uniform would mean closing some programs. They also noted that after passing previous reform measures, state legislators had failed to provide enough money to finance the services envisioned.

Jennifer Vitko, who oversees mental health services in Wapello, Davis and Appanoose counties, voiced concerns during Statehouse meetings in which the new system was designed over the past few years.

"I was very skeptical," Vitko recalled last week. For example, she had predicted she would have to close an Ottumwa program where people with mental illness can spend daytime hours. But that program will continue, she said, and she is adding other services. First up is the addition of a specialist who will help determine whether jail inmates need mental health services when they're released.

Vitko said part of the reason for her optimism is that Iowa agreed to accept hundreds of millions of extra federal dollars to essentially expand its Medicaid program under President Barack Obama's Affordable Care Act. Because of that decision, many adults with chronic mental illness are gaining health insurance coverage for the first time. That should mean counties will be relieved of many costs stemming from residents' psychiatric or counseling visits, hospitalizations and medications.

Rep. David Heaton, a Mount Pleasant Republican who helped design the new system, said he's hearing positive reports from most of the new regions. He knew there was much gnashing of teeth among mental health advocates as the changes were designed.

"I think everybody's feeling a little bit more secure right now," he said.

Rick Shults, an Iowa Department of Human Services administrator overseeing the transition, said he understood why many local officials were anxious about it. "It's difficult to make a change," he said. "It's difficult to understand how it's going to work."

Shults said he's pleased with how the transition is going. One of the main benefits will be more organized networks of mental health services, which are often scattered and scarce, he said. The main remaining challenges include finding ways to bolster Iowa's small supply of psychiatrists and other professionals, he said.

The statewide reorganization includes complicated changes in the financing of mental health services. Some counties that collected less than average amounts of property taxes for such services are receiving extra state money. One of those is Polk County, which is the only county that was allowed to serve as its own region.

Polk, Iowa's most populous county, was able to show that it could provide all required mental health services on its own. In fact, Polk already was providing more help than most other counties. Karen Walters Crammond, who oversees the county's mental health programs, said she and her colleagues braced for the possibility that Des Moines-area residents would lose programs as the state tried to force uniformity.

"We feared that it would be crushed down to the lowest common denominator," she said. "It's not."

For example, Crammond pointed to a new "crisis observation center," which is to open this month in downtown Des Moines. The center is to be an alternative to jail or a hospital for people who need help with mental health crises but aren't in immediate danger of hurting themselves or others. That center would not have been possible without about $6 million extra per year Polk County is receiving from the state under the redesign, she said.

Some regions aren't quite so well off. Lori Nosekabel, who leads the new southwest Iowa region formed by Adair, Adams, Taylor and Union counties, said she's trying to catch up financially because of the way the property tax calculations worked out.

"We're having some cash-flow problems, but we're making it work," she said. She isn't adding any services, but she's optimistic she can make it through the first year without cutting any.

State leaders infuriated county officials earlier this year by declaring that they intended to "claw back" 80 percent of whatever the counties saved on mental health services under the expanded Medicaid program, called the Iowa Health and Wellness Plan.

But tensions have eased over that issue after state and local leaders negotiated the details of how those payments will be figured. Heaton, the legislator who helped craft the plan, also noted that the state could wind up plowing those millions of dollars back into mental health services.

Teresa Bomhoff of Des Moines, a mental health advocate who closely monitors the reform effort, said she's pleased with how the process is going so far. Bomhoff, who represents the National Alliance on Mental Illness, will continue to push for the state to strengthen required services and continue to provide sufficient money.

"We'll have to see how the next couple of year go as they roll out the services, and hope for the best," she said.

Computerized bed registry sought

A governor's veto has grounded plans to start a system to help find slots for Iowans who need psychiatric hospitalization.

Legislators approved spending $200,000 to set up a computerized registry to track when psychiatric beds at Iowa hospitals were open or full. Iowa has a critical shortage of such beds, and local officials say they waste many hours on the phone seeking an open slot anywhere in the state. Psychiatric patients routinely have to travel hours to get to the nearest open bed. They're often transported by sheriff's deputies, at significant cost to counties. Some patients wait for days in emergency departments while hospital officials search for open psychiatric beds.

Proponents hoped a computerized registry would smooth the process of finding open beds and help ensure slots go to the patients who most need them. But Gov. Terry Branstad last month vetoed the entire $140 million bill that included the project, because he determined the spending was unaffordable.

Advocates say they have not given up on the idea of a computerized bed registry, which have been set up in other states. They also hope the psychiatric-bed crunch could be eased by other reforms that are to offer alternatives for people who aren't ill enough to need hospitalization but aren't stable enough to be on their own.

— Tony Leys

Read or Share this story: http://dmreg.co/1m4SekG