Governor Nikki Haley speaks about the Rev. Daniel L. Simmons, Sr. during his funeral services at Greater St. Luke AME Church June 30.

COLUMBIA – Gov. Nikki Haley has led the state through more tumult in the past six months than many leaders face in their entire careers: The shootings of nine Charleston churchgoers in June, the subsequent and successful charge to remove the Confederate battle flag from Statehouse grounds in July and historic flooding that killed 19 this month.

Online To stay up-to-date on South Carolina politics, go to palmettopolitics.com or download the Palmetto Politics app for iOS or Android.

It was a tumultuous year that raised the governor’s political profile and has her on the short list for other national Republican offices.

A prominent critic of Haley’s first term, Clemson University political science professor David Woodard, had only praise for the governor’s second term — as did the people he’s polling.

“I think she’s just doing splendidly right now,” Woodard said. “I’ve been asking about Nikki Haley and she is very popular among Republican voters. Now, I realize that’s not the full electorate, in other words: if they’re holding her responsible for any of these things, it’s not apparent in their approval of her.”

Research published by political science professors from Carnegie Mellon University and Boston University in 2011 found that voters affected by natural disasters “respond to powerful, random events as well as the actions that the politicians take in response.”

“When the governor and president do respectively request and approve a disaster declaration, they typically nullify the negative effect of the damage and may often garner a reward,” professors John T. Gasper and Andrew Reeves found. “The effect of a disaster declaration is much stronger for the governor than it is for the president.”

Record-breaking rainfall across the state led to historic and deadly floods the first week of October. An emergency declaration requested by Haley on Oct. 2 was approved the next day by the federal government. Two days later in a rare move, Haley received verbal approval for a major disaster declaration, which was formally issued later in the day.

The disaster put Haley back in the spotlight.

“We’re not going to stop until this final situation is taken care of,” Haley assured the public on Oct. 6, following disastrous dam breaks, large quantities of water heading toward the Lowcountry and a rising death toll.

‘Stepped out front’

As he watched the disaster unfold, Bob McAlister empathized with Haley and her team. He remembered sleeping in his office for a week during Hurricane Hugo when he was Gov. Carroll Campbell’s deputy chief of staff and communications director.

“The worst thing a leader can do in a crisis is to be timid and not be aggressive,” McAlister said. “The tipping point is when people are afraid and they don’t know what’s going to happen.”

Hugo hit in September 1989, two years into Carroll’s first term. McAlister, who now runs his own public relations shop, McAlister Communications in Columbia, has no doubt that the response helped secure a second term for Carroll.

“Carroll Campbell played a major role; he was an unproven commodity and there was a real partisan divide in that the Legislature,” McAlister said. “We were in the minority. But Carroll, just like Gov. Haley, stepped out front and said: ‘We’re going to fix it and we’re going to be better than before’ and he proceeded to getting it done.”

Haley called for evacuations in several areas out of caution over the threat of rising river levels. While some areas saw that flooding, announcements to evacuate over flood worries in Georgetown or Jamestown along the swollen Santee River didn’t materialize — even as dams broke elsewhere with limited warning.

McAlister said it’s easy to criticize a decision, as many did Campbell’s early call to evacuate the coast.

“(Campbell said) ‘I’d rather take a risk saving lives than endangering them, and of course that turned out to be the right call,” McAlister said. “Had Hugo not done the damage it did or veered off and gone somewhere else he would’ve been subject to severe criticism. But a leader in a crisis doesn’t worry about critics.”

College of Charleston political science professor Gibbs Knotts credits Haley’s success to several critical factors.

“It goes back to being able to take decisive action, putting a good team around her and being able to talk with the people on the ground and empathize with the folks,” Knotts said. “She can connect with people through ... television and social media.”

Haley, 43, said in her “New South” speech this September that she handles her own Instagram and Facebook accounts, the latter of which saw thousands of likes and positive comments on multiple posts throughout the disaster.

That speech at the National Press Club in Washington came amid much buzz over her as a potential presidential running mate.

“If a nominee asks me to sit down, of course I’ll talk to them, and I’ll go from there,” Haley said.

A cabinet post?

A more immediate and prominent role may be Haley as chairman of the Republican Governors Association.

Haley has raised funds and worked for the RGA’s executive committee since 2011 has helped her gain more recognition as the country’s youngest, current governor and only female Indian American. Time on the committee helped propel careers of Wisconsin Gov. Scott Walker, New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie, Louisiana Gov. Bobby Jindal and former Texas Gov. Rick Perry.

Current RGA vice chairwoman New Mexico Gov. Susana Martinez could also snag the spot as Republicans are in need of attracting Latino voters, especially as the party tries to mitigate damage rendered to the voting block by candidates. VP and cabinet buzz also swirls around Martinez, a two-term governor, former district attorney and member of the committee since 2011.

The executive committee election will be decided by 31 Republican governors, at the annual conference on Nov. 19. The term would cover the critical span of the 2016 presidential election cycle.

The RGA chair position brings a lot of attention, S.C. GOP Chairman Matt Moore said. Haley’s proven her executive ability during the unprecedented year of tragedies.

“It’s about being a confident, skilled governor, which she is, and presenting a very positive vision for where the Republican Party is going, and she’s doing that as well,” Moore said. “She has not been afraid to speak on not only the party’s direction, but when presidential candidates step out of line.”

He added her work with the RGA can’t be underestimated either.

“I know she did a good job at helping the RGA fundraise and as a top surrogate for them,” Moore said about Haley. “They’d be wise to put her talents to work.”

New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie, served with Haley when he was RGA chairman, attended her inauguration this year and reached out to her in support during the recent flooding.

Christie, who is running for the 2016 Republican presidential nomination, did not comment on Haley’s most recent tragedy, but spoke highly of her when he backed her on removing the Confederate battle flag.

“Governor Haley has demonstrated what it means to be a leader during extremely difficult and tragic times for her state and our country,” Christie said in a June 23 statement.

Sandy caused $39 billion in damages to New Jersey in October 2012 and became a defining moment of Christie’s legacy, just as many see the events of 2015 will define Haley’s.

“Strong people need strong leaders and strong leaders need strong people,” McAlister said. “And in these three crises South Carolina had both.”

Nationally syndicated columnist Jack Kelly recently wrote a column titled “Inexperience isn’t a liability” in which he named his “dream cabinet” should a Republican Party win.

“Fortunately, there are many qualified people on a deep Republican bench to fill them,” Kelly wrote. “I’m thinking in particular of South Carolina Gov. Nikki Haley, who has drawn well-deserved praise for how she’s handled the Charleston church shooting, the Confederate flag flap and the recent flooding.”

Many observers didn’t speculate on Haley’s next move. Woodard would be surprised by a vice presidential selection, and suggested, like Knotts, that a cabinet post would fit.

“I think it’s about figuring out what she’s going to do next in life,” Knotts said. “Whether she wants to wade into the national political environment, but getting the amount of media coverage and being able to handle things, those are the types of things people can remember you for.”