The Teachout-Wu campaign began what it says will be a sustained assault on former congresswoman Kathy Hochul's Washington record today, 15 days before New York's Democratic primary.

"I believe that Kathy Hochul's views, and her votes, should be considered disqualifying for someone who is seeking the nomination of the Democratic Party in this state," said Tim Wu, who is running against Hochul for lieutenant governor, in a conference call that included running mate Zephyr Teachout, reporters, and campaign staff.

Wu said that over the next ten days, his campaign will release a "dossier" on Hochul's record in four parts. The first was distributed today, and details what Wu said is "Hochul's history of cooperation, as a congresswoman, with the House Republican leadership."

On Sunday, the campaign released a video of Hochul talking about her relatively conservative record, as she attempted to defend her Buffalo-area House seat in a heavily Republican district. (Hochul was elected to the seat in 2011 after Republican Chris Lee resigned, but lost her re-election race to Rep. Chris Collins in 2012.)

The dossier cites several of Hochul's votes against the Affordable Care Act, and her vote to hold Attorney General Eric Holder in criminal contempt of Congress, a vote that included just 17 Democrats and was scored by the National Rifle Association.

Teachout used the dossier as an opportunity to attack Cuomo.

"Why we're on today is that I also believe [Governor Andrew Cuomo] needs to explain why he chose as a running mate someone who is deeply out of touch with Democratic values, and whose voting record suggests that she does not really belong in the traditional New York Democratic Party."

Peter Kauffmann, a spokesman for the Hochul campaign, sent a statement issued today by Rep. Charles Rangel.

"I don't know where this professor was when the New York delegation was facing relentless attacks from the Tea Party in Washington, but I do know where Kathy Hochul was -- standing and fighting right alongside us. New Yorkers deserve a lieutenant governor who has shown she can deliver for them, not someone just looking to fill time during his summer vacation," said Rangel.