Sous chef Jackie Henry, left, and prep cook Monica Coles apply royal icing to a gingerbread house Tuesday at the Embassy Suites Loveland. ( Steve Stoner / Loveland Reporter-Herald )

Click photo to enlarge «

1

»

If you go What: 2014 Home Sweet Home celebration and fundraising event for Habitat for Humanity. When: 1-4 p.m. Saturday, Dec. 6. Where: Embassy Suites Loveland, 4705 Clydesdale Parkway. Cost: Admission is free; activity tickets are: $15, photos with Santa; $10, gingerbread cookie decorating; $5, face painting; $3, life-size Candy Land game; and $2, crafts. More info: Visit lovelandhabitat.org or call 669-9769.

If prep cook Monica Coles can help build a home out of sugar, then Loveland Habitat for Humanity can sweeten the deal for affordable home-building with the annual Home Sweet Home fundraiser Dec. 6 at Embassy Suites Loveland.

"They're building houses for people in need; we're building houses for fun," Coles said Tuesday, standing in front of a mostly complete gingerbread house. It boasts a new popcorn roof, instead of the usual sugar cookies or gingerbread, and candy-filled flower boxes.

"Everything is edible except the wood, nails and glue and the glitter," she said.

Coles, Embassy Suites sous chef Jackie Henry and their crew spent two days assembling the gingerbread house after three weeks of popping 75 pounds of popcorn and baking hundreds of cookies to turn into bricks and siding that they glued, sometimes with frosting, onto the wood frame built by the hotel's maintenance staff.

"It's such a wow factor," said Lou Ann Hoehne, director of event sales at Embassy Suites Loveland. "I think it's an expression of the character of the hotel. It's a taste of home and comfort and a feeling of the season and the joy it brings.

"We built a neat little thing we want lots of folks to enjoy," she said.

Embassy Suites hosts the Home Sweet Home event centered on the gingerbread house, bringing in Santa Claus for weekend visits at the house.

Holiday parties and events scheduled in the hotel's conference center may include stops at the house, tree-lined hallways and the decorated atrium, which is decked out with winter-loving stuffed animals such as a mule sticking his head out of a barn, ice-skating penguins, an ice-fishing polar bear, a moose and animated snowflakes hanging from the ceiling wearing red gloves.

Loveland Habitat's fifth annual Home Sweet Home is expected to bring 200 people to the hotel to see the gingerbread house, said Vince Deely, resource development and marketing director of the nonprofit.

"The fact it's a real life-size gingerbread house is a pretty amazing thing to see," Deely said.

The Home Sweet Home holiday event and fundraiser will feature games, cookie decorating, crafts and family and pet photos with Santa Claus. The event serves as the nonprofit's annual holiday party for families, neighbors and supporters of the organization.

"It's a lot of eye candy going on with the Christmas decorations and the music and the entertainment we have," Deely said. "The whole idea is to bring people out to enjoy the activities and raise a little money."

During the event, Loveland Habitat will sell holiday wreaths and baskets from the organization's ReStore thrift store refashioned and repurposed by volunteers. The nonprofit raised more than $1,100 from last year's sale and aims to raise $2,500 this year.

The nonprofit raised nearly $11,900 through the sale and from event sponsorships and tickets, all to help support its affordable-home-building program that, so far, has constructed 119 homes in Loveland in 27 years.

Embassy Suites also features tree-lined hallways for the sixth annual Holiday Celebration of Trees, which has the theme of Colorado Christmas this year.

Health-care organizations, businesses and groups decorate trees to donate to a family or nonprofit in need in a program sponsored by AccentCare of Colorado in Windsor; the donors purchase a tree and buy or make the trimmings.

"It's just a wonderful stroll through the conference center. It adds a lot of light and character," Hoehne said. "Visitors come just to see the trees."

The 17 trees that are being sponsored went up this week and will be in the hallways of the conference center and the atrium through Dec. 21. The sponsors will take down and deliver the trees the next day.

Staff members from Green House Homes decorated a tree that the staffers themed as "home for the holidays."

"We want to bring back memories of being home for the holidays," said Lisa Bryant, admissions and marketing director for the new Loveland skilled-nursing facility.

Visitors can vote on their favorite trees for first to third place through Dec. 21.

"I think it makes it look like Winter Wonderland," said Marissa Watson-Bane, bereavement coordinator of AccentCare, about the Celebration of Trees. "It just sparkles down the hallway."

Shelley Widhalm: 970-669-5050, swidhalm@reporter-herald.com, twitter.com/ShelleyWidhalm.