This week, women's access to basic health care was dealt another blow: A court ruled that even secular employers can refuse to allow employees to access an insurance plan covering contraception if they have a "moral objection" to women using birth control.

The case was brought by March for Life, a secular nonprofit that organizes a large anti-abortion march in Washington, D.C. every year. Last year's Hobby Lobby case set the groundwork for this one when it challenged a provision of the Affordable Care Act (ACA) that required insurance plans to cover contraception, unless those plans were offered by religious institutions that have a religious objection to birth control, in which case there were exceptions. Hobby Lobby is not a religious institution but a for-profit corporation owned by a religious family that opposed some forms of birth control; the Supreme Court held that under the federal Religious Freedom Restoration Act (RFRA), Hobby Lobby did not have to offer its employees insurance coverage that violates its' owners religious beliefs.

Advertisement - Continue Reading Below

It was a bad decision, and Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg warned in her dissent that the court "ventured into a minefield."

She was right.

Dozens of anti-contraception cases have been filed in the wake of Hobby Lobby, adding to the hundreds brought in an attempt to destroy the ACA. Few have been successful, but last week, in a far-reaching and convoluted opinion, Judge Richard J. Leon took Hobby Lobby one step further and ruled that even a moral objection to a generally applicable law — not a religious one — is enough to exempt the moral objectors from having to follow it.

Most Popular

Leon's legal logic is difficult to follow. The contraception mandate, he wrote in the opinion, violates the Fifth Amendment's guarantee of equal protection under the law because it treats religious groups differently than secular ones. Just one problem: The Supreme Court already ruled on that issue in a previous case, holding that when the government exempts or accommodates religious organizations or individuals from a generally applicable law, it does not similarly have to exempt or accommodate their secular counterparts. No matter, Leon says — moral philosophy should be treated the same under the law as a religious belief.

Leon also holds that the contraception mandate violates the RFRA, a federal law that requires the government not "substantially burden" the free exercise of religion unless the burdensome law is narrowly tailored to further a compelling government interest — that is, the government has to have a really good reason to do what they're doing, and they have to do it carefully and thoughtfully. Even though the RFRA is about religious objections to laws and March for Life is a non-religious organization, Leon still held that the RFRA applies because two of the March for Life employees who brought the claim, one of whom is the group's president, are religious. March for Life also requires its employees to oppose most forms of contraception as a condition of working there. Although March for Life's objection to contraception is a moral one, since they're a secular nonprofit, Leon held that the plaintiff employees' religious beliefs are nevertheless substantially burdened by the ACA, and therefore the secular organization they work for doesn't have to provide a health plan that covers birth control.

It's worth noting that the employees who object to contraception aren't actually required to pay for, obtain, or use contraception at all. It's the simple presence of contraception as an option among hundreds of other medications covered under their insurance plans, options they never have to take advantage of, that they oppose as a gross violation of their personal morality.

This is a disturbing ruling for a lot of reasons, not least of which is that it elevates the nebulous "moral objection" to the level of a religious one, and it doesn't require that the moral objection be grounded in any sort of objective or scientific truth. The basic claim that the March for Life plaintiffs assert — that nearly all forms of birth control are "abortifacients" and end pregnancies — is simply not true. That didn't matter in the Hobby Lobby decision, because courts have long held that religious beliefs don't have to be proven true to be valid — they just have to be sincerely held. That makes sense, given that it's awfully difficult to definitively prove that God exists, for instance.

The plaintiffs in the March for Life case ground their opposition to birth control in religion. But March for Life is technically not a religious organization, so it has to claim a "moral" objection to birth control. That objection, though, still flies in the face of scientific fact. They say that all forms of hormonal birth control cause abortions, wiping out nearly all options other than sterilization and the diaphragm, despite scientific evidence to the contrary. That opens up a door to frightening future rulings, wherein any employee or employer could claim a moral obligation to opt out of a generally applicable law, even if that opting out harmed other employees or compromised their rights.

And refusing to offer a health plan that covers many birth control options does, in fact, harm others, even at an organization like March for Life, where employees vow to oppose these exact kinds of birth control. First, what people profess to believe and what they actually do in the privacy of their own homes and in their doctors' offices are often two different things — there are certainly women who hold themselves out to be "pro-life" but who have terminated pregnancies, used the birth control pill, or had an IUD inserted. It's hypocritical for someone to work at an organization like March for Life and still use a contraception method the group opposes, but anyone who did so certainly wouldn't be the first, and choosing the best reproductive health options should remain a private choice available to all people, regardless of their political beliefs. We also shouldn't assume that every employee of a mission-driven organization agrees with the mission — in this economy, people need jobs, and there are almost surely folks who work at organizations where employees technically promise to adhere to a certain set of moral requirements, but who quietly choose to actually abide by their own moral code. It's not like your employer is going to go rifling through your bedroom looking for evidence of sexual misbehavior, or rooting around in your cervix for an IUD, right? Except now, your employer can use the courts as a surrogate to make sure you don't get that IUD in the first place.