Author Marilynne Robinson Getty Images

The setting of Marilynne Robinson’s ‘Gilead’ is arguably an important character in the novel. The small Iowa town in which the story unfolds gives the book its title and is where the protagonist, Rev. John Ames, composes his letter to his young son.

In a review in the Nation of Robinson’s 2014 novel, ‘Lila,’ which forms a trilogy with ‘Gilead’ and ‘Home,’ writer Roxana Robinson described the town as “a safe, domesticated place where people work in their gardens and hang out their wash. Children swing in the backyard and swim in the river…. There is no sense of physical danger here; the most powerful conflicts are intellectual, emotional and moral.”

Gilead, where children are safe playing on their own and Ames himself wanders outdoors when he can’t sleep, is where the minister has spent almost all but two of his seventy-six years. Ames writes: “It was on the nights I didn’t sleep at all and I didn’t feel like reading that I’d walk through town at one or two o’clock. In the old days I could walk down every single street, past every house, in about an hour. I’d try to remember the people who lived in each one, and whatever I knew about them, which was often quite a lot…And I’d pray for them.”

As Rev. Ames’s health fails, his daily circuit becomes even more circumscribed, limited largely to the home he shares with his young wife and son and the church where he has preached for decades.

Gilead in the mid-1950s seems a reassuring, remote place of solid Midwestern values. Ames himself refers to it affectionately as “a shabby little town” and his attachment to it—and, perhaps, a sense that Gilead’s distinctive qualities may not outlast him for long—flows like an undercurrent through the book.

Speaking of his church, Ames writes, “The light in the room was beautiful this morning, as it often is. It’s a plain old church and it could use a coat of paint. But in the dark times I used to walk over before sunrise just to sit there and watch the light come into that room. I don’t know how beautiful it might seem to anyone else.”

Although Robinson doesn’t have Ames dwell on descriptions of the town’s layout—such as stores, a post office and the like, she establishes a very assured portrait of the place. Readers, did you finish reading ‘Gilead’ with a clear picture in your mind of the town? Can you see Rev. Ames writing in his house or walking into his church? And are there any places you know that bring to mind Gilead, Iowa?