GRAND RAPIDS, MI – Autocam Corp.’s quest to adopt the U.S. Supreme Court’s “Hobby Lobby” ruling won its first victory on Monday, Aug. 4 when the high court returned the case Autocam lost last year back to the 6th Circuit Court of Appeals

In a single-page ruling, the Supreme Court sent Autocam's case back to the appellate court “for further consideration in light of Burwell v. Hobby Lobby Stores, Inc...”

As devout Roman Catholics, Autocam President and CEO John Kennedy and his family argued the “Religious Freedom Restoration Act” allowed them to waive the Affordable Care Act’s requirement to provide contraceptives as part of their company’s private health care coverage.

Though the Kennedy’s lost their claim before U.S. District Judge Robert Jonker and their appeal to the 6th Circuit Court of Appeals last year, lawyers for Hobby Lobby won a similar claim when their appeal was heard before the Supreme Court.

In a 5-4 decision announced June 30, the high court ruled that Hobby Lobby’s owners were protected by the “Religious Freedom Restoration Act” from fulfilling Obamacare’s mandate to provide birth control and sterilization drugs as part of their health care coverage.

Tom Ciesielka, a spokesman for The Thomas More Society, said their nonprofit group asked the high court to review and reverse the 6th Circuit U.S. Court of Appeals’ decision on Autocam’s behalf.

Ciesielka said their lawyers expect the 6th Circuit Court will act on the Supreme Court ruling rather than sending the case back to Jonker’s courtroom, where it was first rejected.

Although Autocam has since sold its automotive business to a publicly-held company that will be required to comply with the Obamacare mandates, Kennedy has said he will continue to seek the exception for the Autocam medical device business his family has retained.

RELATED: Autocam's lawyers headed back to court after Supreme Court affirms their stance in Hobby Lobby ruling

Jim Harger covers business for MLive/Grand Rapids Press. Email him at jharger@mlive.com or follow him on Twitter or Facebook or Google+.