The City of Ferguson, Mo., responding to Freedom of Information requests, has released the full contents of racist emails circulated by the chief court clerk and two police supervisors that were disclosed by the Justice Department in a report last month.

The report called on the city to overhaul its criminal justice system. The full disclosure of the emails give further detail of the back-and-forth between the clerk, Mary Ann Twitty; Richard Henke, a police captain; and William J. Mudd, a sergeant, on government email accounts. The three have since left the government.

In one message sent from Ms. Twitty to the two police officials in December 2011, she forwarded a list of “insensitive one-liners.” One of them spoke of a man being devastated to learn that his wife was having an affair.

“I converted to Islam, and we’re stoning her in the morning!” the email read.

In another message, Ms. Twitty forwarded a photo of former President Ronald Reagan feeding a chimpanzee with a baby bottle of milk.

“Rare photo of Ronald Reagan babysitting Barack Obama in early 1962,” the photo caption read.

Yet another sent from Mr. Mudd to Ms. Twitty showed a picture of two dogs lying on a floor. Beneath the photo, it told the story of a man who went to sign his dogs up for welfare, explaining to the person taking the application that they were “mixed in color, unemployed, lazy, can’t speak English and have no friggin clue who their Daddies are.”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

The release of the full emails on Thursday comes as the city is still navigating the racial tensions that resulted from the fatal shooting of Michael Brown, a black 18-year-old, by Darren Wilson, a white police officer.

The Justice Department report that revealed the emails detailed systematic bias in Ferguson’s law enforcement system. City leaders are negotiating a settlement with federal officials to avoid facing a lawsuit.

For critics of Ferguson, the emails only confirmed their criticisms of the town.

Ferguson’s mayor, James W. Knowles III, quickly denounced the emails once they were revealed. Ms. Twitty was fired and Mr. Henke and Mr. Mudd were forced from the department days later. None of them have spoken publicly since leaving the government.

Several top officials including the city manager, municipal judge and police chief have also left their posts in the wake of the report.

In just days, the city will elect three new members to its seven-member council, with activists pushing to diversify Ferguson’s leadership ranks.