Updated: 3:30 p.m. Friday.

No one's throwing a victory party just yet, but Oregon business lobbyists are guardedly optimistic about dodging a host of new employer mandates and sanctions proposed by state legislators.

With Democrats firmly in control of both legislative houses, employer groups expected to be on the defensive during the 2015 session as lawmakers brought forward bills to raise the minimum wage and require paid sick days.

What they didn't anticipate was the volume and variety of worker-friendly proposals to impose new costs and penalties and changes in hiring and scheduling practices.

With just weeks remaining this session, the conventional wisdom in Salem is that a scaled-back sick leave bill is likely to pass, but a higher minimum wage is likely dead.

Many other "job killer" bills are stalled or all but dead. But veteran lobbyists say they are troubled nonetheless by the tenor of many of the proposals, whether aimed at curtailing wage theft or preventing employers from disqualifying job applicants based on their criminal history.

"From my vantage point, it seems like a lot of bills portray a hostility between employers and employees," said Bill Perry, a lobbyist for the Oregon Restaurant & Lodging Association.

With an improving economy, Oregon has seen steady job growth and falling unemployment. Yet "when you look at some bills, it makes it look like everybody's unhappy, that employers are not doing anything for workers," Perry said.

"What we've seen so much this session is adding a private right of action to so many statutes," said Jan Meekcoms, a lobbyist for the National Federation of Independent Business.

With the right to go to court, valid complaint or not, one disgruntled employee can put a small business owner out of business, Meekcoms said. "It really needs to be a collaborative arrangement and we're creating laws that make it very unfriendly.

"I've been here five and a half years and I have seen it every session. It just hasn't gotten traction until now and the reason why is because (Democrats) have the power to give it that traction."

Tom Chamberlain, president of the Oregon AFL-CIO, acknowledged that it's been "a really tough session" for labor.

"You always enter each legislative session with high expectations, but rarely do your expectations match the final results," he said.

As union representation has fallen while wage disparity has risen, labor advocates have turned to the Legislature on behalf of more and more workers who are not covered by collective bargaining agreements and lack basic protections, Chamberlain said.

"I think we'll see more of it," he said. "Workers feel they haven't been part of the economic recovery. We're losing the core of the middle class in Oregon as we see more manufacturing jobs go away."

***

Early in the session, a coalition of Oregon industry, agricultural and small business advocates led by Associated Oregon Industries released a list of "job killer" bills whose cumulative impact, they said, would harm the state's business climate and economic recovery.

Only one of those so far has passed. House Bill 2007 makes it illegal to take disciplinary action against a worker who asks or talks about their wages in the workplace. Retaliation would be considered an unlawful employment practice and give the employee a right to sue the employer for damages.

"It sets a very bad precedent," Meekcoms said. "It shuts down open, honest communication that should occur in a working environment between an employer and employee."

She said employers could find themselves defending themselves against claims by workers who misconstrue an unrelated disciplinary action as retribution for an earlier wage discussion.

A bill mandating statewide paid sick leave could come up for a Senate vote as early as next week and then head to the House. Senate Bill 454 is scheduled for a work session today (Friday, June 5) in the Ways and Means Committee. (Update: The measure was approved Friday and sent to the Senate.) A top priority of labor activists, SB454 originally would have applied to all employers, regardless of size, and required them to give workers up to seven days a year of paid sick leave.

The bill was later amended to apply to employers with 10 or more workers, require just five days of paid sick time, and pre-empt cities and counties from enacting their own sick leave ordinances. (Portland's law, applying to companies with 6 or more employees, would be allowed to stand.) Business lobbyists also argued successfully to permit shift trading, reduce record-keeping requirements and secure a year's grace period from penalties.

As for other bills perceived as a threat to job growth or unreasonable burden on employers, the NFIB's Meekcoms said, "It's predictably unpredictable at this point of the game."

Here's a rundown:

SB718 – Allows employees to file civil lawsuits for unpaid wages without first filing a wage theft claim with the state Bureau of Labor and Industries. The bill originally would have allowed employees to file liens on an employer's real or personal property for alleged but unproven wage claims, said AOI lobbyist Betsy Earls. Current committee: Senate Rules.

SB845 – Penalizes large employers whose employees receive health insurance coverage through the Oregon Health Plan. Under the Affordable Care Act, employers of 50 or more workers must provide health insurance for their full-time employees. In cases where those employers do not offer coverage, many workers obtain it through the OHP or a health insurance exchange. Current committee: Ways and Means.

SB 888 – Mandates predictive scheduling. Requires employers to grant flexible or predictable work schedules three weeks in advance and compensate employees for changes in certain circumstances. Makes it illegal to retaliate against workers who request flex or predictable schedules. Current committee: Senate Rules.

HB 2009 – Increases statewide minimum wage from $9.25 per hour to $15 an hour. Many other similar bills also were introduced. A citizen group hopes to place an initiative on the 2016 general election ballot. Current committees: Senate Rules, House Rules.

HB 2386 – Authorizes new cease-and-desist authority for the Bureau of Labor and Industries in cases where the agency has "reason to believe" wage theft has occurred. The measure allows BOLI to impose a civil penalty and require a bond when the employer does not pay wages on an established payday. Current committee: House Business and Labor.

HB 2764 – Increases workers compensation costs. Allows private attorneys who represent injured workers to receive increased fees, comparable to those earned by attorneys for insurers or self-insured employers. The bill was amended to delete a provision automatically increasing the fees every two years and instead calls for a biennial review. Current status: Passed the House; awaiting third reading in Senate.

HB 2960 – Creates an Oregon Retirement Savings Board to manage a state-sponsored retirement plan. The bill would require employers to automatically enroll workers not eligible for other plans. Business lobbyists argue the bill shouldn't go forward without first establishing whether it would expose the state or employers to liability under the Employee Retirement Income Security Act, which sets minimum standards for pension and health plans in private industry. Current committee: Ways and Means. (Update: The measure was approved Friday and sent to the Senate.)



-- George Rede

grede@oregonian.com

503-294-4004

@georgerede