Dude, Where's My Voting Rights Act?: Last year, Rep. Steve Scalise, a Louisiana Republican and one of House Speaker John Boehner's top lieutenants, made headlines – and not in a good way – when news surfaced he was chummy with white supremacists including David Duke, the former Ku Klux Klan leader turned Bayou State politician. Like most scandalized figures, Scalise kept his job after taking an apology tour, allowing the Congressional Black Caucus and civil rights leaders yell at him for a bit, then promising to do better. But two of those leaders – Marc Morial of the Urban League and Wade Henderson of the Lawyers' Committee for Human and Civil Rights – have called out Scalise for making an empty promise. The New York Times reports Morial and Henderson sent Scalise's office a letter saying the House GOP's third-ranking officer has not done anything to restore portions of the Voting Rights Act of 1965. The letter also reminded that Scalise's speech before the white-rights European-American Unity and Rights Organization in 2002 wasn't that long ago, and that he vowed to make amends by taking action. To date, the letter says, "that offer has rung hollow." In a statement, Scalise's spokesman, Chris Bond says the congressman "discusses a wide range of important issues in his regular conversations with members of Congress, including leaders of the Congressional Black Caucus, where he works to find common ground and advance their shared values."

Your Evening Video: A brief history of why this is important:

99 Problems: Move over, #BlackLivesMatter; you've got competition. The nascent civil rights movement, which has been clashing with Bernie Sanders, the uber-progressive running for the 2016 Democratic presidential nomination, isn't the only liberal interest group vying for his attention. Politico reports that, since emerging as a viable threat to front-runner Hillary Clinton, all kinds of single-issue advocates – from gender-rights advocates to campaign reformers like Lawrence Lessig, a Harvard law professor and potential rival – are demanding Sanders put their views at the top of his stump speech or are loudly calling him a sellout for not doing it already. The series of ideological purity tests, however, run the risk of weighing down Sanders' campaign and lets Clinton slide for keeping the progressives at arm's length. Which, ironically, is what opened up space for Sanders' campaign to begin with.

Don't Agonize, Organize: Now that his unsightly contretemps with Fox News anchor Megyn Kelly are behind him for the moment, Donald J. Trump is showing signs that his is more than a vanity campaign of an ambitious plutocrat (or really bad performance art). The Washington Post reports The Donald is doing some old-fashioned groundwork in Iowa, cruising the heartland in a giant bus and signing up voters. Or, more accurately, he's paying people to do it for him, in what looks like an honest attempt to win the January caucuses. Even a good showing could give Trump a boost coming out of exhibition season, and force his 16 rivals to take him more seriously heading into the regular primary voting schedule. The seasoned pros who know Iowa like their own phone numbers are impressed: "You cannot swing a dead cat in Iowa and not hit a Trump person," one GOP operative told the Post. "It's unlike anything I've ever seen."

Drawn Conclusion: