Health insurance trade association America's Health Insurance Plans has brought its annual conference to Nashville this week, convening hundreds of payers, providers, and even former presidential candidate and Massachusetts governor Mitt Romney, to discuss the changing landscape of health care.

Romney gave the conferences' closing address Thursday and discussed a number of current political issues, including national security and global warming. He touched on health care at the end of his speech, saying that poverty was at the root of many health care issues in America and that the nation's leaders needed to focus on education and job creation to help pull people out of generational poverty.

He also discussed the insurance legislation that was implemented in Massachusetts when he was governor, saying it was not a model intended for the entire nation and that premiums are increasing because people are "being made to purchase comprehensive, mandated coverage plans" through the Affordable Care Act.

"Let each state craft their own plan," Romney said. "If they want to try what Massachusetts did, let them do it. If Vermont wants to try single-payer, let them try. If Texas wants health savings accounts, they should. Their objective will be to get everybody insured and cover pre-existing conditions."

Prior to Romney's speech, conference sessions covered an expanse of health care issues, particularly those that affect the relationship between payers and providers. Here are three of the most-discussed topics from the conference and perspectives from speakers in both the private and public sectors.

Price transparency and consumerism

The rise of consumerism and its effect on the traditionally business-to-business health insurance industry was a major theme of the conference. Most attendees and speakers agreed that high-deductible plans were the major force behind the rapid increase in consumer-based health care.

But one consequence of health care consumers spending more of their own money is the demand for more transparency in pricing and the true costs of services.

"Without consumer engagement, there is no pressure for prices to go down," said Elizabeth Holmes, founder and CEO of Theranos.

Theranos, which Holmes founded in 2003 and has former Sen. Bill Frist as a board member, offers accessible and affordable lab testing, with transparent prices available on the company's website. Holmes likened consumer-based lab testing to at-home pregnancy tests, and said by making lab testing more accessible, early detection becomes possible for patients who are not a part of the existing health care system.

"When prices are transparent and consumers are informed, competition flourishes," Holmes said.

Conference speakers also discussed ways to make interactions with health insurance companies more consumer-friendly, which can improve patient engagement and lower costs. Insurance plans have to recognize the value in design in improving member experience, said Amy Cueva, founder and chief experience officer of Mad*Pow, a design and technology agency.

"Health insurance companies have a huge opportunity to influence the health literacy of their members," Cueva said, if they can effectively provide intuitive technology, straight answers and self-service tools.

Value-based contracting

As the health system moves to paying for value over volume, insurance companies are tasked with engaging their provider partners in new contract models that dramatically change how doctors and health systems are paid.

Dr. Amy Fahrenkopf, medical director and vice president of market transformation for Highmark Inc., said consistent training, education and robust provider assessments are working well as the insurer implements these new contracts. But there are still challenges, she said, in provider engagement, especially with those providers who have limited resources to collect and mine patient data.

Fahrenkopf said Highmark was actively pursuing providers who were making the necessary investments to succeed under value-based contracts.

"We used to want as many providers as we could get in our networks, but now we pay attention to those who are engaging and want to move the needle on the same things we do," she said. "We're moving to a different model where we will be providing a lot more resources to providers that are strategic partners than we will to others."

Interoperability and information technology

Dr. Karen DeSalvo, national coordinator for health information technology for the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, outlined the department's near-term goals for Medicare's IT abilities. DHS expects to reach full interoperability by 2018, and is also working on setting standards for compiling administrative and clinical data, as well as expanding IT incentives for providers.

"It's not just Meaningful Use anymore, but how do we weave encouragement for interoperability into what we're doing at the federal level?" she said. "We're feeling a lot of pressure from consumers and Congress to move this quickly, and what we're hearing has the biggest impact is incentives."

DeSalvo also said commercial payers can help move the needle by building contracts that pay more to providers using interoperable systems.

"We want to change the way we do business in one-sixth of our economy, where we are not paying for more, we're paying for better, and that's normal and mainstream," DeSalvo said. "That's where we're going and that's why we've asked commercial payers to come along."