GREENE COUNTY, Mo. -- The FBI says it conducted a record 23 million background checks last year.

Here in the Ozarks, many are voicing their concerns over President Obama's executive order-- including the Greene County Sheriff.

President Obama's gun control initiatives bring to the forefront a debate over the correlation between mental health and guns-- and also, an argument over privacy rights versus security.

"The bottom line is not the guns," said Greene County Sheriff Jim Arnott. "It's the violent acts of people."

Sheriff Arnott says the president's focus could be in the wrong place.

"Instead of focusing on gun control, it would be nice if the president would focus on violent criminal control," said Arnott. "That's the issue we have-- the common denominator."

Sheriff Arnott believes federal funds could be used more efficiently at the local level-- where law enforcement officers encounter people who obtain guns illegally on a daily basis.

"The FBI, the ATF-- they're not going to have information about Joe Blow that lives in Greene County, Missouri out in the rural areas that deputies repeatedly deal with-- that we know has a mental health condition," says Arnott. "There is no database that tracks that-- who tracks that? Local law enforcement."



Part of the president's plan includes funding for additional ATF and FBI agents to help process background checks.

"Everybody talks about a mental health issue and they want to track that," Arnott said. "But the federal government doesn't have a way to do that."

"It's unfortunate that gun control and mental illness are so often linked in the public mind," said Burrell Behavioral Health Psychologist Dr. Paul Thomlinson.



Mental health field workers fear their patients may not seek treatment because they're worried about having their rights curtailed.

"Because the minute people with mental illness get the message your records aren't confidential-- that's the minute we are unable to provide them effectively with services," said Dr. Thomlinson.

It's unclear at this point what kinds of changes may come with the executive action.

"We have no idea what day to day impact this would have on our sharing information," Thomlinson said.

"I don't understand how they're going to accomplish what they want to do," said Arnott.

The latest CBS News poll shows 51 percent of Americans believe gun laws should be more strict-- that's down seven percent since last fall.