Scooby Wright was 7 years old when he first said the words out loud.

His teacher asked the "What do you want to do with your life?" question, and Scooby answered: "I want to play in the NFL."

That's not an uncommon response for a kid, but only a precious few end up having the body, the talent, the relentless dedication just to have a chance to have the opportunity.

For Wright, that opportunity is here.

Wright, who played his final game at linebacker for the Arizona Wildcats after making 15 tackles (3.5 for loss, two sacks) in the New Mexico Bowl on Saturday afternoon, will skip his final season of eligibility and enter the NFL Draft, he said after the game.

"He's betting on himself," his father, Phil Wright told TucsonNewsNow.com on Friday night.

If the draft projections as of right now hold true, that could end up being a pretty good bet.

"We've been hearing from everybody that he's right now, as of today, before the bowl game, low first round, second round, possible third," Phil said Friday night.

That's a reasonable projection, according to Rob Rang, a senior NFL draft analyst for CBSSports.com. Rang on Friday, in a text to TucsonNewsNow.com, pegged Wright as a "second-day" draft pick, meaning a second- or third-rounder, in his personal evaluations. Rang added that his NFL contacts confirmed that projected range.

Wright's injury-filled junior season -- in which he played only parts of two games in the regular season before the bowl -- certainly muddied the waters regarding his NFL future, but he has loads of great game tape from 2014.

That's when he made 163 tackles, including 29 for loss and 14 sacks, and forced six fumbles.

"He's very instinctive," Rang said in an interview last month. "He sees the play happening before it happens. His ability to create tackles for loss is undeniable. ... But I have some reservations about his straight-line speed and his fluidity in coverage."

The speed will be a question. No doubt. That is why Wright will head to Miami a couple of days after Christmas to begin training with Pete Bommarito, the owner of Bommarito Performance Systems who has trained several hundred drafted players, including four 2015 first-rounders.

"We looked at a number of different options, but Pete is supposed to be the best speed guy," Phil said.

Scooby has previously been tested in the low 4.7-second range in the 40-yard dash, his dad said. At a high school combine, Scooby ran a 4.88. While making a list of pre-draft goals, the family is aiming for Scooby to post a 40 time in the 4.62 to 4.65 range. Phil said Scooby actually has a personal goal of 4.59.

"He has no technique, no nothing. He lumbers," Phil said of his son's sprinting ability in the 40. "That's why he's going to Pete."

But Arizona defensive coordinator Jeff Casteel said before the season that Scooby's short-area burst is "off the charts," and Phil backed up that assessment with stories of when his son ran the 100 meters in high school.

Scooby would invariably be in the lead after 30 to 35 yards before falling toward the back of the pack halfway through the race. Scooby was quick, but not fast.

"The golden ticket is that 40 time," Phil said. "If he runs anything under that 4.65, he's golden."

Scooby is listed at 6-1, 246 pounds, and might drop to about 240 to prepare for the NFL Combine and 40-yard dash.

He is not small by NFL middle linebacker standards. Perhaps an inch shorter than the prototype, but nothing that would be a deal-breaker.

The 40 time will be key, but Wright is probably more athletic than you think. His upper body strength will test very well, and his quickness in the three-cone and shuttle drills should do the same. His work ethic and character are "intangible" plusses, and he doesn't figure to have any problems when scouts probe his football IQ and ability to break down schemes and strategy.

Rang looks at Wright as a "classic 4-3 middle linebacker."

"I haven't seen him get off blocks and have to fight through guards consistently like a 3-4 inside linebacker would," Rang said. "He's not a linebacker who is going to fit in certain schemes."

That's what the kicking-the-tires process will be for NFL teams leading up the draft, which will be held April 28-30. Is Wright only a 4-3 middle linebacker? Can he play in a 3-4 scheme? Is he an every-down linebacker who can cover? Can he be an NFL edge rusher like he was at Arizona?

Competition will be stiff. In the past five years, an average of only four inside linebackers have been selected among the first three rounds, according to ESPN.

Among the senior inside linebackers Wright will be contending with are Alabama's Reggie Ragland, Missouri's Kentrell Brothers and Temple's Tyler Matakevich, who won this season's Nagurski and Bednarik awards as the nation's top defender. Wright won those awards in 2014, as well as the Lombardi, given to the nation's top lineman/linebacker.

No matter how it turns out from here, Wright had one of the most special seasons in Arizona history, leading the Wildcats to the 2014 Pac-12 South title and the Fiesta Bowl. Part of his legacy will always be "Two-Star Scoob" -- that overlooked, wildly underrated recruit who was once summarily dismissed by a Cal assistant who told him he should probably try his luck at lower-division Sacramento State instead.

Wright was rated as the 96th-best inside linebacker recruit in the 2013 recruit, according to the 247Sports composite rankings of several recruiting sites.

But almost as soon as Wright arrived at Arizona out of Santa Rosa (Calif.) High School, the comparisons began to another high-motor, diamond-in-the-rough defender from northern California: Tedy Bruschi.

That former Arizona Wildcat also was deemed "too" everything -- too small, too short, too slow.

Bruschi, after his All-America career, was a third-round pick, 86th overall, in the 1996 draft, before playing 13 years in the NFL and winning three Super Bowl rings with the New England Patriots.

Something in that draft range could be in store for Scooby, but postseason workouts will largely determine how he rises or falls from here.

Wright was able to get back healthy for the New Mexico Bowl after suffering a meniscus injury in his left knee in the season opener and then a sprained right foot in the fourth game upon his return to the field, Sept. 26.

Part of the decision to leave now, Phil said, was centered on not having to absorb several hundred more collisions in college.

"There are a lot of doubters. But he tells me, at this point, if someone takes me in the third round, then I prove myself again," Phil said. "It doesn't matter -- second, third or fourth -- he just says, 'It's time.' ...

"If he is satisfied with going in the third round and getting an opportunity, then that's his opportunity. If someone doesn't take a chance on him until later, that's not going to bother him or us. Coach (Rich) Rodriguez took a chance with him and that's all he wants someone else to do -- take a shot."

- - -

Scooby Wright prepared a statement to read after the New Mexico Bowl. Here is that statement:

"I want to announce I have decided to enter the 2016 NFL Draft. I couldn't have asked to be around a better group of people than I have been with over the last three years here at Arizona.

"Coming out of high school, I only had one scholarship offer and that was Arizona; they took a chance on me and for that I am thankful to Coach Rodriguez. I am forever grateful for all my coaches, from the strength coaches to defensive coordinator Jeff Casteel for making me the player I am today. I also want to thank the Wildcat Nation for their support and encouragement the last three years.

"This past season, I have faced a lot of adversity, but at the end of the day it has made me a better man and human being. I am truly blessed and humbled to be in the position I am today to have the opportunity to go chase my dream that I have had since I first started playing this great game.

"Once again, thank you to everybody who has supported and helped me get to where I am today."

- - -

Follow Anthony Gimino on Facebook and Twitter