BOULDER — Poor, hapless buffoon John Falstaff, played to a frustrated fare-thee-well by Michael Winters in the Colorado Shakespeare Festival production of Shakespeare’s “The Merry Wives of Windsor.”

* * * ½ comedy

The Falstaff here is a different man than the Falstaff in “Henry IV,” though. In that play, he’s a gourmand and bon vivant. Here, he’s a fulsome, self-interested boor whose main ambition is to humiliate a couple of husbands by bedding their wives.

Director Seth Panitch sets “Merry Wives” in mid-century America, in a rundown Catskills resort. There, Falstaff serves up corny, innuendo-filled jokes, but his eye is on the comely mistresses Ford ( Vanessa Morosco) and Page (Mare Trevathan), and wooing them, temporarily, from their unsuspecting husbands (respectively, anxious Peter Simon Hilton and laid-back Scott Bellot).

When wives Ford and Page discover that Falstaff has written them identical love letters seeking their favors, the women come up with a plot to school the lecher. Their husbands find out, initially misinterpreting their plans. As Ford, Peter Simon Hilton is hilariously suspicious, especially in disguise as a beatnik.

Comedy ensues, abetted by a subplot involving winsome Anne Page ( Kyra Lindsey) and paramour Fenton (a consciously Ken-doll-ish Joshua Archer). Both of Anne’s parents roundly despise Fenton, preferring disastrously unsuitable bachelors.

Setting “Merry Wives” in the nifty ’50s is inspired. This Falstaff was made for white shoes and velour smoking jackets, and the women’s clothing, either bouffant skirts and wasp waists or snug suits that might have come from Joan Harris’s “Mad Men” closet, have a visual sexiness absent in Elizabethan drag.

While director Panitch leaves Shakespeare largely intact, the actors freely riff a bit. Falstaff’s scruffy accomplices Nym and Pistol, normally a pair of actors, are interpreted by Sammie Joe Kinnett as a talentless ventriloquist whose dummy gets most of the good lines.

There’s a reference to Strunk & White, and in attempting to be seductive, Falstaff pleads, “You love Lowenbrau, and so do I.” Swords are updated to golf clubs, shuffleboard tangs and tennis racquets, and a choreographed number about cuckolds could have been on the Ed Sullivan show.

The supporting cast is excellent, with pages dressed in preppy khaki pants or skirts, and Tammy Meneghini‘s Mistress Quickly is wonderfully arch.

Claire Martin: 303-954-1477, cmartin@denverpost.com or twitter.com/byclairemartin