Buy Photo Mothers visit the fifth- and sixth-grade class of “Miss Blanche Booker” in 1954 at Emmet Field School in Crescent Hill during American Education Week. (Photo: By Al Blunk, The Courier-Journal. Nov. 1 1954)Buy Photo Story Highlights A Crabb estate house used to be on part of the school site, next to Louisville Water Co. facilities

The school board considered closing Field in the late 1990s, but community support kept it open.

Offices and six classrooms were added in 1969-70, and the school has a new media center.

Field Elementary School was one of two major public grade schools that opened in Crescent Hill in the early 1900s, and after 100 years it's going strong after being revitalized.

The school, 120 Sacred Heart Lane off Frankfort Avenue, will celebrate its centennial with a public open house from 11 a.m. to 2 p.m. May 16. Government and school district representatives will speak, and student participation will include performances of Chinese Sword and Fan dances.

The other early public school, George Rogers Clark — identified in the 1908 Crescent Hill Beautiful booklet as Crescent Hill Public School — opened in 1905, followed by Field in 1915. Clark closed in 1977 and was converted to condominiums in 1982.

History

Field was named for Jefferson County Circuit Court Judge Emmet Field, who was elected four times and died in his courtroom, according to "Crescent Hill Revisited," by Samuel W. Thomas. Before his death in 1909, Field lived in a mansion in the neighborhood at today's Crescent and Field avenues.

Field is said to be the first public school in Louisville built on a one-story floor plan. The school board purchased the land for the school from heirs to the Crabb estate.

Entries in the book say that there were two Crabb estates, one in front of the school and another farther east where Crabbs Lane is today. "The Crabb place had a secret stairway in it" that was used to hide people during the Civil War, Frances Hunter Woodford wrote about the house by the school. "The water company bought it and tore down about 1915," before later adding a company building there.

The Spring Station School also had once occupied part of the Field site, the book says, after 11 neighbors purchased property in 1858 for a "female school." It flourished for a decade, before the property was sold to a contiguous land owner.

Tuition and garden

Reminiscences by Virginia Moore Mason in the book say that the Eastover residential area next to Field "was in the county then and we paid tuition to attend Emmet Field. All of us went to that school then, except for a few Catholic children who went to church schools.

"In school we learned ... to write with quill-type pens that were dipped in ink wells. Much emphasis was placed on both writing and spelling. ... In summer, the school had a small garden, which we tended under supervision and harvested our crops and learned how to sell them too."

Grand building

A rendering of the proposed Field building in 1914-15 appears to show a much wider and grander building than was actually constructed. The front entrance is shown facing the water company, in contrast to today's entrance on Sacred Heart Lane, Eric Hodge, with Jefferson County Public Schools facilities planning, said.

The one-floor layout "was said to be safe against loss of life in case of fire," according to a brief history written in 1961 by Virginia Huber, school services chairwoman, and supplied by JCPS archives coordinator Mary Margaret Bell. The history also says Field opened one of the first official elementary school libraries in the Louisville system in 1961, spurred by Emily Nash, mother of Field student and future author Alanna Nash.

The school is known for its polished, original wood flooring. It was renovated in 1969-70, and an addition with offices and six classrooms was built around part of the original structure.

1954 Education Week

During American Education Week in 1954, a photo of mothers visiting the fifth- and sixth-grade class of "Miss Blanche Booker" during a history lesson at Field ran Nov. 11 in The Louisville Times, along with scenes at other schools. Parents were invited to "see how their children are being taught."

1969-70 facelift

The school board considered closing Field in the late 1990s, but community support kept it open. More improvements have been made recently, including adding a media center and a new accessible ramp and stairs. "It's gotten a nice facelift," Hodge said. "When you're a 100-year-old building, you have to have those now and then."

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1bGps7e