Topics: aol_on, Beasts of the Southern Wild, Books, Curtis White, Editor's Picks, excerpts, Race, Rand Paul, Tea Party, Ted Cruz, White people, Innovation News, Business News, Life News, Entertainment News, News

It would be pleasing to one’s sense of enlightened amour propre to know that the storytelling done by America’s political progressives has no sins of its own to account for, no egregious lying machines smelling of propaganda, false consciousness, and the exploitation of the terminally foolish. We progressives would like to think that all of our as-if-ing is done through the innocence of the arts, through our utopian aspirations, and not inflicted on other people for our own benefit. That, unfortunately, is not the case.

Let me try to take account (with a sort of counter-contrarian flourish) of at least one of those leftish narrative strands. It is this: we left-leaners narrate poor, white, rural, conservative, Southern culture as if it were the world of the People of the Id. These People are, of course, not shy about labeling us, so-called liberals, as sinners of one kind or another (humanists, relativists, heathens, homosexuals, baby killers, communists, in order of increasing flammability), but we’re not much conscious of how we return the favor.

We return the favor by treating them as if they were primitive, violent, stupid, animalistic, and destructive. We treat them as if they were children of Freud’s secular Satan, the dark Id. They are not, in our view, “evil” as such because their faults seem so natural to them—so “native.” But they do seem immoral. That is, they seem to us to need an agency outside of themselves to impose a little moral order, a little Law, on them—by the scruff of the neck, if needed—just as we see on the television show “COPS.”

We think of the People of the Id as a part of us, a part of our own community that we must be vigilant against. They are a part of us, but a part we must master. We think that they need a little justice imposed on them. When the detective heroes of HBO’s 2014 “True Detective” impose the law on the pedophilic monsters of rural Louisiana, they are clearly imposing the law on people who are only a very small degree removed from themselves: poor, white, violent, drug- and alcohol-abusing people who managed somehow to find a place on the “force.” “True Detective” is an allegory of morality understood as self-mastery.

But are the People of the Id aware that their unjust acts are unjust? Sometimes, I suppose. From all appearances, there are sociopaths out there happily acting out of “motiveless malignity.” Our newspapers seem to be full of their wicked exploits, staggering to contemplate. Take, for example, this one from October 2014:

Four Fresno County teenagers were arrested Wednesday evening in connection with the golf-club slaughter of more than 900 chickens at a Foster Farms ranch south of Fresno, authorities said.

Hats off to the youth of Fresno on this one. I can’t think of a motive for it, it doesn’t fit into any notion of deviant culture that I can think of—even Voodoo takes it one chicken at a time—and it’s clearly a malign thing that they did, although what Foster Farms had in mind for the chickens can’t have been a lot better.

(Actually, according to investigations done by the Humane Society and others, getting whacked by a golf club might qualify as mercy in comparison with what industrial farming puts chickens through. Sure, the teens employed “unsound methods,” but they just need the guidance of more experienced hands. Or perhaps Foster Farms should look on the boys as innovators and set them up with internships when they are paroled.)

But this sort of thing is not the behavior of the People of the Id, and neither is the sexual/religious derangement of Southern whites depicted on True Detective. Unlike the youth of Fresno, the People of the Id think that when they act they’re doing their duty—they’re doing what “anyone would do in my shoes.” They think this even when very few people outside their community would do anything of the sort, never mind the shoes. In any case, the People of the Id feel quite innocent about their acts. “Nothin’ special. Just standin’ up for my rights,” they say.

Or perhaps it is all a misunderstanding: the boys were merely seeking to understand the poet Frank Stanford’s immortal line “I have inhaled the fumes of the chicken feathers of death myself.”

In other words, the People of the Id do what they’re told they shouldn’t do largely because they are under the impression that they are heroic, the defenders of all that is good, and certainly not people filled with motiveless malignity, a phrase that sounds to them like something that an overeducated elitist from San Francisco would say.

Should the People of the Id be called on their bad behavior, should their leaders be put in shackles, they are surprised, then outraged. Their friends and family members, their civic and religious leaders, turn and howl at the cameras. The very first thing they claim is that they, the valiant People of the Id, are the ones who have been treated unjustly, beginning with the fact that they have been treated like People of the Id, like a “common criminal,” as they put it. They say, “We are not People of the Id, and we don’t know where you got that idea. We are patriots. We are the real Americans. We are protecting the American Revolution from tyranny! You should be thanking us!”

I speak here of the Tea Party and the NRA. I speak of Hobby Lobby and Cracker Barrel. And at the extreme I speak of the White Aryan Resistance and the Creativity Movement.

The problem is not that the People of the Id are bad; the problem is that there is another group of people called the People of the Law who call them bad. But the People of the Law are mistaken. Their mistake is in thinking that there is a difference between the Id and the Law, a difference between the Id’s putative destructiveness and the benign enforcement of the Law. But they are in fact the same thing, mutatis mutandis. What the People of the Id believe and too often act on, sometimes horribly, are the things that everyone around them—father, mother, neighbor—has believed for decades if not centuries, and in this they are no different from the People of the Law. The people to whom love is owed have put them under a heavy obligation to believe certain stories, for the stories are nothing other than their community’s virtues. These virtues seem obvious to them: “You can’t tax me without my consent, you can’t tell me what kind of gun I can own, you can’t tell me my daughter can get an abortion, and you can’t tell me two men can get married, not in Mississippi they can’t.” No wonder they think that federal appeal courts are the instruments of the Antichrist.

When, as often happens, the People of the Id are told by “outsiders” (those who bring the Law to them) that their truths are lies and their virtues false, they become confused and indignant. And should federal agents and troops come around to enforce foreign virtues, it will seem as if they are being forced to become members of a perverse community of evildoers, and they don’t wish to be perverse (they don’t wish to be “preverts,” as Colonel “Bat” Guano [Keenan Wynn] put it in Dr. Strangelove). They become angry because they can no longer experience the pleasure of feeling at one with their world, and at one with that world’s unique sense of joy in living (even if this joy is predicated on, for example, a tolerance for beating up gays on Saturday night—that’s just boys letting off steam and if the queers don’t like it they should move to San Francisco—where they belong!). It is for these reasons and more that we have in recent years experienced rancher-racist-patriot-hero-deadbeat Cliven Bundy and his armed and Stetson-hatted posse of seditionists. It is for these reasons that we have endured ugly-white-man-millionaire-NBA-franchise-owning-racist-with-diminished-mental-capacities Donald Sterling. And it is for these reasons that we have had no choice but to look into the eyes of oops-I-thought-y’all-was-Jews murderer Frazier Glenn Miller and wonder what dark mystery thrives therein. We ask this man to pray for our forgiveness, but that makes no sense to him. “Forgive me my virtues!”—that is how he should pray!

When the People of the Id argue that they are merely living in a way that is consistent with the most ancient American traditions, traditions that have made them who they are, they are not wrong. As you may recall from high school history class, the Republican movement in this country was led by Thomas Jefferson and James Madison against the Federalists—in particular John Adams, with his fondness for courtly ritual, and the imperial Alexander Hamilton. The Republicans accused the Federalists of being aristocrats, elitists, and monarchists intent on establishing a strong central government, an exploitative system of excise taxes, a corrupt system of finance based on a permanent federal debt, and a standing military to enforce the government’s autocratic whims. For Republicans, that sounded like being asked to pay for their own oppression.

Sound familiar?

But just as the Republican Party of the present has issues with Tea Party extremism, the Jeffersonians had their own problems with immoderation that came to a head in what was known as the Whiskey Rebellion. In brief, an excise tax to support the federal budget was placed on whiskey, which at that time was used by many farmers not only for local consumption but also as a kind of currency. Where were they going to get money to pay the taxes on the whiskey that they were using as money? (Perhaps they should have offered to give a few barrels to Hamilton and tell him to sell them if he wanted money.) Opposition to the tax in the West was so strong that a rebellion erupted in western Pennsylvania in which thousands of armed rebels organized, terrorized tax collectors, flew their own flag, and considered marching on the federal garrison in Pittsburgh. As our Tea Partiers of today would say, pennant in hand, “Don’t tread on me!” But these activities only served to provoke exactly what they most feared: a federal military response brought down on their heads by Hamilton (gleefully) and Washington (resolutely).

And who were these rebels? The Federalists called them “busy and restless sons of anarchy,” the anarchy consisting essentially in contempt for centralized lawmaking. These rebels were the first scofflaws, but they were also typical of rural America at the time. As Gordon S. Wood describes our rustic forebearers in his book Empire of Liberty: A History of the Early Republic, 1789–1815:

[N]early all Americans—men, women, children, and sometimes even babies—drank whiskey all day long. Some workers began drinking before breakfast and then took dram breaks instead of coffee breaks. “Treating” with drink by militia officers and politicians was considered essential to election. During court trials a bottle of liquor might be passed among the attorneys, spectators, clients, and the judge and jury . . . Whiskey accompanied every communal activity, including women’s quilting bees.

And in the southern states, the men enjoyed chasing their whiskey with mortal combat:

Men on the frontier often fought with “no holds barred,” using their hands, feet, and teeth to disfigure or dismember each other until one or the other surrendered or was incapacitated. “Scratching, pulling hair, choking, gouging out each other’s eyes, and biting off each other’s noses” were all tried, recalled Daniel Drake, growing up in late eighteenth-century Kentucky. “But what is worse than all,” observed the English traveller Isaac Weld, “these wretches in their combat endeavor to their utmost to tear out each other’s testicles.”

Hatred of the federal government, taxes, banks, and debt. A trust in the manly virtues of gun toting and whiskey. The embrace of extreme violence. Are the Tea Party, the NRA, and the avid fans of Xtreme Fighting mixed martial arts wrong to think that what they represent is not criminal but deeply, psychically American? Are they not part of—even if a boundary-pushing part—Jefferson’s belief that the American experiment had “the duty of proving what is the degree of freedom and self-government in which a society may venture to leave its individual members”? Jefferson’s assumption was that democracy would cure itself; it did not need central regulation.

It’s this simple: Our modern People of the Id do not believe that the degree to which they have taken freedom goes beyond that place where a democratic society may venture. It is for this reason that they become so irate when a bureaucrat tells them that they must wear a helmet when they ride a motorcycle, or that they can’t use a phone when they drive. Needless to say, the list of things forbidden by federal and state law is not a short one, as the prohibitions posted at our state and national parks demonstrate, which is why it is rare to see one that has not been improved with buckshot. Do the People of the Law want to regulate head injuries in professional football? Do they want to ban the NFL? To which the clever redneck ought to respond: “Would you prefer going back to a time when the local sports hero was an eye gouger and testicle tearer? What we are now is a great refinement on what we were. We have established our own limits without the intrusion of someone else’s law. Yes, there may be brain trauma involved, but that’s our worry, and we’ve got our nuts . . . as well as Peyton Manning!”

Oddly, this point of view has recently gained plenty of sympathetic admirers in more sophisticated circles: witness the rise of “cracker chic” on cable TV food programs for southern cuisine and craft bourbons, or television’s glorifying of hunting, American “pickers,” and the ancient way of life depicted on the History Channel’s Swamp People or the Learning Channel’s Trailer Park: Welcome to Myrtle Manor. Or perhaps you prefer Glamour Belles, Lizard Lick Towing, Sweet Home Alabama, or Animal Planet’s Hillbilly Handfishin’. And everyone should prefer the elemental charm of Dog the Bounty Hunter!

Of course, all this is dependent on typecasting rural people, especially in the South, and chortling at a safe distance as its representatives perform a sordid white minstrelsy (minus the talent for tap dancing). More to the point, this programming dictates a Federalist understanding of the rural: the people of the countryside are unlike us. They are crude and violent, if sometimes good for a laugh. If they are poor, it is because that’s how they like it. (As far as their poverty is concerned, the People of the Law are perfectly happy to say, “It’s their culture and who are we to judge?”) For us, their culture provides the benefit of an occasional shot of Elijah Craig twenty-one-year-old single barrel or a plate of blackened redfish and cheesy grits but not much more (except for the occasional night out slumming with the line dancers). This sort of media representation reinforces the old Federalist idea that rural culture requires policing. Surprisingly, even the protagonists of the above programs seem to accept the idea that their undertakings benefit from the supervision of governmental grown-ups. At the end of the day, they confess, “I’ve made some bad choices in my life.”