Please enable Javascript to watch this video

On the heels of a depressing, maddening and sickening week in the NFL, I have a shameful confession that reflects the power and popularity of the league: After the Ray Rice and Adrian Peterson news broke, and after the magnitude and severity of their actions had properly set in, my next instinct was to check my fantasy football team.

Because that’s what many of us – unfortunately – have now been conditioned to do.

It’s a conundrum of sorts: That fans filled stadiums all over the country and continued to watch football this weekend, supporting the league, despite the shocking and disgraceful video of Ray Rice hitting his then-fiance; and despite the turmoil surrounding Commissioner Roger Goodell; and despite Greg Hardy receiving a game check for the second straight week while he appeals a domestic violence conviction; and despite Ray McDonald suiting up and playing for the Niners in the midst of an arrest for allegedly striking his pregnant fiancé; and despite one of the league’s highest-profile running backs, Adrian Peterson, turning himself after being indicted for child abuse.

The league is more popular than it’s ever been. And Fantasy Football is a primary reason. And as long as games are played, regardless of scandal or turmoil, fans will still be invested. I’m guilty – and admittedly ashamed – of it too.

But it doesn’t mean these issues should be ignored – and in the words of my friend, Arash Markhazi (@ArashMarkazi) on Twitter: “Sports is often an escape from reality but sometimes, such as times like these, it can be a force to help change reality.”

That’s why I applaud any pregame show, postgame show, or game itself that took time to address the issues at hand. I don’t mind debates about Rice, Peterson, Ray McDonald or Greg Hardy being “shoved down our throats” as some would like to put it – because spreading awareness about the severity of domestic violence and child abuse is of the utmost importance – and the games themselves have a captive audience, whether some fans want to hear about it or not.

And if we’re going to enjoy – or at least pay attention to – a league with all of these current problems, then I believe it’s a responsibility to not only understand them, but to raise awareness and educate others as well.

ESPN’s Darren Rovell reminded us that October is Domestic Violence Awareness month. The NFL has an obligation to that campaign, along with its normal observation of Breast Cancer Awareness month.

And as football fans, we have an obligation to listen.