If you’re familiar with Colorado Consumer Health Initiative ads to encourage young people to get insurance through Colorado’s health insurance exchange, you’ll know their ads have nothing to do with subtlety. The one with a keg stand and flagged “brosurance” was especially memorable. But one of the ads from the series focused on women is a bit more controversial and, as expected, is drawing even more ire. It’s been dubbed #hosurance by its critics on Twitter. Ugh!

Susie wants to bed Nate. It’s highlighting a realistic scenario. Her health insurance covers birth control, so now she’s less likely to get pregnant. The ad has drawn fire from a mix of people, particularly because an Obamacare health insurance ad seems to be promoting casual sex.

A woman who wants to have a one night stand is seen as slutty, which is also a bit ridiculous. I like my ads on the subtle side, and between the brosurance and let’s get physical ads, I found them a bit tacky.

A Washington Times editorial commented:

“These messages can only be interpreted as ways to promote promiscuity as cool and hip — and with Obamacare being the ticket to more sex.”

A Slate article praised the ad for its directness:

“The whining from the right shows why the Colorado Consumer Health Initiative and Progress Now were smart to run such a blunt ad highlighting the birth control benefit. Women do use birth control to have sex without getting pregnant, and if pro-choicers dance around that fact or employ euphemism to discuss it, it lends credence to the notion that there is something shameful about it.”

The ads have also garnered a lot of attention on Twitter and from critics and supporters on the “Thanks Obamacare” Facebook page.

All of this controversy is just what Adam Fox wanted. He is the director of strategic engagement for the Colorado Consumer Health Initiative.

He told Business Insider that it’s been fun watching how people respond to the ads. “We’ve seen both positive and negative reactions, but if people are seeing the ads and purchasing health insurance, that’s a good thing.”