MANCHESTER, N.H. -- Ohio Gov. John Kasich sought to use the first GOP presidential forum Monday to contrast his experience with 13 other candidates, touting his role in balancing the federal budget and tax reforms and job growth in Ohio's economy.

Kasich, appearing at the Voters First Forum, has said before that he has the strongest collection of experience among the Republican candidates, and he touched on that again Monday at St. Anslem College just outside of Manchester.

"It's about record and accomplishment," Kasich said.

"Cutting taxes, balancing the budget is what drive jobs and economic growth," Kasich said. "We don't have the right to live high on the hog and put the bills on our children."

But while all the candidates cited building a stronger economy as a goal, Kasich took that a step further, touching on the idea of economic growth allowing government to then help those in need.

"Economic growth is not just an end to itself. I think with economic growth comes a responsibility to help the people who are living in the shadows," Kasich said. "Our whole purpose is to give people a sense that the American dream is still alive, and that we all can rise."

And unlike the other candidates, Kasich did not directly bash President Barack Obama. The Ohio governor has previously avoided critical attacks on both the president and former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton, saying he wants to focus on what he would do.

The forum is a tradition in New Hampshire, home of the first presidential primary. It was sponsored by the New Hampshire Union Leader and news organizations in South Carolina and Iowa -- two other states with early presidential contests. It was televised in all three states and nationally on C-SPAN.

Fourteen of 17 major Republican candidates participated: Former Florida Gov. Jeb Bush, Dr. Ben Carson, New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie, Texas Sen. Ted Cruz, former Hewlett-Packard CEO Carly Fiorina, South Carolina Sen. Lindsey Graham, Louisiana Gov. Bobby Jindal, New York Gov. George Pataki, Kentucky Sen. Rand Paul, former Texas Gov. Rick Perry, Florida Sen. Marco Rubio, former Pennsylvania Sen. Rick Santorum, Wisconsin Gov. Scott Walker and Kasich.

Each was asked similar questions by the moderator and also allowed a 30-second response at the end. Cruz, Graham and Rubio participated from Washington via a C-SPAN link.

The forum provided a warm-up event to Thursday's GOP debate in Cleveland hosted by FOX News. That debate, though, will be limited to 10 candidates.

But for Kasich, Monday's forum also provided an opportunity to talk about the strengths of his record and why he is different from the other candidates, said John Weaver, Kasich's chief campaign strategist.

"He was able to introduce himself to hundreds of thousands, if not millions of voters in early states," Weaver said.

Kasich said afterward he was pleased with the event.

"I had a great time." he said. "I'm glad I was here."

For Kasich, who appears to be moving into the Fox debate lineup Thursday, the forum also gave him a chance to present himself to New Hampshire voters.

The governor has focused on New Hampshire, the first primary state, more so than on Iowa, which will hold the earliest caucus. He has placed as high as third in one statewide poll.

A new poll Granite State Poll released Monday showed Kasich in sixth place, drawing support from 6 percent. That put him one point behind Christie and Paul.

Donald Trump, with 24 percent, led the pack -- doubling the support pulled by Bush (12 percent) and Walker (11 percent).

While the candidates answered a broad range of questions, there were some popular targets. Among them: Obama's policies on immigration, his efforts at addressing ISIS and the need to repeal the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act -- commonly known as Obamacare. Several candidates called for complete defunding of Planned Parenthood of America and its programs, in the wake of the release of controversial videos that purport to show Planned Parenthood supports the sale of fetal organs and tissue.

Here's a quick look at what some of the others said:

Jeb Bush: Tackling the issue of ISIS and terrorism will require engaging other countries, supporting them with air power and firepower and proving that the United States will be engaged, he said. America let its guard down after the heightened security levels following 9/11 and needs to step it back up, Bush said.

Ben Carson: Obamacare should be repealed, but not before a replacement safety net is in place, he said. He would focus on a system that promotes broad use of health savings accounts. And he made a pitch for unity to address America's problems. "You name it, there's a war on it," he said, specifically mentioning wars on women, races and economic disparity. "They're not Democrat and Republican problems."

Chris Christie: Addressing the high cost of entitlements means the next president must be willing to tell the hard truth of what must be done, Christie said. That means raising retirement ages -- over time -- for Social Security and reducing or eliminating benefits for the wealthy. "Government leaders are failing the American people by not telling them the truth about what is needed," he said. "What the people of New Jersey have come to know is that when I say I'm going to do something, I do it. When I say I'm not going to do something, they know I won't."

Ted Cruz: The proposed nuclear treaty with Iran poses a security threat to the United States and must be rejected, Cruz said. He also decried what he described as an attack on constitutional liberties by the government that must be reversed. "I believe 2016 is going to be an election like 1980, and as Ronald Reagan said, 'We will win by painting in bold colors, not pastels'."

Carly Fiorina: She, too, cited a need for leadership in Washington to address the nation's problems. She cited her career, starting as a secretary and rising to the head a Fortune 50 company, as proof she can get things done. "The political class has let you down," she said. "We need a president who understands the economy, the world and who's in it."

Lindsey Graham: Foreign trade policy should be conducted with options, he said. "Clenched fist or an open hand. You choose." He specifically cited China as a country that he says "cheats."

He also would take a tougher stance against terrorism, ISIS and Russia's Vladimir Putin.

Bobby Jindal: The Louisiana governor decried Obama's policies as a move to socialism, something he said he would bring to an end. "This president is trying to turn the American dream into the European nightmare."

George Pataki: It is important that the Republicans recapture the White House, and they can do so by uniting Americans behind good conservative policies and not polarizing the electorate, he said. "We will take America's government back for the people."

Rand Paul: "I'm a different kind of Republican. I think we need a new kind of GOP," Paul said. He described himself as a constitutional conservative who believes the federal government should leave individual rights alone and states' rights alone.

Rick Perry: The former Texas governor touted his efforts to stem a flow of immigrants into Texas, deploying state law enforcement. "The American people don't trust Washington, D.C., to secure the border," he said. "I know a little something about securing the border."

Marco Rubio: The Florida senator said he is running for president to save and rebuild the American dream "and we can leave for our children a new American century." That will require modernizing the nation's economy for the 21st century.

Rick Santorum: In addition to securing the border, he also called for a 25 percent reduction in the number of unskilled immigrants allowed into the country legally. Those new arrivals are hurting the American workforce, he said.

Scott Walker: Social Security and Medicare both need reforms, Walker said. As for Medicaid, he would favor giving the states control of the health care program for the poor.