CLEVELAND, Ohio -- Regardless of who performs best when Republicans take the debate stage Thursday in Quicken Loans Arena, the message will be the same, the chairwoman of the Democratic National Committee said.

All are promoting similar agendas, said U.S. Rep. Debbie Wasserman Schultz, who is also DNC chairwoman: End or roll back Medicare, do nothing to address climate change, do nothing to address racial and gender pay gaps and provide tax cuts to the wealthy.

"The people of the Forest City are going to get an up close and personal look at the Republican Party of today, and I'm confident that when they get a close look, they won't like what they see," Wasserman Schultz said. "They are all the same. All of the Republicans who are running for president in 2016 are singing off the same song sheet and working from the same old tired Republican playbook."

Wasserman Schultz appeared in Cleveland for a pre-debate strike on the GOP's policies, seeking to contrast Republicans with Democrats. She was joined by Ohio Democratic Party Chairman David Pepper, former state Sen. Nina Turner and Democratic U.S. Reps. Marcy Kaptur and Tim Ryan.

Here are five criticisms and contrasts they sought to make at the news conference:

Debating for the wealthy

The group criticized the GOP as a party that caters to the wealthy while not addressing problems of everyday Americans.

"We're here for what I think is a big audition," Ryan said. "The people on the stage tonight will be auditioning not for the people of Ohio. They're going to be auditioning for the billionaires.

"They're going to be auditioning for Sheldon Adelson. They're going to be auditioning to the Koch brothers," Ryan said. "Are we worthy of your money in the upcoming election?"

Average workers, though, are left behind, he said, as average wages remain stagnant.

"This is about economics. This is about jobs," Ryan said. "We need an agenda that's going to bring manufacturing back to places like Cleveland and Akron and Youngstown and Toledo; that is going to give people an opportunity, which is all they really want."

Economic philosophy

The economic policies put forward by the GOP candidates are versions of failed trickle-down economics that won't help average families, Wasserman Schultz said.

"What it means for the middle class and working families if any one of them happened to become president, is disastrous economic policy that got us into the worst economic crisis when George Bush was president since the Great Depression."

With a Democrat in the White House, the nation has seen more than five years of job growth, she said.

Lack of inclusiveness

While Republicans have talked about broadening the party's base, the Democratic Party already has a record of inclusiveness, Pepper said.

"We're the party that believes in marriage equality," he said.

He cited other policies meant to reach across demographic lines: support for the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, support for public funding to ease the cost of a college education and support for comprehensive immigration reform.

Wasserman Schultz pointed to the party conventions as an example.

"It isn't the Democratic Party that has to put a handful of minorities up front so that the cameras can see them," she said.

Voting restrictions

The group, particularly Turner, criticized changes in voting laws at the state level that they say effectively suppress the vote. Turner cited laws approved in Gov. Scott Walker's home state of Wisconsin, as well as in Ohio under Gov. John Kasich. Both governors are GOP presidential candidates.

Turner argued that the goal should be to find ways to bolster voter participation as much as possible. Changes in voting laws have done just the opposite, she said.

Particularly damaging in Ohio, she said, was the elimination of Golden Week, a one week window when people could register to vote and cast their ballot on the same day. Their ballot would then be held until the voter registration was confirmed as valid.

Public works improvements

Kaptur criticized Republicans in Congress for failing to adequately address the need for funding for infrastructure. Local communities, she said, are struggling to find ways to repair roads and bridges and water systems while the GOP in Congress delays on taking action.

I hope you don't hit any big potholes while you're here in Cleveland, but if you do, thank a Republican," Kaptur said.

She also rapped Kasich for rejecting federal funding that would have upgraded rail systems in Ohio, as well as promoted high speed rail. Ohio is the fifth largest rail center in the country, she said, but the decision that rejected high speed rail funding also vetoed funding to upgrade the commercial freight lines.

Matt Borges, chairman of the Ohio Republican Party, dismissed the Democratic event as "kind of pathetic" and defended Kasich's record in Ohio.

"Marijuana is not legal yet," Borges said in an interview with the Dix Communications. "They're smoking something if they think that they can get away with trying to press this message that somehow the governor's accomplishments aren't real."