That set up what has become one of the hardest fought and most contentious political races of the year. The infusion of cash goes far beyond anything New Hampshire has seen in a Senate race, with more than $10 million spent on television ads alone, according to the Center for Public Integrity.

Mr. Brown has tried to nationalize the race, framing everything in relation to Mr. Obama. He casts both the president and Ms. Shaheen as having left the country vulnerable to the Ebola virus and terrorism, both of which he says could easily cross the unsecured Mexican border. In fact, he told Fox News, referring to the militant group in Iraq and Syria that calls itself the Islamic State, “There’s deep concerns that there are members of ISIS actually coming through the border right now.”

Polls suggest the anti-Obama tack may work. Half of likely voters in New Hampshire say they do not trust the federal government to handle the Ebola crisis properly. And a majority opposes Mr. Obama’s signature legislative achievement, the Affordable Care Act, which Ms. Shaheen supports and Mr. Brown wants to repeal.

Laura Gamache, 30, a real estate agent in Bedford, said she was voting for Mr. Brown because he had met with people in her office and she liked his ideas about how to grow a business. “He spent 45 minutes with us and was easy to talk to,” she said. “And I do think we need to do something about border security.”

Mr. Brown casts himself as an independent who would work with both parties to break the gridlock in Washington. When Ms. Shaheen accused him in a debate of having voted to outsource jobs, he accused her of having “outsourced her independence” by voting with Mr. Obama 99 percent of the time.

Ms. Shaheen’s campaign theme is that she “puts New Hampshire first.” She promotes issues like lowering the costs of student loans and child care, and extending unemployment benefits.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

She says Mr. Brown is “fear-mongering” and “grandstanding,” partly to distract from his record of supporting big oil companies and Wall Street banks, and partly to scare voters.

“The Republican strategy is to target Democratic women and suggest we’re not tough enough on national security,” she said in an interview.

Later, in a debate, making a point about her toughness, she said, “I was asking questions about ISIS before my opponent ever moved to New Hampshire.”

Ms. Shaheen frequently refers to Mr. Brown’s move to New Hampshire, calling it opportunistic. She says that he does not really understand the state and that it is “not a consolation prize.”

After noting in her stump speech Mr. Brown’s membership on the board of a company, Kadant, that outsourced jobs, she includes this applause line: “We don’t need to import a senator who will outsource American jobs.”

This matters to voters like Rich Derby, 49, a postal worker, who went to a labor rally for Ms. Shaheen in Hooksett.

“Jeanne Shaheen is very supportive of New Hampshire,” he said. “I don’t like the out-of-state person coming in. He lost in Massachusetts and is now just trying to find a seat for himself.”

But if this is a wave election, the campaigns may have little control over the outcome.

“Obama could sink Shaheen,” said Andrew E. Smith, a political scientist and pollster at the University of New Hampshire. “If we get five Ebola cases, if the stock market drops 500 points, if the Baghdad airport falls to ISIS, that will determine who wins and who loses.”

Ms. Shaheen was hit by a wave election in 2002, when, after three successful two-year terms as governor, she lost in her first try for the Senate. President George W. Bush was still popular after the terrorist attacks of Sept. 11, 2001, and 2002 was one of the few midterm elections in the last century in which the party in the White House — then, the Republicans — gained seats in Congress.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Asked at a recent debate what lessons she had learned from that loss, Ms. Shaheen said: “That sometimes there are factors beyond your control, and there are things happening in the country that affect a race. I think we’re seeing this now in this race.”