Hundreds pack Rubio rally in Houston



















































































































































































































































Photo: Gary Coronado, Houston Chronicle Image 1 of / 62 Caption Close Image 1 of 62 Supporters listen to Marco Rubio at a rally on the eve of Thursday's CNN GOP Debate at the Houston Marriott South at Hobby Airport on Wednesday. Supporters listen to Marco Rubio at a rally on the eve of Thursday's CNN GOP Debate at the Houston Marriott South at Hobby Airport on Wednesday. Photo: Gary Coronado, Houston Chronicle Image 2 of 62 Marco Rubio holds a rally at the Houston Marriott South at Hobby Airport Wednesday, Feb. 24, 2016, in Houston, Texas. Marco Rubio holds a rally at the Houston Marriott South at Hobby Airport Wednesday, Feb. 24, 2016, in Houston, Texas. Photo: Gary Coronado, Houston Chronicle Image 3 of 62 Supporters listen to Marco Rubio at the rally at the Marriott. Supporters listen to Marco Rubio at the rally at the Marriott. Photo: Gary Coronado, Houston Chronicle Image 4 of 62 Marco Rubio holds a rally on the eve of Thursday's CNN GOP Debate sharing his vision for a New American Century at the Houston Marriott South at Hobby Airport Wednesday, Feb. 24, 2016, in Houston, Texas. Marco Rubio holds a rally on the eve of Thursday's CNN GOP Debate sharing his vision for a New American Century at the Houston Marriott South at Hobby Airport Wednesday, Feb. 24, 2016, in Houston, Texas. Photo: Gary Coronado, Houston Chronicle Image 5 of 62 Rubio of Florida, holds up a drawing given to him. Rubio of Florida, holds up a drawing given to him. Photo: ERIC THAYER, New York Times Image 6 of 62 Supporters recite the Pledge of Allegiance at the Rubio rally. Supporters recite the Pledge of Allegiance at the Rubio rally. Photo: ERIC THAYER, New York Times Image 7 of 62 The crowd waits to meet Rubio. The crowd waits to meet Rubio. Photo: ERIC THAYER, New York Times Image 8 of 62 Marco Rubio holds a rally on the eve of Thursday's CNN GOP Debate sharing his vision for a New American Century at the Houston Marriott South at Hobby Airport Wednesday, Feb. 24, 2016, in Houston, Texas. Marco Rubio holds a rally on the eve of Thursday's CNN GOP Debate sharing his vision for a New American Century at the Houston Marriott South at Hobby Airport Wednesday, Feb. 24, 2016, in Houston, Texas. Photo: Gary Coronado, Houston Chronicle Image 9 of 62 Supporters cheer for Marco Rubio. Supporters cheer for Marco Rubio. Photo: Gary Coronado, Houston Chronicle Image 10 of 62 Supporters listen to Rubio at the rally. Supporters listen to Rubio at the rally. Photo: Gary Coronado, Houston Chronicle Image 11 of 62 Marco Rubio greets supporters in Houston. Marco Rubio greets supporters in Houston. Photo: Gary Coronado, Houston Chronicle Image 12 of 62 Marco Rubio greets supporters. Marco Rubio greets supporters. Photo: Gary Coronado, Houston Chronicle Image 13 of 62 Marco Rubio exits the stage at the rally at the Houston Marriott South. Marco Rubio exits the stage at the rally at the Houston Marriott South. Photo: Gary Coronado, Houston Chronicle Image 14 of 62 Marco Rubio greets supporters. Marco Rubio greets supporters. Photo: Gary Coronado, Houston Chronicle Image 15 of 62 Marco Rubio greets supporters. Marco Rubio greets supporters. Photo: Gary Coronado, Houston Chronicle Image 16 of 62 Marco Rubio and a supporter take a selfie. Marco Rubio and a supporter take a selfie. Photo: Gary Coronado, Houston Chronicle Image 17 of 62 Marco Rubio greets supporters. Marco Rubio greets supporters. Photo: Gary Coronado, Houston Chronicle Image 18 of 62 David Michael Smith, 61, a semi-retired political scientist, protests outside the Harris County Republican Party 2016 Lincoln Reagan Dinner, held at the Bayou City Event Center on Knight Road on Wednesday. David Michael Smith, 61, a semi-retired political scientist, protests outside the Harris County Republican Party 2016 Lincoln Reagan Dinner, held at the Bayou City Event Center on Knight Road on Wednesday. Photo: Jon Shapley, Houston Chronicle Image 19 of 62 Staffers with the Ted Cruz campaign prepare to hand out stickers before the Harris County Republican Party dinner in Houston on Wednesday. Staffers with the Ted Cruz campaign prepare to hand out stickers before the Harris County Republican Party dinner in Houston on Wednesday. Photo: Jon Shapley, Houston Chronicle Image 20 of 62 John Gozaba, a 23-year-old student at the University of Texas, puts a Ted Cruz sticker on his jacket before the Republican dinner in Houston on Wednesday. John Gozaba, a 23-year-old student at the University of Texas, puts a Ted Cruz sticker on his jacket before the Republican dinner in Houston on Wednesday. Photo: Jon Shapley, Houston Chronicle Image 21 of 62 A protestor who declined to be identified stands outside the GOP dinner. A protestor who declined to be identified stands outside the GOP dinner. Photo: Jon Shapley, Houston Chronicle Image 22 of 62 Vanessa Phillips, a 60-year-old retired clerical worker, protests outside the GOP dinner. "(We're here) for justice for all mankind, equal protection and equal rights," Phillips said. Vanessa Phillips, a 60-year-old retired clerical worker, protests outside the GOP dinner. "(We're here) for justice for all mankind, equal protection and equal rights," Phillips said. Photo: Jon Shapley, Houston Chronicle Image 23 of 62 Bobby Rodriguez, a Ted Cruz staffer from Houston, passes out signs during the GOP dinner. Bobby Rodriguez, a Ted Cruz staffer from Houston, passes out signs during the GOP dinner. Photo: Jon Shapley, Houston Chronicle Image 24 of 62 Ted Cruz speaks to supporters during a rally at Mach Industrial Group in Houston on Wednesday. Ted Cruz speaks to supporters during a rally at Mach Industrial Group in Houston on Wednesday. Photo: Jon Shapley, Houston Chronicle Image 25 of 62 Ted Cruz speaks to supporters during a rally at Mach Industrial Group in Houston on Wednesday. Ted Cruz speaks to supporters during a rally at Mach Industrial Group in Houston on Wednesday. Photo: Jon Shapley, Houston Chronicle Image 26 of 62 Ted Cruz signs autographs during a rally at Mach Industrial Group in Houston on Wednesday. Ted Cruz signs autographs during a rally at Mach Industrial Group in Houston on Wednesday. Photo: Jon Shapley, Houston Chronicle Image 27 of 62 Lynn and Linda Rowe, of Baytown, enter the rally for Cruz. Lynn and Linda Rowe, of Baytown, enter the rally for Cruz. Photo: Jon Shapley, Houston Chronicle Image 28 of 62 Ted Cruz signs autographs during a rally at Mach Industrial Group in Houston on Wednesday. Ted Cruz signs autographs during a rally at Mach Industrial Group in Houston on Wednesday. Photo: Jon Shapley, Houston Chronicle Image 29 of 62 Kelli Toombs cheers on Cruz at the rally. Kelli Toombs cheers on Cruz at the rally. Photo: Jon Shapley, Houston Chronicle Image 30 of 62 Gov. Gregg Abbott share the stage with Cruz at the rally. Gov. Gregg Abbott share the stage with Cruz at the rally. Photo: Jon Shapley, Houston Chronicle Image 31 of 62 Marta Rivera, a 37-year-old hospitality worker, listens as the National Anthem is sung at the Harris County Republican Party 2016 Lincoln Reagan Dinner, held at the Bayou City Event Center on Wednesday. Marta Rivera, a 37-year-old hospitality worker, listens as the National Anthem is sung at the Harris County Republican Party 2016 Lincoln Reagan Dinner, held at the Bayou City Event Center on Wednesday. Photo: Jon Shapley, Houston Chronicle Image 32 of 62 Carl McConnell, a 62-year-old engineer and Trump supporter, waits for the start of the Harris County GOP dinner. Carl McConnell, a 62-year-old engineer and Trump supporter, waits for the start of the Harris County GOP dinner. Photo: Jon Shapley, Houston Chronicle Image 33 of 62 Hope Johnson listens to the Pledge of Allegiance at the GOP dinner. Hope Johnson listens to the Pledge of Allegiance at the GOP dinner. Photo: Jon Shapley, Houston Chronicle Image 34 of 62 Texas Gov. Greg Abbott at the GOP dinner. Texas Gov. Greg Abbott at the GOP dinner. Photo: Jon Shapley, Houston Chronicle Image 35 of 62 Texas Railroad Commissioner Ryan Sitton speaks to the crowd at the GOP dinner. Texas Railroad Commissioner Ryan Sitton speaks to the crowd at the GOP dinner. Photo: Jon Shapley, Houston Chronicle Image 36 of 62 Ted Cruz at the GOP dinner Ted Cruz at the GOP dinner Photo: Jon Shapley, Houston Chronicle Image 37 of 62 Gov. Greg Abbott greets Cruz at the GOP dinner. Gov. Greg Abbott greets Cruz at the GOP dinner. Photo: Jon Shapley, Houston Chronicle Image 38 of 62 Lt. Gov. Dan Patrick at the GOP dinner. Lt. Gov. Dan Patrick at the GOP dinner. Photo: Jon Shapley, Houston Chronicle Image 39 of 62 Harris County Republican Party Chairman Paul Simpson speaks to the crowd at the GOP dinner. Harris County Republican Party Chairman Paul Simpson speaks to the crowd at the GOP dinner. Photo: Jon Shapley, Houston Chronicle Image 40 of 62 People mingle before the GOP dinner. People mingle before the GOP dinner. Photo: Jon Shapley, Houston Chronicle Image 41 of 62 Ben Carson speaks at the GOP dinner. Ben Carson speaks at the GOP dinner. Photo: Jon Shapley, Houston Chronicle Image 42 of 62 Ben Carson listens to Ted Cruz speak at the dinner. Ben Carson listens to Ted Cruz speak at the dinner. Photo: Jon Shapley, Houston Chronicle Image 43 of 62 Ted Cruz leaves the stage after speaking at the GOP dinner. Ted Cruz leaves the stage after speaking at the GOP dinner. Photo: Jon Shapley, Houston Chronicle Image 44 of 62 Karen McReynolds, of Houston, cheers for Cruz at the GOP dinner. Karen McReynolds, of Houston, cheers for Cruz at the GOP dinner. Photo: Jon Shapley, Houston Chronicle Image 45 of 62 Jane Cummins, of Houston, listens to Ben Carson speak at the dinner. Jane Cummins, of Houston, listens to Ben Carson speak at the dinner. Photo: Jon Shapley, Houston Chronicle Image 46 of 62 Ben Carson speaks at the GOP dinner. Ben Carson speaks at the GOP dinner. Photo: Jon Shapley, Houston Chronicle Image 47 of 62 The top issues for Republicans, according to a new NBC News/Wall street Journal poll.

In 2012, Republicans and Democrats agreed on the top U.S. issue: Job creation. That's not the case anymore. See what's changed. less The top issues for Republicans, according to a new NBC News/Wall street Journal poll.

In 2012, Republicans and Democrats agreed on the top U.S. issue: Job creation. That's not the case anymore. See what's ... more Image 48 of 62 Top issues for for Republicans 1. Terrorism - 27 percent Top issues for for Republicans 1. Terrorism - 27 percent Photo: Bebeto Matthews, STF Image 49 of 62 2. Deficit and government spending - 24 percent 2. Deficit and government spending - 24 percent Photo: Ed Andrieski Image 50 of 62 3. Job creation and economic growth - 21 percent 3. Job creation and economic growth - 21 percent Photo: James Glossop Image 51 of 62 4. Religious and moral values - 12 percent 4. Religious and moral values - 12 percent Photo: Chip Somodevilla, Staff Image 52 of 62 5. Immigration - 8 percent 5. Immigration - 8 percent Photo: Nick Ut, Associated Press Image 53 of 62 6. Health care - 4 percent 6. Health care - 4 percent Photo: Carolyn Kaster, STF Image 54 of 62 7. Climate change - 1 percent 7. Climate change - 1 percent Photo: Matt York, STF Image 55 of 62 Top issues for Democrats 1. Job creation and economic growth - 37 percent

- 37 percent Top issues for Democrats 1. Job creation and economic growth - 37 percent Photo: Craig Hudson, The Chronicle Image 56 of 62 2. Health care - 17 percent 2. Health care - 17 percent Photo: Bloomberg, Bloomberg Via Getty Images Image 57 of 62 3. Climate change - 15 percent - 15 percent 3. Climate change - 15 percent Image 58 of 62 4. National security and terrorism - 13 percent 4. National security and terrorism - 13 percent Photo: Video Released By The SITE Intelligence Group Image 59 of 62 5. Deficit and government spending - 9 percent 5. Deficit and government spending - 9 percent Photo: Pete Marovich, Bloomberg Image 60 of 62 6. Immigration - 4 percent 6. Immigration - 4 percent Photo: Matt York, STF Image 61 of 62 7. Religious and moral values - 2 percent 7. Religious and moral values - 2 percent Photo: Gregorio Borgia, STF Image 62 of 62 Hundreds pack Rubio rally in Houston 1 / 62 Back to Gallery

Sen. Marco Rubio gave a Houston crowd on Wednesday his message of limited government and the direction of American conservatism in the 21st century at a rally ahead of Thursday's Republican presidential debate at the University of Houston.

READ THIS: Cruz and Abbott team up in Houston

In front of several hundred people in a half-filled Marriott ballroom, Rubio told Houstonians he would protect America's values, repeal President Obama's executive orders, cancel the Iran nuclear deal and support free enterprise.

"This isn't just an election," Rubio said. "We're trying to decide two things: What does it mean to be conservative in the 21st century and what is America going to be like in the 21st century?"

Rubio talked about the influence of his family — his grandfather's love for Ronald Reagan and his parents' lives as working-class immigrants in Florida, a message that resonated with many Rubio supporters.

"I am so happy the message he has is for all Americans, even though he's proud of his heritage, he speaks for everyone," said Rubio supporter Juan Sabillon.

Rubio didn't mention Sen. Ted Cruz, and only mentioned Donald Trump to say Trump had said parts of Obamacare were "pretty good," to boos from the crowd. He warned the crowd that if he lost in the primary, it would mean a "President Bernie Sanders."

RACE AGAINST TIME: Clock is ticking as Rubio looks to pick up Bush donors

Supporters had faith, too, that their candidate can make it out of third place to win the nomination.

"He cares about the economy, he cares about capitalism, he cares about taking away Obamacare, he cares about taking away Obama's Iran deal, and I think he can do it," Irene Conde, 54, of Friendswood, said.