Donald Trump (businessman/blowhard): A

The fact that he was on the stage is a win for Democrats. What he actually says is immaterial.

Chris Christie (New Jersey governor): A

Christie was ready. He didn’t waffle. His answer on Social Security was the best of any candidate on any question. He was also strong on domestic surveillance. Expect to see Christie have the biggest bounce from the debate. Moderators let him off the hook by not bringing up ethical issues.

Scott Walker (Wisconsin governor): B

Walker did his, “I’m just a dull, God-fearin’ regular guy from Wisconsin” schtick. We’ll see what Walker is made of when the field thins, but for now, he’s running on union-busting and a 4.6 unemployment rate in Wisconsin, which is good enough.

Ted Cruz (Texas senator): B

Cruz will likely thrive in the debates. He doesn’t get into specifics, and can go toe-to-toe with the best Baptist preacher. Expect social conservatives to flock to him, especially in Iowa. Cruz has a very limited appeal, his supporters are rabid and may get him to the top three in Iowa but after that…

John Kasich (Ohio governor): B-minus

Kasich had a couple of great responses, the best being about accepting Obamacare in Ohio. He also told his story well, even if it did sound over-rehearsed. But he loses points for pandering to the home crowd. (The debate was in Cleveland.)

Marco Rubio (Florida senator): B-minus

Rubio is like a scratch golfer playing against guys on the PGA Tour. He looks like he can run with the big boys, but after a while his lack of experience shows up. He has some ideas worth hearing and one can see how in a general election he might appeal to some more conservative Democrats. He did well on education and immigration, but social issues will be his downfall.

Ben Carson (retired neurosurgeon): C

Carson vanished for a while, which was easy considering the rather sizable egos on stage. He didn’t really embarrass himself (any more than normal) but he also showed that he basically has no idea how foreign policy or government works. Carson will be able to trade on his accomplishments as a physician for only so long.

Jeb Bush (former Florida governor): C-minus



Bush looked like a candidate who hasn’t run for office in 12 years, which is what he is. He even botched his closing statement, which one would assume he had prepared for. He stumbled repeatedly and looked like he wasn’t sure what he actually believed. If he hadn’t raised more than $100 million he would be in crisis, but all that money will allow him time to get his footing.

Mike Huckabee (former Arkansas governor): D

Huckabee did not offer an actual solution to one of the problems he was presented with. The very definition of “all hat and no cattle.”

Rand Paul (Kentucky senator): F

Paul got tuned up by both Trump and Christie. His campaign was already a disappointment but the debate exposed Paul’s thin platform and even thinner resume. The F here is also for Fading Fast.

Moderators (Bret Baier, Megyn Kelly and Chris Wallace): D

They started off very strong with questions about candidates past statements and contradictions. But when things got issue-specific they flatlined. No questions about either climate change or gun violence and only one about #BlackLivesMatter is inexcusable.

Follow BNR on Twitter

ALSO READ: