The Affordable Care Act's Health Insurance Marketplace opens officially today.

Most individuals and their dependents, who don't already have health insurance, are required to get coverage if they don't want to pay a penalty.

Aiken County and other South Carolina residents can go online and visit www.healthcare.gov to sign up and select a plan. Open enrollment will continue until March 31, 2014.

People have until Dec. 15 to get health coverage that will begin on Jan. 1, 2014. They have until March 31 to avoid penalties.

Uninsured South Carolinians also can buy plans from companies not offering coverage in the Insurance Marketplace. But if they don't make their purchases through www.healthcare.gov, they won't be eligible for tax credits that will help them pay for their insurance, said Adrian Grimes, director of communications for Consumers Choice's Health Plan.

Consumers Choice is one of several companies with plans for South Carolina residents in the Health Insurance Marketplace. According to Katherine Nelson Todd, community relations manager for Consumers Choice, the others are BlueCross BlueShield, BlueChoice HealthPlan (a BlueCross subsidiary) and Coventry Health Care of the Carolinas. However, Coventry's plans aren't available in every South Carolina county, she said.

Resources for help

A comprehensive explanation of the Affordable Care Act and the Health Insurance Marketplace appears in today's Aiken Standard in the Living on the Go section on page 1C.

There also are other sources of help locally for Aiken County residents who are confused about ObamaCare and the process for acquiring health insurance.

“We are offering enrollment assistance,” said Gail Diggs, director of outreach and community services for Rural Health Services, also known as the Margaret J. Weston Community Health Centers.

Rural Health Services' headquarters is located at 4645 Augusta Road in Clearwater. The nonprofit organization has three, full-time certified application counselors and two backup counselors who have completed their training and are ready to answer questions about the Affordable Care Act.

“All you have to do is call 803-593-0621; that is our outreach and open enrollment direct number,” Diggs said. “We aren't insurance agents; we won't select a plan for you. But we will help you if you don't understand it, you don't have access to a computer, or you're more comfortable with somebody walking you through it.”

The assistance is free, and people don't have to select Rural Health Services as their primary health provider, Diggs said.

“There are no strings attached,” she said.

Diggs added that, if possible, it is a good idea to for people to go online, create accounts and familiarize themselves with the Health Insurance Marketplace before calling Rural Health Services. Applicants will need certain information to get plans, and a checklist can be viewed at www.healthcare.gov and downloaded.

“Our main focus is the uninsured,” Diggs said. “But we've already had people calling and asking if they can come in and see if what is online (in the Health Insurance Marketplace) is cheaper than what they already have. They are welcome to do that, and they also can do it on their own.”

Rural Health Services was among the 1,159 health centers that received federal grants to provide open enrollment assistance.

Help also is available from the Aiken-Bamberg-Barnwell-Edgefield Regional Library System. The system has 14 facilities, including the Aiken County Public Library, which is located at 314 Chesterfield St. S.

“We are approaching the Affordable Care Act the same way that we have, for many years, approached consumer health information in general,” said Mary Jo Dawson, the Regional Library System's director. “Our approach is that our role is to connect our library users with online resources and community contacts. We have not been trained (as certified application counselors), and we will not be assisting people in the selection of plans. But we will give them high quality sources of information to use.”

More specifically, library employees will show people how to use the facilities' computers, find websites, print out information and set up email accounts.

Information about the Affordable Care Act is posted on the regional library system's website, www.abbe-lib.org. Click on Databases & Websites near the top of the homepage and then click on Affordable Care Act (Health Insurance) under A to Z listing of Reference Sites. There is a list of links to websites, publications and videos.

Dawson said in late September the regional library system's plan was to put a more obvious link on its home page to the Affordable Care Act information, but, as of Monday, that hadn't happened.

S.C. Navigators

Three organizations received federal grants under the Navigator program to assist South Carolinians in the Health Insurance Marketplace's enrollment process. They were Deco Recovery Management, which is based in Maryland; The Cooperative Ministry in Columbia and the Beaufort County Black Ministry in Beaufort.

The Benefit Bank of South Carolina is a partner with Deco Recovery Management in the Navigator effort. According to information on The Benefit Bank's website, www.tbbsc.org, sites in Aiken with Benefit Bank representatives are Area Churches Together Serving at 340 Park Ave. S.W., Children's Place at 310 Barnwell Ave. N.E. and the Aiken County Public School District's Office of Federal Programs at 1000 Brookhaven Drive.

Other sites in Aiken County are the Christ Central Mission-Wagener at 115 Railroad Ave. in Wagener, Our Lady of the Valley Catholic Center at 2443 Augusta Road in Gloverville and JoAnn Tillman Ministries at 630 Bradley Drive in North Augusta.

The Aiken County Public School District site serves students and families of school-aged children. The rest are open to the public, but nearly all require appointments.

A Benefit Bank spokesperson said many of its employees and volunteer counselors are still undergoing training to assist people with the Health Insurance Marketplace or haven't started yet. Training is expected to continue through November.

However, the spokesperson added, any counselors that haven't been trained should still be able to tell someone how to get help with the insurance enrollment process within the Benefit Bank system.

Dede Biles is a general assignment reporter for the Aiken Standard and has been with the newspaper since January 2013.

A native of Concord, N.C., she graduated from the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill.