Grassroots Commentary Mysogynism and Racism: The Real Story

For years we have been hearing about the perceived violence and racism of the Tea Party, other Conservative groups and that their hate for President Obama based solely on his ancestry. In truth, there has been virtually no violence and the supposed racism doesn’t exist any more than any other political group, less than most; far, far less than the political left wing.

First case in point, an Obamacare protest event in Arizona, MSNBC touting their “fact” that anyone against the President’s signature legislation was obviously a racist, showed a gentleman in the crowd open carrying a gun. Contessa Brewer contended the Tea Party was made up of all white people who were gathering for one purpose to attack the black President and to show this, they pushed a photo of a gun on the waistband of a Tea Party attendee. The previously mentioned open carrier was their “proof”. Their trouble, or at least the trouble for the other networks who picked it up, was the gun and the waistband belonged to a black Tea Party member. CNN, ABC and the others quietly dropped the story…the ghouls at MSNBC still pull that one out on occasion; they have never refuted.

The story that is often brought up is the supposed racial epitaphs slung at the gathering after the signing of the Affordable Care Act. Pelosi, Carnahan and others walked through the crowd and after the walk, Carnahan said they were called names by people shouting these epitaphs. However, with 21st century technology and 35 thousand people on the Mall that day, not one single video or audio of any such shouts surfaced; even with a $100,000 cash reward. Moreover, there were news people by the thousands from all over the planet; this was the largest economic and social legislation in modern American history. Not one single camera caught a single catcall. It was all a lie..and the media, of course, ran with it anyway. And most still do, especially MSNBC..many Americans still believe it happened; and of course, this was the way it was supposed to be. Tell a lie often and it become the “truth”.

The silence of the media was deafening after SEIU (Service Employees International Union) thugs attacked Kenneth Gladney, a black man and Tea Party activist. Gladney was beaten, kicked and called a racist names outside a health care reform town hall meeting in St. Louis on August 6, 2009 that was called by U.S. Rep. Democrat Russ Carnahan. Gladney was treated and an emergency room for injuries to his knee, back, elbow, shoulder and face suffered in the attack.

On the left-wing site “The News Blog,” posted a doctored photograph of Michael Steele while he was the Lt. Governor of Maryland and running for a Senate seat. It portrayed Steele as a “Simple Sambo” with a blackened minstrel-style face, nappy hair and big, think red lips. The caption read: “Simple Sambo wants to move to the big house”. This racist stereotype is the same one Democrats used for black men during the era of slavery and segregation.

Dr. Condoleezza Rice, one of the greatest Americans in modern history, was the object of particularly vicious racist attacks by the left. Cartoonist Jeff Danziger denigrated Dr. Rice as an ignorant, barefoot “mammy”, reminiscent of the stereotyped black woman in the movie “Gone with the Wind” about the slave era black woman who remarked: “I don’t know nothin' ‘bout birthin’ no babies”. This was one of dozens of attacks on Condi Rice during her time with the Bush administration.

AlterNet.org, a left wing website/blog posted an article criticizing Herman Cain for being a black conservative. The post read; “I find black garbage pail kids, black conservatives fascinating, not because of what they believe but rather because of how they entertain and perform for their white conservative masters.” and it continued “We always need a monkey in the window for he, she, reminds us of our humanity, while simultaneously reinforcing a sense of our own superiority.”

Most recently, Tamera Mowry-Housley an actress from a previous sitcom and married to Adam Housley, a Fox News reporter was and in being viciously attacked. Her crime, marrying a white man. “White man’s whore”. “Hey black b***tches used to get $300, and you give it for free”. MSNBC hosts; to paraphrase.. the rhetoric is awful, but she should expect it.

Expect it? So as long as racism comes from the left it really isn’t racism, just “bad rhetoric”. And why does very few Americans know of these sorts of blatant racist attacks? Because the main stream media cover for everything left wing..ie..the neo-Democrats in the 21st century.

Let’s address the violence and the increase in numbers of incidents in the last few years. Actually left wing violence has long been a problem going back to the turn of the 20th century with the assassination of President McKinley by far left anarchists and the predecessors to the early 20th century Communists. And on through the 1920s and Democrat held KKK and the dozens of lynchings of black men. Continuing into the 1960s and 70s and the all too familiar bombings, murders and attacks on soldiers from the far left anti-war protesters.

In the recent decade, there have been several acts of horror. Many of these were placed on Conservatives and the Tea Party during the first hours after the incidents due to the biased and complicit media, but were soon proven wrong; to name a few.

Sept 2009: census-taker Bill Sparkman found hanged in rural Kentucky. Media speculated it was Tea Party for several days until it was found he killed himself and staged the scene.

Feb 2010: Joe Stack flies small plane into an IRS building; speculation that he was Tea Party member, however it was soon found he was anti-tax and anti-Tea Party; He quoted from the Communist Manifesto.

Feb 2010: Amy Bishop shoots colleagues at University of Alabama faculty meeting. Gun-loving Tea Party suspected by the out of control media. It was discovered she was an ardent supporter of President Obama and actually worked locally for the campaign.

March 2010: John Patrick Bedell shot two Pentagon security. A right-wing extremist media was what the media speculated. However, it was found he was a registered Democrat and 9/11 Truther.

May 2010: Massive Times Square car bomb found before it exploded. NY Mayor Bloomberg speculates it’s someone angry about the Affordable Care Act; the media ran with that one. The perpetrator ended up being your garden variety Ji'hadist.

Sept 2010: James Lee takes hostages at Discovery Chan HQ. Media immediately speculated a global warming skeptic, however, it was discovered he was a wacko environmentalist who hated humans.

There were many more..in fact, nearly every act of violence in the last 10 years has been laid at Conservatives first until the truth comes out that almost every single one of these violent incidents are from the left wing in America; with cover from their minions in the biased media.

Misogynism from the left and the media have long been a problem. Any conservative woman, public or not, is fair game to the left wing. The chortle and laugh at the sick jokes often on the air. Michelle Bachmann ranks at near the top of the attacks..on air, she has been called a Zombie by MSNBC host Chris Matthews, and phony-assed broad and skank by Mike Malloy a left wing radio talk host.

Michelle Malkin, a blogger and former reporter, is commonly the subject of both racial, misogynistic and sexual attacks; on air, and in well known left wing blogs. Case in point, Matt Taibbi, Rolling Stone…to quote; “[T]his move of hers to spearhead the teabag movement really adds an element to her writing that wasn’t there before. Now when I read her stuff, I imagine her narrating her text, book-on-tape style, with a big, hairy set of b—- in her mouth. It vastly improves her prose.” Not only did he verbally sex assault her, he managed to include the homosexual sex act label the left wing has given the Tea Party. Another particularly vicious blog; “Do you think Malkin’s breezer run horizontally instead of vertically?” This blogger managed to be sexist and racist at the same time. There are hundreds of these types of attacks on Malkin, one only needs to browse the internet.

Nikki Haley, the current Governor of South Carolina, is also attacked both racial and mysogynistically by the left. The most egregious would be the so-called extra-marritial affair that has long been proven a hoax, yet the left still love to drag it out just for fun. The Huffington Post recently reiterated…“The political blogger who claims he had a physical relationship with married Republican South Carolina gubernatorial candidate Nikki Haley offered new details in a sworn statement released Tuesday,” This “political blogger” is now know to be a figment of some sick imagination; yet the rumors keep on due to the media and the South Carolina Democrats bringing it back up again and again. The Associated Press managed to even get in on the attacks from the Democrats….“South Carolina Democrats on Thursday seized on a 10-year-old voter registration document for Gov. Nikki Haley to claim the Republican uses her Indian-American heritage when it’s convenient because it lists her race as ‘W’ for white.” The Associated Press and the rest of the main stream media had no problem with Elizabeth Warren claiming Native American with her 128th percent Indian heritage.

Laura Ingraham, an attorney who clerked for the Supreme Court and now a radio host, was viciously attacked on air by host Ed Schultz who said the following: “But you know what they’re talking about? Like this right-wing slut, what’s her name, Laura Ingraham? Yeah, she’s a talk slut.”

Recently these sexist attacks have been outed by the alternative media and in some cases action has been taken. But they are common and very under reported; the reason comes directly from Newsweek magazine..to quote; “the sexist treatment of Republican women is … their own fault for being so attractive.” “There seems to be an insistent, increasingly excitable focus on the supposed hotness of Republican women in the public eye, like Sarah Palin, Michele Bachmann, Michelle Malkin, and Nikki Haley - not to mention veterans like Ann Coulter,”

Why are these racist, sexist and misogynistic attacks so unheard of in the main stream of America? Simple, they do not fit the narrative of the “racist conservatives”. The one argument the left have that keeps them from collapsing is “Conservatives are racists”. There is nothing else for them to argue with the failures of the 21st Century Neo-Democrat party.

Do I want to stop this sort of thing myself or with legislation? No…I would like to see it end with the left self controlling, but I would never want to stop anyone from political speech, no matter how vicious. The one extreme difference between the conservative and the progressive is the conservative would willing take a bullet for the progressive to say anything they may choose. The progressive will do anything in their power to silence conservatism and any sort of speech contrary to theirs.