MILWAUKEE — More than $400,000 was raised as walkers and runners from across Wisconsin gathered at the lakefront to support HIV prevention, care and treatment programs at the 26th Annual AIDS Walk Wisconsin and 5K Run.

In addition to individual walkers and runners, AIDS Walk Wisconsin presented four unique team competitions that challenged groups to raise funds for HIV services.

The ‘Raising the Bar Challenge’ is a friendly competition among taverns from across the state. For the fourth year in a row, Team DIX was this year’s winner raising $47,408 — which is also the team that raised the most funds overall.

The team from Northwestern Mutual won this year’s ‘Cream City Corporate Challenge,’ with a fundraising total of $6,269. This challenge is presented in partnership with the Cream City Foundation and is designed to help promote AIDS Walk Wisconsin fundraising and participation among various corporate LGBT resource groups.

Get Dolled Up raised $1,798 to win the Stylists Against AIDS challenge. And the winners of the AIDS Walk Wisconsin High School Challenge was West Bend High School SAGA — they raised $573.

The top individual fundraiser this year is Eric Hamilton of Milwaukee who raised a whopping $27,623.

Winners of the 5K run were Cody Powers and Molly Soulder.

ARCW President and Chief Executive Officer Michael Gifford is thrilled with how Saturday’s fundraiser turned out.

“Today marks another successful AIDS Walk Wisconsin. We are grateful to the thousands of walkers who joined us, the corporate partners who continue to support us and everyone who donated. The funds raised today will propel us forward in the fight against AIDS in the year ahead,” said Gifford.

Lance Bass, of boy band N’Sync, and his husband Michael were also along the walkers and runners to help raise money for the cause.

“I think Wisconsin knows how to do these AIDS walks and what they’re doing at the health center is amazing. It should be a blueprint for all of us to follow in all the other cities and around the world,” said Bass.

The grand total raised at today’s AIDS Walk Wisconsin was $402,542.