Topics: 2016 Elections, Education, GOP, Governor, Jeb Bush, midwest, Pat Robertson, Scott Walker, The Right, University of Wisconsin, White House, Wisconsin, Politics News

So the scuttlebut among the Villagers is that Wisconsin Governor Scott Walker is the GOP’s Great Whitebread Hope, the man Jeb Bush has to beat. I’ve written before about the political establishment’s habit of picking out an upper midwestern Governor in the mold of Robert LaFollette to push as the GOP’s best chance to appeal to the proverbial “independents” who are desperate for a Republican reformer with results. In each election cycle you read endless arguments that start with this premise:

You could make a good argument for a Midwestern governor as the Republican presidential nominee,” said Larry Sabato, a political science professor and director of the Center for Politics at the University of Virginia. “The Midwest has electoral votes Republicans need to reverse their fortunes in the Electoral College.”

One could say the same thing about the West and the Northeast. The GOP could use those electoral votes just as well, but but for some reason nobody makes the case that the Republicans will win if they nominate the Republican Governor of Maine for president. This seems to be more of a beltway fever dream than anything else. Polling shows that people really aren’t that “independent” and reforms are in the eye of the beholder. In any case, one need only look to past big winners Tim Pawlenty and Tommy Thompson to see how well it worked out.

Still, Walker seems to be thrilling the punditocracy even more than these bland Governors usually do. This undoubtedly has to do with the fact that he survived a recall effort and won re-election afterwards, which makes him in the eyes of the beltway some sort of giant slayer. But the fact is that he first won in the Democratic bloodbath of 2010 and then barely eked out a win in the next Democratic bloodbath of 2014. In the middle of those two off-year Republican landslides, he was recalled! No other Governor in the nation was recalled, but Scott Walker was and that somehow makes him a great moderate reformer who is a GOP national hero. By that logic, more Governors should want to be recalled so they can be admired for their political brilliance.

Walker is also seen as a very serious threat to rest of the GOP field because he is popular among Republicans in Iowa. But then so was Pat Robertson and he didn’t have the benefit of sharing the same media market at the Wisconsin Governor does. And many Iowa winners of both parties litter the graveyard of presidential dreams. Being popular there is not a sign of political savvy, it’s a sign of … being popular in Iowa.

None of this is to say that Walker has no chance or that he doesn’t have a nice set of qualifications for the GOP primary voter. He is an extremely right-wing Christian who is very conversant in the language of hardcore social conservatism. (See: popular in Iowa.) This is a valuable skill for any GOP candidate who needs to navigate the treacherous waters of Republican party politics without seeming like a zealot to the rest of the country. And his initiatives to restrict the right to vote are catnip to Republicans of all stripes. (If there’s one thing they know it’s that they cannot win if everyone who is eligible to vote is allowed to cast a ballot.) And if there’s one comparison to Ronald Reagan that actually makes some sense it has to be the crown jewel of his political achievements: union busting.

Still, Walker is something of a clod who gets himself into trouble time and time again. It’s not just that he speaks in tangled syntax that only a Navajo Code Talker could love. Joan Walsh noted a perfect example in this piece about Walker’s opponent in the last election: [T]he bigger trend is not if I have a gender question, it’s actually that she’s off the chart from where a Democrat normally is, gender-wise, with male voters as opposed to female.” Ok.