Topics: Joe Biden, John Travolta, mantouching, Oscars, the daily dot, Video, Oscars News, News, Politics News

This article originally appeared on The Daily Dot

When I started college, one of my first jobs was working the front desk at my university’s admissions office. I shared a desk with my boss, a voluptuous chatterbox who was bright, perky, and personable. She was the kind of woman whose cheeks you’d always want to pinch.

Unfortunately, our department director, a squirrelly little man with comically large glasses, often did just that. When she did something he liked, he would grab her face to show his approval, as if she were a child or a beloved pet.

The first time he did it, she was in front of students. The second time, she was in front of colleagues. When I recently asked her about it, she told me, “I can remember who was there. I can remember exactly how uncomfortable it made me. It didn’t actually hurt or anything. It was this moment where I simultaneously felt like an object and also like there was nothing I could do about it, so I should just let it happen.”

More from The Daily Dot: “Classic cartoons are so much funnier with Ice T’s voice”

Other friends recalled similar stories from work colleagues, acquaintances, family members, and strangers, in which men touched them without prior consent or approval. One example came from a former coworker who remembered “walking in a grocery store parking lot, wearing a skirt, and a man walked up to me, put his hand up my skirt, grabbed my ass, and then walked off.” A writer I know reported a bizarre incident in which she was “standing at a bus stop [when] a guy rushed [her] and proceeded to kiss [her] foot before hopping on his bus and escaping.”

While these encounters happened between strangers, most women who told me they had experienced unwanted touching from a man said it had happened in a public place, such as a bar or the workplace. The perpetrator was usually someone they knew.

In an office environment, such unwanted touching constitutes sexual harassment (although a great number of women decline to report it, due to factors like social pressure or fear of workplace retaliation.) However, if you’re a woman at a bus stop, or if you’re picking up hummus at a grocery store, there aren’t the same protections in place. If you’re on stage presenting at the Oscars and a well-known celebrity starts petting your face, there’s no obvious chain of command or boss to report it to.

For the audience, such moments could appear to be humorous. This man is harmless, they all laugh, and the Internet laughs right along with them. It’s a shared inside joke that everyone is in on. He’s just a “creepy uncle.” He’s not hurting anyone.

Of course, the celebrity in question is John Travolta, who doubled down on becoming an Internet meme this week after he felt up Idina Menzel’s face onstage at the Academy Awards. Menzel and Travolta appeared together to bury the hatchet over an incident last year, in which Travolta infamously flubbed the “Let It Go” singer’s name, calling her “Adele Dazeem.”

The Internet immediately made a small moment into a viral sensation. Someone created a John Travolta Name Generator, in which the Saturday Night Fever star could mangle your name, too. Adele Dazeem even got her own Twitter account.

So when Travolta awkwardly touched Menzel’s face at the Oscars this year, the Internet was bound to react as if the incident was intended to be comical. It was an indication that Travolta had become Hollywood’s “creepy uncle.” But no one saw the encounter for what it was: a moment of public sexual harassment.

More from The Daily Dot: “’50 Fox News lies in 6 seconds’ is the Daily Show’s gift to the Internet”

In fact, the face-touching wasn’t even Travolta’s only transgression that evening. On the red carpet, the star also kissed the side of Scarlett Johansson’s face while he placed his hand around her waist. Photos show that Johansson was clearly uncomfortable with the gesture, her eyes glossing over as she stares into the distance. (Johansson, for her part, has been a good sport and defended him.) The moment should have been shocking and deeply troubling, but instead it got turned into a meme. You can find photos of John Travolta embracing Kanye West, the Statue of Liberty, and his own Hairspray character. How droll!

The lack of outcry beyond the requisite “Wow, what happened to John Travolta?” shouldn’t be surprising to anyone, especially in light of the recent coverage of Vice President Joe Biden embracing Stephanie Carter, the wife of the Secretary of Defense Ashton Carter, during his swearing-in ceremony.

As the Daily Dot’s own Miles Klee reported, “Biden all but demanded that Carter’s wife Stephanie stand near him so he could squeeze her shoulders, sniff her hair, and whisper in her ear.” Klee further reminds us: