Affordable Care Act funding is making it possible for Blue Ridge Community Health Services to extend services for substance abuse, particularly opioid abuse, which has reached epidemic proportions.

The $350,000 grant will enable the community health center to hire a psychiatrist, a counselor and an RN case manager — preferably with experience dealing with substance abuse.

“It’s very exciting to be able to hire three people in addition to the people we already have here dedicated to this cause,” said Linda Davidson, Behavioral Health director at BRCHS. Hiring is taking place immediately.

With staffing in place, services will be seamless for patients who need help with substance abuse issues, with a dedicated counselor and a medical provider that can prescribe, as well as a case manager that can keep treatment moving.

The first phase will involve screenings — performed at yearly exams and wellness checks for patients 12 years old and older, to determine risk for behavioral health issues so that intervention, treatment and referrals can be made for the patient.

“The intervention is to let them know where they are — are they having healthy habits or they’re on the borderline from going to something not so healthy medically?” said Davidson.

Those who are more in need will see a counselor right away for an intervention. If they need referral to a program for medication-assisted treatment, they can also get that immediately.

“This is an opportunity for patients to really take control of their health care,” Davidson said. “They will be able to make that decision after the screening — if you see this as an issue, how do you want to manage this ... do you want to take that path from addiction to wellness?”

Similar screenings are already performed for depression at BRCHS. The screenings and intervention protocol is based on a best practices model, while it isn’t yet available widely, she said.

A minimum of questions will be asked of patients for the screenings, and will include queries such as, “Have you used drugs other than those required for a medical reason?” and “Do you abuse more than one drug at a time?” and “Do you feel bad or guilty about your drug use and have your spouse, parents or friends complained?”

Based on answers received, a relative, moderate or high risk is determined for the patient, in turn determining how the intervention is implemented.

In the next two years, BRCHS anticipates screening 10,000 individuals and providing medication-assisted program services to over 1,300 people, with about overall 4,000 visits, for services like group and individual psychotherapy.

“We’ll basically be looking at everyone as an individual because everyone is so different,” Davidson said. “We’re here to support people and offer them the tools they need.”

Davidson noted that there’s been a lot of buzz in the community about the expansion of services at BRCHS; medical providers there are in agreement about the need for intervention.

“It’s difficult to address the chronic health issues many of our patients face without first addressing any underlying substance abuse or other behavioral health issues,” said Dr. Evan Beasley. “Further integration of behavioral health and primary care at our clinics is going to help us better serve our communities.”

Reaching the underserved in the community as well as individuals misusing opioids (which are often misused along with other substances) is key to stemming the epidemic.

“There aren’t many resources like this that are truly available for people regardless of their ability to pay, regardless of their background,” said Milton Butterworth, chief development officer for BRCHS, who added that the expansion of services for behavioral health at BRCHS doesn’t mean that the community can wash its hands of the problem.

“This does not cover the capacity necessary to solve the entire region’s issues, but it’s a start,” he said. “Hopefully from this foundation we can work together with the rest of the region to chip away at this.”

Davidson is hopeful, as well. “I’m from Vermont, I’ve just been here the past three months, and I’m so impressed by the action of this community to tackle many different problems,” she said.

To learn more, visit brchs.com or call 828-692-4289.

— Reach De Bona at beth.debona@blueridgenow.com or 828-694-7890. Follow @BRNBeth