The Louisiana Republican Party issued a formal statement Thursday (April 10) calling for U.S. Rep. Vance McAllister, R-Swartz to resign. The full statement is below.

"The Republican Party of Louisiana calls on Vance McAllister to resign his seat in Congress. Mr. McAllister's extreme hypocrisy is an example of why ordinary people are fed up with politics. A breach of trust of this magnitude can only be rectified by an immediate resignation. He has embarrassed our party, our state and the institution of Congress. A video showing him engaged in conduct unbecoming a member of Congress, on public time, in a public office, with one of his employees, was the focus of the national press for days. I call on Mr. McAllister to put the interests of his nation, state and party above his own and step aside.

We are praying for Mr. McAllister and the families that are involved. I attempted to resolve this matter privately and directly with Mr. McAllister, but his chief of staff chose to make this information public. Therefore, I have chosen to release this statement today."

State Party Executive Director Jason Dore first confirmed the resignation request on-the-record to NOLA.com | The Times-Picayune earlier Thursday.

This week, a security video was leaked to The Ouachita Citizen showing McAllister, just weeks after his election, kissing a married staffer.

One state lawmaker who lost against McAllister in November was the first local official to call for his resignation Tuesday. While the resignation request from the state GOP is a blow to McAllister, he ran and won without the support of the Republican establishment during the special election.

Instead, McAllister pumped his own money, hundreds of thousands of dollars, into the campaign. He enjoyed heightened attention after the Robertson family of Duck Dynasty fame counted him as their choice for Congress. But he lost some support from some other conservatives when he came out in favor of the Medicaid expansion option available under the Affordable Care Act during a November debate.

His runoff opponent, state Sen. Neil Riser, R-Columbia, was not endorsed by the state party. But he did receive nods from nearly the entire Louisiana GOP delegation, with the exception of U.S. Sen David Vitter, who did not endorse anyone.

On Thursday, state party officials did not return multiple requests for comment on why they are asking for McAllister's departure, when they did not do so for Vitter in 2007 after he admitted his involvement in the DC Madame scandal.

At the time, Villere did not ask for Vitter's resignation. Here is what he said: "I think if nothing else comes out, and this is all there is, then three weeks from now, this will all be behind (Vitter)."

NOLA.com | The Times-Picayune also reported: "In a concerted push Thursday (July 12, 2007) to offer some support for the most prominent Republican statewide elected official, the state GOP organized the release of a flurry of supportive statements. Most urged personal support for Vitter and his family and focused on the legislative work Vitter has done in his eight years on Capitol Hill."

. . . . . .

Lauren McGaughy is a state politics reporter based in Baton Rouge. She can be reached at lmcgaughy@nola.com or on Twitter at @lmcgaughy. Find her latest stories on the Baton Rouge hub's Facebook page.