In the latest attack on Obamacare, a Texas Congressman warns of the potential for "medical martial law" with an expansion of a health force led by the U.S. surgeon general, to be used in event of emergencies such as hurricanes.

In the latest attack on Obamacare, a Texas Congressman warns of the potential for "medical martial law" with an expansion of a health force led by the U.S. surgeon general, to be used in event of emergencies such as hurricanes. CC By 2.0

A Texas Congressman this week attacked Obamacare in what appeared to be a trifecta of libertarian fears and passions, including socialized medicine, funding for the U.S. Department of Homeland Security, and a vague suspicion of an emerging "armed" health force deployable for international emergencies.

Among those skeptical of claims made Tuesday by Rep. Louie Gohmert, a Republican, would be left-wing journalists and the Blue State “sheeple” under their hypnotic spell, some conservatives say. Speaking to a wide conservative audience, Gohmert appeared on Janet Mefferd’s Christian radio program retweeted by InfoWars.com, one of the world’s top 1,000 websites with more than 2.6 million monthly U.S. visitors.

In the attack on Obamacare, Gohmert parsed language from the Affordable Care Act, whose text includes 234,812 words, in addition to more than 20,000 pages of administrative regulation. Referring to language discussing “the president’s own commissioned and noncommissioned officer corps,” Gohmert warned that the new law gives the federal government greater powers to declare a form of medical martial law in the event of a “national emergency.”

Under the new law, the U.S. Public Health Service’s Ready Reserve Corps is directed to “assist full-time Commissioned Corps personnel to meet both routine public health and emergency response missions.”

However, Gohmert took issue with the apparent exclusion of one word among those 234,812 words in the original law.

“It says it is for international health crises, but then it doesn’t include the word ‘health’ when it talks about national emergencies,” Gohmert said. “I’ve asked, what kind of training are they getting… I want to know are they using weapons to train, or are they being taught to use syringes and health care items?”

Gohmert added that he’s received “no clear answers” yet regarding his suspicions about Obamacare. The congressman linked his concerns about possible medical martial law with a recent federal contract from Homeland Security to buy 750 million rounds of bullets, a procurement the government says is intended for more than 90 law enforcement agencies over a period of five years.

“Some kind of secret security force is something the United States is never supposed to have… but until we get enough members of Congress stirred up over the things I’ve been preaching about then we’re not likely to get answers,” Gohmert said.

However, the U.S. Public Health Service might appear a bit less sinister on closer examination, according to FactCheck.org.

The new law merely hires more doctors and other health professionals to serve the country in the event of a public health crisis, such as the devastation wreaked by Hurricane Katrina in 2005, which killed more than 1,800 Americans. In that crisis response, the U.S. depended partially upon personnel from Mexico's military for help in the American Southwest. Prior to passage of Obamacare, the public health service employed around 2,800 full-time doctors, nurses, scientists, and other professionals, with a reserve force similar to the U.S. Army National Guard. Now, the service will gain more full-time, uniformed employees.

The uniformed health service will also likely gain a new leader in the coming week when President Barack Obama nominates Vivek Hallegere Murthy, a 36-year-old attending physician at Brigham and Women's Hospital, to succeed acting surgeon general Rear Admiral Boris Lushniak, NBC News reported Thursday. Murthy, also affiliated with Harvard Medical School, is co-founder and president of Doctors for America, a Washington-based group of 16,000 doctors and medical students advocating for affordable health care.

Below is an audio recording of the interview with Rep. Gohmert, uploaded Tuesday to YouTube: