Teacher Zach McDowell demonstrates a magnetic field project during Super Science Friday at Lincoln School of Science & Technology on Friday while second grader Adoni Ostrander Braham watches. ( Sarah Rose / Daily Record )

First grader Hunter Massey participates in Super Science Friday at Lincoln School of Science & Technology on Friday. (Sarah Rose / Daily Record)

Students at Lincoln School of Science & Technology participated in energy-themed science projects on Friday during their Super Science Friday event.

"Each of the student classes have three different learning modules or learning labs to rotate through and all of it emphasizes on using energy," said Principal Tammy DeWolfe.

She said students in each grade level had their own projects.

"The primary students are focusing on positive and negative batteries and the positions of batteries in toys and how to correctly install batteries in electrical devices," DeWolfe said. "First grade is focusing on additional batteries, flashlights and how the closed circuit works. Second grade is creating and making their own battery systems and little generated motors using magnetic fields. Intermediate students are learning about the different forms of energy."

The event has taken place multiple times during last three years.

"Our Super Science Fridays that we conduct during the school year is to address some of the science gaps in our regular core curriculum and bridge that learning building-wide with school-wide events," she said.

She said energy is one subject that is being taught throughout the year. The other topics are animals in our world, discover space and planet earth.

School custodian Abe England began the Super Science Friday event.

"In the beginning, we talked about conductors and nonconductors, things that conduct electricity and things that don't conduct electricity," England said. "And then after that, we talked about magnetic fields based off of electromagnetic fields where it's only magnetic when it's on. As soon as you turn it off, the magnetic field goes away."

Advertisement

Wolfe demonstrated how strong a magnetic field is to the students. She held up a pole to a magnet and attempted to pull away.

"This magnet actually has the strength of a thousand pounds before it separates," England said. "It's a pretty strong electric magnet. That iron bar was just there so she could try to feel how strong the field was."

Sarah Rose: 719-285-5157, roses@canoncitydailyrecord.com or twitter.com/sarahfaithrose