Topics: ben stiller, Comedy, Movies, Owen Wilson, penelope cruz, zoolander, Zoolander 2, Entertainment News

When I watch some bad movies, I cannot figure out why they were made. The recent “Dirty Grandpa” seems to exist so that Robert De Niro can say the “N-word” on-screen and stick his flaccid penis in Zac Efron’s face. Its director, Dan Mazer, is an Oscar nominee. Was this the kind of movie he dreamed of making when he got into film?

But in the case of “Zoolander 2,” it’s hard to fathom why anyone wanted to make this particular version of it. There’s no reason the movie had to be this terrible. “Zoolander 2” was written by four people who have done much better things. Nicholas Stoller made “Neighbors” and “Forgetting Sarah Marshall.” John Hamburg wrote and directed the underrated “I Love You, Man,” a touching and observant bromance. Ben Stiller and Justin Theroux were two-thirds of the team behind “Tropic Thunder,” one of the more audacious Hollywood satires of the past decade. Your opinions on seeing Robert Downey Jr. in blackface may vary, but you cannot say the film lacks gumption.

Many of these comic talents were behind the original “Zoolander,” a charming dumb-smart comedy marred by its unfortunate release date. The film, about an assassination plot foiled by male models, debuted in theaters just two weeks after Sept. 11. Since no one wanted to see a terrorist comedy, “Zoolander” performed very modestly in theaters—en route to becoming a cult classic on DVD.

For Stiller and co., getting a do-over must have felt like a shot at redemption, like Rocky climbing the stairs of the Philadelphia Art Museum before the title match. It’s just too bad the end result is the exact opposite: falling down and hitting every single step along the way. “Zoolander 2” never, ever finds its rhythm, like a badly dubbed foreign film that always feels a beat behind. Some scenes sag under the weight of bad material, while others feel as if the writers forgot to add the actual jokes.

It’s not a good sign when a movie scores its biggest laughs in the first five minutes. “Zoolander 2” begins promisingly enough. The world’s pop stars are being systematically killed off, with Justin Bieber (playing himself) marking the most recent casualty in the celebrity serial murders. Before he dies, Bieber snaps one last selfie in his final moments, taking painstaking care to select the proper Instagram filter to document his untimely death. The premiere of TV’s “Scream Queens” featured a similar gag spoofing millennial narcissism in the face of tragedy, and the joke is still funny.

The rest of “Zoolander 2” lacks any real comic bite—or much of a reason to exist. “Zoolander 2” details Derek Zoolander’s (Stiller) quest to climb back to the top of the modeling industry, more than a decade after he left the fashion world in disgrace. His ex-wife, Matilda (Christine Taylor), was killed when the Derek Zoolander Center for Kids Who Can’t Read Good and Who Wanna Learn to Do Other Stuff Good Too collapsed immediately after it was built. His son, Derek Jr., was subsequently taken away by Child Protective Services. By teaming up with a sexy Interpol agent (a wasted Penelope Cruz) to find the culprit behind the killings, Zoolander can not only get Derek Jr. back but also prove he’s still got it.