Topics: Editor's Picks, man, Music, Neko Case, Reproductive Rights, Entertainment News

On her new album, “The Worse Things Get, the Harder I Fight, the Harder I Fight, the More I Love You,” Neko Case delivers some of her most revealing and personal songs yet. Even the album’s lengthy title reveals her as she is: a lover and a fighter.

And one of the many fights in Case’s life is the one for reproductive rights. Famously known for saying she should have been aborted because her parents weren’t ready to be parents, Case has been an outspoken pro-choice advocate throughout her career. In a 2009 interview with the New York Times, Case expounded on movies like “Juno” which center on unplanned pregnancies and suggested that abortion would have been the gentlest way to solve the plot problem. Her song “Pretty Girls” describes a scene she once witnessed in a Planned Parenthood waiting room: “Your hearts are so tried and so innocent / Wind your flimsy blue gowns tight around you / Around curves so comely and sinister / They blame it on you pretty girls.”

It’s no surprise that Case is still speaking her mind about abortion rights at this point in her career, especially given today’s prevalent anti-choice legislation. Asked what it would take to truly transform the political climate into a more choice-friendly one, Case was full of candid wisdom: “People will have to stop talking about things in a sensationalist, tabloid-style way. Nobody listens. It’s just an irritant. Religion needs to be removed from the discussions as our constitution promises. We need a big-picture recalibration.”

She added, “The men who have gotten women pregnant need to be accountable if we are. If we are going to jail, the men are coming too. Religious rhetoric will bite its own ass trying to nail only women in a two-person process. I’d like to hear people talk about that way more. More to shut up the sexist assholes, women included, who think we ‘acted alone’ than actually putting anyone in jail which is obviously just as ludicrous as abortion being illegal and stigmatized in the first place. I don’t want anyone punished for it, men or women.”