RANCHO CUCAMONGA, Calif., Jan. 03, 2016 (GLOBE NEWSWIRE) -- Dr. Fahed Hattar and the associates at Dr. Hattar Dental and Orthodontic are making the life-changing benefits of dental implants much more accessible to those who need it. The residents of Rancho Cucamonga, Victorville and the surrounding California areas are reaping the benefits of a professional, experienced dentist who is offering implant dentistry at some of the most affordable prices in the state.

Dr. Hattar Dental and Orthodontic specializes in dental implants, including the mini implant, single tooth implants and dentures, for patients in the Rancho Cucamonga and Victorville areas. One of the highlights of the practice includes the availability of a single tooth implant for only $899 (this excludes the crown or prosthetic.)



Dental implants effectively function as a very comfortable replacement for a person’s natural tooth root. The implant can then act as an anchor for a dental prosthetic or a dental crown. The result is an extremely lifelike and comfortable effect. After patients discuss their available options with Dr. Hattar, many clients decide that a tooth implant is the best route to solving their dental issue.



Dental implants in Rancho Cucamonga can help to resolve a variety of oral issues, and Dr. Hattar is an expert in this area. Patients receive comprehensive care from the time of diagnosis all the way through the completion of the chosen course of treatment. The staff at Dr. Hattar Dental and Orthodontic also places an emphasis on treating each client with care and compassion, as if they were their only patient.



Dr. Hattar explains, “Implants come very close to emulating the tooth’s natural root within the mouth. Many patients say that getting dental implants is the best dental decision they have ever made. When fitted with a crown or prosthetic, they become like permanent teeth, restoring the smile as well as the patient’s comfort levels throughout the day.”



Dr. Hattar continues, “I believe that everyone should have access to this high level of oral health and dental comfort. That’s why we are offering dental implants at just $899 per tooth.”



Dr. Hattar and the entire dental team at Dr. Hattar Dental and Orthodontic bring their educational credentials, friendly chair-side demeanor, focus on compassion and passion for orthodontic dentistry to every patient they see. Their goal is personalized dental care to ensure total patient comfort and satisfaction, from routine examinations to dental implants.



Dr. Hattar Dental and Orthodontic has two locations; one office is located in Suite F at 15366 11th St. in Victorville, Calif. The two clinic locations serve the Rancho Cucamonga, Victorville and surrounding areas with personalized, comfortable and compassionate care along with a full range of dental services. For more information, the public can call 760-243-3595 or visit the Dr. Hattar Dental and Orthodontic website.

Dr. Hattar Dental and Orthodontic, 760-243-3595