In the search for a new chief executive, the South Broward Hospital District took a good step last week in agreeing to interview all four internal candidates — and perhaps all external candidates — in public view, as required by Florida's Sunshine Law.

The district's board members also took to heart the legal advice of outside counsel and former U.S. Sen. George LeMieux, whom they hired to help handle the Sun Sentinel's request to see the names of the 14 candidates identified by a search firm.

"The selection of a CEO is the highest form of public business that you could take," LeMieux said, citing statutes and case law. "Those documents are public record."

However, even as the board that oversees Memorial Healthcare System expressed its commitment to transparency before an overflow crowd of doctors, nurses and community stakeholders Wednesday evening, disturbing undercurrents surfaced.

For one, the search firm hired to perform a national search said it wouldn't reveal the external applicants' names because they are "trade secrets." Before making anything public, Korn Ferry representatives said they first will see whether anyone wants to drop out. The consultants suggested half of the 10 external candidates might withdraw.

That may well be true. Agreeing to participate in a public search for a high-profile, high-paying job may prove to be too uncomfortable for some people. But we question, as has been suggested, whether prospects would face retribution or lose their jobs if identified.

Think about it. If a high-performing, out-of-town CEO tells her board that a search firm called to see if she might be interested in running a great hospital system in South Florida for as much as $1 million per year, do you think the board's first reaction will be to fire her? A counter-offer is a better bet. That is, if the candidate is of the quality that Memorial, a government health care system, is paying the search firm $330,000 to identify.

Let's remember, the person who gets this job will be responsible for a six-hospital system with taxing authority and $1.9 billion in annual revenues. The public deserves to know who is being considered, be they a top-flight hospital executive, a politician or someone's business partner.

It is a shame the hospital district hired a search firm so unfamiliar with Florida's public records law that it made promises to candidates it cannot keep. Because of that, the selection process has been sidetracked, attorney fees are piling up and the clock is ticking down to the Feb. 28 departure of current CEO Frank Sacco.

Meanwhile, questions have surfaced about how the firm was hired, the possible involvement of a North Broward Hospital District competitor and another possible violation of the Sunshine Law.

In a dramatic moment during the meeting's public comments, Memorial's chief pediatric heart transplant surgeon, Dr. Frank Scholl, insisted that board member Laura Raybin Miller told him an external candidate would be chosen CEO. That raises questions about how such a promise — which would have required lining up four votes — could be made.

Miller insisted she never said that, that the doctor misheard her, that things wouldn't change with the arrival of a new CEO and that she only wanted what was best for Memorial, including greater transparency from the chief executive's office.

It's possible that Miller and other board members who appear to be leaning toward an outside candidate may be reading between the lines of a letter they received from Gov. Rick Scott, who has appointed or reappointed all seven of them. In his letter, the governor insisted they conduct a national search. He even offered his office's help in coordinating it.

We asked the governor's office whether he's implying that an outside candidate should be chosen, but didn't get an answer.

We also asked, given the governor's criticism of hospital CEO salaries, whether he agrees with the search firm's suggestion that Memorial pay its next chief executive as much as $1 million annually, up from the $740,000 now paid Sacco.

On that, Scott's spokeswoman directed us to the second paragraph of the letter, which says: "As we look toward the next chapter of Memorial Healthcare System, it is vital we maintain an open process to ensure we find the best candidate that will focus on patient outcomes and reducing costs for Florida taxpayers."

Three times in his letter, it must be said, the governor underscores the need for transparency in the process.

While the hospital system has begun to respond to our public records request, we've yet to receive requested records from the search firm and the governor's office.

Absent more information, the Sun Sentinel Editorial Board does not yet have a position on whether an internal or external candidate should be chosen.

However, a chorus of Memorial doctors, nurses, staffers and community leaders believe that one of the four internal candidates should be chosen because they have the DNA of this award-winning system in their blood.

We'd counter that if a stellar outside candidate emerges — someone who's earned top stars from patients and government metrics, has a demonstrated track record of raising money and navigating political currents, has recruited and motivated a top-notch staff, and has built good community relationships while keeping a sharp eye on the bottom line — that sounds like a pretty good fit, too.

We encourage candidates from within and without not to be discouraged by the momentary sidetracking of the search process. This is a great job in a great community, and the best candidate will enjoy great support.

But we also encourage candidates to proceed with their eyes wide open. Understand the political tensions in this state about Obamacare, Medicaid expansion and whether public hospital systems should be sold to private corporations, an issue that lurks in the background.

Ask a lot of questions. We promise to continue to do the same, on behalf of a community that cares deeply about this patient-focused health care system and the people who have made it great.