President Barack Obama is making one last attempt to save the “Cadillac tax,” even though he knows he won’t be able to finish the job before leaving office.

The Cadillac tax is a surcharge on expensive health care plans, designed to raise revenue and, more importantly, to hold down spending on medical care. It became law as part of the Affordable Care Act and was originally scheduled to take effect in 2018. But the tax was almost instantly unpopular. In December, Congress voted to push back the introduction, and Obama reluctantly went along.

Now, the tax is not supposed to take effect until 2020. Most observers expect that, at some point, Congress will push back the starting date even farther into the future -- a pattern likely to repeat itself over and over again, so that the tax never actually takes effect.

But the administration isn’t quite ready to give up. The president’s budget, which becomes public on Tuesday, includes a proposal to modify the Cadillac tax in ways that would address several key objections to it. And while nobody expects Congress to act on the White House proposal this year, the proposal could start a conversation that carries over into the next administration.

Leading presidential candidates from both parties have come out against the tax, although several have indicated -- or at least hinted -- that they’d like to find some policy alternative that pursues the same basic goals.

It’s not hard to see why. The Cadillac tax represents an effort to scale back the “employer tax exclusion,” a provision of the tax code that effectively makes a dollar of insurance premiums more valuable than a dollar of wages. The exclusion, which has been in place since the 1940s, is one reason that so many employers started offering health benefits -- and why employer coverage is still the dominant method of coverage today.

But economists have long argued that the exclusion has negative side effects. For one thing, they point out, it’s highly regressive: Somebody making $300,000 gets a much bigger benefit than somebody making $30,000. And by giving artificial incentive for workers to take health insurance instead of wages, economists believe, the exclusion ends up driving up the consumption of expensive health care services, which leads to higher premiums and lower wages.

The Cadillac tax seeks to reduce these incentives for expensive plans, albeit in a roundabout way -- namely, imposing a financial penalty on the most expensive plans. That has made the tax highly unpopular with the unions that negotiated generous plans for their members, as well as with many employers.