BURBANK, Calif.--(BUSINESS WIRE)--EP Cares™, Entertainment Partners’ groundbreaking Affordable Care Act (ACA)-compliant insurance program, has received The Institute for HealthCare Consumerism's (IHC) Superstar Award for Private Exchange Implementation. EP Cares™ is the first ever entertainment industry private healthcare exchange and is designed specifically to meet the unique challenges and transient nature of the non-union production community.

“When we began to read the Affordable Care Act documentation, it became clear that our industry was not equipped to address the issue of compliance given the existing infrastructure,” noted Mark Goldstein, President and CEO of Entertainment Partners, the industry’s leading provider of payroll and production management services. “We love to tackle complex client issues and develop simple solutions in response. And we knew we had the breadth, depth, and expertise to create a turnkey offering that would make ACA compliance simple for the production community.”

In its first year, EP Cares™ has been quickly adopted as the dominant ACA-compliant insurance program for the entertainment industry. A number of major studios, independents, and production companies of various sizes have already signed up for the program.

EP’s ACA Solutions group is led by Senior Vice President and Chief Labor Counsel Joseph Scudiero, a recognized industry expert on ACA compliance. “EP manages all compliance, administration, and financial aspects of the program, provides an easy-to-use automated enrollment system, and participating employees enjoy the benefit of transportable and affordable coverage as they move from project to project,” noted Scudiero. “Our clients are thrilled that we could provide a product that was so tailored to their specific needs.”

The annual HealthCare Consumerism Superstars Awards recognize and honor the forward-thinking individuals, innovative solutions providers, and exceptional organizations that are making a difference in our workplaces and healthcare system by moving the healthcare consumerism mega-trend forward. This year’s honorees also include industry leaders Kaiser Permanente, HealthPlus, Union Bank & Trust, and Kraft Foods, Inc. The awards will be presented at the IHC Forum West Conference in Las Vegas on November 12.

EP partners with Lockton, the largest independent benefits consulting and brokerage firm, Anthem Blue Cross to deliver medical, dental, vision, and life insurance plans, and Express Scripts for pharmacy benefits. PlanSource provides the employee benefits administration platform. For more information on EP's Affordable Care Act Solutions, visit www.ep.com/aca.

About Entertainment Partners:

Entertainment Partners is the global leader in entertainment payroll, residuals, tax incentives, finance, and other integrated production management solutions, with 15 offices in the U.S., Canada, London and Tokyo. Combining its comprehensive capabilities, extensive resources, and unparalleled industry experience, EP collaborates with clients to help them produce the most cost-effective and efficient film, television, digital, and commercial projects. The EP Financial Solutions group is the industry’s largest and most experienced incentives team, drawing on unparalleled expertise in maximizing U.S. and international incentives. The company also provides casting and payroll for background actors through its legendary Central Casting division, a Hollywood icon since 1925. Established over 35 years ago, EP is a 100% employee-owned company. Visit the website at www.ep.com.