You must enter the characters with black color that stand out from the other characters

Message: * A friend wanted you to see this item from WRAL.com: http://wral.com/14331804

— The North Carolina Court of Appeals on Tuesday ruled that use of a discarded cigarette butt as evidence in the trial of a man accused in the death of North Carolina State Board of Education member Kathy Taft was constitutional and that Jason Williford, convicted for Taft's murder, got a fair trial.

Williford, 35, is serving life in prison without the possibility of parole for the March 9, 2010, murder of Taft, who was asleep inside the Raleigh home of a friend when Williford broke in and raped the 62-year-old.

Five weeks later, Raleigh police arrested Williford after DNA from the crime scene matched his DNA on a cigarette butt that had been discarded outside his apartment – less than two blocks from where Taft had been staying.

"Local law enforcement and (North Carolina State) Crime Lab scientists worked tirelessly to solve this brutal murder, with DNA evidence helping investigators zero in on the right suspect," North Carolina Attorney General Roy Cooper said in a statement. "Today's ruling means law enforcement can continue to combine old-fashioned detective work with high-tech science to solve cases and achieve justice."

Williford's had appealed his 2012 conviction, saying police should have obtained a search warrant before collecting the butt and using it as evidence against him.

The state argued, however, that the butt was admissible because Williford threw it away outside the boundary of his home in a common area where he had no reasonable expectation of privacy.

"The shared parking lot in front of (the) defendant's four-unit apartment was not part of ... the defendant's apartment," the three-judge appellate panel wrote in its unanimous ruling.

"The defendant did not have a reasonable expectation of privacy in the parking lot, he abandoned his cigarette butt by discarding it. Its subsequent collection and analysis by law enforcement did not implicate defendant’s constitutional rights."

At trial, Williford admitted to raping and killing Taft, but defense attorneys argued that a variety of mental disorders combined with drinking and prescription drug abuse factored into the attack and kept him from fully realizing the consequences of his actions.

Wake County prosecutors, who sought the death penalty, never disputed Williford’s mental issues but argued that he knew what he was doing when he intentionally broke into the house and beat Taft in the head with a heavy rock.

A 15-year member of the state school board, Taft lived in Greenville but was staying with her sister at 2710 Cartier Drive – the home of a longtime friend who was out of town – after having cosmetic surgery.

Taft’s sister found her unconscious on the morning of March 6, 2010, and called 911 thinking there had been a complication with the surgery. It wasn’t until Taft was at the hospital that they realized she had been beaten and raped.

She died three days later.