Loveland businesses win alongside Denver for playoff game

Landon Breshears signs for his Silver Mine Subs delivery brought by John Keeton during the Broncos playoff game in southwest Loveland on Sunday. Area restaurants and delivery services reported game day was busy and they're expecting another busy day next Sunday when the Broncos face the New England Patriots. (James Garcia)

The Broncos and the 49ers weren't the only winning team on playoff game day Sunday.

Wing Shack in Loveland saw record sales for a non-Super Bowl, selling around 1,000 pounds of wings, as opposed to the 250-300 pounds the store sells on an average Sunday. Wing Shack manager Steve Murlowski, said the day was "slammed."

"We burned through our stock pretty quickly," Murlowski said, when Denver was ahead, 17-0, at 4:30 p.m. "The Broncos haven't gone to the Super Bowl since Wing Shack has been in business. We're going to knock it out if they make it -- and it's looking pretty good right now."

Area restaurants and delivery services are in for another busy day Sunday and then potentially for the Super Bowl, if Peyton Manning and his crew can pull it off.

While pizza and wings come to mind readily when thinking about rooting for your favorite football team, the sub sandwich business also benefits from the game day diehards, though Sunday wasn't as busy for Silver Mine Subs as they had expected.

"There's a lot of pizza/football advertising, so that's what people think of," said Silver Mine Subs delivery driver John Keeton as he pulled up to an apartment building in west Loveland. "I expected it to be busier, but it usually gets busier if they win."

Silver Mine Subs may not have seen as much action as wings did before and during the game on Sunday, but the shop did profit from the playoff games on Saturday.

Advertisement

"It also depends on the day. If it was a Saturday game, it'd be busier," Keeton said, explaining the day before had seen more sub orders.

Shift manager Nathan Jones said the day had been fairly slow, despite selling quite a few party platters. Keeton had delivered around 20 orders, receiving average tips, from noon until 5 p.m.

Landon Breshears said he had finished watching the San Francisco-Carolina game after he'd gotten off work. He said he normally enjoys subs or pizza for game watching.

Later in the game, the Broncos were still up 17-0, but then the Chargers landed themselves on the scoreboard, but it didn't make a difference as the Broncos kept their lead.

The score was 24-7 and around 50 football fans were enjoying some microbrews at Big Beaver Brewing Company, cheering fiercely into the fourth quarter.

"It's been busy all day," said bartender Arika Freiwald of Fort Collins. "People started showing up before we opened. Right at 2 (p.m.), I had a line."

Freiwald said she's a Packers and Broncos fan. Along with the levity that comes from drinking and cheering with other members of the community, the brewery also offers half-price pitchers on NFL game days to promote leaving the house for football.

"We have a solid base of regulars, so they'll definitely be here for the Super Bowl," she said.

The bar crowd erupted in a fit of excitement when the San Diego Chargers closed the gap slightly. But in the end, the Broncos won with a final score of 24-17 and the bartenders' jar was filled with tips.

Denver will play the New England Patriots Sunday, Jan. 19, and the subs, wings and brews will be ready to again serve the NFL superfans of Loveland to help them cheer the Broncos on to the Super Bowl.

James Garcia can be reached at 970-635-3630 or garciaj@reporter-herald.com. Follow him on Twitter: @JamesGarciaRH.