Doctor taking a patients blood pressure (Photo: AndreyPopov, Getty Images/iStockphoto)

The federal government began imposing a new round of Medicare penalties on 148 Florida hospitals this month because too many elderly patients were readmitted within 30 days of being treated for certain ailments.

Nationally, an estimated $428 million in Medicare payments will be withheld from more than 2,600 hospitals in fiscal 2015 because of excessive readmissions. That's up from $227 million in the fiscal year that ended Sept. 30.

The latest schedule of penalties, an accountability measure built into the Affordable Care Act, was first reported earlier this month by Kaiser Health News. Kaiser said 39 hospitals around the country will be assessed the maximum 3 percent of their Medicare reimbursements. The fines are based on readmissions from July 2010 through June 2013.

No Florida hospital faces the maximum penalty, but two will be penalized more than 2 percent: St. Vincent's Medical Center Southside in Jacksonville (2.9 percent) and St. Lucie Medical Center in Port St. Lucie (2.4 percent). Another 27 — including Wuesthoff Medical Center-Melbourne — will be penalized 1 to 2 percent.

Supporters of the controversial 2010 health care law, which congressional Republicans have tried repeatedly to gut or repeal, say the law did the right thing in making hospitals accountable for their former patients.

"It's a prime example of an ACA provision that promotes system improvements in a manner that will simultaneously increase health outcomes and lower costs," said Greg Mellowe, policy director for Florida CHAIN, a consumer health advocacy group.

The 148 hospitals with higher-than-acceptable readmission rates in Florida represent 79 percent of the state's eligible medical centers, the sixth-highest percentage in the nation. The average penalty assessed against hospitals in the state is 0.58 percent, slightly below the national average of 0.63 percent, according to Kaiser.

Three Brevard hospitals topped the state average: Wuesthoff-Melbourne (1 percent), Health First Cape Canaveral Hospital (0.9 percent) and Wuesthoff-Rockledge (0.9 precent).

For the second consecutive year, Parrish Medical Center in Titusville was not penalized.

Last year, 80 percent of Florida hospitals made the list, with an average penalty of 0.35 percent, a little below the national average of 0.38 percent.

The Medicare penalty program began in October 2012 under the Affordable Care Act to control the growth of health care costs. Medicare estimates it spends $17 billion annually on preventable readmissions, according to Kaiser Health News.

The first two years of penalties were assessed on hospitals for readmissions of patients originally treated for pneumonia, heart failure or acute myocardial infarction.

This year's penalties added readmissions of patients were treated for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) or elective surgery to replace a hip or knee.

Beginning in October 2016, hospitals also will be penalized for excessive readmissions of patients who underwent coronary artery bypass surgery.

The percentage of 30-day readmissions that triggers a penalty varies, based on a hospital's size and the specific reason for readmission. Nationally, Medicare considers the threshold to be 23 percent for heart failure, 21.1 percent for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, 17.9 percent for acute myocardial infarction, 17.7 percent for pneumonia, and 5.27 percent for total joint replacement of a hip or knee.

"We think that reducing readmissions is an important goal," said Akin Demehin, senior director of policy for the American Hospital Association.

Hospitals are looking at their discharge planning processes and are working with people in their communities to focus on preventable readmissions.

The American Hospital Association, however, also says the penalty program needs to take into account the difficulties faced by teaching hospitals and larger hospitals in urban areas with high poverty rates. Also, former patients readmitted for an unrelated medical condition — such as a car accident — should not be counted in assessing penalties, Demehin said.

Mellowe with Florida CHAIN said hospitals' ability to improve their readmission rates have been hampered by the state's refusal to expand Medicaid. If hospitals received more government money to help defray the expenses of caring for the poor, they could devote more resources to keeping elderly patients from coming back, he said.

"The challenge is that the burden falls squarely on hospitals that are already anchoring the system and feeling financial pressure from many other factors outside their control, such as, in Florida's case, the legislature's continued rejection of the Medicaid expansion that is also called for in the ACA," Mellowe said.

Brevard readmission penalties

Hospital

2015

2014

Wuesthoff-Melb.

1.01 percent

.35 percent

Cape Canaveral

.91 percent

.08 percent

Wuesthoff-Rockledge

.89 percent

1.07 percent

Palm Bay

.20 percent

.03 percent

Viera

.09 percent

.10 percent

Parrish

No penalty

No penalty

Source: Kaiser Health News

Highest readmissions

These 10 states have the largest percentage of hospitals being penalized in fiscal 2014 for excessive readmission rates based on the three-year period ending June 30.

New Jersey 98 percent

Conn. 88 percent

Delaware 86 percent

Mass. 80 percent

New York 80 percent

Florida 79 percent

Alabama 76 percent

Virginia 76 percent

Penn. 72 percent

Tennessee 72 percent

Source: Kaiser Health News

Brevard hospitals respond

"As the requirements are annually adjusted to meet changing demand, we continue to focus on improving our quality of outcomes and customer experience. Our goal is to exceed the expectations of our patients and provide safe and high-quality care."

— Matt Gerrell, Health First's vice president of marketing and communications

"Achievement of excellent clinical quality, safety and patient experience outcomes means we are fulfilling our mission on behalf of the people we serve."

— Natalie Sellers, vice president of communications, community and corporate services for Parrish Medical Center

"Providing safe, quality care for our patients is our highest priority at Wuesthoff Health System. A multidisciplinary team of physicians, administrators, nurses and other clinicians regularly review our results to identify opportunities to strengthen our discharge process and the transition of patient care. This work is helping us reduce our readmissions and this will be reflected in future updates."

— Diana VanDeMark, director of marketing and communications for Wuesthoff Health System

Read or Share this story: http://on.flatoday.com/1tDUHI9