To the dditor:

Tim Doherty wrote the following comments to Jim Dixon, “Any time Dixon wants to debate his version of reality against the independent pragmatic version of reality, all I can say is bring it on.”

Advertisement

The following definition, “a devil’s advocate is someone who, given a certain argument, takes a position they do not necessarily agree with (or simply an alternative position from the accepted norm), for the sake of debate or to explore the thought further. In taking this position, the individual taking on the devil’s advocate role seeks to engage others in an argumentative discussion process.” This definition of a Devil’s advocate seems to describe Mr. Doherty perfectly. It’s hard to “bring it on,” to a Devil’s Advocate such as Mr. Doherty, or half-truth tellers such as Obama.

I enjoy reading the Letters to the Editor, and can usually pick out the letters that Mr. Doherty will respond too, and what his response will be. If someone writes positive for the Democrats, then Doherty is Republican. If someone writes favoring Republicans, Doherty then favors Democrats. If their letter favors the left, then he favors the right. Someone writes joking about climate change, and then Doherty will say it’s freezing the Devil’s campfire, or no snow for the winter Olympics.

Last year Doherty stated that voter were not educated enough to vote on important issues, and then the following editorial on June 4th, he writes, “Less than 8 percent of citizens went to the polls and most took this responsibility seriously. They did their homework and entered the polling station knowing who they believe would best represent their views. These are my neighbors and they are knowledgeable, conscientious and care about the community.”

Someone writes about the Affordable Care Act and says that it should be called the UN-Affordable Care Act, and then Doherty can quote the page numbers and paragraphs having read the whole document, page by page to memory.

I like to believe I’m a little like Will Rogers when he stated that he never met a man that he didn’t like. Some men/women are just a little harder to understand than others. I do respect everyone opinions, and even Mr. Doherty’s both sides of the fence “bring it on” opinions.

Harvey Yaw

Montgomery