The topic of “recruitment and retention” took on new meaning at Colorado Parks and Wildlife last July when Rick Cables resigned from his position as director of the agency responsible for managing hunting, fishing, wildlife resources and 42 state parks after two critical years on the job.

Suddenly, the broad-scope mission to recruit sportsmen in Colorado was temporarily focused on enlisting just the one.

Department of Natural Resources executive director Mike King said he believes the agency has found that sportsman in Robert Broscheid, a longtime member of the leadership team at the Arizona Game and Fish Department who was named Thursday as the new director of CPW. Broscheid, 44, will take the reins from acting director Steve Yamashito by Dec. 2.

“We had some outstanding internal candidates along with great candidates from other states that made the final cut, but Bob just felt like the right person at the right time based on where we are now,” King said. “He has the experience and the energy and enthusiasm for parks and wildlife stewardship. Our outdoor recreationists will really like this guy.”

Currently serving as the special assistant to the director at Arizona Game and Fish, Broscheid rapidly climbed the ranks over 17 years at Arizona Game and Fish after starting as a wildlife specialist the week after graduating with a wildlife conservation degree from Arizona State University in 1997. He went on to serve as habitat branch chief and assistant director of the Wildlife Management Division before working for the last six years as deputy director for the agency and executive director of Arizona’s Natural Resource Review Council established by Arizona Gov. Jan Brewer to develop a comprehensive, statewide strategy for natural resource management and economic development.

Broscheid said he believes his experience in Arizona has prepared him for the forthcoming challenges of his new position in Colorado.

“There are a lot of similarities. They are both Western states, both facing invasive species issues, forest health issues, climate change impacts that are occurring or will be occurring, water issues,” Bro- scheid said. “But there are also differences with regard to things like private land and big-game hunting opportunities. In terms of big game, I think Arizona manages more on the quality side of hunting, where Colorado is more the opportunity side. Colorado is really focused on giving more people the chance to go out and hunt.”

Which brings us back to the recruitment and retention issue.

Faced with declining license revenues in recent years, Colorado has placed increasing emphasis on engaging the next generation of sportsmen through a variety of portals ranging from fishing to small-game hunting, along with things such as archery and shooting range opportunities at state parks.

Although Arizona does not have a combined parks and wildlife agency like that established in Colorado during Cables’ tenure, the state’s reputation for quail hunting drives a solid small-game program responsible for initiating many new sportsmen. Broscheid hopes to use similar tactics in Colorado, with the added benefit of state parks to introduce a vast audience to the outdoor lifestyle.

“Recruitment of young people and getting them outside is, in my mind, the most important priority in Colorado. With parks, I kind of look at that as the first door people walk through to the outdoors,” Broscheid said. “In Arizona, we used small game as a way to introduce youth in particular to hunting. But what we learned over the last decade is that we have to provide a broad experience. Some kids are more experienced than others. It’s similar on the parks side when it comes to hiking, camping and boating activities, even watchable wildlife. Let the individual choose how they want to be introduced to the sports and how they want to advance.”

Broscheid said he intends to build upon the departing director’s emphasis on customer service and fiscal responsibility while continuing to promote wildlife and other natural resources. His true passion, though, is getting young people outdoors. And there’s no better place to do that than Colorado, he said.

“Having both parks and wildlife under the supervision of one director that I’ll be assuming really is a golden opportunity that I’ll be looking forward to,” Broscheid said. “Being in Colorado is the pinnacle of outdoor recreation in the country. There’s no doubt about it.”

Scott Willoughby: swilloughby@denverpost.com or twitter.com/willoughbydp