We need a president who will fight for American workers, families, and seniors — not Wall Street and Washington elites — and give every American hope in a brighter, more prosperous future.

Advertisement - story continues below

If you had $10 million in the stock market six years ago, you’d have over $40 million today. The NASDAQ is up 275 percent, and the S&P 500 is up 210 percent. Wall Street is booming!

The Washington bubble is more like a Kevlar, economic shield. Six of the 10 richest counties in America surround our nation’s capital. Federal employees have a 99 percent job security rate and are more likely to die than lose their jobs because of a government layoff or misconduct.

Washington is more dysfunctional than ever; but the number of insiders, interest groups, lobbyists, and record-breaking salaries keeps swelling.

Advertisement – story continues below

Some are doing great in President Barack Obama’s economy, but Main Street America and South Carolina tell a different story.

Ninety-three million Americans don’t have jobs, and many have seen their full-time jobs with benefits become two part-time jobs with no benefits. We’ve had 40 years of stagnant wages for the bottom 90 percent of American workers.

Meanwhile, the cost of healthcare, education, and housing keeps ballooning. One in four American families pays more than half their income on housing.

Advertisement – story continues below

For the first time in history, we have a president who celebrates government dependency and discourages hard work. The goal of Obamacare is permanent government dependency. Forty-six million Americans depend on the government for food stamps. In South Carolina, that’s 17 percent of the population.

America’s workers have been getting punched in the gut. The U.S. has lost 5 million manufacturing jobs in the last 15 years. We demonize the trades and push a one-size-fits-all, overpriced college education for everyone.

Washington signs unenforced trade deals with foreign countries and does nothing as the Chinese manipulate their currency, rip off American products, and subsidize industries.

Washington looks the other way and ignores the law so we can import low-wage labor, undercut American workers, and drive wages lower than the Dead Sea.

Advertisement – story continues below

I’m running for president because there’s a huge disconnect between Washington and the Real World. There’s a difference between making a speech and making government accountable to the people who pay for it.

As governor, I defeated the Clinton machine. I cut taxes nearly 100 times, balanced the budget every year for 10 years, and raised average family income by 50 percent, despite facing the most Democrat legislature in the country.

As president, I will protect Social Security and Medicare. I will never rob seniors of the benefits our government promised them and forced them to pay for. I’ll also repeal Obamacare and return the $700 billion Obamacare raided from Medicare.

Hillary Clinton has made the minimum wage central to her presidential campaign. Instead of fighting over the minimum wage, I’ll focus on solutions to help every American earn his or her maximum wage.

We can never create prosperity for working people, grow our economy, and restore America as the greatest country on earth if we punish productivity and subsidize reckless irresponsibility.

That’s why as president, I’ll pass the FairTax and abolish the IRS to let every American worker keep his full paycheck. My plan will untax the poor and untax seniors living on a fixed income. It will also bring trillions of dollars in offshore investment and manufacturing back to the United States.

The Washington elites will spend millions falsely attacking me because they know I am not one of them and I will not protect them at the expense of hardworking American taxpayers.

But now, more than ever, we need a president who will fight for American workers, families, and seniors — not Wall Street and Washington elites — and give every American hope in a brighter, more prosperous future.

The views expressed in this opinion article are solely those of their author and are not necessarily either shared or endorsed by the owners of this website.