FILE - In this June 19, 2012 file photo, Dr. Bruce Stowell examines patient Robert Busch at his office in Grants Pass, Ore. The once-simple relationship between patients and the family doctor is fast becoming a throwback to another era as new alternatives emerge and primary care becomes more like a commodity, with access to doctors increasingly based on what consumers will pay. (AP Photo/Jeff Barnard, File)

COLUMBUS, Ohio (WCMH) — Five years after the Affordable Care Act became law, healthcare advocates believe it’s finally paying off.

Across Ohio, community health centers are seeing more patients coming with insurance. It is allowing them to expand their services and add additional locations.

“We’ve had our patient base go from about 50 percent uninsured we are seeing everyday and every month,” said Dr. Dana Vallangeon, CEO of Lower Lights Christian Health Center.

The health center, located in the heart of Franklinton, opened its doors in 2002. Today, thanks to ACA and Ohio’s expansion of Medicaid, they now have seven locations across central Ohio.

Dr. Vallangeon said their patient load has grown from over 6,000 to more than 11,000. They have the capacity for 15,000 patients.

Last month, they opened their on-site pharmacy and have been gradually adding services since the passage of health care reform.

“Since 2010 and 2011, we’ve been able to add psychiatry. We’ve been able to add some collaborations with Maryhaven for substance abuse,” said Dr. Vallangeon. “But we’ve actually been able to directly add dental care and optometry services.”

The Ohio Association of Community Health Centers reports that in 2002, Lower Lights was one of 23 centers and 110 sites in Ohio. In 2014, that number has grown to 45 federally qualified health centers with 244 sites.

Federally qualified health centers offer comprehensive primary-care in under-served communities. In Ohio, these centers have obtained more almost $29 million dollars in federal grants this fiscal year.

Dr. Vallangeon doesn’t see the money drying up. She said there is support from both political parties to keep community health centers growing.

“We are just really scratching the surface of what the country needs from real reform and where people are accessing care,” said Vallangeon.