Insured Patients More Likely to Be Diagnosed, Treated

Empirical analysis confirms that insured people are more likely to be diagnosed and treated for high blood pressure, diabetes, and high cholesterol, a researcher says.

People with health insurance are more likely than uninsured people to have chronic conditions diagnosed and under a treatment regimen, according to estimates by researchers at Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health.

The study, appearing this month in Health Affairs, uses 10-years of Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act insurance enrollment projections from the Congressional Budget Office to estimate the number of people who might benefit from improved diagnoses and treatment of high blood pressure, diabetes, and high cholesterol.



Joshua Salomon

"I was surprised that the effect was consistent and detectable across all three of these conditions," says Joshua Salomon, lead author of the study and a professor of global health at Harvard. "In each case, insurance improved diagnoses; in each case insurance improved control, and if you look at the clinical outcomes, in each case the outcomes were healthier for those who had insurance."

Salomon estimated that if the number of nonelderly Americans without health insurance were reduced by half, as the CBO projects, there would be 1.5 million newly insured individuals diagnosed with one or more of these conditions, and 659,000 newly insured individuals able to achieve control of at least one condition.

Salomon conceded that the findings that insured people are more likely to be diagnosed and treated could have been predicted.

"It's because of the lack of direct evidence in general that we were surprised at the degree to which the different measures we looked at all told a consistent story of the benefit from insurance. That was the hypothesis we were testing, but we were surprised by the consistency of the results," he says.

"As healthcare professionals, this is certainly what we would have hoped to find, but there has been surprisingly little empirical analysis of this question in part because it is hard to answer."