— Outreach Clinic Brandon is set to celebrate its fifth annual Kentucky Derby Party, a signature fundraiser for the nonprofit’s efforts to bridge the healthcare gap for Hillsborough County residents with economic need.

Founded as the Brandon Outreach Clinic, the nonprofit this year celebrates its 26th anniversary, seeing a rising need in the care of aging baby boomers.

“As the baby boomers age, and they don’t have health insurance, their healthcare issues become very complicated,” said Deborah “Debbie” Meegan, the clinic’s longtime executive director. “We’re seeing a lot of hospital-discharge patients. We’re keeping them alive and well so they don’t have to go to the emergency room.”

Sponsors are sought for the annual fundraiser, which last year raised $35,000 for the clinic, Meegan said. This year’s goal is $50,000. Tickets are on sale now for the fundraiser, which typically sells out early. Tickets cost $75 per person and sponsorship levels start at $250.

The event this year is set for 5 to 9 p.m. May 7, which coincides with the Derby Day race, billed as “the most exciting two minutes in sports.” This year’s Kentucky Derby Party venue is at the Palmetto Club at FishHawk Ranch.

“We’re excited, and the FishHawk population seems really excited about it,” Meegan said, noting that clinic volunteers sold a bunch of tickets at the Farmer’s Market in Park Square held the first Sunday in March.

“The derby is a fun event that is different from so many other fundraising events,” Meegan said. “The ladies love to dress up in beautiful hats, and the men love to sip bourbon.”

Also featured are horse contests, a cornhole contest and a “Taste of the Derby,” featuring menu items from local restaurants.

“People are always drawn to a wide variety of foods,” Meegan said.

Doctors, nurses and other medical professionals who donate their time and services provide care through the not-for-profit clinic. To be seen, a patient must be between 100 and 200 percent of the federal poverty level, depending on household size. All ages are served, from children to senior citizens.

As always, the need is great, Meegan said.

“The Affordable Care Act has had an impact,” she added, “but there’s still thousands of uninsured people who need our services right here in Hillsborough County.”