Tina Brown speaks at IAC HQ on Dec. 10, 2014, in New York. (Photo: Desiree Navarro, Getty Images)

Tina Brown, the most famous magazine editor of her era, who lost $100 million when she ran Newsweek and The Daily Beast, and countless more trying to reinvent herself in other media ventures over the past 15 years, is now in the conference business. The New York Times is her new intrepid investor and she has taken up offices at the Times' headquarters where she is busily hiring staff.

While Tina Brown as a harbinger of success might reasonably give cooler heads some pause, everybody in media, it seems, wants to be in the conference business, or what I recently heard described as "experiential extensions."

So, first, what exactly is this business?

Conferences, not so long ago, were part of "trade" media. They were gatherings, usually dreary ones, of industry-specific interest, often organized by trade publications — specialty publishers covering a particular business sector. This was particularly true in the technology business, where the rate of change was so fast, and the need to raise ever-more money to finance this rate of change so pressing, that the industry seemed willing to gather together as often as possible. This redounded to the benefit of various tech publications. In fact, in some instances the conferences became more profitable than the publications themselves.

So, in some natural seeming segue, much of the rest of the media, wanting more and more to be in the technology business, now, too, sees itself going into the conference business.

Is this wise?

Conferences can certainly seem to resemble media. They are about identifying a group of people who want and are willing to pay for information on a specific subject, and then finding sponsors who are willing to pay for the privilege of putting their names in front of these people. And too, you have to supply interesting information at a conference — that's content.

Conferences also address some of the issues of digital media competition. The Internet can't really steal this business. The point of a conference is to be with actual people (even live streaming and Google hangouts don't cut it). Hell, it's actual social media.

And yet, of course, while it can seem like an irresistible idea — learning as you party, instead of as you work — it is not at all trivial to get people to leave their jobs, get on a plane and pay (often thousand of dollars) to go to your party.

This has seemed like a valuable use of time and resources in tech, in part, perhaps, because nerdish tech people need remedial social help, and in part because investment is often directly related to whom you meet at conferences. (A key part of the tech PR business is organizing your conference presence.)

But there is much less need and urgency when it comes to general interest media.

Tina Brown's conference business is largely organized around women's themes. That is, it is worthy without being necessary. Indeed, Brown's model tends to be a little different from others. It is generally about congratulating influential and powerful women, who can then be counted on to make their associates and employees pay for tickets; and then to have sponsors, who might hope to do business with the powerful and influential, cough up for some signage and proximity to celebrities. The media business and the PR and promotional business have always had obvious crossover points, but it might seem here that Brown has wholly turned into a flack.

A few years ago, before every media organization decided conferences were a hopeful new revenue source, Katharine Weymouth, then publisher of The Washington Post, ran into a firestorm of finger-waving about organizing get-togethers in her home with Washington Post reporters and editors for anybody who might be filling to pay the fee. This seemed particularly shameless then, as it does now, but it is the straightforward conference model: pay money to meet someone who can potentially help you. The more they can help you the more you will likely pay. (Some tech conferences, for instance, can cost as much as $5,000 a head.)

Many sponsorships, which can run into the hundreds of thousands of dollars, come with speaking berths and special seating arrangements for the sponsoring company's CEO and other executives.

While media outlets like The New York Times might campaign against political contributions that yield special access, the conference business, which it aspires to, is quite overtly a business where you pay for access. And, of course, media organizations trying to recruit celebrity speakers for the conferences (the sine qua non of a conference) will fare better if they have offered the celebrity positive coverage in the past (and they are quite screwed if they've given negative coverage).

Still, even these quid pro quos hardly guarantee success. Other than the handful of notable conferences on the tech side, events or "experiences" remain a low-margin, tough-going business for everybody else. For one thing, there are so many conferences. It is rather a disappointment, when you hope to meet the high and mighty, to show up and find a sparsely populated room with people just like yourself.

For another, a good conference is a form of theater, and hence complicated and often expensive to produce. Media companies suddenly find themselves in live entertainment, a business they are apt to know little about. Hence, most conferences tend to feel like being back in high school.

And then there is Tina Brown. While the jury may be out on her conferences, she is second to none at getting others to finance her reinventions.

MORE BY MICHAEL WOLFF

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1DaHysj