By Jessica Wehrman

Washington Bureau

U.S. Senate candidate Ted Strickland is weighing in on Ohio Gov. John Kasich’s proposed changes to the state’s Medicaid program, warning that the changes could drive up prices and cause Ohio Medicaid recipients to lose coverage.

In a letter to Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services Administrator Andy Slavitt dated May 3, Strickland said the proposals “would create a severe cost barrier for Ohio Medicaid recipients and likely cause many individuals to drop their coverage.”

“This proposal would make it more difficult for those who need healthcare the most to acquire it,” he wrote. “By erecting barriers to individuals receiving healthcare, it could reverse the gains in coverage made by the Affordable Care Act and send individuals back to the emergency room to seek care. This proposal has the potential to hurt over a million Ohioans and increase the cost of our healthcare system for every Ohioan.”

He urges Slavitt to reject Kasich’s application.

Kasich’s proposal – which must be approved by the federal government – would require working-age, nondisabled adults on Medicaid to make monthly payments into a health savings account.

Strickland, whom Kasich defeated as governor in 2010, hopes to unseat Sen. Rob Portman, R-Ohio, in November.

Ad attacks Portman for stance on Garland appointment

An outside group was on the air last week with ads attacking Sen. Rob Portman for being unwilling to allow a vote on President Barack Obama’s Supreme Court nominee.

The Constitutional Responsibility Project – a group that’s working to get the Senate to vote on the nomination of Judge Merrick Garland – is airing a 30-second ad in the Columbus and Cincinnati media markets over this week’s Senate recess.

“The constitution says the President shall make nominations for the Supreme Court and the senate votes,” the narrator intones. “ No exception for election years. Why is Rob Portman refusing to do the job Ohio elected him to do?”

Portman met with Garland last month, and while he said he had a positive impression of the judge, he said it would be best to hold off confirming a new Supreme Court nominee until after the net president assumes office.

The Constitutional Responsibility Project, which is allied with the left leaning Americans United for Change and other coalitions has also launched a mobile billboard campaign across nine states over nine days urging GOP senators to allow a vote on Garland. They’re holding more than 50 events in Pennsylvania, Arizona, Illinois, Iowa, Missouri, New Hampshire, North Carolina, Ohio and Wisconsin.

Ohio to receive $3.7M from HUD

Sen. Sherrod Brown last week announced that Ohio will receive more than $3.7 million from the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development to build and preserve affordable housing.

The state received the money through the National Housing Trust Fund, which aims to create and preserve safe affordable housing for low-income households and families experiencing homelessness.

Ohio’s affordable housing providers can use this funding for property acquisition, site improvements and development hard costs, demolition, relocation assistance, financing costs, operating cost assistance for rental housing, and reasonable administrative and planning costs.

The National Housing Trust Fund, created in the Housing and Economic Recovery Act of 2008, is funded by contributions from Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac.

Newborns with neonatal abstinence syndrome require specialized care which can result in longer hospital stays and increased costs. A recent study found that these costs – most of which are being paid by Medicaid – can be more than five times the cost of treating other newborns.

According to the Ohio Department of Health, between 2004 and 2011, neonatal abstinence syndrome increased from 14 cases per 10,000 live births in 2004 to 88 cases per 10,000 live births in 2011.