Snowboarder Belle Brockhoff has revealed she has been subjected to hate tweets hoping she would "break a leg and get locked in the slammer" because of her sexuality.

I've had a lot of people tweeting me about different things ... I've had hate tweets.

Speaking after her luckless eighth placing in the ladies' boardercross at Extreme Park, the 21-year-old did not unload on Russian president Vladimir Putin and his anti-gay propaganda laws as many had expected.

"I've had a lot of people tweeting me about different things ... I've had hate tweets": Boardercross star Belle Brockhoff. Photo: Getty Images

She said she would speak about the issue after she had enjoyed the rest of the Olympics, but did say she had been trolled on social media because of her outspoken opposition to the discriminatory legislation passed last year.

Advertisement

Instead of being insulted by the barbs, Brockhoff said she found them funny.

"I've had a lot of people tweeting me about different things," Brockhoff said. "I've had hate tweets. But it's good getting different sides of the story, and trying to open your eyes a lot more before you say anything.

No room to move: Australia's Belle Brockhoff (left) and Torah Bright (yellow bib) contest the boardercross quarter-final. Photo: Reuters

"I've been called an aggressive something dyke or something, but I thought it was pretty funny. This one guy said, 'I'm right behind Putin, you should break a leg and get locked in the slammer' ... The hate is funny."

The cruelty and fickleness of boardercross was there for all to see when Brockhoff and Torah Bright failed to reach the final after both crashed.

After Bright fell in the quarterfinal, Brockhoff was taken out in her semi-final after Canadian rider Dominique Maltais took a wide line.

Grateful: Torah Bright congratulates Belle Brockhoff after the two collided in their boardercross quarter-final. Photo: Getty Images

Maltais eventually claimed silver behind the Czech Republic's Eva Samkova, who had dominated all day. Brockhoff went on to finish second in the consolation final, meaning she finished eighth overall.

"If a Canadian hadn't taken me out, I would've won," the 21-year-old joked afterwards. "I am going to write her a strongly worded open letter.

"She just took a really tight line. She's really aggressive on the course and her board hit my board. I couldn't stop myself from going off the edge. I was a little bit winded but all good.

"She (Maltais) said, 'I'm so sorry, Belle'. When athletes are in that zone, they will take any line."

Brockhoff said she did not consider a protest, which can be lodged if another rider grabs or pushes during the run.

As an openly gay athlete who has publicly condemned Putin's laws, Brockhoff had come to Russia as more than just a snowboarder.

"I want to enjoy the Olympic experience, but after that I will definitely be voicing my opinion," she said.

"Like I said before, if I didn't get a medal, nobody is really going to care. I will still say things that I want to say. If people want to listen they'll listen.

"Snowboarding before this was always my focus. This was just an extra thing. If I had more pressure from the LGBT (lesbian, gay, bi-sexual, transgender) community to speak out, then I would have to do well. I felt more pressure from that than whatever everyone else was putting on me from the sports side of it."

Bright crashed in the same quarter-final as Brockhoff, and was fearful she had taken out her Australian teammate.

"I was trying to make sure I wasn't anywhere near Belle so I can't touch her," Bright said. "My heart sunk because I thought, 'I have just taken out my teammate. I am the worst Australian ever'. When I fell and looked up and she was still on her feet, I was so grateful she went through to the next round."

This was the first time Bright, the halfpipe silver medalist, had contested boardercross at the Olympics.

Asked if she would continue in this discipline, she said: "You never know. This was a challenge and I did it. Everybody laughed at me and I said it's just snowboarding."