COLUMBUS, Ohio and RALEIGH, N.C., March 11, 2015 /PRNewswire/ -- TeleHealth Services, the nation's leading provider of turnkey healthcare grade television and interactive patient education solutions, today announced that it has expanded the relationship with The Ohio State Wexner Medical Center (OSUWMC) as a partner in developing an industry-leading patient entertainment experience to aid in enhancing quality of care. In driving to new heights of the healthcare facilities' award-winning commitment to excellence in clinical care and the patient experience, The Ohio State Wexner Medical Center determined the need for securing a technology partner who combined cutting-edge patient entertainment and information solutions to enhance patient satisfaction and aid in providing a patient engagement focus.

A hospital-wide solution of the latest in IPTV technology was completed to aid in providing superior performance in delivering high quality, efficient, and blockbuster patient entertainment and amenities. To support this vision, TeleHealth Services implemented a comprehensive IPTV hospital television system as a platform to expand the reach of their digital media resources. The hospital's IPTV solution offers a range of popular TV channels in HD, an interactive programming guide, and expansion for the inception of an OSUTV branded channel. Additionally, the solution can monitor and control all TV functions remotely, and has been architected to ensure failover protection if the server or network fails. The hospital's IPTV system also offers management features to ensure parental security settings for safeguarded viewing. By creating a more home-like entertainment experience through HD programming and large screen healthcare televisions provided within the inpatient setting, the technology aims to provide increased levels of patient experience. Based on their ability to provide a full technology solution and a wealth of experience in the healthcare industry, The Ohio State Wexner Medical Center turned to TeleHealth Services for their solutions.

By creating a high-quality, cost effective patient education and entertainment portal, and integrating additional levels of support tools within the patient care environment, The Ohio State Wexner Medical Center will increasingly find the advantages of transmitting information to patients via television to provide welcome distractions, change health behaviors and educate the patient, while decreasing operating costs. Additionally, the hospital's IPTV solution is aiding in creating efficiencies for hospital staff. With the inception of the Affordable Care Act, technical staff resources have become one of the most coveted resources within a hospital facility, and the IPTV solution allows them to spend more time focusing on their core competencies versus traditional coaxial systems.

"This again demonstrates the power of our advanced patient engagement platform to handle innovative new healthcare features and provide the powerhouse capabilities to deliver content around the hospital. We have created a patient experience that demonstrates our commitment to enhance our client hospitals in the digital world by leapfrogging even consumer technology to create enhanced patient experiences. Throughout its implementation of a collaborative patient- and family-centered environment, the leadership at OSUWMC had a vision to use home-like amenities to improve overall patient satisfaction," said Dan Nathan, SVP/ GM of TeleHealth Services. "TeleHealth Services is proud to have worked with OSUMC to make this vision a reality. TeleHealth's strategy is to deliver flexible, scalable interactive solutions that address our client hospital's current needs but also provides a clear path for expansion as needs change."

Come see TeleHealth Services' advanced IPTV system at HIMSS15 in Chicago, IL April 12 - 16 at booth 8121. Call 919-772-8604 to schedule your demo today!

About TeleHealth Services:

With more than 2,500 healthcare clients across the country, TeleHealth Services is the nation's leading provider of integrated technology and communications solutions for the healthcare market. Combining 50+ years of healthcare expertise and partnerships with industry-leading manufacturers, TeleHealth Services is uniquely positioned to offer a full suite of hospital technology solutions that includes:

Interactive patient and staff education platforms

Healthcare grade televisions and accessories

Bedside patient entertainment solutions

The latest educational and entertainment content

Comprehensive design, implementation, and service packages

Flexible financing solutions

Headquartered in Raleigh, N.C., TeleHealth Services is a division of Telerent Leasing Corporation. Telerent, founded in 1957, operates as a subsidiary of ITOCHU International, Inc. For more information on TeleHealth, call 877-432-9076, or visit at http://www.telehealth.com/.

Contact:

Matt Barker

Vice President of Marketing

TeleHealth Services

919-772-8604

matt.barker@telehealth.com

www.telehealth.com

SOURCE TeleHealth Services