Lions pick up 19 hits, 12 RBI in victory

Mountain View pitcher Lilly Meza delivers a pitch in the Lions' first game against Thomas Jefferson during the regional softball tournament Saturday at Barnes Complex. MVHS won Region 5 with a 14-4 victory over Pueblo Central in the championship game. ( Trevor L Davis / Loveland Reporter-Herald )

Postseason softball can be a cruel time for teams around the state.

Months of preparation and hard work boil down to a single day, one tournament and a pair of games. Mountain View knows this all too well after producing one of the strongest regular seasons in Colorado at the 4A level a year ago, only to lose in the regional tournament and miss a trip to state.

This season once again turned out plenty of wins and a high ranking, as the Lions earned the fifth overall seed in regional play, hosting Region 3 at Barnes Complex in Loveland, hoping to exercise some demons.

On the power of two victories (one tight and the second dominant), Mountain View once more earned a berth to the state tournament with a 3-2 win over No. 28 Thomas Jefferson on Saturday morning and 14-4 mashing of No. 12 Pueblo Central in the championship game.

"Most of our motivation came from not going to state last year and we just wanted to play really well," sophomore Izzy Griego said. "We all did a good job of lifting each other up. It feels really good to come back like we did this year."

Nothing about Saturday was easy for the Lions as Thomas Jefferson put forth a tough effort in the opening game, yet Mountain View found enough offense to support shutdown pitching from junior starter Lilly Meza, sending the Lions to the championship game and one more win from state.

Pueblo Central was also eager to find its way to state, and the title of regional champs sounded pretty appealing as well. The Wildcats struck first in the top of the second inning with some help from MVHS' defense.

A pair of errors produced traffic for Central, which used two sacrifice bunts and a timely RBI single from Harlee Quintana at the bottom of the order to turn both errors into runs.

However, the Lions showed signs of a mature team, forcing mistakes in the field from their minds and refocusing on their jobs at the plate. Mountain View exploded for 19 hits (eight for extra bases), with most of the damage coming over a two-inning stretch.

Mountain View 's Kailee Stobbe takes a cut against Thomas Jefferson in the first game of the regional tournament Saturday at Barnes Complex. (Trevor L Davis / Loveland Reporter-Herald)

In their half of the second, the Lions hit around and pushed six runs across with five straight RBI knocks, starting with a Jaelyn Taylor infield hit and a double from leadoff hitter Tara Shadowen. Griego would tag a double and catcher Kaley Barker a single, the frame finishing with a RBI-single from Meza.

"I think once we start getting our hits together and stringing them together as a team, then we start doing a lot better," junior Kendra Seely said. "I think we don't let the pressure get to us when we're batting; that's our strength. When we all work together and string our hits together, that's our strong suit."

Pueblo Central mounted a mini-rally of its own to kick off the third inning, scoring two more runs — with another unearned — yet it never felt like the Wildcats were seriously threatening the way the Lions had their sticks going.

Mountain View simply repeated the formula and hit around for the second time in the third, scoring six more runs to put the 10-run mercy rule in striking distance. Four different MVHS players picked up at least one RBI in the frame, led by a pair from Griego, with Barker and Meza picking up one more each and Madison Langman her first.

Griego finished the game 2-for-4 with a team-best three RBI, which was matched by Barker, who produced a perfect 4-for-4 afternoon. Langman ended the game and started the celebration with a run-scoring single in the fifth.

Six different Lions picked up at least one RBI and all but one a hit in the championship contest. Winning the region guarantees Mountain View a top eight seeding at state.

"Nobody ever has the feeling that we need to get our order turned over so that we can get a rally going. They all feel like they can start one. Everyone can get that hit; it doesn't have to be one through four," MVHS coach Randy Felton said. "They're all ready for that moment, they're all capable in that moment and I don't think they even care where they're hitting in the order."

Cris Tiller: 970-669-5050 ext. 511, tillerc@reporter-herald.com or twitter.com/cristiller

4A Region 3

Championship Game

Mountain Lions 14, Wildcats 4 (5 inn.)

At Barnes Complex

Pueblo Central 022 00 — 4 5 2

Mountain View 066 11 — 14 19 4

W — Lilly Meza. L — Taylor Puga.

Pueblo Central hitting (ab-r-h-rbi) — Jovonna Sisneros 3-0-0-0, Dominique Trujillo 3-0-0-0, Puga 3-1-2-0, Courtney McClees 3-1-0-0, Mercedes Salazar 3-1-1-0, Ashleigh Espinoza 1-0-0-1, Jaylee Sanchez 2-1-1-1, Kylie Herrera 1-0-0-1 , Harlee Quintana 2-0-1-1. Totals 21-4-5-4.

Mountain View hitting (ab-r-h-rbi) — Tara Shadowen 4-2-3-1, Izzy Griego 4-2-2-3, Kaley Barker 4-2-4-3, Meza 4-1-2-2, Kendra Seely 3-1-1-0, Kailee Stobbe 4-2-3-0, Alyssa McWilliams 4-1-0-0, Madison Langman 4-2-3-2, Jaelyn Taylor 3-1-1-1. Totals 34-14-19-12. 2B— Meza 2, Stobbe, Shadowen, Griego, Barker. 3B — Shadowen.

Pueblo Central pitching (ip-h-r-er-bb-so) — Puga 3.2-10-7-0-1, Sanchez 1.1-5-4-0-1.

Mountain View pitching (ip-h-r-er-bb-so) — Meza 5-5-4-1-1-2.