Pearl Harbor, HI

Japanese and U.S. cities, together with the U.S. Navy, have marked the 70th anniversary of the end of World War II with a memorial service at Pearl Harbour.

Mayors and city council members from Honolulu and Nagaoka on Friday joined the commander of the U.S. Pacific Fleet in laying wreaths and unveiling a new plaque.

Fireworks resembling white chrysanthemum flowers were launched at the end of the ceremony.

White chrysanthemums are often presented at memorial services in Japan to honor the dead.

Nagaoka is the hometown of the late Japanese Admiral Isoroku Yamamoto, the architect of the attack on Pearl Harbour that launched the U.S. into the war in 1941.

U.S. planes bombed the city during the last weeks of the war, killing nearly 2,000 people.

The war ended when Japan surrendered on August 15, 1945, which was still August 14 in Hawaii and other parts of the U.S.

The December 7, 1941, bombing of Pearl Harbour killed about 2,400 sailors, Marines and soldiers on the Hawaiian island of Oahu.

Around the world, there were 15 million battle deaths and 45 million civilian deaths from the war, according to the National World War II Museum in New Orleans.

News

General {{Title}} Remove Change News General Courts Web Only Crime Outdoors Events Center Non-Homepage Boredom Busters Pipeline Positively KELOLAND Technology Hunger Affordable Care Act Shops Flooding Remembering 9/11 Drought JazzFest Spring Storm Honor Flight Spencer Anniversary

DoApp Health News Business News Sports

Agriculture Markets Livestock Crops Politics

HealthBeat Cancer Children's Health Heart Health Wellness & Nutrition General Health Beat Women's Health RX Resources What's Going Around OTC Diabetes Recalls Dental Health Men's Health

Politics South Dakota Legislature Budget Congress Taxes General Local Campaign President US Senate New Laws US House Iowa Ballot Issues Local Races Minnesota Gubernatorial

Education Funding College Elementary High School Pre K School Supplies Middle School

Sports Professional College High School Sports Zone Headlines Summit League Tournament Olympics

Business Industry Your Money Matters Development Gas & Energy Legislation Economy/Stocks Employment General Health Care Technology Education Funding Tourism Banking/Finance Housing Transportation Insurance Meetings & Events Retail & Restaurants All Industries On The Move Shops Agriculture

Featured Stories Eye on KELOLAND Inside KELOLAND

Weather Snow Forecast Records Rain Flooding Drought WX Corner General

World News

Investigates GEAR UP

Sponsored Done

© 2016 Associated Press. All Rights Reserved. Material may not be redistributed.