PEORIA — Fortune 500 companies aren’t the only businesses that can use the services of a consultant.

Phil Newton and Rick Richardson are two Peorians who have joined forces to offer consulting services to small businesses and not-for-profits.

As executive director of the South Side Mission from 2002 until November of last year, Newton has a wealth of experience in the not-for-profit sector, working for four charities in Peoria and Bloomington since 1993, activities that have involved working on fundraising for more than 20 years. “When you’re the executive director of a not-for-profit organization, you automatically spend a lot of time fundraising,” he noted.

Rick Richardson has 25 years’ experience working in finance, accounting and consulting roles, working for the Simantel and Marquette ad agencies in Peoria as well as a six-year stint working for the Kathryn Beich organization in Bloomington.

After a career working for other companies, he decided to start his own agency, called Pivot, while Newton formed Perennial Partners in February.

While the two maintain separate companies, they also like to collaborate on projects. “I can handle the topside — money coming in — while Rick takes care of expenses,” said Newton.

“I started Perennial Partners this year because of the need not-for-profits have for planning help,” he said.

Richardson, who served on the board of directors for Junior Achievement of Central Illinois for nine years, said small companies in the area also need assistance. “Small and medium-sized businesses are underserved when it comes to good, sound consulting work. I think there’s a lot of demand out there,” he said.

The two men have learned that it’s possible to operate on their own without a lot of overhead. “The local coffee shop is our office. With work done online, the only overhead is a cup of coffee,” said Richardson, speaking from a table at the thirty-thirty coffee shop on Main Street.

The Internet plays a big part in the work the pair are able to do. “People have found me online. Social media is gold. LinkedIn is pretty big,” said Newton.

Richardson said that with most of his work experience in central Illinois, he stays involved in local networking, including meeting with other consultants.

“I try to stay up with some of the entrepreneurial groups in the area like One Million Cups that meet every week,” said Richardson.

Newton also is familiar with much of the work going on in central Illinois. “I know all the funders in town. I also know that funding is harder to get than ever, but there are ways to get it if you know how. I’m doing a lot of grant writing these days,” he said.

Help doesn’t have to carry a high price tag, said Newton. “Non-profits are chronically underfunded, but my services start at $95. I can write a basic grant for $100,” he said.

One of the concerns for both men about going into business for themselves was the matter of acquiring health insurance. “I went to the marketplace that I’d never tried before,” said Richardson, referring to options provided by the Affordable Care Act. “Last summer when I went out on my own, I found an option that was one-third less than the COBRA payment I had been making,” he said.

Newton found another health care solution. “My wife, Jill, and I found coverage through Samaritan Ministries. Not only does it provide good coverage, but there are a number of discounts available — such as 30 percent off prescriptions at Walgreens,” he said.

“I think that’s one of the advantages of the Affordable Care Act that you don’t hear much about: It frees one up to work on their own.”

Both maintain websites that list information about the services they provide: perennialpartnersci.com and pivot4solutions.com.

Steve Tarter is the Journal Star business editor. Tarter’s phone number is 686-3260, and his email address is starter@pjstar.com. Follow his blog, Minding Business, on pjstar.com and follow him on Twitter @SteveTarter.