EAST RUTHERFORD, N.J. — Hope that linebacker was worth it, Houston.

Every time Trindon Holliday returns a punt or kickoff for a score, the Broncos rejoice. Others shake their heads and wonder: Come again why the Houston Texans waived Holliday?

Since the Broncos picked up Holliday in October of last season, he has made five returns for touchdowns in 14 games. His latest was an 81-yard punt return for a touchdown that clinched the Broncos’ 41-23 victory against the New York Giants on Sunday.

“I don’t have any goals as far as how many to get this year. I just try to take one back every week, help my team out,” Holliday said.

Giants punter Steve Weatherford was hitting them low all day. In the fourth quarter, Holliday fielded a punt on the bounce, then took off, running past a couple tacklers, stepping out of a couple more.

“The key was I waved my guy off and he jumped to the side as soon as the ball bounced,” Holliday said. “Then I saw the hole open, and I hit it.”

The Broncos have gone 13-0 in the regular season since they claimed Holliday. They are 0-1 in the playoffs, a loss in which Holliday had two of his scoring returns.

Clady, Ihenacho injured. The Broncos suffered two significant injuries in the game against the Giants. Strong safety Duke Ihenacho walked out of the locker room with a boot around his badly sprained right ankle. Left tackle Ryan Clady hobbled badly on his wrapped left foot.

Montee bounces back. Montee Ball couldn’t blame anyone else for his first-quarter fumble inside the Giants’ 5-yard line that ruined a terrific opening drive by Broncos quarterback Peyton Manning. And he didn’t.

“My eyes got real big,” Ball said. “It was perfectly blocked. I was going in, and I let my teammates down. That’s the worst feeling. Today I did some good things in the passing game, but there’s no excuse for putting the ball on the ground.”

Ball wasn’t benched. He came back and made two catches for 27 yards, although he gained only 16 yards on 12 carries.

“They had faith in me, and I’m truly, truly grateful for that,” he said.

Manning meets Tripucka’s sons. At the Broncos’ team hotel Saturday, quarterback Peyton Manning met with Kelly, T.K. and Mark Tripucka, three of Frank Tripucka’s six sons.

Frank Tripucka died Thursday at 85. He was the Broncos’ first starting quarterback in 1960 and the first Broncos player whose number — 18 — was retired.

When Manning signed with the Broncos in March 2012, Frank Tripucka humbly agreed to surrender his number 18.

“I was explaining to them that in our quarterback room we have a picture of their father,” Manning said. “I’m honored to wear his number, and it was a good meeting, and they said their dad would have been proud.”

Frank Tripucka’s wake was held Sunday as the Broncos were playing the Giants a short drive away. His funeral will be Monday. Billy Thompson, the team’s director of community outreach, will attend the service.

Manning joins 60,000-yard club. Manning logged his 60,000th passing yard Sunday. Only he, Brett Favre and Dan Marino have reached the mark, and Manning did it faster than any. He has 60,256 career yards.

Trevathan rebounds after Week 1 fumble . After committing a boneheaded fumble against Baltimore, linebacker Danny Trevathan finished Sunday’s game with a team-best 10 tackles along with Denver’s only sack.

Giants honor Bill Parcells. The Giants honored Bill Parcells at halftime by giving the former coach his Hall of Fame ring. Parcells, whose first head coaching job was at the Air Force Academy, won two titles coaching the Giants and owns the franchise’s best winning percentage (.611) in the Super Bowl era.