Democrats facing tough reelections have taken to distancing themselves from President Barack Obama, opting to pass on the campaigner-in-chief’s help on the campaign trail. And now, vulnerable Democrats like Rep. Joe Garcia (D-Fla.) who once supported the Affordable Care Act have figured out just how to run on Obamacare — by placing the blame for the healthcare law’s failure on the White House.

Garcia, who was elected to represent Florida’s 26th Congressional district in 2012, was an ardent supporter of the president’s healthcare law and touted the “many benefits to this legislation” while campaigning. And while Democrats seeking reelection in the 2014 midterms have begun distancing themselves from Obamacare in the midst of its disastrous implementation, the House Majority PAC — a political action committee supported by House Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi (D-Calif.) — released an ad supporting Garcia’s attempts to fix the law, while passing the buck for its failures on to the Obama administration.

“Joe Garcia is working to fix Obamacare. He voted to let you keep your existing health plan and took the White House to task for the disastrous healthcare website,” the ad’s narrator says, taking a shot at the president’s “if you like your plan, you can keep it” lie.

The ad continues, referencing Garcia’s votes to “hold insurance companies accountable” in covering patients with pre-existing conditions — a measure already ensured by the Affordable Care Act.

Though the Florida Democrat wasn’t in office when Obamacare was passed in 2010, he praised the law for including provisions that “prohibit lifetime limits on care,” Garcia’s campaign website states, and criticized Florida Gov. Rick Scott (R) for refusing federal funds to implement the law and failing to expand Medicaid.

As the midterms elections grow closer, Pelosi’s House Majority PAC has made a point to assert the Obamacare train wreck is not a result of House Democrats’ actions, but rather the Obama administration’s. The organization released an ad last month on behalf of Rep. Ann Kirkpatrick (D-Ariz.) criticizing the federal healthcare exchange’s “stunning ineptitude”and highlighted her attempts to fix the broken law.

While Republicans have seized to opportunity to highlight Obamacare’s failures thus far, it looks like the White House is going to have to play defense against Democrats, too.

Watch Garcia’s ad below.