BOSTON (CBS) — You know how it normally goes when the US House and Senate gather in joint session to hear a speech.

Remember the 2009 State of the Union address, as the bitter debate over Obamacare was gaining steam, where the president called his critics liars and they returned the favor? No need to single out that dreary evening; the ritual partisan dance where one side cheers while the other pouts is a staple of State of the Union speeches.

So it was interesting to see the assembled pols, on their Sunday-best behavior as Pope Francis – appearing well-versed on their chronic gridlock and dysfunction – gentle admonished the members that “we must move forward together, as one.”

On the surface, it seemed as if they might be listening. The usual partisan posturing and snark were replaced by what seemed to be genuine emotion at the sight and sound of a true spiritual leader. Democrat Congressman John Lewis, an iconic civil rights activist from the 1960s, was openly moved by the Pope’s tribute to Martin Luther King Jr. Republican Senator Marco Rubio, the son of immigrants, teared up when the Pope talked immigration.

Why can’t our politicians behave more like this when the Holy Father isn’t there to chaperon?

For ideologues like Rep. Joe Pitts of Pennsylvania, anything short of total validation of their pet positions is unacceptable, even from the Pope.

Pitts said afterwards he was disappointed the pope “didn’t use his forum to speak on behalf of the unborn,” even though the pontiff called for protection of human life “at every stage of development.”

And the fact is, Congress is jam-packed with people afraid to do anything – like, say, compromise – that might cost them their seat.

“A good political leader always opts to initiate processes rather than possessing spaces,” said Pope Francis.

But it’s fear of losing their space by alienating the voters, special-interest groups and donors who put them there that drive DC these days. And it isn’t likely that a few hours of good feeling engendered by the Pope’s persona will leave a dent in that.

You can listen to Keller At Large on WBZ News Radio every weekday at 7:55 a.m. You can also watch Jon on WBZ-TV News weeknights at 11 p.m.

Email Jon at keller@wbztv.com or reach him on Twitter @kelleratlarge.