Eager to sell more of their chocolate-covered gourmet pretzels as corporate gifts, sisters Ali and Lauren Borowick decided to rent a booth for their company, Fatty Sundays, at Trade Brooklyn, a business-to-business trade show scheduled for Wednesday, April 2. They've got a clear goal in mind for marketing the tasty treats: "We are looking to establish relationships with a minimum of 15 new companies that we can begin working with on corporate gifting and events, especially as the holiday season approaches," said Ali.

The team from Fatty Sundays will have plenty of company at the show. With Brooklyn's startup scene thriving and many local businesses focused on growth in 2014, Trade Brooklyn, now in its fifth year, is expanding, too. Jonathan Levin, president of event producer Cardinal Trade Group, expects to see about 150 exhibitors, an increase from 100 last year, and about 2,500 attendees, up from about 1,500.

Selling local

44%—Share of New York City businesses that expect to boost revenue in 2014.

Source: TD Bank survey



The show will take place at its largest venue in four years—the New York Marriott in downtown Brooklyn, bringing together national and regional companies such as Verizon Wireless, Citibank and Office Solutions, which have a presence in Brooklyn, and many small businesses from the five boroughs, said Mr. Levin. About 20% percent of those attending come from outside the region, he said.

Certainly, participating in trade shows like this can be a substantial investment for a small company, and there's no guaranteed return on it. The Borowick sisters—who founded their South Williamsburg-based business in May 2012 and now both work there full-time with a handful of part-timers—plunked down $895 for an exhibit table under an early-bird special. Regular exhibitor prices this year are $1,295 for six feet of space, and $1,395 for eight feet.

But after staying away from trade shows during the recession, many owners are returning in a push to win business-to-business sales. The Center for Exhibition Industry Research, based in Dallas, found that professional attendance at trade shows was up 5.8% year-over-year in the fourth quarter of 2013, the biggest gain since the third quarter of 2007. Local trade shows are popular, experts say, because they offer an opportunity to deepen relationships in the community.

"We've all heard that global is the future of growth and the big boys are focusing on global," said Marshal Cohen, chief industry analyst at market-research firm NPD Group in Port Washington, L.I. "It's the small retailers that have learned now to focus locally," he said. "And local is worth its weight in gold."

Crash course

To make sure attendees find Trade Brooklyn valuable, Mr. Levin has increased the number of hour-long seminars to 15 this year, from eight in 2013. The event will include a panel for minority- and women-owned businesses on winning government and private-sector contracts. Other seminars cover topics ranging from technology integration to the Affordable Care Act.

Mr. Levin has also planned an hour of networking at the pre-show breakfast and a speed-networking event later. But, as the Borowick sisters realize, sometimes you've got to let the merchandise speak for itself—which they plan to do at their table. "We'll be sampling pretzels, of course," she said.

Get Crain's Small Business Alert Sign up for our FREE weekly Small Business Alert email newsletter. An essential summary of the week's top headlines selected for small businesses. More Newsletters ›

Comments