Health The Most Committed Obamacare Opponents Are Opting Out Of Subsidies Altogether CREDIT: AP Photos

If Obamacare detractors have their way, the Supreme Court will determine that the subsidies for health care in federally run marketplaces are in fact unconstitutional and millions of Americans will lose access to affordable coverage.

But some opponents of the health law — including Grace Brewer — have decided to take matters into their own hands, voluntarily forgoing the government subsidies that could help them purchase insurance as a form of protest.

“I wanted a minimal plan and I’m not allowed to have it,” Brewer, a self-employed chiropractor from Kansas, told US News & World Report. Although a federal subsidy would have lowered her health care costs under Obamacare, Brewer refused it, saying that she didn’t feel comfortable accepting aid financed by taxpayer dollars, especially after losing a plan she said fit her medical needs and cost significantly less than what Obamacare offered.

Brewer’s act of defiance will leave her without insurance this year. Under rules outlined in the Affordable Care Act, her lack of coverage would require her to pay a penalty in her 2016 tax filing that will account for 2 percent of her annual income. However, with no dependents and prescriptions she needs to be fill, Brewers believes that she can weather the storm. “I am frustrated. I am angry. And I say ‘no’ to the exchanges. Somebody has to stand up and this is the only way I can do it. I will not be signing up under duress. I’m taking care of myself,” Brewer said.

Brewer’s not alone in her sentiments. A small, but vocal, contingent of Americans have decided to opt out of the government insurance program, citing philosophical reasons.

It’s not a new GOP talking point. In 2013, Sens. John McCain (R-AZ) and John Barrasso (R-WY) proposed legislation in the months leading up to the first Obamacare open enrollment that would allow people to circumvent the requirement to buy insurance. During that time, debate sparked about whether GOP members and their aides would follow in activists’ footsteps and skip their plans, although doing so would mean that they will do without a special health insurance subsidy given to members of Congress.

“The American people should have the choice to purchase health coverage without fear of their government extracting onerous penalties,” McCain told The Blaze. “A better, more affordable American health care system must be based around the fundamental value of freedom, and this bill takes a key step in that direction.”

Over the last couple of years, right-wing groups have also specifically targeted college students, attempting to dissuade them from taking advantage of Obamacare. Representatives of Generation Opportunity hosted tailgates on more than 20 campuses in 2013 as part of an effort to convince Millennials that they’re better off uninsured than getting coverage through the landmark health care legislation. The anti-Obamacare group’s national tour followed the production of commercials that featured a menacing Uncle Sam telling students to “opt out” of Obamacare.

While those wary of government meddling in personal affairs may find this form of protest admirable, the fact remains that low-income people don’t necessarily have the luxury of going without subsidized insurance coverage. Before the passage of the Affordable Care Act, Americans paid $3,000 more in health care costs than their European counterparts. More than 40 percent of Americans skipped out on health services, like refilling their prescription medication, because of exorbitant costs.

When Obamacare’s marketplaces opened for the first time in 2013, millions of the working poor, people of color, women, and those with preexisting conditions attained affordable coverage for the first time in their lives. Since then, 60 percent of that group has used their new insurance to seek services. This held especially true in communities of color, where the uninsured rate has fallen by seven points over the past year.

Enrollment numbers from the Department of Health and Human Services show that 87 percent of people who selected coverage in federally-run marketplaces during the last enrollment period qualify for subsides that help them pay for their plans. If states in federally run marketplaces no longer allowed tax credits, health care costs would increase by an average of more than 75 percent, and peopled affected would pay $400 more in monthly premiums.

That would place incredible financial strain on millions of low and middle-income Americans who would have to choose between paying higher premiums or being fined for opting out of coverage. Even worse, they may not find support from GOP lawmakers who think it’s better to simply opt out of Obamacare.

“In federal-exchange states where the largest numbers of people might lose subsidies if SCOTUS rules against the law, state officials might be less likely to then set up their own exchanges to keep the subsidies flowing,” The Washington Post’s Greg Sargent wrote earlier this month.