This article was initially published as a letter to subscribers of The Upshot’s weekly newsletter. You can sign up for the email here to get this and all of the best of The Upshot.

An assertion in the economist Tyler Cowen’s article “It’s Not the Inequality; It’s the Immobility” drew the scrutiny of readers. Mr. Cowen wrote:

“Since 1973, for workers as a whole, wages have stagnated largely because of a severe productivity slowdown.”

Cynical Jack of Washington D.C.:

Yes, there has been a productivity slowdown, but it is not responsible for the stagnation in wages. According to the Economic Policy Institute, real average hourly compensation has grown 113 percent since 1973 for production/nonsupervisory workers, whereas productivity has grown 254 percent.

Photo

Bob of Portland:

Productivity growth may have slowed but productivity still has increased a great deal since the 1970s, while wages have not. The cause of wage stagnation is the decoupling of productivity growth and wage growth. The wealthy have figured out how to keep ever more of the pie for themselves and meanwhile they work to convince everyone else that what’s good for them is also good for the rest of us.

Kaleberg of Port Angeles, Wash.:

The claim that all we need is higher productivity has been debunked for anyone looking back at the last 30 years. We’ve had plenty of productivity growth, but reduced mobility and greater inequality. Basically, been there, done that. Maybe it’s time to attack the problem instead.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Kyle of Indianapolis defended the claim:

Professor Cowen is writing about total factor productivity (TFP), which accounts for both capital and labor, and it is a better measure of an economy’s production over time. Think of it as a measure of our return on capital. And yes, TFP growth has slowed since 1973. As stated by The Economist, the U.S. TFP growth rate from 1947-1969 was 1.9 percent, slowing to 0.8 percent from 1970-present.

More:

■ Dean Baker of the Center for Economic and Policy Research posted a rebuttal here.

■ In a Q. and A. with Eduardo Porter for The Upshot in July, Mr. Cowen discussed inequality at length, including this passage, which touched on productivity:

“If today we had a rate of technological innovation comparable to say 1890-1930, the middle class and the poor would benefit tremendously from those new goods and services. Income inequality might go up or down but we could stop worrying so much about it.

“That earlier period brought such innovations as electricity, the automobile, radio, the airplane, basic advances in public health, and much better fertilizers, among many others. In more recent times we’ve had a lot of innovations in the manipulation and storage of information, but this just hasn’t benefited ordinary lives as much.”