Health insurance companies will descend on the state capital today for two days of lobbying—and might need both of them to explain the bill at the top of their agenda.

The measure would allow businesses with 51 to 100 employees to continue purchasing stop-loss insurance next year. It’s sure to trigger a lot of quizzical looks from lawmakers, and the following questions:

Who’s taking away midsize companies’ ability to buy stop-loss policies? And why?

For that matter, what is stop-loss insurance?

For the answers, the Insider turned to Patrick Gillespie, director of state government affairs for Cigna, one of the insurers that sells stop-loss policies in New York. He could probably talk about stop-loss for weeks, were anyone inclined to listen that long. Fear not—the Insider boiled the explanations he gave during a 40-minute phone interview into a ready-to-eat meal.

The big picture: Stop-loss insurance protects employers who self-fund—that is, pay their workers’ health-care bills directly, rather than cover them through a traditional insurance policy. Self-funding can save companies money, but can destroy them if one or more employees racks up extraordinarily high medical bills. A stop-loss policy kicks in if that happens, limiting what they’ll have to pay in any given year.

If the legislature doesn’t pass (and Gov. Andrew Cuomo doesn’t sign) S.2366 and A.1154 this year, on Jan. 1, about 1,700 businesses with nearly 130,000 employees will stop self-funding because they—along with about 9,300 other midsize firms—will lose their legal right to buy stop-loss policies.

These companies would then have several choices. Those willing to pay more could buy a traditional policy that keeps the same level of benefits for their workers. Those looking to keep their costs the same could turn to a less-generous plan (say, bronze instead of silver, in the parlance of the Affordable Care Act). Some might drop coverage altogether and ask their workers to shop for policies on the state’s health care exchange.

It wasn’t supposed to be like this. Nobody set out to take away stop-loss insurance from midsize businesses. But in 1992 New York did take it away from small businesses—those with 2 to 50 employees. On Jan. 1, 2016, the Affordable Care Act will require New York to expand its definition of small businesses to include those with up to 100 workers. An unintended effect will be to subject the newly defined small businesses to the 1992 law.

The irony is that the Affordable Care Act was designed to broaden health insurance coverage. “The intention of the ACA seems to be the opposite of what it would achieve here,” noted Mr. Gillespie.

The Cuomo administration is investigating whether that will actually happen. The fate of stop-loss for midsize firms may ultimately be decided by the Department of Financial Services, which regulates the insurance industry. If DFS chief Benjamin Lawsky doesn't buy insurers' arguments, he could ask legislators or the governor to kill the bills.

Curious legislators might wonder why their predecessors 23 years ago banned stop-loss policies for small businesses in the first place. The idea was to rescue Empire Blue Cross/Blue Shield, which was in financial straits and needed more customers. It worked: Unable to self-fund, small businesses bought more BC/BS policies. The insurer survived.

And that’s why insurance brokers will be knocking on lawmakers’ doors today and Tuesday, explaining what this is all about.

“Let’s face it: If I were to walk down the street in Manhattan, there’s not a whole lot of people worried about stop-loss,” Mr. Gillespie said. “But it’s very important to our employers.”

Get Crain's Morning Insider Sign up for the Morning Insider email and receive political news and musings every morning at 6 a.m. More Newsletters ›

Comments