On Wall Street things rarely turn out quite the way you expect, and this year was no exception. The biggest surprises this year? No one expected...

1 ... Netflix NFLX 2.59 % to zoom.

The online TV and movies company came roaring back from turmoil and crisis in 2012 and was the best performer this year in the S&P 500 stock index. Netflix stock quadrupled in 2013, as viewers flocked to the service to "binge watch" hit programs such as "House of Cards," a Netflix original starring Kevin Spacey, and "Breaking Bad," the AMC AMCX -1.39 % series about a high-school chemistry teacher who turned into a drug lord.

Who expected this? Certainly not the Wall Street analysts who are paid to. According to Thomson Reuters, at the start of the year an astonishing 30 of the 36 analysts who covered Netflix rated the stock either a miserable "hold" (which is generally Street-speak for a "sell") or an outright sell. That's about as bearish as analysts get.

As recently as last spring, the average target price for the stock was $139. It closed last week at $376.

2 ...Stock markets to soar.

Even though U.S. stocks came into the year already overvalued according to many long-term measures, they boomed nonetheless. The S&P 500 posted an astonishing total return of 27%, putting most other major markets in the shade.

Who expected this? Not money managers. The Barron's Big Money poll of investment managers in late 2012 showed a big upturn in bearish sentiment. Fewer than half of those polled were bullish on markets for this year. The number of bears, who expected the market to fall, doubled.

ENLARGE Bill Butcher

3 ...Larry Summers to crash.

The great tap dancer of Washington and Wall Street politics finally ran out of dance floor. Mr. Summers, former Treasury secretary, Harvard University president, economic adviser to President Obama and hedge-fund executive, was reported earlier in the year to be the favorite to succeed Ben Bernanke as chairman of the Federal Reserve.

But Democrats on Capitol Hill put up stiff opposition. As pressure mounted on the president to appoint Mr. Summers's more amenable rival, the eventual pick Janet Yellen, Mr. Summers bowed out of the race.

4 ...Housing to take off.

Mortgage rates leapt this year, as many had long feared. The rise in long-term interest rates, fueled by a strengthening economy, sent interest rates on 30-year conventional mortgages rising a third from 3.3%, at the start of the year, to 4.4% by the end.

Though that drove up the cost of buying a new home, the housing market shrugged it off. Prices kept rising, defying the predictions of a correction.

A measure of national house prices tracked by Zillow, the online real-estate company, ended the year up more than 5%. Prices in Florida were up 15% on the year, those in California, an astonishing 23%.

5 ...Gold to plummet.

According to one reading of the ancient Mayan calendar, the world was due to end in December 2012.

But the most fervent fans of gold were almost as gloomy. For years they have been predicting disaster.

This year many of their warnings seemed prescient: The U.S. national debt broke $17 trillion for the first time ever. The U.S. government shut down amid political dysfunction and came within days of defaulting on some of its bonds—an economic earthquake that would have shaken the entire global financial system to its foundations. Detroit filed for the biggest municipal bankruptcy in history.

And gold? It fell another 26%, one of the sharpest annual slumps on record, to just over $1,200 an ounce.

"It was a bad year to bet on the end of the world," jokes Larry Glazer, portfolio manager at Mayflower Advisers.

6 ...Japan stocks to boom.

A year ago big money managers told Bank of America BAC -0.34 % Merrill Lynch that they hated the Japanese stock market. Japanese stocks were among the most unloved asset classes in the world. The managers wouldn't touch them with 10-foot poles.

How'd that work out?

New Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe launched expansionary economic policies and set the stock market on fire. The Nikkei 225 index of top shares rocketed 53% (in yen terms) this year.

7 ...Emerging markets to sink.

In the same Bank of America Merrill Lynch survey a year ago, top money managers said their favorite asset class was stocks in supposedly fast-growing "emerging markets" such as China, Russia, India, Brazil, Taiwan and South Korea.

They loved these markets as much as they loathed Japan. But emerging markets actually fell 3.5% in U.S.-dollar terms this year, according to index company MSCI. And that's even when you count the dividends.

8 ...The new pope to "occupy."

Nobody expected Pope Benedict XVI to resign, the first to do so in nearly 600 years. And no one expected his successor, Pope Francis, to launch a scathing critique of the current financial system, attacking "an economy of exclusion," "the new idolatry of money" and "a financial system which rules rather than serves."

ENLARGE

But perhaps people shouldn't have been so surprised. The Holy Father, who hails from Argentina, is said by some to keep by his bedside a radical book which says, among other things, that you cannot serve God and mammon. What's more, it praises an ancient commune in which "all that believed were together, and had all things common. And sold their possessions and goods, and parted them to all men, as every man had need."

The book also contains a seditious story which seems to imply there is something wrong with worshiping a golden calf.

9 And certainly not...

The world's best-performing stock market this year, according to MSCI, was… anyone?

Step forward, Bulgaria, whose market doubled in dollar terms. Other stellar performers included the United Arab Emirates (up 84% in dollars), Argentina (73%) and Zimbabwe (35%).

Maybe the Mayans were on to something.

Write to Brett Arends at brett.arends@wsj.com