WASHINGTON -- This week's floor debate over the currently stalled bill expanding federal efforts against human trafficking was notable because it included a real debate over a contentious issue -- abortion.

It brought together Sen. John Cornyn, R-Tex., lead sponsor of the human trafficking legislation and strongly anti-abortion, and Sen. Dianne Feinstein, D-Calif., the pro-abortion rights lawmaker and one of the bill's many co-sponsors.

Cornyn favors language in the human trafficking bill that applies the so-called Hyde Amendment, barring federal funding for abortions, to a fund created by the legislation from fines paid by human traffic perpetrators to help victims. Feinstein and other Democrats are demanding the language be removed.

What was notable is that the two engaged in an actual debate on the merits, and even explored ways to resolve the dispute, which has left the Senate without the 60 votes needed to gain a vote on the broadly supported human trafficking legislation. The Senate again Thursday failed to round up the 60 votes needed to advance the human trafficking legislation - with Democrats continuing to vote no because of the abortion language.

Cornyn and Feinstein also discussed a key issue -- whether the Hyde Amendment's exception from the abortion funding ban for victims of rape might make their argument academic - because an adult having sex with a child under 17 is defined as rape in criminal statutes -- and that's a major component of human trafficking.

Now, it's true the debate is duplicative at parts - we've edited out some of those redundancies - and occasionally the two senators talk past each other. But there are real honest arguments, some of them powerful. It's not the usual case of an individual senator offering up a solo argument, repeating the favorite talking points of his or her political party.

So, we're doing something a little different. Presenting a transcript of almost the entire debate Wednesday between Cornyn and Feinstein. Warning it's lengthy.

CORNYN: "I was in my office and watching the Senator on TV, so I thought I would come to the floor and maybe we could get to the bottom of this. There seems to be a ship passing in the night, it seems to me."

"I know the Senator from California cares passionately about this issue, and I don't question that for a moment. It is very clear to me. But I ask the Senator from California, she graciously agreed to cosponsor this legislation?"

FEINSTEIN: "I did."

"Not only -- I believe the Senator voted for the bill in committee and cosponsored it. The Senator also voted for that limitation in the Consolidated Appropriations Act of 2014. This is the same or similar language of what was contained in the Affordable Care Act, contained in the Defense authorization bill, and contained in literally every appropriations bill since 1976."

"This is what I would love to have my friend, the Senator from California, explain to me: Why is it that it all of a sudden becomes objectionable on this legislation--when you care and I care so passionately about getting help for these victims -- that this is the reason to derail the legislation?"

FEINSTEIN: "Because of what this legislation is. This legislation is the raping and the misconduct, sexually, with young girls, girls 14, 15, and 16. What if they are impregnated? Should they be entitled to be able to go and get an abortion? Does this body really want them to be forced to bear somebody else's child?"

"So this offers the opportunity for some funding. These aren't wealthy girls. They don't live in Beverly Hills, Hyde Park, or any of these places that are prominent. They are on the streets. They are lost, maybe lost mentally, lost physically. They may have been abused, and now they are caught up in an industry where they are held hostage in the night."

"I have read of some in a neighborhood in my city being handcuffed at night, stripped, so they don't have clothes and can't run away. They are put out on the streets, they are watched. They are moved around. If it becomes too hot in one area, they are moved to another. They are moved to another State, and they come from other countries."

"It just seems to me to have this in this bill -- and, Senator, I have great respect for you. I have wanted to work with you on this. I know you are sincere."

"It is not in the House bill. So maybe the House understands this. I can't speak for the House."

CORNYN: "I think it is great to have an honest conversation with my friend. So it is clear that the Senator from California has voted for this restriction on use of taxpayer funding for abortions previously, correct?"

FEINSTEIN: "Not to my knowledge. Let me put it that way. Now you can blame me and say I should have known -- I am not the only one on our committee, Senator, who is in this position, either, who communicated with your staff and was under the impression that the bill was identical to last year, with the exception of seven pieces, which are not this. The seven were detailed to us.

CORNYN: "I am not going to engage in a debate about whether the Senator should have known or how she voted in the past. I believe the record would demonstrate that she and others voted for the Affordable Care Act, which actually National Abortion Rights Action League says is an expansion of the Hyde amendment."

"I ask the Senator, you rightly point out that these child victims of sexual assault will have been raped, either statutory rape -- they are below the age of consent -- or they are adults and they have been assaulted, criminally assaulted."

"Isn't it your understanding of the Hyde amendment that the exclusion to the Hyde amendment would still allow them to gain access to the services that you believe they need or deserve?"

FEINSTEIN: "Yes. I think that is correct. I suppose we could change this to have a rape implication, but the gauntlet has been thrown down."

"And it is not up to me alone to remove it. There was no open discussion in our committee when we discussed this that there was a highly sensitive issue in it, Senator."

"Now, I will plead mea culpa. And guess what. I will wave a whip and get my staff and say: Look henceforth at every code change. But my colleague and I both know that occasionally things slip through. I will plead mea culpa on that. But once I found out, I had an obligation to do something about it."

"So I am pleading with my colleague, let's just take it out. Let's just pass this bill. Let's put the Kirk-Feinstein amendment in. Let's go after the Internet purveyors. Let's go after 19 sites that put pictures of girls 12, 13, and 14 to be sold all around the United States, to be sold after big football games in various areas of the country. Let's go after them. Isn't that more important?"

CORNYN: "That is the reason I am so confused by the filibuster of this legislation by people, including my friend, who are cosponsors of the legislation and who already voted for it."

"I am not about pointing fingers in terms of what staff or Members should have read or understood about the legislation, but I believe the reason it was not debated at the Judiciary Committee level is because it had become a routine matter since 1976, when the Hyde amendment was passed. Every appropriation of Labor-HHS or other funding that could arguably use tax dollars for abortions has been limited by the Hyde amendment language."

"I had a couple of Senators in my office yesterday afternoon who are proudly pro-choice. I am proudly pro-life. But even my pro-choice friends said we still believe taxpayer funds should not be used for abortions except in the case of rape or to protect the health of the victim."

FEINSTEIN: "Well, why then, if I may ask a question, respectfully?"

CORNYN: "Sure."

FEINSTEIN: "Why isn't it in the House language?"

CORNYN: "I would say to my friend that I can't vouch for the House's product. I can just say what the Congress as a whole has done since 1976, and it has limited the expenditure of funds for this purpose under the terms of the Hyde amendment."

"So we have talked about ways to get past this impasse, and I would just have to say I think abandoning the Hyde amendment would be a dramatic mistake and something I am not willing to be a part of. It has become this one area, in a divisive area of abortion, where there has been bipartisan consensus for 39 years; at least to the point it has remained the law of the land effectively. To take it out and say somehow we are going to depart from that today or this week would, to me, be a dramatic expansion of taxpayer funding for this purpose that I can't support."

"So I would say, if there are ways we can deal with this fund, as a fund that can be appropriated on an annual basis subject to the normal restrictions -- that is something I talked about with the ranking member, our friend from Vermont, that possibility -- I think there are ways we might be able to get to a solution. But stripping out this limitation, which has been the law of the land for 39 years, is not acceptable because it would represent a huge expansion on the use of taxpayer funding for abortions in ways many of my pro-choice friends don't support."

FEINSTEIN: "Well, I guess I disagree with that. Those of us who believe a woman should control her own reproductive system, in concert with her family and her doctor, have objection to the government getting involved and telling us what to do. It is actually not your reproductive system -- and I say 'you' generically, as a man -- it is our reproductive system. In a sense this has been a battle for our identity."

"I sat on a term-setting and paroling authority in California in the 1960s, when abortion was illegal. I sentenced women to State prison for abortion. It had then an indeterminate sentence of between 6 months and 10 years. I saw abortionists come back to prison. I asked one, when I was setting the sentence: Why do you keep doing this? Her first name was Anita. And she said: Because I feel so sorry for the women."

"That was the way it was. I remember passing the plate at Stanford for a young woman to go to Tijuana for an abortion. The morbidity that was done to women through back-alley abortions, this has opened a Pandora's Box of big emotional issues for women."

"As to the Hyde amendment, if there is rape and you can prove it, that is right; and then there is a 12-year-old, a 13-year-old who is out on the streets as a prostitute, which is a different thing -- sort of the same but sort of different. The overwhelming evil of this trade overcomes any of this, because you take a young woman, and you probably change their life for the worse for the rest of her life."

"Imagine your daughter being out on the street; my daughter, my granddaughters being out on the street like this and what it would do to them being handcuffed and moved and traded around the country and girls brought from Nepal through India, all over Europe. This is what is going on in the world today, and we are sitting here arguing essentially about the availability of an abortion in this area. To me, that is so secondary to the enormous harm that is being done."

"My colleague knows over the years we have lost virtually every battle that has been on this floor and we are tired of it. So we are taking a stand and we are going to hold that stand."

CORNYN: "I obviously don't agree with my friend from California, but I respect her for answering the questions I have posed here today. I just find it a terrible shame we are going to relegate what has been the law of the land for 39 years on this bill in a way that would block help to the very people I know the Senator from California cares so passionately about."

"If we are going to undo the Hyde amendment, which the Senator has voted for in some form or another repeatedly over the years, then we are not going to make any progress. If we can find some other way to structure the funds so the appropriators will have a more direct role in appropriating the fines and penalties paid into this fund on an annual basis, I think maybe there is some room to talk. But I thank the Senator for her courtesy in answering my questions. I am sorry we find ourselves at this loggerhead, but I hope at some point that can be resolved."

FEINSTEIN:"May I say one more thing? It is my understanding -- breaking news coming here--that there is no language in Federal statute on sex trafficking that defines a trafficking survivor as a victim of rape. So the victim would have to prove she is a victim of rape."

"Now, look at what happens. I don't know if in my colleague's legal career it took him close to very young victims of this who cover up and who don't want to let people know. I am sure my colleague knows all of the vicissitudes, the hard life. We are asking someone to prove it."

CORNYN: "I would say to my friend that when I was attorney general of Texas for 4 years, I had responsibility for administering the Crime Victims' Compensation Fund as part of my duties of office, and we worked very directly with victims groups, including those who took care of very young children who had been sexually assaulted, sometimes by members of their own family--just the worst, the most reprehensible sorts of crimes."

"But if I can ask the Senator just one last question. Of course, we have had the procedural vote on the floor, twice now, where Democrats have blocked our ability to both vote on amendments, including amendments the Senator may have with the Senator from Illinois, Mr. Kirk. Why is there an objection to processing those amendments and allowing the Senate to work its will? Why can't we vote on them? Why can't the Democratic minority take up the majority leader's offer for a vote to strip the language out that your side objects to?"

FEINSTEIN: "Can I answer that as honestly as I feel?"

CORNYN: "I wish the Senator would."

FEINSTEIN.:"Because there are many of us who believe this is one small step for womankind. It is one battle we can win, and we have had loss after loss after loss."

"You know, many of us ran on the right to choose. I was one of them. I am old enough to have seen the way it was before, to have sentenced women who committed illegal abortions with coat hangers. That is sort of the systemic root of all of this. It is our history, Senator. We are trying to change that history, and we keep losing. So there is one small thing in this."

"My colleague has done a superior job in putting the bill together. Let it go."

CORNYN: "I would just say, in conclusion, that I think it is a terrible shame that my colleague's side of the aisle has decided to take this bill hostage to try to litigate something that has been the law of the land for 39 years. I understand she feels passionately about it. I don't question that for a minute -- the sincerity of my colleague's deeply held personal views."

"But why in the world would my colleagues take as a hostage a piece of legislation that is going to help those 100,000 children who are sex-trafficked each year? Why should they suffer so my colleagues can make a point on this particular piece of legislation?"

"I don't understand that and I think it is a terrible shame."

FEINSTEIN: "Well, let me answer a question with a question. Why doesn't my colleague just take it out? It is not in the House bill. Then we don't have to conference it, we don't have to have another fight, we can get the amendments in the bill to strengthen the bill, and we can move on, with the two parties together doing something that is right for the Nation. Why don't we do it?"

CORNYN: "Mr. President, I would say to my friend, I don't blame her for asking, but why in the world would we change settled law for 39 years in order to accommodate the minority's view on this bill, and to change, as I said, what has been the law of the land?"

"Since the Senator voted for this very language previously this year in the Judiciary Committee -- since she cosponsored it, I don't really understand it since she voted for the legislation that is referred to here that has that amendment. Does the Senator see this as breaking new ground? Is she trying to expand or eliminate the Hyde amendment?"

FEINSTEIN: "I see it for standing up for a principle. I know something about these girls. I know something about the history of abortion in this country. I am old enough to have gone through it and know that I don't want to go back to those days. I don't want young women who take the law now so much for granted to have to return back."

"This is just one small step. There is nothing wrong with accommodating the minority on what is a relatively small point. In the House, 435 people over there didn't want it in. So why not accommodate the minority? The Senator just comes out a bigger person."

CORNYN:"I would say to my friend I appreciate her courtesy and her indulgence in having this conversation. I also feel on principle this limitation on tax dollars is an appropriate one. I understand the Senator disagrees and she would like to eliminate this from this point forward. But I am simply unable on principle to accommodate the Senator in that request."

"As I said, I do appreciate her courtesy."

FEINSTEIN: "I appreciate it, too. And I appreciate the discussion. Principle doesn't know minority and majority. Principle is deeply held."