Bureaucracy: The central goal of ObamaCare is supposed to be to make health care more affordable. So why is the IRS threatening massive fines on businesses that try to help their employees buy an ObamaCare plan?

Back in 2013, the IRS issued a startling new rule. Any business that doesn’t provide insurance but does help employees with the cost of their own insurance will be fined $100 per day — which works out to $36,500 a year — per employee.

In the bizarre logic of the Obama administration, a company that offers such help is actually providing a group plan, one that doesn’t meet ObamaCare’s ridiculous array of mandates and regulations.

Allegedly, the goal of the penalty — which went into effect this month — was to keep businesses from dumping workers into the ObamaCare exchanges. But to small businesses that have been helping their employees in this way for decades, it’s a devastating blow.

“This is a brand-new penalty that nobody knew about, and it’s huge,” Jack Mozloom of the National Federation of Independent Business told The Hill.

The NFIB figures that 14% of companies that don’t offer insurance have such policies in place.

Even Obama’s own Treasury secretary, Jack Lew, who oversees the IRS, can’t quite fathom this rule.

He told Congress recently, “The objective of the Affordable Care Act is to make sure that affordable health care is available to all, and I believe that the provisions that you’re referring to are not consistent with that.”

There are currently two bills in Congress to eliminate this fee. We hope that a fix gets passed soon and that Obama isn’t so arrogant as to veto it. Regardless, it’s only a foretaste of what’s to come if ObamaCare remains the law of the land.

When designing ObamaCare, Democrats gave regulators vast discretion to implement it. And as a result, decisions about insurance, benefits, coverage, treatments and so on will increasingly be made by unelected, unaccountable and, apparently, brain-dead bureaucrats in Washington, D.C., not by individuals or private companies acting on their own.

Just keeping up with all the costly and misguided rules that regulators spew out will require Congress’ full time and attention. That is, unless lawmakers can find a way to chuck the entire ObamaCare law and replace it with reforms that actually make health care more affordable, not less.