When the next flood hits, Greg Berman wants the militia ready.

Berman, a Lyons weather analyst, has been organizing volunteer flood-watchers. So far, there's 35 people in the Flood Watch Network, ready to keep an eye on the St. Vrain, on Boulder Creek, on the Big and Little Thompson, and send up a warning if things look bad.

It's a real-time safety net that Berman has wanted since September's disaster, which forced his entire town to evacuate.

"I got to thinking what can be done, not to prevent this, but to give people more warning?" he said.

Traditionally, part of that warning has been the river gauges, able to track how fast and how high the water is moving. But the last flood damaged or destroyed many of those gauges, including one in Lyons that sat just below the confluence of the north and south St. Vrain. Repair and replacement has been slow, making eyes on the ground even more valuable.

This spring's runoff will be the test. The mountain snowpacks are coming in at 150 to 200 percent of normal, Berman said, and if the right pattern of quick warming and rainfall hits this spring, the May runoff could be powerful.

How powerful it needs to be will depend on how much the river's layout was changed by the flood, he said.

Advertisement

"In the past, 1,200 cfs (cubic feet per second) was enough to send up an alert that flooding may happen." he said. "But because of the new topography in the river, we don't know if that number now is 1,500 or 700."

Longmont's strongest runoff in recent years came in 1995, when the St. Vrain hit 1,910 cfs. (Snowpack that year was only 75 percent of normal.) By contrast, September's flood saw between 18,000 and 21,000 cfs in the Longmont area, according to initial flow estimates; the flow may have been above 30,000 cfs near Lyons.

The St. Vrain region actually sees two runoff periods — the first starting in early to mid-May, the second in late June to early July. So for about the next three months, Berman will be watching weather patterns, snow packs and reports from the flood watchers. Those reports will include an estimate of how high the river is in their area, and eventually how fast it's moving, though Berman said they're still working on an easy way to measure the speed.

Reports and warnings will be made on Facebook through the Flood Watch Network page (facebook.com/floodwatchnetwork); a separate website is being set up for those not on Facebook. Information will also be passed to the Lyons Fire Protection District and other participating agencies, as well as to all the Denver television networks.

"The goal is to make sure there are no surprises this time," he said online shortly after the network's page was set up in February.

Efforts will continue after runoff is over, but the intensity will vary with the need. In the low-flow winter time, for example, constant updates may be less necessary, while a rainy fall might require more attention.

The network is not currently coordinating with the National Weather Service's spotters, though that could come in the future. The NWS does excellent work across the state, Berman said, but this was a way for the Lyons area to have its own tripwires in place.

"As far as I know, we're the only network watching this area this in-depth," he said.

Working in a small area has a big advantage, he said. Many watchers overlap each other, and if there's a question mark in a spot, it's easy for him to doublecheck conditions.

Those wishing to be part of the spotting efforts can email Berman at weatherbe@gmail.com or message him through either the network's Facebook page or through his Weather Talk page (facebook.com/GregsWeatherTalk).

"I don't want to sound like I'm a superhero," Berman said. "I'm just trying to help our town out, and the towns around us, too."

Contact Times-Call staff writer Scott Rochat at 303-684-5220 or srochat@times-call.com