Kristina M. Johnson, Colorado Women's Hall of Fame inductee (Courtesy photo)

On Thursday, six women will be inducted into the Colorado Women's Hall of Fame.

Among the 2014 class will be Kristina M. Johnson, a co-founder of Colorlink Inc. and the University of Colorado Optoelectronics Computing Systems Center. Colorlink Inc. is the Boulder-based division for 3-D technology company RealD Inc.

Johnson, who currently is the chief executive officer of Maryland-based clean energy policy advisory firm Enduring Hydro, holds more than 45 U.S. patents, served as provost at The Johns Hopkins University, dean of the Pratt School of Engineering at Duke University and also was the undersecretary of energy for the U.S. Department of Energy.

Johnson recently spoke with the Daily Camera about her past and current roles and her thoughts on women in technology.

The following has been edited for clarity and length.

1.) You've held roles in the private sector, academics and government. How were these roles similar and different, and in what ways were you able to effect change?

I started out with my academic career at the University of Colorado in the Electrical and Computer Engineering Department in 1985 and it was a fabulous 14 years. I helped co-found the Optoelectronics Computing Systems Center (a National Science Foundation center) with professor Thomas Cathey, who was my mentor when I was in high school, of all things.

One of the themes, whether it's in government or in corporate or academia, was the interest in cross-disciplinary research for product development or policy.

At the optoelectronics center, we worked with physicist Noel Clark, chemist Dave Walba, mathematician Karl Gustafson and other engineers.

It was really a very enriching time. Our students shared seminars and worked together.

I also always have been intrigued by wanting to make something that someone would want to use.

Gary Sharp, he and I founded Colorlink Inc. (which is now the Boulder-based division of 3-D technology company RealD). ... Those 3-D glasses we have now, those were things that we invented in the lab.

Gary Sharp, he came up with stacked polymer to separate color, and that's why current 3-D movies are (better than with past 3-D glasses). It wasn't until Gary's invention that we had the ability to make great 3-D (movies).

That was a really fabulous time at the university. It was a very creative time. I think my happiest moments are inventing.

... I used to say there were three things I'd never do: one, start a company; two, be a dean; and the third, which I have yet to do, is write a book.

Going into government, it was a really interesting time because I remember on election night in 2008 just watching the president and first-lady-to-be and Sasha and Malia walk out onto that catwalk ... I just really was feeling the moment and thought, "Wow, I'd like to do something to just really help this administration."

I kind of parked that idea and I was eventually offered several different positions, one being the undersecretary for energy at the U.S. Department of Energy.

I think growing up in Colorado, I grew up with a strong feeling for the environment and passion for the planet.

Again, we had the chance to do something very cross-disciplinary with nuclear energy, fossil fuels energy and renewable energy used in the so-called All-of-the-Above Energy Approach.

I was fortunate enough to recruit Dr. Mark Handschy, who commuted almost on a weekly basis to (Washington) D.C. from Colorado and really helped me oversee funds from the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act.

We really worked hard to make sure we created jobs.

That was a really great partnership; we worked together for a couple years. I was really interested in going back and seeing what I can do and bring (to the private sector). I saw so much capital on the sidelines. I thought we could bring some of that capital to clean energy.

2.) What changes have you seen in the roles women play in technology?

You can look at 200 years of government: we have yet to have a woman president. There's still a gap there, yet there are many more (women in executive technology positions) than when I was at the Pratt School of Engineering.

There were five major Division 1 school that had women deans of engineering. We were all numbered. I don't know how many more there are today.

What I try to do is really promote women in under-represented (areas).

It does take role models. There are mentors and there are role models.

You can be either gender and be a mentor, but a role model is someone that looks like you, someone you look up to and say, "If she can do it, then that's something I can do."

3.) You are the holder of many patented technologies. Is there a creation that brings the most pride to you?

One of the things I enjoyed when at CU was we developed an optical system for scanning slides for pap smear tests, looking for cervical cancer cells. It's a classic needle in the haystack ... there are so many different inventions (from detection of masses in mammograms to Kodak referencing the technology for a pigment layer for liquid crystal displays).

I think several generations of students worked on (that technology).

... But I think my proudest moment, more than anything, was the opportunity to build a world-class research group.

4.) What advice do you have for women pursuing technology and engineering roles?

I think what's most important is just believing in yourself, not to get discouraged if things don't turn out perfectly the first time. Rarely things worked out the ways I thought they would.

And don't be afraid to ask for help.

5.) How do you attract more women into the technology majors and keep them in that field?

In effect to the study in the '90s that said that women who get degrees in science and engineering and then pursue those careers where they can align their technological or vocational interest with a social good.

Where you have programs that emphasize both the technical and social good coming together, you have the opportunity for attracting more women.

— Alicia Wallace, Camera Business Writer