As the 20th anniversary of the genocide approaches, Rwanda hopes to become the region's Silicon Valley and build up a tech-savvy generation that values national identity over ethnicity. Photo: Getty

Busogo, Rwanda: Rwanda commemorates the genocide's 20th anniversary on Monday with solemn ceremonies to remember the more than 800,000 people, mostly ethnic Tutsis and moderate Hutus, butchered over 100 days by the nation's Hutu majority. With resentment still lingering, the government is in the midst of an ambitious effort to transform itself, the economy and society.

The genocide still shadows Immaculee Mukamusoni's life. Ethnic Hutu militias killed her mother, father and siblings, and for the next two decades she had little support. Today, she and her husband work as day labourers on a farm to provide for their five children.

But, this week, she boarded a bus that she hopes will transform her world. Outfitted with 20 laptops, it is a central part of a government initiative to bring technology to impoverished rural parts of the country. In the next two weeks, Ms Mukamusoni will learn programs such as Microsoft Word and Excel, and to access websites and send email.

Slowly rebuilding their lives: A woman stands on her porch at a suburb set on a hill overlooking Kigali, Rwanda's capital. Photo: AFP

"It's been 20 years, but we continue to struggle," said Ms Mukamusoni, 38, who has long tried to find full-time work. "I hope this knowledge will help our life."

Advertisement

The goal of Rwandan President Paul Kagame is nothing short of making tiny, landlocked Rwanda a regional Silicon Valley that will attract investors and multinational companies. That, he hopes, will speed Rwanda's transition from an agriculture-based economy to a services-oriented one, and help build up a middle class and a new generation of tech-savvy Rwandans who value national identity over ethnicity.

Creating a more equal society, Rwandans hope, will prevent the ignorance, hatred and envy that fuelled the massacres in 1994.

Metal racks hold the bones of thousands of genocide victims inside one of the crypts at the Nyamata Catholic Church memorial. Photo: Getty Images

"One of the ingredients of genocide is poverty, and addressing it is an important part of the rebuilding of the country," said Mr Kagame, Rwanda's minister for youth and information and communications technology. "So what Rwanda has decided is to make IT a key component of the whole economic model."

A more digitally literate country will help create more accountability and transparency among leaders, mitigate communal tensions and prevent Rwandans from being manipulated into killing again, he said.

But Rwanda's aspirations face significant hurdles. Mr Kagame's rule has been criticised as increasingly authoritarian, and the United States and other nations have warned about a lack of freedoms and the singling out of political opponents and journalists.

In the years after the genocide, the United States and other Western donors poured billions of dollars in aid into Rwanda, driven in part by guilt for failing to act in 1994 to stop the killings. That, combined with government policies that fostered businesses and cracked down on corruption, turned Rwanda into an economic darling, lauded by the West for rebuilding from the ashes of the genocide.

Education, health care and access to basic services expanded, and foreign investment poured in. The number of people living below the poverty line dropped from 59 per cent in 2001 to 45 per cent in 2011, according to the World Bank. And, between 2001 and 2012, growth averaged 8.1 per cent a year.

Today, the streets of the capital, Kigali, are lined with new buildings, elegant boutique hotels and fancy restaurants. The roads are among the best on the continent. The nation consistently tops lists of the least corrupt and most business-friendly in Africa.

But Rwanda's staunchest allies are now voicing their displeasure at Mr Kagame's policies. Last month, South Africa expelled three Rwandan diplomats, linking them to murders and attempted murders of Rwandan dissidents living in exile. Mr Kagame has denied involvement but has also publicly branded them traitors, saying Rwanda has a right to defend itself against those who "betray" it.

The United States, Britain and other Western donors partly have also suspended aid to Rwanda for its backing of rebels in the neighbouring Congo, which Mr Kagame has denied. In a report last year, the World Bank warned that the cut in foreign assistance could lead to "aid shock" that could reduce economic growth and slow progress in combating poverty.

For Mr Kagame's supporters, the outside pressure has brought more urgency to efforts to wean the country off Western aid, on which it relies for 40 per cent of its national budget. And most see the positioning of Rwanda as a high-tech economic hub as one solution.

"It reinforces our desire to one day not be able to depend on aid," said Clare Akamanzi, chief operating officer for the Rwanda Development Board. "Technology is a key. We call it the driver for other economic activity."

In 2005, mobile networks and access to Internet was limited. But, by 2010, fibre-optic cables criss-crossed the country. Today, roughly 65 per cent of the population uses mobile phones. Internet access, already among the fastest in the region, is poised to grow dramatically. Last year, the government signed a deal with a South Korean company to create a 4G network with the goal of giving high-speed Internet access to 95 per cent of Rwandans within three years. In rural areas, Rwandans can use free internet at special centres as well as on the buses.

On the sixth floor of a building in Kigali, a group of students and recent graduates work with their mentors on laptops on modernist tables and couches with colourful pillows, resembling the offices of a tech start-up. Only this space is owned by the Rwandan government, which is not charging rent.

Launched nearly two years ago, this is kLab, or the Knowledge Lab, where Rwandans can become digital entrepreneurs. Here, kLab's 364 members, who are mostly aged in their 20s and 30s, get free Wi-Fi, training seminars, mentors and networking opportunities with venture capitalists. Already, its members have created an online shopping centre, a web application that raises investment funds for farmers and a mobile-phone-based food delivery service, among other small start-ups.

"We call kLab a mini Silicon Valley," Jovani Ntabgoba, 28, the general manager, said with pride.

Some members are using technology to help survivors of the genocide. Next Monday, Aphrodice Mutangana, 29, will launch a text-messaging application that allows Rwandans to donate money to help elderly survivors who have no financial or family support.

"As the young generation, we are the future of the country," said Mr Mutangana, who also created a text-messaging app that sends out daily diet and health information to subscribers. "We want to show that we Rwandans, sometimes, we are able to solve our problems. We don't have to wait for anybody."

But many foreign investors still perceive Rwanda as risky because of its violent past. Interest rates for business loans are high. And many rural areas still lack electricity.

For now, though, the dream continues. On the technology bus, emblazoned with the slogan "Bridging the Digital Divide," the students described their goals. One wants to learn high-tech ways to help his parents run their rural shop. Another, a counsellor, wants to use PowerPoint to create better reports.

Their instructor, Providence Uwingeneye, views the bus as a vivid symbol of the progress Rwanda has made in the past two decades. Before the genocide, such training programs were often based on ethnicity, wealth and connections.

"In choosing students, we don't base it on whether they are Hutu or Tutsi, whether they are poor or rich," he said. "Now, every Rwandan has the same chance to get knowledge."

Washington Post