Related Coverage Healthcare Costs: How to get the best prices at the hospital

We have a warning as you go through healthcare open enrollment at work. A certain type of plan could leave you stuck with huge hospital bills. It happened to some employees in our area.

The problem lead to a revision in the Affordable Care Act, but that doesn’t mean you are in the clear.

Diane Lee tells us why you should avoid “skinny healthcare plans” in this 7 News special report.

SKINNY HEALTHCARE PLANS:

In so many ways, starting a family has been priceless for Sara Wagner, except when it comes to the actual cost. That’s been a nightmare.

The Campobello mother showed us some of her hospital bills. The main birth cost was $10,500, anesthesia $1,500, and nearly $3,000 for the baby’s care. Those are all out-of-pocket expenses.

You might assume the nurse didn’t have health coverage. But she did, through her employer Lake Emory Post Acute Care in Inman.

Lets rewind to when Wagner was 8-months pregnant. During open enrollment she learned the nursing home was switching providers for 2015. Good news, she thought, her new plan’s premium would drop by 78 dollars a paycheck.

“I was like, oh well yeah, this is great and I got to reading it and I was like, oh, this is not going to cover hospitals.”

In writing it says “hospitalization not covered” in the only plan Lake Emory offered.

The company did tack on what’s called a hospital indemnity plan, but it only covers $300 dollars a day.

A normal child birth runs well into the thousands of dollars per day.

Wagner knew weeks before she even gave birth how painful the bill was going to be.

“I cried! I called my mom crying, balling my eyes out and even after I got off the phone with her I sat there and I was like Ok, it’s going to be OK, and then after I started crying again,” said Wagner.

So how is it possible?

Her new plan called Keysolution took advantage of a shortcoming in the affordable care act which failed to explicitly require substantial coverage of hospital and physician services.

The plan met the original healthcare law calculations for minimum coverage, barely.

“I don’t think it adequately protects anyone. In fact it doesn’t protect them, it’s garbage,” said Hank Steinberg, the President of Steinberg & Associates.

The independent independent insurance expert doesn’t mince words when he describes how financially devastating this type of plan can be.

“It leaves the employee potentially liable for hundreds of thousands of dollars. Ninety-five percent of the bill could fall on the employee’s shoulders and that’s just not right. I think that’s morally wrong.”

But it’s perfectly legal.

By the time the US Treasury realized a handful of companies were offering what the industry refers to as “skinny plans,” companies like Lake Emory had already signed a binding agreement with the insurance provider.

We went to Lake Emory to ask them why an organization based on patient care, would only offer a healthcare plan with such limited coverage for hospital stays. They declined our request for an on camera interview, and so did their provider, key benefit administrators.

The US Treasury revised the healthcare rule so employers now face a large fine if they don’t provide substantial hospital coverage.

But a lawyer for Lake Emory’s parent company, Fundamental Administrative Servicestold us quote: “There is an exception for certain employers that adopted plans prior to November 4, 2014.”

The Treasury Department says that exception only lasts until the end of this year.

Still, keep this in mind, moving forward companies can keep offering these skinny plans. They pay the fine only if they fail to also offer a comprehensive plan that limits your out of pocket costs.

Be aware, the skinny plans may be less expensive, but they have no cap on how much you have to pay for hospital bills.

Months later Wagner says she’s not even close to paying off her medical bills.

“I don’t like feeling like I can’t take care of my child because I’m pouring all this money into these hospital bills,” she said.

Even with a new job, she says caring for a new baby is hard enough on your wallet, when you don’t have to pay more than $15,000 for the birth.

TAKE HOME MESSAGE:

With a comprehensive plan, one that offers substantial hospital coverage, there is a cap on your out-of-pocket expense for in-network care.

It’s less than seven thousand.

Again, with a “skinny plan” there is no limit to how much you may have to pay if you land in the hospital.

So consider carefully the risk of one of these less expensive skinny plans. It could cost you much more in the long-run.

SIDE NOTE:

Another expensive issue you may encounter during open enrollment is what’s called the family glitch.

That’s when an employer pays 100% of the premium for workers, but contributes nothing toward the cost of adding a spouse and kids.

You can always shop for coverage on the Marketplace, but in that case, your family members won’t be eligible for tax credits to help pay the premium. When people are eligible for employer-sponsored coverage, they can only qualify for Marketplace premium tax credits if the employer-sponsored coverage is considered unaffordable.

Coverage is considered unaffordable only if your cost for coverage for yourself, alone, under the employer plan is more than 9.56% of your income in 2015. The cost of adding your spouse and children to family coverage is not taken into consideration.

So although you may feel your family coverage is unaffordable in practical terms, it is considered technically affordable.

If your family members end up uninsured because family coverage is unaffordable, they will not have to pay a tax penalty under the “individual mandate.”