“State of the Union” host reminds GOP presidential candidate he doesn’t exactly have a great track record when it comes to matrimony

Donald Trump has a lot of opinions. But when it comes to same-sex marriage, the outspoken Republican presidential candidate says his views are now “changing.”

Trump appeared on CNN’s “State of the Union” Sunday, where he addressed a number of topics including abortion, the Affordable Care Act, ISIS, immigration and gay marriage.

When the conversation turned to same-sex marriage, which the Supreme Court ruled to legalize nationwide Friday, Trump affirmed he holds a more conservative position on the issue, saying only “I’m [for] traditional marriage. It is changing rapidly.”

Also Read: Donald Trump, Marco Rubio, Rick Perry, Carly Fiorina Slam Supreme Court's Same-Sex Marriage Ruling

Tapper then asked the real estate mogul what was traditional about being married three separate times.

“But what do you say to a lesbian who’s married, or a gay man who is married, who says, ‘Donald Trump, what’s traditional about being married three times?'”

Trump didn’t argue with the question, and said he now has a successful union with wife Melania.

“They have a very good point,” Trump told Tapper. “I have a great marriage. I have a great wife now. My (first) two wives were very good. And I don’t blame them, but I was working, maybe like you, 22 hours a day.”

Also Read: Donald Trump Threatens to Sue Univision Over Nixed Miss USA Deal

Trump went on to admit, “I blame myself because my business was so powerful for me.”

During the interview, Trump also doubled down on his comments about undocumented immigrants from Mexico, which led Univision to nix airing the Miss USA pageant.

“I like Mexico. I love the Mexican people. I do business with the Mexican people, but you have people coming through the border that are from all over. And they’re bad. They’re really bad,” Trump told Tapper.

Also Read: NBC Distances Itself From Donald Trump: 'We Do Not Agree With His Positions on a Number of Issues'

“You have people coming in, and I’m not just saying Mexicans, I’m talking about people that are from all over that are killers and rapists and I mean, they’re coming into this country,” he continued.

On Thursday, Univision elected to end its business relationship with the Miss Universe Organization due to part-owner Donald Trump’s “recent, insulting remarks about Mexican immigrants,” the company said in a statement.

Also Read: 2016 Presidential Contenders: TheWrap's Essential Guide to Who's In And Where They Stand (Updating)

The Spanish language broadcaster also said it “will not be … working on any other projects tied to the Trump Organization.” That includes no longer airing the July 12 Miss USA pageant as planned.

Watch the video above of Trump on CNN. His comments on gay marriage are at the 7:41 mark.

2016 Presidential Contenders: The Race to the White House (Photos) Republican Texas Senator Ted Cruz was the first person to officially throw his hat into the ring on March 23. Getty Images

Republican Senator Rand Paul announced his candidacy on April 7. Getty Images

Former First Lady and Secretary of State, Democrat Hillary Clinton announced she would again seek the Oval Office on April 12. Getty Images

A Tea Party favorite, Florida Senator Marco Rubio announced his candidacy on April 13. Getty Images

A self-described democratic socialist, Vermont Senator Bernie Sanders announced he would run on April 28. Getty Images

Retired neurosurgeon, Dr. Ben Carson announced his candidacy on May 3. A native of Detroit, the Republican lived in Baltimore for 36 years. Getty Images

The first woman to lead a Fortune 20 company, Republican Carly Fiorina announced her candidacy on May 4. Getty Images

Former Arkansas governor and Fox News host Mike Huckabee announced his second presidential run in the GOP field on May 5. Getty Images

A former Republican senator from Pennsylvania, Rick Santorum announced his second presidential bid on May 27. Getty Images

Former New York Governor George Pataki announced the launch of his presidential campaign with a YouTube video on May 28. Getty Images

Martin O'Malley, a Democrat and former governor of Maryland, joined the race on May 30. Getty Images

Lindsey Graham, a Republican senator from South Carolina, announced he would run for the highest office on June 1. Getty Images

A former Republican and independent governor of Rhode Island, Lincoln Chafee announced his bid for the Democratic nomination on June 3. Getty Images

Rick Perry threw his hat into the ring for a second time on June 4. The Republican was the longest serving governor in Texas history. Getty Images

The son of one former president and brother of another, former Florida Governor Jeb Bush announced his bid for the Republican nomination on June 15. Getty Images

Republican real estate mogul Donald Trump threw his hat into the presidential ring on June 16, saying he'd be “the greatest jobs president that God ever created.” Getty Images

"I'm running for President of the United States of America," tweeted Louisiana's Republican Governor Bobby Jindal, who used social media to announce his candidacy on June 24. Getty Images

After declaring that "both parties have failed our country," New Jersey's Republican Governor Chris Christie announced his intention to run on June 30. Getty Images

Jim Webb, a decorated Vietnam vet and the former Democratic governor of Virginia, announced his candidacy on July 2. Getty Images

Wisconsin's Republican Governor Scott Walker announced his candidacy on July 13 with a campaign video. Getty Images

Ohio Governor John Kasich announced his candidacy for the Republican nomination on July 21, saying no other candidate else has his experience dealing with deficits, unemployment and national security. Getty Images

Jim Gilmore, former Army intelligence officer and Republican governor of Virginia, announced his candidacy on July 30. Getty Images Previous ; Next 1 of 22 From Jeb Bush to Hillary Clinton and Donald Trump, the race continues to grow Republican Texas Senator Ted Cruz was the first person to officially throw his hat into the ring on March 23.