On Fridays, sports columnist Benjamin Hochman presents his mailbag, which touches on both sports and pop culture. To submit a question for consideration, send an e-mail to Benjamin.

@BillyStup — Are the Broncos better off in the secondary without Champ Bailey playing?

BH: It’s crazy to think that we’ve gotten to the point where this question would ever be asked. But the cornerback again won’t play (foot) at the Giants on Sunday. And for the fans, the most recent image of Bailey is his futile chase of Torrey Smith after Smith burned him in the playoff game.

I will say this: When Champ is ready to play, you must start him and see what he has in the tank. He’s too talented and too hungry to just push him aside, even if Dominique Rodgers-Cromartie, Chris Harris, Tony Carter and the gang fared pretty well against Baltimore in Week 1. Yes, I know Champ’s so old that he voted for Coolidge. But consider that even last season, he led the NFL in yards per cover snaps, according to profootballfocus.com (0.82). And when in coverage of a play, of the players in the top 10 on that list, his opposing QBs had the lowest combined passer rating.

The glass-half-full view is that other Broncos cornerbacks fared well in the opener. According to PFF, Rodgers-Cromartie had the most coverage snaps (49) of the corners to allow a 0.00. And Harris had a good game, including the INT, as evidenced by his plus-3.3 overall grade on PFF, good for second among all CBs.

Here are some other fun Broncos tidbits, courtesy of profootballfocus.com:

• Demaryius Thomas leads all wide receivers with 24.8 yards after catch per reception.

• Peyton Manning has the highest NFL passer rating (148.7) when he has 2.5 seconds and less of time in the pocket.

• Of Shaun Phillips’ 45 passing snaps as a 4-3 DE, 64.4 percent came from the left side. He tallied three sacks and two hurries from this side.

@shaunehiggins — where should the NFL draw the line on caring re: what happens off the field? VM’s issues beg q’s re: sense, but y should NFL care?

BH: Definitely a fascinating topic with Von Miller, one I attacked in one of my daily Happy Hour columns. Basically, the NFL has to protect its brand; it can’t let its league turn more into the Wild West than it already is. Many fans want the players to be held accountable. But really, there are also many fans who don’t really care what a dude does, as long as he does a lot of awesome stuff on Sundays. These fans compartmentalize. There are two categories, in reference to things a player does off the field: “bad” and “actual bad.” I think these fans chalk up driving without a license (err, speeding without a license) as simply “bad.” They’re not thaaat ticked off. Only when it comes to “actual bad” stuff, such as major crimes, does it truly rattle these fans.

@krause_tobias — What is your favorite triangle?

BH: Isosceles, obviously.

@TOsieczanek — who is @PeytonsHead on Twitter?

BH: Uncovering this would earn a Pulitzer. This guy/gal (Best head on Twitter. Making fun of sports, pop culture, and my size! Control center for the #LaserRocketArm) has 81,000 followers, and is good for a follow, if only to hear him/her opine about Broncos stuff. How funny would it be if it was actually Peyton running the account (like Michael Keaton in “Nowhere to Run,” when he plays an FBI undercover agent who wears shirt that says FBI).

Here’s a good Peyton’s Head tweet: Deion Sanders’ wife is suing for $200M, claiming she’s been portrayed as a gold digger. Deion’s defense? “Your Honor, she’s suing for $200M”

@AndrewLiv — why do writers find the need to announce that they aren’t using the Redskins team name? Trying to draw attention 2 themselves?

BH: No, they’re trying to draw attention to the issue. I’ve actually got a lot of backlash on Twitter from fans who think the Redskins should keep their name. I said to the fans, what if a new team was named after something that was brutally offensive to you and your culture? And surprisingly, a lot of people said they wouldn’t care or take it personally.

Obviously, the NFL is a business, and having a huge brand in the Redskins is going to make them money. But it’s so offensive, right? Like, if there was going to be an expansion team (a point brought up by writer Christine Brennan), and someone suggested “Redskins,” there’s NO WAY the league would sign off on that.

All I say is, even if you’re a staunch supporter of Redskins the name, force yourself to read this piece by the brilliant Dave Zirin.

@zombyboy — What is the airspeed velocity of an unladen swallow?

BH: An African or European swallow?

Benjamin Hochman: bhochman@denverpost.com or twitter.com/hochman



To submit a question for Hochman’s Mailbag, send an e-mail to Benjamin.



Visit denverpost.com each weekday near quittin’ time for a heavy pour of sports commentary from Denver Post columnist Benjamin Hochman. Care for another round? Find previous Happy Hour installments at denverpost.com/hochman.