Angelo Calbone talks about his role as president and CEO of Saratoga Hospital Saratoga Hospital CEO balances changing industry, responsibility to community

Correction: The surname of Angelo Calbone was misspelled in an earlier version of this story.

Angelo Calbone is the president and CEO of Saratoga Hospital, a role he's held since 2006. Under his leadership, the hospital has expanded its urgent care facilities, including a partnership with Albany Medical Center to open Malta Med Emergent Care. Underway now is a $34 million renovation and expansion of the Church Street campus. It will include a new, larger intensive care unit, 10 state-of-the-art surgical suites, and separate areas for pre- and post-operative patients. The Times Union talked to Calbone about his job and what keeps him in touch with the community:

Q: What drew you to medical administration?

A: You could say I took a less traditional route. I graduated high school and wasn't really sure what I wanted to do. Instead of enrolling in college immediately, I took a job at the local hospital — in housekeeping — and saw, firsthand, what healthcare organizations mean to their communities. I was impressed with the environment and the strong sense of purpose. After a year, I enrolled in college to study business, but stayed on at the hospital as a pharmacy technician. I just loved being there, knowing that what we were doing really mattered. After college, I went to graduate school, completed a 12-month administrative residency and, in 1983, was hired as an administrative associate at an Ohio hospital. I've been in hospital administration ever since.

More Information

Q: How has the Affordable Care Act affected Saratoga Hospital?

A: It's not just the Affordable Care Act; it's a combination of factors that are changing the way patients access care, the way we measure outcomes, and the way that hospitals are paid. On an administrative level, we have had to accelerate our investments in electronic medical records and other information systems to help us monitor outcomes and provide the additional documentation required by insurance companies and other payers.

We've also added patient support staff, such as case managers, to help patients better manage their conditions, so they avoid unnecessary readmissions.

When most people hear the phrase "Affordable Care Act," they think first of increasing access to health insurance and, as a result, access to healthcare. Access to care was a concern of ours even before the Affordable Care Act and was the reason we built our Saratoga Community Health Center — to make high-quality primary care available to everyone in our community, regardless of their insurance status and ability to pay. The center offers a more affordable alternative to the emergency department, and that helps reduce the inappropriate hospital readmissions targeted by the Affordable Care Act.

Far more important, the center gives patients the opportunity to forge that essential healthcare relationship — between patient and primary care provider.

Q: Please describe an experience you had with a healer.

A: I would point to two experiences from my years growing up in West Virginia. The first involves the role of our family doctor, who really had an impact on our entire family. When we spoke about him, it was with great respect — even reverence. One of my early memories is of sitting in his waiting room as a 5-year-old. Years later, when I was a young administrator in a local hospital, he was on the medical staff there, and I remember how gratifying it was to be part of the same team, contributing to our community.

The second experience goes back to my year in the housekeeping department at that same hospital. I spent a lot of time on a unit where the head nurse took an interest in me and my future. She, more than anyone, gave me the opportunity to see what bedside nursing is all about and what a difference nurses make in the lives of their patients.

Q: There have been many changes and improvements at Saratoga Hospital since you became president in 2006. What makes you the most proud?

A: What I'm most proud of is what hasn't changed. Despite all the growth and additions, we remain a welcoming, comforting and compassionate organization, where staff greet families, listen to patients, and provide the personal touch that has always been the hallmark of Saratoga Hospital.

Q: Staff at the hospital and urgent care centers encourage visitors to fill out postcards that go to you, describing a time someone did an exceptional job. What was the most memorable card, and have any suggestions made by patients made their way into policy changes at the hospital?

A: I get so many of these and am touched by every one of them. Most are from patients who want to call my attention to a specific staff member — to let me know what a wonderful job that person did in providing care. The cards that I set aside, the ones that blow me away, describe a different kind of care: amazing charitable acts, where our staff has personally taken the responsibility to make sure that people were OK — tending not just to their healthcare, but to their pride and dignity. For example, the staff member who, after noticing that a patient's family didn't have money to eat in the hospital cafeteria, paid for them to have a meal. These cards are from people who had no resources and our staff looked after them.

Q: As president and CEO, what do you consider your biggest challenge?

A: There is no one "big challenge." There is the responsibility of leadership, and it is shared by the CEO, our board of trustees, and every member of our leadership team. Together, we bear the responsibility of positioning and managing this organization to ensure that our community has access to the best possible care and that our staff works in a strong, stable organization. As leaders, it's our job to navigate the current healthcare environment — the ever-changing needs and regulations — and make sure we make the right decisions for our community and our organization. That's our challenge and our responsibility, and it requires a thousand different things.

Q: Do you have the opportunity to interact with the hospital's care providers? What things do you like to discuss with them?

A: I interact with our providers every day. It may sound simple, but the most common question I ask is, "How are we doing today?" And I'm interested on multiple levels. How are we responding to the issues at hand — the patients and families who have come in that day? How are we meeting our overall responsibility as the Saratoga region's hospital? How are we doing in fulfilling our obligations in every role we play: as an employer, a good neighbor, a community leader?

Q: As the latest project, expanding the intensive care unit and adding surgical suites and pre-and post-op areas, draws to a close, what is your next goal?

A: Although we anticipate continued growth, our primary focus will be on exploring partnerships and determining the role we will play in the region's evolving healthcare networks. Our goal, and our responsibility, is to ensure that Saratoga County has access to great care for years to come — and that means taking advantage of opportunities to collaborate and align ourselves with other organizations, including hospitals, physician practices, and other types of healthcare providers.

lhornbeck@timesunion.com • 518-454-5352 • @leighhornbeck