As the end of the year approaches, there are always a bunch of things that need to be done before the calendar changes, or right after the New Year rolls in. This year is no different, and law firm Snell & Wilmer has compiled “to-do” lists for retirement plan sponsors. Here are the actions sponsors should at least consider before they’re overtaken by Father Time. Complete your profile to continue reading and get FREE access to BenefitsPRO.com, part of your ALM digital membership. Benefits:

Your access to unlimited BenefitsPRO.com content isn’t changing. Once you are an ALM digital member, you’ll receive: Critical BenefitsPRO.com information including cutting-edge post-reform success strategies, comprehensive service provider listings, educational webcasts and videos, resources from industry leaders, and informative eNewsletters.

Exclusive discounts on ALM, BenefitsPRO Magazine and BenefitsPRO.com events.

Access to other award-winning ALM publications including LifeHealthPro.com, ThinkAdvisor.com and Law.com. Register Now Already have an account? Sign In X Sign in with your ALM Account Remember Me Or... Sign In With LinkedIn

3. Individually designed qualified plans that fall into Cycle D, such as some multiemployer plans or plans whose employer identification number ends with 4 or 9, must be restated and resubmitted for a determination letter on or before Jan. 31. 4. Updated summary plan descriptions (SPDs) must be provided to plan participants at least every five years if a material change was made to the plan during that five-year period. SPDs must also be provided at least once every 10 years for plans that have not changed for that period of time.

For 401(k) plans 1. First, check off all the items on the list for qualified plans.

5. Disclosure information on participant fees for designated investment alternatives in the plan must be provided annually. The initial disclosure was on Aug. 25, 2012, and that meant the next disclosure was due no later than Aug. 25, 2013. However, to allow administrators to time the release of the disclosure to coincide with other required disclosures, the Department of Labor gave plan administrators a one-time chance to change the deadline, and considered administrators to have satisfied the deadline if the 2013 fee disclosure was provided no later than 18 months after the initial disclosure on Aug. 30, 2012 — namely, by Feb. 25 of 2013. Administrators who went ahead and satisfied the requirement for the 2013 disclosure by last August may opt to take advantage of the 18-month period to reset the date for the 2014 fee disclosure chart, so that they can align the release of the fee disclosures to coincide with other required disclosures.