Visitors to a £1billion new super-hospital keep getting trapped in the lifts - because they have no buttons inside.

The futuristic new 14-storey South Glasgow University Hospital opened to patients last month featuring robots, a children's cinema and lifts without buttons to try and bring 'healthcare into the 21st century.'

But it appears the ultra-modern facility appears to be ultra-confusing for many staff and patients who claim they have spent 'what seems like days' trapped in the speeding elevators.

Scroll down for videos

Visitors to South Glasgow University Hospital keep getting trapped in the lifts - because they have no buttons inside

One hospital worker said: 'It's an amazing building but I've spent the majority of my time in the lift so far - as have a lot of people.

'You can easily get sucked into them for what seems an interminable age.

'If you jump in without thinking, or if you're chatting and not concentrating, you can find yourself - for what seems like hours - zooming from floor to floor.

The futuristic new 14-storey South Glasgow University Hospital opened to patients last month aiming to bring 'healthcare into the 21st century'

But it appears the ultra-modern facility appears to be ultra-confusing for many staff and patients who claim they have spent 'what seems like days' trapped in the speeding elevators

One hospital worker said he had spent the 'majority of my time in the lift' since the building opened, 'as have a lot of people'

'I had to go just one floor up, not long after arriving. I jumped into the lift without pressing the button and was lost for nearly half an hour!

'The staff will get used to it, but it catches newcomers to the building out time and time again.'

The issue arises from the fact that the new modern new lifts which will only travel to pre-selected floors. Anyone jumping in without pressing a floor number first may be stuck for quite some time.

It has become such an issue that NHS bosses have now enlisted staff and volunteers to explain how to use them properly.

There are even animated films to help people figure out how to negotiate the new building.

Nicknamed the 'Death Star' by locals because of its giant 14-storey star-shaped design, the £1 billion hospital was funded by the Scottish Government.

The issue arises from the fact that the new modern new lifts which will only travel to pre-selected floors

It has become such an issue that NHS bosses have now enlisted staff and volunteers to explain how to use them properly

The lifts are just one aspect of a futuristic design that also sees the hospital boast self-service check-in machines, a children's cinema and a fleet of robots

Other teething problems include complaints there are too few parking spaces and even claims there are not enough beds

The lifts are just one aspect of a futuristic design that also sees the hospital boast self-service check-in machines, a children's cinema and a fleet of robots delivering linen and other goods via a network of tunnels.

Other teething problems include complaints there are too few parking spaces and even claims there are not enough beds.

A spokeswoman for NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde defended the new lifts, but acknowledged it may take time for people to get used to them.

She said: 'These lifts have been chosen because they offer the best way to get our patients to their chosen floor as quickly as possible.

'But we recognise adapting to new technology can take a bit of getting used to, which is why there are plenty of staff and volunteers available to help users find their way around and get to grips with some of the new technologies in place.

'We have also developed a series of short animated films which are available on our website and TV screens in GP practices to help users understand how find their way around.'

Some people complain that the futuristic hospital doesn't have enough beds, parking spaces - or lift buttons.