After a month delay of project, county officials expect further delay with contractor.

Standing on a dry lake bed in his Loveland backyard, John Heinz points to his dock Friday showing where water levels are at normally during this time of year on Horseshoe Lake. Water levels in the lake are low this year because of a bridge being built on Larimer County Road 11C on the east side of the lake. ( Jenny Sparks / Loveland Reporter-Herald )

Construction on the spillway bridge project between Horseshoe Lake and Boyd Lake is facing delays again, residents and county leaders were told this week.

While other lakes and reservoirs in Northern Colorado are filled thanks to the rain received this month, the construction has kept Horseshoe Lake low.

Larimer County officials said complications with the project, unexpected weather conditions and delays in its partner's work on the project have caused the delay in the project that should have been completed in June. The current timeline to finish the project is July 10, but officials say they anticipate an extension request from the contractor. Residents who live around the lake and have memberships to recreational rights on the lake are not happy.

The county has been working to replace the spillway bridge between the two lakes with a 3-cell concrete box culvert and make repairs to the roadway while Seven Lakes Reservoir Co. and Greeley-Loveland Irrigation Co., which own the water rights, have been working on the inlet, outlet and gate facilities.

In 2009, the county secured $560,000 in federal funds to replace the bridge, which was deemed dangerous and needed replacement. However, to proceed, the county needed to work with the irrigation companies because they owned the water rights. In 2012, county officials say they were still waiting on the reservoir companies to move forward with plans and the county expressed its concerns. Once the company received a loan, it was able to move forward with plans for its portion of the project for a high level outlet, spillway modifications and gate. Plans for the full project were developed in 2013 to begin early 2014. New Design Construction Co., the lowest bidder, was selected to complete the project for the county and irrigation companies.

Advertisement

The alloted time for the contract was 70 working days with completion expected by June 10, after which the contractor would have to pay back $1,100 per day as liquidated damages.

Then the problems began. Due to technical difficulties with surveying, the condition of the foundation and unexpected weather, the contractor asked for a month extension, which was granted. However, at a Larimer Board of County Commissioners meeting late Thursday, Larimer County Public Works Director Marc Engemoen said the firm might ask for another month soon.

Engemoen gave a presentation about the project to commissioners and residents who were in the audience. He said the project was a priority for the county.

"If done right, this is what prevents a catastrophic failure or reduces the risk of a catastrophic failure," he said.

But Engemoen said the county has control over only one part of the project.

"We made agreements to work together but not infringe on each other's responsibilities," he said.

And because of that, Engemoen said delays from the reservoir company's side are not something the county can get involved in, but they do affect the project timeline.

"When you tether yourself to someone, you don't have complete control over the pace you go," he said.

Getting involved, according to Engemoen, would introduce liabilities and risks to the county. Commissioners at the meeting asked Engemoen to meet with the county attorney and see what options it has when it comes to contracts like this one where the county is working with another entity.

Both Ron Brinkman, general manager of Seven Lakes and Greeley-Loveland Irrigation, and the contractor declined to come to the meeting where residents and commissioners were waiting to hear updates on the project.

Throughout the process, residents have been voicing their concerns and complaints to the commissioners, ranging from the inability to use the lake 130 families pay membership and dues to use, the traffic and road rage on Monroe Avenue — due to detouring County Road 11C and the time the project has taken to complete.

For John Heinz, secretary of the Horseshoe Lake Corp., all of these issues posed a real problem.

"This should be one of the best water years ever," he said. "Every lake is filled to the brim except Horseshoe Lake."

Because the lake isn't filled, he said, some residents who live near one of the dry bays are having dust blown onto them and their properties, and they can't use the water. Others, he said, are unable to use the water for irrigation purposes on old farmland.

But the major problem, Heinz said, is the lack of communication from officials about the status of the project, something for which he doesn't fault the commissioners themselves, rather county staff and the reservoir company.

"Last year on Sept. 24, the county held a hearing on the project. (Officials) stated more than once the project would be completed by June," he said. "We are two months behind in a three-month project."

In addition to the delays discussed at the meeting, Heinz said work in general seems to be moving very slowly on the project.

"There seems to be no sense of urgency for this project," he said.

And people keep making plans based on the dates they are told the project will be completed, only to find out that it has been delayed again.

County Commissioner Tom Donnelly said he understands residents' concerns.

"The project's taken a long time," he said. "It's a complex project, but it's going over time, and that's a problem."

And Donnelly said the board wants to take a thorough look at any extension requests for the project and get questions answered first.

"There are a lot of bidders who bid on this project, and they said they could do it in 70 days," he said.

Commissioner Lew Gaiter said at the meeting that the county will look at lessons learned from this project for future contracts.

"One of the frustrations is that (citizens) have zero recourse with the company," he said. "They don't elect them."

At the meeting, Donnelly said it would not be the final time commissioners discuss the topic and they plan to keep the public informed.

Contact Reporter-Herald Staff Writer Saja Hindi at 970-669-5050 ext. 521 or hindis@reporter-herald.com.