Update at 9:04 p.m. Saturday by Robert Wilonsky: The National Weather Service has just released its video look-see at the coming winter storm. Might be the night’s must-see viewing. In a word: THUNDERSLEET.

Plan accordingly. And if you don’t believe the weather service, there’s always this second opinion from Frankie McDonald. Be prepared. You know — charge your tablets, get out the flashlights, order your Chinese food, pick up yer Pepsis. Etc. Hard to argue with that.

Remeisha Shade at KXAS-Channel 5 is forecasting the heaviest sleet before sunrise Monday, followed later in the evening by the chance of freezing drizzle, and says it likely won’t get above freezing until Tuesday afternoon.

Update at 4:21 p.m. Saturday by Julie Fancher: The National Weather Service has upgraded the Winter Storm Watch to a Winter Storm Warning from 6 p.m. Sunday to 6 p.m. Monday.

“The warning means we are fairly confident this event is going to happen,” said Steve Fano, a meteorologist at the National Weather Service office in Fort Worth.

Fano said it’s likely this event will produce some sleet and freezing rain.

“We are pretty certain this is going to produce some sleet and freezing rain, though sleet looks more likely now than it did yesterday,” he said. “Though either one creates hazardous driving conditions.”

Update at 3:15 p.m. Saturday: Yes, it’s hard to fathom a winter storm on a Sunday when it’s mostly clear and around 60 the Saturday before. But the National Weather Service remains confident that tomorrow evening, things will begin to get iffy on their way towards treacherous.

For now, at least, here’s the latest timing, per meteorologist Jamie Gudmestad at the National Weather Service office in Fort Worth.

“The front should be coming in tomorrow morning, starting as rain” — around 7, 8 a.m., give or take.

“Then, as the cold front moves in, it will switch over to wintry mix by evening” — around 6, 7 p.m., give or take.

Right now — and that’s right now, at 3:15 p.m. on Saturday — it looks like temperatures will hit freezing around midnight as they plunge into the mid- to upper 20s by Monday morning.

“But that’s at the surface,” says Gudmestad. “Colder air aloft could bring some of the wintry precip earlier than the surface temperatures.”

The heavier rain will come before the freezing temperatures — at least, that’s according to the current modeling. But we’re expected to see enough of the wintry stuff to cause problems — around 1/4 to 1/2 an inch by Monday morning, and “we’ll be lucky to get above freezing” Monday, Gudmestad says.

And don”t tell the kids just yet, but, she says, “it’s still looking like” a school-closing kind of Monday..

Update at 8:40 a.m. Saturday: While you slept, the National Weather Service expanded the Winter Storm Watch issued Friday afternoon. It now extends much further south of Dallas-Fort Worth — all the way to Waco and Corsicana. That, says the National Weather Service’s Dan Shoemaker, is how confident the National Weather Service is in its ice-coated forecast.

The NWS has also moved up the timing of the winter storm’s arrival.

Initially, forecasters had sleet arriving in Dallas-Fort Worth just as Sunday turns into Monday. Now, Shoemaker says, most of its models show us dropping below freezing around sunset Sunday — just as a second batch of precipitation is moving into the area following a first round of plain ol’ wet stuff scheduled to arrive during the day.

“That second batch rolling in Sunday night, that’s the one where we’ll be cold enough to start as freezing rain,” says Shoemaker. “Then it’ll change to sleet, and that change will happen pretty fast. We moved up the time because it’ll be colder” earlier than originally forecast.

You can see that now: The first cold front initially forecast to arrive Saturday afternoon slid through Dallas-Fort Worth around 6:30 this morning. Once-upon-a-forecasted highs in the 70s are long gone. We’re in the low 50s and upper 40s across the area, and unlikely to warm much beyond that. There also won’t be any rain today. That comes tomorrow in the afternoon.

Then, the ice. How much? Half an inch, says Shoemaker — enough to create “hazardous travel Sunday night into Monday and Monday night into Tuesday, when whatever doesn’t dry up during the day Monday refreezes.” KXAS-Channel 5′s Rick Mitchell says that “any ice on the roads will likely last through Tuesday morning.”

This is the first time we’ve heard the words “freezing rain” mentioned in the forecast — a whole different threat than sleet. Freezing rain brings down power lines. Sleet makes roads icy. Shoemaker says right now, at least, it doesn’t look like a major concern — the freezing rain should quickly turn to sleet. But, of course, all winter-weather forecasts are fluid … until they freeze.

“Right when you go to freezing, a lot of the raindrops will melt as they fall and refreeze as freezing rain,” he says. “But it should switch over to sleet pretty quickly. It’ll all pack down into ice by Sunday night. I don’t think there’s four inches coming — this isn’t like our cobblestone-ice event [of December 2013]. There’s not same amount of moisture. But that doesn’t negate the fact there will be a lot of problems with this. But we get a lot of problems when it rains during rush hour.”

And, yeah, you might as well prepare to keep the kids at home Monday. Nothing worse than an ice day too. But looks like that’s pretty close to a sure thing.

“If this forecast is good, and we have pretty good confidence that it is, I don’t know why schools wouldn’t close,” Shoemaker says. “The roads will ice up Sunday evening. I would anticipate schools closing. This looks like that kind of event.”