Yesterday was Robert Johnson’s birthday — the bluesman’s 104th, for those keeping count. The First Presbyterian Church of Dallas, which spared from the wrecking ball the building in which the Mississippi bluesman recorded on June 19 and 20 in 1937, celebrated by filling its end of downtown with the songs that would serve as the template for almost everything that followed involving a voice and a guitar. Among the immortals cut in Dallas: “Love in Vain Blues,” “Me and the Devil Blues,” “Traveling Riverside Blues,” “Hellhound on My Trail.” Press play. It’s all there.

But 508 Park Ave., now in the midst of its resurrection, will serve as far more than just a shrine to Johnson’s haunting echoes upon its completion in the midst of what the church has rebranded Encore Park. The amphitheater is already completed, surrounded by Christy Coltrin and Brad Oldham’s sculpture wall. The old Warner Bros. sign, once faded and nearly forgotten, was repainted in January. In a town filled with watercolor promises usually broken or abandoned, what First Presbyterian’s already accomplished in a relatively short time is nothing short of a revolutionary act.

Still to come: the community garden, the recording studio, the rooftop deck, the art studio and the centerpiece known as the Museum of Street Culture.

Carol Adams, author and activist and wife of First Presbyterian’s Associate Pastor of Community Ministries, the Rev. Bruce Buchanan, sends us this first-ever sneak peek at the museum, designed by Good Fulton & Farrell. It will be curated by Alan Govenar, historian and playwright and the museum’s executive director.

Says Adams, the museum “will include four listening rooms” meant to represent the music recorded at 508 Park Avenue in June 1937 — not just Johnson, but Bob Wills & His Texas Playboys, and Roy Newman and His Boys, Zeke Williams And His Rambling Cowboys and others. A fourth listening room will play nothing but music made by the men and women who played in Deep Ellum in the 1920s, among them Ledbelly, Blind Lemon Jefferson, Lightnin’ Hopkins.

“There will be a 90-foot interactive timeline tracing the history of homelessness in U.S. since the Civil War; blues and American music; the history of film and the specific history of the building, and the history of The Stewpot and how it came to purchase the building,” says Adams. “In the way back we will feature information on the Dallas Nine and the Depression, discussing dislocation and migration. We’ll also have two screens for showing movies; one on the right will show silent films (that’s Charlie Chaplin represented there), and one for movies with sound, representing the kinds of movies that Warner Bros. would have stored there during its time in the building. We will also restore a film vault so people can get idea of how the extremely flammable film of the 1930s was stored.”

The first floor will also feature what they’re calling the Open Art Studio Art Gallery, filled with art made at the across-the-street Stewpot. It will look like this:

“We will have human-size videos of the artists talking about their art and their experience being homeless,” says Adams. “These are being done by Alan Govenar. The woman at the far right is watching one of those videos.”

There’s an Easter egg contained within the rendering: The middle painting on the far right wall features a look at 508 Park once it’s fully restored. It was done by Leon Pollard at the Stewpot. Here, a closer look:

And, finally, one last first look inside 508 Park Avenue: the art studio itself, which will fill about half of the second floor, where a gallery filled with rotating exhibits is also planned. There will also be individual painting rooms in the back. Says Adams of this rendering: “Almost all of the art represented here was done by the artists. The three artists who are identifiable are actual members of the Open Art Studio.”

Sooner than later, says Adams, we’ll see renderings for the third floor, which will contain the recording studio.

Three years ago, the resurrection of 508 Park Avenue was little more than a good idea with a long way to go. The building, owned by a liquor distributor who’d hoped to raze it, was a boarded-up mess. But in a town where renderings often stay figments of overeager imaginations, First Presbyterian’s dream team has so far made good on its promises.

“To have a unique museum like this is something we can be very proud of,” says Dallas Mayor Mike Rawlings, a member of the church, in the new video seen above. “Nobody has really ventured into this area, and I really think it’s [a] breakthrough.”

In that same brand-new video, Nasher Sculpture Center Director Jeremy Strick says “there’s a wealth of possibilities a project like this affords, and the only limit is our imaginations.”