Councilors will review a contract and proposal to fund a $20,000 position at a local nonprofit for a teen diversion program

A City Council agenda item that appeared before councilors last July will be a topic of discussion again at 6:30 p.m. Tuesday at 500 E. Third St — a teen restorative justice program.

Like the Teen Court program councilors approved in March, the restorative justice program is a diversion program for teens that aims to allow them to take responsibility for their actions in misdemeanor criminal offenses and work to repair any damage they've caused — but this program does that prior to court involvement.

When councilors first discussed this program last year, the nonprofit Restorative Justice Community Council asked for the city to partner with it to run this program with $20,000 a year in funding to support a part-time staff member. Councilors requested more information about the program and how it would work at that time.

City Manager Bill Cahill said the nonprofit also needed time to draft a contract, and now representatives will be back with a proposal and contract for councilors' approval. For the first year, Cahill said, the contract agreement will be $10,000 since almost half the year would have passed before implementation.

The Thompson School District already runs its own restorative practices program as well as Teen Court — in collaboration with the city — but a City Council memo stated the district's restorative justice program is limited and the district would also be involved in this program, if approved.

Advertisement

The part-time program coordinator that the city would be funding will be a position that recruits, screens and trains approved volunteers; manages the referral process; schedules restorative conferencing after appropriate referrals are made; and provides administrative support for the program (grant applications, reporting, etc.).

For this year, the position will work with the city attorney's office and the Loveland Police Department to establish the referral implementation and ensure there are trained volunteers available for the 2015-16 school year.

Cahill said in 2015, no additional money would need to be appropriated to fund the program at $10,000, but in future years, appropriation requests would need to be made.

The nonprofit expects to manage about 60 cases per year with a $3,600 fee collection from offenders each year to help cover costs of operation, according to the memo.

The program, the memo states, is "expected to help reduce prosecution and court-related expenses by successfully deferring cases away from the formal system, while reducing recidivism as a consequence of offenders accepting responsibility for their actions and more fully understanding the consequences of their actions."

Councilors could also go into two closed meetings Tuesday night about the Sprouts Farmers Market lawsuit and for an update on the next deadline for the downtown South Catalyst Project. As of Friday morning, the city had not yet received its major tenant commitment, which was due by the end of the day.

Saja Hindi: 970-669-5050 ext. 521, hindis@reporter-herald.com, twitter.com/SajaHindiRH.