Kim Davis' lawyers compared the Rowan County clerk on Friday to Martin Luther King Jr., who fought against the government and its racist laws. Davis is the government.

Buy Photo Rowan County Clerk Kim Davis, right, argues with David Moore and David Ernold, after they were denied a marriage license at the Rowan County Courthouse in Morehead. (September 1, 2015) (Photo: Tim Webb, Special to the CJ)Buy Photo

Let’s get one thing clear. Rowan County Clerk Kim Davis wasn’t jailed on Thursday because of her religious beliefs. She was jailed because she is a government official who refused to follow a legal and direct order from a federal judge designed to protect others' constitutional rights.

It’s a classic case of a local authority disagreeing with federal courts and trying to push back – only to lose in the end.

It happened when Arkansas Gov. Orval Faubus called out the National Guard to keep black students out of Little Rock’s Central High School nearly 60 years ago.

President Dwight D. Eisenhower, a Republican president who understood the rule of law, ended that fiasco when he federalized the Arkansas National Guard troops and sent them back to their barracks. He then sent in 101st Airborne to protect the African American students.

It happened with Alabama Gov. George Wallace, who in his early 1963 inaugural address proclaimed, “segregation now, segregation tomorrow, segregation forever.”

It was actually segregation for six months, as President John F. Kennedy, who also understood the rule of law, sent in the Alabama National Guard on June 11 of that year to remove Wallace from the doorway of the University of Alabama, allowing Vivian Malone and James A. Hood to pass.

And it happened in 1970, three years after the court reversed the decision of Leon Bazile, a Virginia Circuit Court judge, who ruled a white man and a black woman committed a serious crime when they married.

“Almighty God created the races white, black, yellow, Malay and red, and he placed them on separate continents. ... The fact that he separated the races shows that he did not intend for the races to mix,” Bazile had written, relying on a religious argument to deprive people of what the courts later said was a fundamental right to marry.

Even though the U.S. Supreme Court ruled that Bazile was wrong in 1967, a handful of states continued to fight it.

President Richard Nixon, a Republican who at least in that case understood the rule of law, had enough of the lawlessness by 1970 and sent his Justice Department into Alabama to force Probate Judge Clyde Brittain to finally comply with the Supreme Court ruling and allow Louis Voyer, a white soldier, to marry Phyllis Bett, a black woman from Anniston, Ala.

Like Faubus, Wallace and Brittain, Davis is a Democrat.

But a funny thing happened on the way to the federal courthouse. The politicians rushing to her defense and saying that she has the constitutional right to ignore the Supreme Court are largely Republicans.

Republican gubernatorial candidate Matt Bevin. Republican attorney general candidate Whitney Westerfield. Republican presidential candidates Rand Paul, Bobby Jindal and Ted Cruz. Heck, Mike Huckabee even said he’ll come to Kentucky on Tuesday to support Davis.

The only Republican presidential candidate who has publicly opposed Davis is Carly Fiorina, who has said the clerk needs to either issue marriage licenses or quit her job.

U.S. Sen. Majority Leader Mitch McConnell, never a culture warrior, has been silent, likely finding the idea of undermining the rule of law and undermining his Republican friends equally distasteful.

The Republican stance is quite a change from the GOP of old, which fancied itself as the law and order party since at least the days of Barry Goldwater. It’s also the same party that has complained incessantly that President Barack Obama’s use of executive orders are the acts of a renegade executive who won’t submit to the rule of law.

One should remember that while some of Obama’s actions have been judged to overstep his constitutional authority, Obama is yet to defy a direct order from a court.

As Davis cooled her heels in the Carter County Jail, her lawyers held a press conference on Friday to say that she was doing well behind bars, comparing her to Martin Luther King Jr., the civil rights icon who was jailed several times for standing up to authorities who allowed the government to run over the rights of blacks.

In the celebrated case of Ms. Davis, she is closer to Faubus, Wallace and Britain.

King fought against the government and its racist laws; like Faubus, Wallace and Brittain, Davis is the government.

Joseph Gerth can be reached at (502) 582-4702 or jgerth@courier-journal.com. His mailing address is 525 W. Broadway, P.O. Box 740031, Louisville, KY 40201-7431. Follow him on Twitter at @Joe_Gerth.

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1EHrrpD