If you go What: Longmont City Council meeting When: 7 p.m. Tuesday Where: Council Chambers, 350 Kimbark St. More info: Read full agenda and more at Bit.ly/LM-City-Council

The developers of a proposed Martin Street Hilton hotel are hoping piped-in scents and carbon fiber filters will keep the aroma of Longmont's wastewater at bay.

Cimarron Hospitality is proposing to build a four-story Hilton Garden Inn northeast of the roundabout at Martin Street and Ken Pratt Boulevard.

But Longmont has restrictions in place for the kinds of development that can occur close to the wastewater treatment plant, designed to keep odor complaints down.

On Tuesday, Cimarron will ask the Longmont City Council to remove the restrictions for the plat of land north across the St. Vrain River from the wastewater treatment plant so the proposed Hilton can be built.

The restrictions around the 501 E. First Ave. wastewater facility were put in place in 2004 and over the next four years the city made improvements to the plant to reduce the odor emanating from the plant. In 2008, the city did a study that showed the odor plume had been reduced but still impacted the land now slated for a Hilton.

Advertisement

The Longmont Planning and Zoning Commission reviewed Cimarron's application at its Feb. 17 meeting and ultimately approved allowing a hotel to move forward as long as the Longmont City Attorney's office researched ways to limit the city's liability in case there was a future conflict between Hilton and the wastewater treatment plant. City planning and public works staff had recommended denying Cimarron's request.

Cal Youngberg, Longmont environmental services manager, presented to the commission then and said the wastewater treatment plant is in the middle of a $41 million improvement project.

"The plant is not easily movable. You can't pick up your wastewater plant and move it anywhere," Youngberg said. "We're trying to protect that investment and these land use restrictions are trying to do that."

Youngberg said that based off the 2008 odor study, the odor "plume" would bother some people, and is likely to be worse at nighttime than during the day because of the Front Range's inversion weather patterns.

"In the odor modeling, the plume is where we still feel there is a risk where the odor could bother some people, not all people, but some people a significant number of times per year," Youngberg said. "We show that there could be 50, maybe 100 incidences a year that exceed that threshold."

Commissioner Chris Teta joked with Youngberg "have you tried, maybe, Febreeze?"

Cimarron Hospitality President Rohit Dand spoke to the commission and said he didn't see the proposed hotel's proximity to the wastewater treatment plant as a problem.

"I think it's a perception. If there are intermittent odors or cycling odors continually ... I feel the impact is not dramatic," Dand said. "Every hotel site or development has a challenge. Especially the good ones."

A Cimarron representative did not return a request for comment on Friday, but Cimarron did provide its own odor study and information about how the proposed Hilton would mitigate the odor in the council packet.

The hotel would be airtight with windows that can't be opened and public areas will use "a central air scent machine from Scent Air that will provide a Hilton-approved scent matriculating throughout the building at all times," according to a letter from Dand.

Additionally, the hotel would have a "seamless carbon system" with 1-inch-to-2-inch carbon filters connected directly with the vertical air conditioning units.

Karen Antonacci: 303-684-5226, antonaccik@times-call.com or twitter.com/ktonacci