Democratic presidential candidate Bernie Sanders is known for his passionate speaking and his democratic socialist views.

Sanders is a senator from Vermont and played a key role in drafting the Affordable Care Act, also known as Obamacare. He has long been a proponent of a single-payer health care system, which can be simply described as government-funded health care. The United States already has a limited form of single payer health care through Medicare.

There is a lot to be excited about in Sanders’ proposed health care plan. The most exciting part of this plan is the idea that the U.S. could finally have universal healthcare. Virtually all of the developed world has universal health care, even Cuba.

Sanders’ plan is a combination of tax reform and Medicare expansion. The plan heavily taxes people making over $250,000 and closes some very important loopholes, including a long overdue tax on capital gains. As for the middle class, nothing comes for free. A 2.2 percent income tax would all be imposed on middle-class citizens, which really isn’t that bad. Someone making $50,000 would pay $1,100 for a year of health care. Forbes is projecting the average American will spend about $10,000 a year on health care under the current system.

The U.S. is so far behind the times when it comes to healthcare, it’s nauseating. The great U.S. spends the most out of any country on health care, according to a USA Today report. Even though we are outspending every other country in the world, Time ranked the U.S. dead last in health care quality among developed nations. I really wish I could say that Sander’s health care reform is going to be the saving grace for our country's embarrassing health care system, but I just don’t see that happening.

Medicare for all is really what this country needs. There’s no hiding the fact that a Medicare for all plan would cost a lot, but what people don’t seem to realize they are currently spending so much more than the rest of the world. The words “tax increase” turn people inside out, but they really shouldn’t. Taxes are no different than buying a service, and universal health care would be just another service, only this one guarantees everyone quality health care.

The plan would give all Americans health coverage, but it just doesn’t seem likely Congress will jump on board. Barring a dramatic flip to a Democrat-controlled Congress, Berniecare is doomed to failure.