The National Stroke Association offers "Understanding Medicare and How it Works” at www.stroke.org Stroke survivors and individuals with disabilities often have specific needs that are better met through a Medicare Advantage plan versus Original Medicare.

Medicare annual open enrollment—Oct. 15 to Dec. 7, 2013—starts just two weeks after the Affordable Care Act (ACA) launches its enrollment period Oct. 1, 2013 through March 31, 2014. The timing of the two separate events may confuse some, and National Stroke Association and Allsup are reminding seniors and people with disabilities with Medicare, they do not have to purchase an exchange plan.

To help individuals better understand their Medicare options, the National Stroke Association brochure, Understanding Medicare and How It Works, is available online at http://www.stroke.org. Printed copies can be ordered free of charge.

“The launch of the Affordable Care Act may make some Medicare beneficiaries doubt their current medical coverage,” said Jim Baranski, CEO National Stroke Association. “It’s important that Medicare beneficiaries, especially stroke survivors, understand that they will have the same benefits as they do now and do not unnecessarily purchase additional healthcare coverage.”

Medicare meets the ACA’s individual responsibility requirement. “If you have Medicare, you do not have to purchase an exchange plan to avoid penalties,” said Paula Muschler, Allsup Medicare Advisor® operations manager.

“However, it’s still a good idea to review your current Medicare coverage and take advantage of the annual enrollment period to make changes,” Muschler said. “There have been some changes to Medicare Advantage plans and Part D coverage for 2014. Stroke survivors and individuals with disabilities often have specific needs that are better met through a Medicare Advantage plan versus Original Medicare.”

For an evaluation of Medicare options, call an Allsup Medicare Advisor specialist at (866) 521-7655 or visit Medicare.Allsup.com. The Allsup Medicare Advisor is a Medicare plan selection service offering personalized help that includes customized research and enrollment assistance.

ABOUT NATIONAL STROKE ASSOCIATION

National Stroke Association is the only national organization in the U.S. that focuses 100 percent of its efforts on stroke by developing compelling education and programs focused on prevention, treatment, rehabilitation and support for all impacted by stroke. Visit http://www.stroke.org for more information.

ABOUT ALLSUP

Allsup is a nationwide provider of Social Security disability, veterans disability appeal, Medicare and Medicare Secondary Payer compliance services for individuals, employers and insurance carriers. Allsup professionals deliver specialized services supporting people with disabilities and seniors so they may lead lives that are as financially secure and as healthy as possible. Founded in 1984, the company is based in Belleville, Ill., near St. Louis. For more information, go to http://www.Allsup.com or visit Allsup on Facebook at http://www.facebook.com/Allsupinc.