The U.S. Capitol building is seen on Tuesday morning after the federal government was shutdown when the House and Senate failed to pass a budget in Washington October 1, 2013. REUTERS/James Lawler

3981074

Is it possible to overdose on schadenfreude? As if the following story isn’t delicious enough, the icing on the cake is the source: Politico.

Cue the violins and break out the hankies. Time for a pity party, courtesy of Jonathan Allen and Jennifer Haberkorn:

Veteran House Democratic aides are sick over the insurance prices they’ll pay under Obamacare, and they’re scrambling to find a cure.

“In a shock to the system, the older staff in my office (folks over 59) have now found out their personal health insurance costs (even with the government contribution) have gone up 3-4 times what they were paying before,” Minh Ta, chief of staff to Rep. Gwen Moore (D-Wis.), wrote to fellow Democratic chiefs of staff in an email message obtained by POLITICO. “Simply unacceptable.”

In the email, Ta noted that older congressional staffs may leave their jobs because of the change to their health insurance.

It goes without saying, but it’s fun to say anyway: Gwen Moore voted for Obamacare.

Here’s the statement she made about it on March 21, 2010:

“Today’s vote caps off more than a year of debate and makes good on our promise to deliver health insurance reform for the American people. Every day people are denied coverage or kicked off insurance. This means life and death; this means bankruptcy; this means higher costs for everyone. This bill changes that.”

Would you care to amend that statement, Rep. Moore?

“Simply unacceptable” sums up most of the country’s longstanding attitude about the Affordable Care Act. It’s neither affordable nor caring. It is, however, an act. It’s all an act.

You had to pass it to find out what was in it, you geniuses. Now you know. Now we all know.

One more wafer-thin mint of schadenfreude: The Affordable Care Act will survive. So said … Gwen Moore.

Last Sunday.