Tawana Lynn Keels, president of the Princeton City Board of Education and a member of the National School Boards Association Board of Directors, recently met at the White House with a senior advisor to President Obama to discuss policy initiatives.

In partnership with the National Policy Alliance, Keels met with top Obama aide Valerie Jarrett to discuss administration priorities on immigration reform, creating ladders of opportunity in high-poverty areas and the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act. The National Policy Alliance is composed of the nine primary organizations representing Black public officials from federal, state and local levels of government throughout the U.S.

“The National School Boards Association’s National Black Caucus of School Board Members is working closely with the National Policy Alliance to keep the lines of communication open with the White House,” Keels said. “School board members are in the trenches and understand the challenges that public schools face with continued reductions in state and federal funding. We have a fiscal responsibility to taxpayers. With a focus on student achievement, school board members lobby to ensure that unfunded mandates do not affect district operations and, ultimately, student achievement.”

The group also met with David Agnew, deputy assistant to the President and director of Intergovernmental Affairs, and David Simas, deputy senior advisor for Communications and Strategy.

This year has been a busy year for Keels, a former president of the Ohio School Boards Association. She was seated on the National School Boards Association board of directors and began a two-year term as chair of the National Black Caucus of School Board Members in April in San Diego. Keels also became chair of education policy for the National Policy Alliance and chair of education policy for the World Conference of Mayors this year.

In addition, Keels in August participated in the 50th anniversary of the March on Washington.