Jeff Katz's chosen profession could help alleviate the shortage of his predicted profession.

Katz, a practicing physician assistant (PA), as well as president and chairman of the American Academy of Physician Assistants (AAPA), was in the "future physicians" club in high school. While he never became a doctor, PAs like him may be called upon in practices across the country to take on more duties akin to primary-care physicians.

According to HHS' Health Resources and Services Administration (HRSA), there will be a shortage of 20,400 primary-care physicians in the U.S. by 2020, thanks to the aging population and more people insured through the Affordable Care Act. Another estimate, from the American Association of Medical Colleges, projects a shortage of up to 90,000 doctors by 2025 for the same reasons that HRSA stated.

HRSA says PAs and nurse practitioners (NPs) integrated into a Patient-Centered Medical Home-type delivery system can ease this shortage. Perhaps not coincidentally, PAs and NPs are becoming more commonplace in practices across the country.

In our eighth annual Physicians Practice Staff Salary Survey, 73 percent of practices indicated they had at least one advanced practitioner on staff — up from 63 percent in last year's survey. Forty-two and a half percent of respondents said they employ one advanced practitioner and 39.5 percent said they employ two. Echoing the rise in advanced practitioners on staff at practices nationwide, Merritt Hawkins, a physician recruitment firm, conducted research that found PAs and NPs combined were the fifth most in-demand position in healthcare in 2014.

Over the course of his career, Katz says he has seen the PA profession grow from a niche job to a staple of the medical team as the dynamics of healthcare have changed.

"The medical complexity has changed. You need good teams working together [to achieve better outcomes]. Not only are there more PAs and NPs, there are other members of the [medical] team whose numbers have dramatically risen over the years," says Katz.

*The eighth annual Physicians Practice Staff Salary Survey is here! We surveyed 1,044 practices on the makeup and salaries of their staff. Here are the complete results for national salary data, regional salary data, and staffing trends.