By CATHERINE SAINT LOUIS, The New York Times

Some people read nutrition labels with the kind of zeal others reserve for tabloids. The pleasure is in the appraisal.

Those crackers in the supermarket with no trans fats? Basket-worthy.

A cafe's peach muffin has one measly gram of fiber? As if.

I, too, am label-conscious. But until now, my own baked goods were stubborn little mysteries. No more. Last week, I ate a 2.4-ounce zucchini muffin with raisins and walnuts that had 269 calories and 24 grams of carbohydrates. The previous Wednesday, I chose the lesser of two evils, a 188-calorie slice of homemade clementine cake instead of a heftier 285-calorie triangle.

How do I know? Prep Pad is a new smart food scale for home cooks that doesn't just weigh food, but also provides a breakdown of its nutritional content. It's instructive not only during preparation, but also with leftovers.

A month ago, I set out to address a paradox. I take time to cook healthy meals at home daily. But some meals still lack protein, and nearly all are devoured, instead of savored. I hoped that Prep Pad could offer more nutritional transparency.

The 9-inch-by-6.25-inch scale made by the Orange Chef, a Google-backed company, is sold at Williams-Sonoma for $149.95. It works with the Countertop app on my iPad, which displays a breakdown of proteins, carbohydrates and fats as I build a meal. (An iPad 3 or newer is needed.)

Discoveries lie in wait. Some made me wince. My 9 p.m. snack while watching "House of Cards" -- plain yogurt, strawberries and granola -- topped 524 calories, 25 percent of them from fat.

By contrast, putting green beans on the Prep Pad, then typing in the ingredient, led to a pleasant surprise decades late: green beans have roughly 4 grams of protein per cup.

My green-bean epiphany mattered because one of my goals in using Prep Pad was to eat more meat-free protein, like the ground-up almonds that were the "flour" in my clementine cake.

Weighing each ingredient was pretty effortless, though it did take slightly longer to weigh the item and type each ingredient into the app.

What got annoying was how many bowls were dirtied. For raw eggs, you must first put a container on the scale, press a button on the app to account for its weight, then start cracking eggs into it. Ditto for mashed clementines. Ditto for flour. By the sixth bowl, I grumpily had to call in reinforcements to wash dishes to make counter space.

Thankfully, you have to do this only once per recipe.

Most bar codes on packaged food can be scanned. But even though more than 250,000 ingredients are in the scale's search engine, some basics can't be found. For a scale that's aiming for full nutritional transparency, this is a major weakness.

Taimoor Dar, a founder of the Orange Chef, says the company is improving the search results. It is also adding items.