The 9/11/2012 attack on the U.S. consulate in Benghazi, Libya is back in the spotlight today on Capitol Hill as lawmakers from the select committee prepare to hold their first public hearing.

Led by Republican South Carolina Congressman Trey Gowdy, members of the Committee have been working for months to interview witnesses and to gather more information about what happened the night Americans Chris Stevens, Glen Doherty, Tyrone Woods and Sean Smith were killed by terrorists.

Today Assistant Secretary for Diplomatic Security Greg Starr, Chairman of the Independent Panel on Best Practices Mark J. Sullivan and former Homeland Security Assistant Secretary for Infrastructure Protection Todd Keil will testify.

“As Chairman Gowdy has said, he is willing to risk answering the same question twice rather than risk it not be answered at all. Since all documents responsive to Congressional inquiries into the Benghazi terrorist attack have not been produced, it is fair to say that not all questions have been asked and answered," Gowdy Communications Director Jamal D. Ware released in a statement yesterday. “Chairman Gowdy is leading a fair, fact-based and impartial investigation. The Committee will consider all evidence, across all jurisdictions, and produce the final, definitive accounting on behalf of Congress of what happened before, during and after the terrorist attacks on our facilities in Benghazi."



"Chairman Gowdy sincerely hopes that all sides will not prejudge the outcome of the investigation—before even the Committee’s first hearing, which is on a topic suggested by the Democrats—and instead allow a constructive and thorough investigatory process that produces a final report on Benghazi that is beyond any doubt. Chairman Gowdy is committed to a process and result worthy of the sacrifice of the four Americans who were killed in Benghazi and worthy of the trust of our fellow citizens,” Ware continued.



This hearing comes just days after a report was published by investigative journalist Sharyl Attkisson showing senior aides to former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton were ordered to separate and withhold damning documents from investigators.

The hearing starts at 10 a.m. et. You can watch live here.