After years of internal debate, the Islamist jihadi movement appears to have reached consensus on a global strategy aimed at seizing territory in as many countries as possible.

Although the Islamic State “caliphate” has attracted the most attention, it’s not the only instance of this strategy being put in effect.

Jihadi groups control vast chunks of territory of Africa, notably in Nigeria, Mali, Mauritania, the Central African Republic, Kenya and Somalia. And Al Qaeda in the Islamic Maghreb, or AQIM, has launched a massive recruiting drive for fighters to seize territory in Morocco, Algeria and Tunisia to add to what it already controls in Libya.

Several Taliban-linked groups control territory in Afghanistan and the Pakistani badlands of Waziristan.

Jihadi “startups” are also taking shape in China’s Xinjiang province and the Ferghana Valley in Central Asia.

Last month, al Qaeda’s leader, Ayman al-Zawahiri, announced a new Indian jihadi startup aiming to seize territory in parts of Kashmir.

Other targets include several autonomous republics in the Russian Federation, the island of Mindanao in the Philippines, two provinces in southern Thailand and enclaves in Myanmar (Burma).

Turkey is also in immediate danger. Though refusing to join President Obama’s anti-ISIS coalition, it’s not immune to the jihadi threat. Reportedly, ISIS elements may already be setting up Turkish bases near the Syrian and Iraqi borders. Other caliph “wannabes” are eyeing Lebanon and Jordan.

And Egypt must worry seriously about losing control to Jihadis in parts of the Sinai.

But the jihadi strategy of seizing territory is most advanced in Yemen. Al Qaeda in Arabian Peninsula, or AQAP, already has control of the southeastern province of Hadhramaut (on the border of Oman) — whose huge oil resources could in time generate enough income for a new jihadi caliphate.

And in Yemen’s north, the Iran-backed al-Houthis has seized control of three provinces near the Saudi border, and threatens to capture the capital, Sanaa.

These jihadis have also set up port facilities on the Red Sea, making it easier for Iran to supply them with arms and volunteers.

Yet Iran itself risks a dose of jihadi medicine. The Jaish al-Adl (Army of Justice), a startup Sunni group, aims to use bases inside Pakistan to set up an “emirate” in the Pishin enclave.

Last week, there were reports, denied by Tehran officials, of Sunni jihadi groups seizing a number of villages inside Iran close to the Iraqi border.

The jihadis’ shift to a strategy of seizing terrority began with the 2007 book by Abubakar al-Naji, dubbed “al Qaeda’s chief theoretician.” (I discussed the book, “Governance in the Wilderness,” in a July 1, 2008, Post column.)

In his work, now the basic textbook of jihadism, Naji claims that the fall of the Ottoman Empire and the abolition of the Islamic Caliphate in 1924 marked the start of “the most dangerous phase in history.”

Those events put all Arab countries, the heartland of Islam, under domination by the “infidel,” who later continued to rule via native proxies.

In Naji’s eyes, it is impossible to create a proper Islamic state in a single country in a world dominated by “Crusaders.” He cites as example the Taliban — which, although a proper Islamic regime, couldn’t hold against “infidel” attacks and opposition by Afghan elements.

Instead, he says, the Islamic movement must be global — fighting everywhere, all the time, on all fronts.

After years of debate, jihadis have concluded that Osama bin Laden was premature if not totally wrong to think the “Infidel” could be brought down with a few spectacular attacks.

Pre-9/11, jihadis killed or took hostage only relatively small numbers of the “Infidel” (especially Americans) — and Western leaders declined to mobilize their publics for a counterattack.

The 9/11 attacks made it impossible for US leaders to continue doing nothing — and equally impossible for the jihadi movement to maintain momentum by bleeding the “Infidel” drip by drip.

Something else was needed. Naji argued that the movement must aim to turn the world into a series of “wildernesses” where only those under jihadi rule enjoy security. He urged extending low-intensity war to countries with a significant Muslim presence.

Using cyberspace, jihadi groups are already promoting the creation of “virtual caliphates” within Muslim communities in Europe, the Americas and India.

The idea is that by asserting a strong “Islamic presence,” jihadis can force the “Infidel” to submit to aspects of Islamic life and, in time, accept de facto Islamic domination (sultah).

Naji recommends kidnappings, hostage-taking, the use of women and children as human shields, high-profile terror killings, suicide bombings and endless gestures to make normal life impossible for the “enemy” and for “deviant Muslims.”

The monster of Islamist terror is capable of frequent mutations. The Naji-inspired startup caliphates represent the latest.