Keith Bayus holds the string to release the ducks for the Rubber Duck Race while hanging from the 9th Street bridge during the Boulder Creek Festival on Monday at the Boulder Creek. (Jeremy Papasso / Staff photographer)

As dozens of spectators lined Boulder Creek Monday to watch the start of the annual rubber duck race, a few children — and adults — became antsy during a 20-minute delay and began to chant, "We want the ducks!"

It's hard to blame them for getting a little impatient. After all, they've been waiting to see the ducks return to Boulder Creek for two years.

The 28th Annual EXPAND duck race made its return to the Boulder Creek on Memorial Day as thousands of rubber ducks were dumped into the fast-moving waters, capping off a wet but wild Boulder Creek Fest in downtown Boulder.

For $5 per fake fowl, people could sponsor a numbered duck as it raced down the creek, with a grand prize of $1,000 in cash and many other prizes up for grabs. The proceeds from the ducks go to EXPAND, a Boulder Parks a Recreation program that provides a wide variety of recreational opportunities for people with disabilities,

While the event still took place last year, runoff and debris from the 2013 flood prompted event organizers to take the race out of the Boulder Creek and instead pluck ducks out of an inflatable pool.

Advertisement

But EXPAND ruled that t he race could return this year, and participants were excited to see the ducks back in the water.

"It's a lot more exciting," said Allison Freedman, who was there Monday with her twin boys Koby and Alon Horowitz, both 7. "Last year was basically a raffle. They just threw a bunch of ducks in a pool."

The Horowitz twins stood at the starting point for their first chance to watch the race take place in the creek. But while it may not have been as exciting, at least the ducks in the pool were easier to watch. When asked if he would try to chase his duck to the finish line, Koby took a look at the fast-moving waters and said, "No."

It was hard to blame him. While the waters were safe enough to hold the race, the recent rains in Boulder meant the creek was flowing fast and nearing the top of the banks in some areas. Boulder dive teams were on the river ready to pluck the winners this year.

Rachel and Anna Tilton didn't get to participate in last year's duck race, but the two were back this year. Despite the competition, Rachel, 7, and Anna, 5, were confident their duck was a winner.

"It's got a jet pack," said Rachel.

Their father, Eric, even spotted the lone duck waiting in the net just before the race and pointed it out to the girls.

"You only need one when you have the fastest duck," he said.

For more information about EXPAND, visit https://bouldercolorado.gov/parks-rec/expand-program-for-people-with-disabilities

Mitchell Byars: 303-473-1329, byarsm@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/mitchellbyars