This week’s events in Quebec and Ottawa point to a potentially troubling trend in the radicalization of violent extremists. The perpetrators of the deadly attacks – Martin “Ahmad” Couture Rouleau in Quebec and Michael Zehaf-Bibeau in Ottawa – were both converts to Islam with troubled, criminal pasts. (As Humera Khan of Muflehun told Gwen Ifill on the Aug. 27 broadcast of "PBS NewsHour," troubled converts sometimes believe that by conducting such acts with their usually superficial interpretations of Islam that they can earn “shortcuts to heaven.”) But this isn’t a simply a problem of some lone converts. Canada, like many countries in the West, has a problem with a very small, but dangerous population of violent extremists. Sharon Cardash of George Washington University’s Homeland Security Policy Institute notes that there have been numerous disrupted plots for attacks in Canada over the past decade.

[READ: Gunman in Canada Attack Complained About Mosque]

The Canadian government has begun revoking the passports of those already fighting overseas (foreign fighters) and those attempting to join the fight. Zehaf-Bibeau had applied for a passport seemingly to go and fight in Syria, but his name had recently been added to a list of so-called “high-risk" travelers. The Royal Canadian Mounted Police are investigating 93 such individuals who they suspect may try to go and fight in Syria or other locations. It is unclear whether he had connections to a wider physical network of extremists, but U.S. counterterrorism officials linked him with the Canadian foreign fighter Hasibullah Yusufzai through social media. Rouleau, for his part, had had his passport seized at the airport when he tried to fly to Turkey to go and fight in Syria and was detained for questioning before he was later released.

Canada’s population of 35.16 million is a bit more than a tenth of that of the United States, but it has produced as many – or potentially more – militants going to fight in Syria and other locations as the United States. Muslims make up 3.2 percent of the Canadian population versus approximately .5 percent of the U.S. population. (Reports suggest that 80 foreign fighters have returned to Canada. Although hopefully many of them have grown disillusioned with the causes that led them down that path.) This in no way means to suggest that Islam is the problem, but rather that Canada as with other countries in the West has a small but active network of individuals who are radicalizing people to become violent extremists.



[READ: After the Parliament Shooting, What's Next for Canadian Security?]

This week’s attacks followed a ramping up of Canadian support in the war on the Islamic State group. Canada has recently dispatched six CF18 aircraft to take part in combat operations in Iraq against the Islamic State group and is sending 69 special operations forces advisers there, too. And just this week Islamic State group spokesman Abu Muhammad al-Adnani called for Muslims in the West to carry out attacks. “If you can kill a disbelieving American or European — especially the spiteful and filthy French — or an Australian, or a Canadian, or any other disbeliever from the disbelievers waging war, including the citizens of the countries that entered into a coalition against the Islamic State … kill him in any manner or way however it may be,” he said.

But this is not the first call for attacks against Canada. A Canadian foreign fighter in Syria, Farah Shirdon, told the Hamilton Spectator through a mobile phone messenger account that “The only thing I have to say to any reporter is tell [the Canadian government] its civilians will pay the price the war your government is waging against the Islamic state." He continued by saying that, "You are waging a war against people who see heaven in the barrel of guns. Do you honestly think you can win? ... The streets of Western cities will be filled with blood." (He has also threatened that Canada and the United States will be attacked after Syria and Iraq are won.)



[SEE: Editorial Cartoons on Gun Control and Gun Rights]

Shirdon is from Calgary which has become a major flashpoint for radicalization and foreign fighters in Canada. As the city’s police chief Rick Hanson told the Calgary Herald, “This is an issue that’s not going away and in the near future will continue to grow. You look at what’s happening in the Middle East right now, the latest events in Iraq, and (militant Islamic group Boko Haram) in Nigeria. That’s going to have an impact in Canada without a doubt.” There is speculation that the number of jihadi fighters in the city area may be between 20 and 30, but the police chief thinks that number may be too conservative. Lorne Dawson of the University of Waterloo believes that there must be someone in that city that is radicalizing and recruiting extremists there. This strongly comports with my friend and colleague Clint Watts’ work about the foreign fighter-flow model where recruiters in hot spots radicalize followers before they go overseas to fight.

The troubling element of Monday and Wednesday’s attacks is that both individuals wanted to go and fight overseas, but couldn’t. Canada’s practice of revoking passports might better mitigate the ability of individuals to go overseas to build human networks and to acquire lethal combat skills and experience, but it might also redirect some of that radicalism at home. This is problematic and raises the possibility that more low-level “propaganda of the deed”-style attacks might be launched to instill fear and to whip up a frenzy of conflict between Muslims and non-Muslims. As I argued recently at War on the Rocks, this will necessitate engagement between Canadian authorities and local communities to work toward reconciling with men and women before they go too far down the path toward radical extremism. The Royal Canadian Mounted Police and Canadian Security Intelligence Service will be busy.