HONOLULU (AP) — Ever wonder what music gets President Barack Obama in the Christmas mood?

Sign in to Spotify to find out. Obama, Vice President Joe Biden and their wives on Wednesday released matching lists of their favorite holiday songs on the popular music streaming service, just in time for Christmas.

Topping the list for Obama and his wife, Michelle, is "O Tannenbaum," the instrumental version by the Vince Guaraldi Trio featured in "A Charlie Brown Christmas."

"Let it Snow" by Boys II Men was next for the Obamas, followed by Mariah Carey's "All I Want for Christmas is You." Their list of 14 songs also features The Jackson 5, Stevie Wonder, Nat King Cole, Ledisi, Luther Vandross, Frank Sinatra and Whitney Houston, among others.

Biden and his wife, Jill, went with a slightly edgier No. 1: Bruce Springsteen's "Santa Claus is Comin' to Town." Second for the Bidens is Neil Diamond's "You Make it Feel Like Christmas," followed by "Let it Snow! Let it Snow! Let it Snow!" by Ella Fitzgerald. Andrea Bocelli, Mary J. Blige, Tony Bennett, U2 and Coldplay are among the other musicians on the Bidens' list of 17 songs.

This past summer, the White House boosted its already active online presence by launching an official channel on Spotify in August. Obama shared his summer daytime and evening playlists, and Mrs. Obama followed with a music list for the International Day of the Girl.

Obama and other White House officials regularly use Twitter, Facebook, Medium and other social media platforms.

Obama recently taped an appearance on comedian Jerry Seinfeld's online talk show, "Comedians in Cars Getting Coffee," that's scheduled for release Dec. 30. He is the first elected official to appear on the show, the White House said, continuing a strategy designed to put him in front of new and non-traditional audiences.

Obama's holiday music playlist was released during his Christmas vacation in Hawaii. The Bidens are spending the run-up to Christmas at their home in Wilmington, Delaware.

OBAMA PLAYLIST

"O Tannenbaum," Vince Guaraldi Trio ("A Charlie Brown Christmas")

"Let it Snow," Boyz II Men

"All I Want for Christmas is You," Mariah Carey

"Santa Claus is Coming To Town," The Jackson 5

"8 Days of Christmas," Destiny's Child

"Someday at Christmas," Stevie Wonder

"The Christmas Song," Nat King Cole

"Silent Night," Ledisi

"Do You Hear What I Hear," Yolanda Adams

"Away in a Manger," Kenny Burrell

"Santa Baby," Eartha Kitt

"The First Noel," Frank Sinatra

"Have Yourself a Merry Little Christmas," Luther Vandross

"Little Drummer Boy," Whitney Houston

BIDEN PLAYLIST

"Santa Claus is Comin' to Town," Bruce Springsteen

"You Make it Feel Like Christmas," Neil Diamond

"Let it Snow! Let it Snow! Let it Snow!" Ella Fitzgerald

"Adeste Fidelis," Andrea Bocelli

"Wexford Carol," Govannen

"This Christmas," Mary J. Blige

"A Sky Full of Stars," Coldplay

"Celebrate Me Home," Kenny Loggins

"Delaware Slide," George Thorogood and the Delaware Destroyers

"Merry Christmas Baby," Bruce Springsteen

"Snowfall," Tony Bennett

"Cheek to Cheek," Lady Gaga and Tony Bennett

"We Need a Little Christmas," Percy Faith

"Christmas (Baby Please Come Home)," U2

"Jingle Bells," Diana Krall

"Christmas All Over Again," Tom Petty

"Simply Having a Wonderful Christmastime," Paul McCartney

___

Online:

Obama playlist: http://go.wh.gov/ObamaHoliday

Biden playlist: http://go.wh.gov/BidenHoliday

___

Follow Darlene Superville on Twitter: http://www.twitter.com/dsupervilleap