Feb. 9 preview

Talk of security in Sochi and a new report on Obamacare will dominate discussion on the Sunday political news shows.

With the 2014 Winter Olympics in full swing, most of the networks are bringing in experts on terrorism and U.S.-Russia relations to weigh in.

NBC’s Meet the Press will air an interview with U.S. Ambassador to Russia Michael McFaul. ABC’s This Week will feature U.S. Rep. Mike Rogers, R-Mich., chairman of the House Intelligence Committee. And CNN’s State of the Union will talk to former Secretary of Homeland Security Janet Napolitano, who is leading the American delegation to Russia. CBS' Face the Nation will talk Sochi security with correspondent Mark Phillips and Rep. Peter King, R-N.Y., a member of the House Intelligence Committee.

Over on Fox News Sunday , the conversation will center around a new report by the nonpartisan Congressional Budget Office about Obamacare’s effect on job creation. U.S. Sen. Roy Blunt, R-Mo., and Sen. Ben Cardin, D-Md., will analyze whether its findings are "the latest bad news for the President’s signature law," Fox says.

U.S. Sens. Chuck Schumer, D-N.Y., and Rob Portman, R-Ohio, will appear on Meet the Press to assess the same topic.

Face the Nation will also touch on immigration reform and unemployment benefits, with input coming from U.S. Sens. Dick Durbin, D-Ill., and Kelly Ayotte, R-N.H.

Before the shows, find out for yourself what the CBO report says -- and doesn’t say -- with PolitiFact’s fact-checks and an annotated version of the report’s key sections.

The conversation on Fox News Sunday will also turn to Syria, which missed a deadline this week to turn over its chemical weapons. Fox brings in U.S. Reps. Michael McCaul, R-Texas, and Adam Schiff, D-Calif., members of House committees on homeland security and intelligence.

PunditFact will be watching it all and listening out for fact-checks.

Who’s talking where:

ABC’s This Week: Rep. Tom Cole, R-Okla., Rep. Keith Ellison, D-Minn., CNN Crossfire host S.E. Cupp, former White House adviser David Plouffe, and ABC News senior White House correspondent Jeff Zeleny.

NBC’s Meet the Press: NBC News chief foreign affairs correspondent Andrea Mitchell, New York Times columnist David Brooks, Washington Post columnist E.J. Dionne, Heritage Action for America CEO Mike Needham, and former White House deputy chief of staff Mona Sutphen.

Fox News Sunday: Columnist and Fox News contributor George Will, Associated Press White House correspondent Julie Pace, Fox News analyst Juan Williams and talk show host Laura Ingraham.

CNN's State of the Union: The Hill columnist AB Stoddard, CNN political commentator Ana Navarro, and CNN political commentator Cornell Belcher.

CBS’ Face the Nation: NPR's Michele Norris, The Atlantic's Jeffrey Goldberg, The New York Times national security correspondent Mark Mazzetti, CBS News political director John Dickerson, and CBS News State Department correspondent Margaret Brennan.