Microsoft CEO Satya Nadella attended UWM. So did columnist Jim Stingl. Go, Panthers! Credit: Microsoft

This column started out to be an interview, Panther to Panther, with Satya Nadella.

But have you ever tried to get the CEO of Microsoft Corp. on the phone? It's hard enough to reach tech support.

My idea was to call him up and compare our experiences at the University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee. I graduated in 1980 with a bachelor's degree in newspaper scribbling, and he in 1990 with a master's in computer science.

I wanted to ask Nadella how he liked Milwaukee, if he lived in a party house near campus, if he had favorite places to get a beer or pizza or floppy disks.

Was he a Panthers fan? Practically no one was when I was in school, though I think we had a basketball team back then. That has changed a lot, now that the UWM men's hoops team is headed for the NCAA Tournament for the fourth time since 2003.

Let me say something that I don't think I uttered once during my entire time at UWM: Go Panthers! Sorry I can't name anyone on the team. There's that tall guy and that other guy.

So anyway, I had been reading about Nadella being named in February as the new leader at Microsoft and about his two years at UWM after earning an undergraduate degree in his native India. He went on from here to work in Chicago before joining Microsoft in 1992.

But the articles I saw had precious little about his life here, except that he worked as a software engineer at a company in Brookfield, tutored inner city Milwaukee kids, and sometimes slept in the engineering and math lab at school because he was working so hard.

I can't top that, though I was known to fall asleep drooling on the U-bus.

The articles, at least in this newspaper, didn't quote Nadella, so I thought I'd ring him up.

UWM is super proud of their workplace descendant of Bill Gates, but they didn't have a private number or email to share with me. School spokesman Tom Luljak suggested I try the main corporate number. To me that sounded like calling the White House and saying, "Yo, is Barack there?"

"Thank you for calling Microsoft Corp." a computer-generated female voice answered. Good start. What she said next seemed odd. "If you need to report injuries or existing danger to life or property, press 1." Who calls Microsoft to report injuries or danger? And what would nonexisting danger be?

Then the voice wanted the name of the person I was trying to reach. I said Satya Nadella as clearly as I could. She asked me to say the name again.

"Are you looking for...?" the computer said, and then I heard another recorded voice of someone I'm assuming is Nadella speaking his name.

Yes, I said.

"Sorry, I'm not permitted to make that call," the female voice replied.

Luljak also had told me about an agency used by Microsoft for media requests. So I called Waggener Edstrom Communications in Seattle in mid-February and heard back by email that "we are not currently offering interviews with Satya Nadella."

But we're almost like buddies from our different years at UWM, I pleaded. I just want to talk about the old days, the mighty black and gold. Please get me 15 minutes on the phone.

Can't do it, said friendly but unbudgeable account coordinator Kimberly Lamberton. I tried her again last week. She thanked me for circling back, but said it's still no.

I reached out to a UWM classmate of Nadella who was quoted in an earlier article about him, and he said he'd pass along my contact info to Nadella. But that's where it ended.

The world is better connected than ever thanks to companies like Microsoft. I only wish I could reach their leader.

Call Jim Stingl at (414) 224-2017 or email at jstingl@jrn.com