LOUISBURG (WNCN) – Next week’s closure of Novant Health’s Franklin Medical Center is part of a larger trend among struggling rural hospitals that shows signs of accelerating, according to UNC’s Dr. Mark Holmes.

Efforts to keep the medical center have been happening for more than a year.

Franklin Medical Center is projected to lose up to $6.7 million this year, a hospital spokeswoman said.

There are 113 full time and 16 part time employees at the hospital.

“The decision to close a hospital may be the most difficult one a health system ever faces,” said Patrick Easterling, senior vice president at Novant Health. “We care deeply about our patients and the communities we serve, and this is something we take very seriously. Unfortunately, utilization of Franklin Medical Center has declined significantly over several years.”

Dr. Holmes has been studying issues facing rural hospitals and notes 57 have closed nationwide since 2010, including three in North Carolina. They include Yadkin Valley Community Hospital, Vidant Pungo Hospital and Blowing Rock Hospital. An Associated Press investigation earlier this year found four out of 62 other rural hospitals in the state are considered “vulnerable.”

“Many of them are trying to find ways to reopen, and most of them have not been successful,” said Holmes. “We do see some circumstances where the hospital can turn it around. But, for the most part it’s usually a long and slow steady change.”

Holmes says several factors have come together to create the situation including: the economic collapse, dwindling rural populations, changing insurance reimbursement rates and better technology that allows people to treated outside of hospitals.

For patients, the change can be significant.

“Now in Louisburg, looks like you’ll be about 30 minutes away from the closest emergency room,” said Holmes. “That extra 30 minutes can be really literally a matter of life and death.”

Franklin Medical Center will continue admitting patients to its emergency room until 7 a.m. Friday, at which point the doors will close permanently.