Megan Silcott had always wanted a career in fashion and aspired to be a model, but that dream seemed dashed when she was paralyzed from the neck down at age 16. It happened overnight and seemingly out of nowhere. An athlete with a lanky, svelte figure, the last thing on Silcott’s mind was paralysis at such a young age.

“[O]ne night I was out with my friends and I had to come home, I didn’t feel that great,” she told Good Morning America in a video interview. “I went to bed and woke up in the morning and I couldn’t get out of bed. I couldn’t walk.”

Silcott had been infected with mononucleosis, also known as mono or the "kissing disease," which is a common viral illness that often affects teens and young adults. While mono typically leads to sore throat, nausea, and fatigue for weeks, it’s treatable and goes away with time. But in Silcott’s case, mono led to Acute Disseminated Encephalomyelitis (ADEM), an extremely rare neurological disorder that affected her brain and spine.

Despite the fact that sudden paralysis was a blow to her plans, Silcott didn’t let it ruin her dreams. “I told myself I was going to heal from this and I was going to be able to pursue everything I wanted to pursue before,” she told GMA. Because of her determination and confidence, Silcott has made magnificent strides in the right direction. She has attended therapy at the Kennedy Krieger Institute in Baltimore, initially using a power chair when she still had very little function in her arms and legs. Now, Silcott is able to walk on her own with the help of a walker.

Recently, Silcott’s dreams have come true. Fashion designer Nina Perdomo called her this winter to participate in New York Fashion Week wearing one of her designs: “I design for a woman that is strong and knows what she wants from life,” Perdomo told GMA. “And I feel like Megan is the perfect example of that.”

The video shows how Silcott exemplifies confidence and grace when walking down the runway with a walker, and is an inspiration to anyone hoping to achieve something they have their eyes set on.

“Here I was, not able to move, not thinking I would ever be able to walk again,” Silcott said. “You know it just goes to show that anything is possible. If you put your mind to it, it can get done.”