Items for It’s Your Business can be submitted online at http://cjonline.com/business, by email to iyb@cjonline.com or by mail to The Topeka Capital-Journal, 616 S.E. Jefferson, Topeka, 66607. Items and photographs will run in print as space permits.

NEW FACES

Lisa Walder Cummings has been named director of operations for Oakley Place and Topeka Adult Care Center in Topeka and The Pines in Holton. The four facilities provide care for up to 12 residents per location in a home-like setting.

Cory R. Buck has joined the law firm of Hite, Fanning & Honeyman in Wichita as an associate attorney. Buck, a 2006 graduate of Topeka West High School, received a bachelor’s degree from The University of Kansas and a law degree from the Washburn University School of Law. He will focus his practice on civil litigation defense.

Lucas Moody, of Emporia, has joined the staff at SOS Inc. in Emporia as director of its Child Advocacy Center. Moody, a graduate of Emporia State University, previously worked at Four County Mental Health in Independence and for TFI Family Services in various locations.

NAMES

Bill Acree has been named CEO and president of the Helping Hands Humane Foundation, effective Jan. 1, 2014. Acree has served as executive director of the Helping Hands Humane Society the past three years. He joined the animal shelter in 2003 as developmental director.

Larry Karns, director of workers compensation for the Kansas Department of Labor, has been elected to the International Association of Industrial Accident Boards and Commissions 2013-14 executive committee. Karns, a graduate of the Washburn University School of Law, practiced workers compensation law in Kansas for more than 36 years before joining KDOL.

Nancy Griffin, of Topeka, recently was elected national vice president during the American Business Women’s Association’s 64th National Women’s Leadership Conference in Little Rock, Ark. Griffin, the self-determination payroll/billing coordinator at TARC Inc. and a 30-year ABWA member, will continue to serve on the association’s national board of directors and the Stephen Bufton Memorial Educational Fund board of trustees.

Shannon Long, of Topeka, recently passed her EPA 608 certification, making her the first student in Bryan University’s new Heating, Ventilation, Air Conditioning and Refrigeration program to earn a certification. Long, a military veteran, passed all three available types of EPA 608 refrigerant certifications.

Richard R. Gomez, of Topeka, recently was re-elected to a second full term to the College of American Pathologists’ board of governors. Gomez, a CAP member since 1991, currently chairs the CAP Council on Accreditation. He also currently serves as medical director for St. Francis Health Laboratory, as medical director of clinical chemistry at Stormont-Vail Regional Medical Center and as medical director of the laboratory at the Holton Community Hospital.

RECOGNITION

Community Action Inc., at its annual meeting on Oct. 10, recognized the following for their service to the agency and community:

■ Tiffany Butler, Personal Achievement Award. Butler has completed vocational rehabilitation to move from public assistance to employment. She volunteers for Community Action’s Safe Kids, CACFP and housing programs.

■ Nancy Johnson, Bill McCormick Community Action Person of the Year Award. Johnson, executive director of the Community Resources Council, is a strong advocate for social services, business and government cooperation who brings more than 25 years experience to bridging those interests.

■ Shelly Buhler, Velma Paris Humanitarian Award. Buhler, a Shawnee County commissioner, was cited for her consistent support of Community Action’s mission and goals, most notably its First Tee of Shawnee County program.

■ Circles of McPherson County/STEPMC, Award for Collaborative Excellence. The Circles initiative equips families for self-sufficiency and in McPherson county has resulted in income increasing 26 percent and assets 11.3 percent, while personal debt has decreased 38 percent and the use of public funds 54 percent.

■ Jewell Welch, Susan M. Wheatley Commitment to Excellence Award. Welch, who will retire from Community Action later this month after 20 years of service, is a former fiscal officer and housing program director who works closely with all agency components.

■ Mary Hughes, fiscal bookkeeper, Staff Person of the Year.

■ Shannon McMahon, Head Start disabilities and mental health coordinator, Staff Volunteer Service Award.

■ Service awards were presented to Herminia Chavez (15 years) and Jewell Welch (20 years).

The Topeka High School Marine JROTC Program recently received its 12th Naval Honor School Award (eighth in a row) and the first Juggernaut Award given by the 3rd Marine Corps JROTC District. Among the THS unit’s highlights were Best Inspection and more than 8,800 volunteer hours given to the community of Topeka and surrounding areas.

The Kansas County and District Attorneys Association announced the following award winners at its fall conference in Overland Park: Don Scott, Seward County Attorney, Prosecutor of the Year; Sally Salguero, assistant district attorney in Sedgwick County, Lifetime Achievement Award; Natalie Chalmers, assistant solicitor general in the Kansas Attorney General’s office, Associate Member Prosecutor of the Year; and Kansas Attorney General Derek Schmidt, Sen. Jeff King (R-Independence) and Rep. Lance Kinzer (R-Olathe), Policymaker

of the Year awards.