Topics: BP, bp oil spill, Coral, Deepwater Horizon, deepwater horizon oil spill, Gulf of Mexico, marine life, Sustainability News, News

More than four years after an explosion sent over 200 million gallons of oil gushing into the Gulf of Mexico, BP continues to insist that the damage wrought by its infamous Deepwater Horizon spill wasn’t so bad — and the evidence to suggest otherwise continues to pile up. The latest study to suggest that all isn’t well in the Gulf, published in the journal Proceedings of the Natural Academy of Sciences, documents the presence of damaged coral located nearly twice as far away from the damaged well and 50 percent deeper than those that had been discovered before, “considerably expanding” the area believed to have been affected by the spill.

Corals, a team of researchers led by Penn State biology professor Charles Fisher explains, are important indicators of deep-sea health: They are constantly interacting with the water around them, and if, say, a plume of oil overtakes them, they’re unable to relocate to cleaner waters. They can live for hundreds, even thousands of years, so natural deaths are relatively rare. And when one does die, it leaves behind a skeleton that disappears slowly, serving as a record of sorts of its life and death.

This is precisely what happened in the Gulf. The researchers first documented the impact of the spill on coral colonies back in 2010, about three months after the damaged well was finally capped. They discovered corals about 7 miles away from the spill site, and more than 4,o00 feet deep, that showed “widespread signs of stress” — findings that, they wrote, “underscore the unprecedented nature of the spill in terms of its magnitude, release at depth and impact to deep-water ecosystems.” Testing, they added, confirmed that oil found at the site carried Deepwater Horizon’s chemical footprint.

“We would not expect deep-water corals to be impacted by a typical oil spill, but the sheer magnitude of the Deepwater Horizon oil spill and its release at depth make it very different from a tanker running aground and spilling its contents,” said Helen White, the lead author of the resulting paper, which was published in 2012. “Because of the unprecedented nature of the spill, we have learned that its impacts are more far reaching than those arising from smaller spills that occur on the surface.”