Two loyal Denver Democrats are vying in Tuesday’s primary to succeed state Rep. Mark Ferrandino, the history-making, term-limited lawmaker who became Colorado’s first gay House speaker.

Ferrandino likely will leave the heavily Democratic District 2 in the primary victor’s hands.

Alec Garnett and Owen Perkins both say they would continue Ferrandino’s popular blend of progressive priorities, including support for same-sex marriage.

But the two campaigns have struck out in decidedly different directions as they’ve knocked on doors across the district, which stretches from Capitol Hill to neighborhoods south of I-25 and east to Holly Hills.

Perkins, 50, proudly focuses on traditional liberal issues, including environmentalism, attaining universal health care and reducing the influence of money in politics. He hits campaign finance reform hard on the trail, repeating often that he would refuse any donation from a political-action committee.

“It’s easy to take money and feel like you’re only going to take from groups you support … but political action committees give you money expecting something in return,” Perkins said.

Garnett, 31, puts his focus elsewhere.

The district’s constituents are among the youngest, on average, in the state, and Garnett sees himself as emblematic of those he’d represent: young, college-educated, newly married and with plenty of student loans to pay off. He has focused on issues that he says resonate with his peers, including education quality, jobs and the economy. He’s particularly focused on ideas for expanding preschool offerings statewide.

“One of the reasons I threw my hat into the ring was because I matched the demographics,” he said.

But Garnett also did so at the urging of Ferrandino, who has endorsed him.

He’s risen fast in Colorado politics. Garnett worked as a legislative aide to U.S. Rep. Ed Perlmutter, then later returned to Colorado to run the 2010 campaign of his father, Boulder District Attorney Stan Garnett, for Colorado attorney general. Garnett lost.

But Alec Garnett parlayed that experience into an appointment as executive director of the Colorado Democratic Party. He stepped down to run for the House seat.

Perkins also can point to a big-name backer: the late former state Sen. Ken Gordon, who died in December. Last year, Gordon gave a full-throated endorsement of Perkins and his focus on rooting money out of politics.

The Baltimore native spent part of his career as a teacher and college instructor in Colorado, and then worked as a journalist, most recently writing about baseball for MLB.com.

He also has worked in the trenches for the Denver Democrats, including as party secretary. He sees District 2, with its strong liberal base, as capable of carrying political weight for more vulnerable Democrats on issues such as gun control.

So far, the big money has focused on Garnett, who raised more than $98,000 through May 28. Perkins has raised nearly $43,000.

In March, though, Perkins surprised some Garnett supporters by capturing 39 percent of the vote at the Denver County Democratic assembly, well above the 30 percent needed to make the ballot.

Garnett had spent months recruiting young supporters to participate in the assembly. Perkins, saying his emphasis was elsewhere before the assembly, suggested his support has grown.

The primary winner will face Republican Jon Roberts in November. Ferrandino, while backing Garnett, also lauds Perkins.

“Owen’s a good guy,” Ferrandino said. “He’s been very active in the district for a long time. The nice thing is that the district is choosing between two good choices.”

Jon Murray: 303-954-1405, jmurray@denverpost.com or twitter.com/JonMurray