A scam we reported on in August is making the rounds again.

Crooks are calling citizens up, claiming to be with the El Paso County Sheriff's Office.

A Colorado Springs couple got a call on their answering machine from an "Officer John Smith." "Smith" identified himself as being with EPSO--and threatened arrest.

"The reason of my call is in reference to a legal case and serious allegation which we have received on your name...the very second you receive this message you need to head down to your nearest police department and surrender yourself."

"My wife got kind of worried because...that person used my wife's name," Akira Sugimura told 11 News.

The couple didn't return the scammer's message to call him back, and instead called the sheriff's office to verify the call. 11 News Call for Action investigator Betty Sexton says that was the right thing to do.

"The important thing is, you didn't take the call," Sexton explained to Sugimura. "So they don't know you're live person, and that's the most important thing, that you don't talk to these people. Because if you talk to them, they know you're alive, that you exist at this number, and they'll keep bothering you. And then they'll sell your name and number to other crooks."

"The strong message here is the fact that law enforcement, specifically the sheriff's office, is never going to call someone and solicit money from them to take care of some kind of potential legal matter; there's always going to be a more appropriate course of action," Lt. Jeff Kramer with the sheriff's office told 11 News.

Kramer says that there have been a couple of variations of this scam circulating the region over the past year, though the call that the Sugimuras received is a more recent version. Kramer said anyone receiving the call should take note of the number the call came from, and then make a report.

"You making a report helps us to connect the dots...if there happens to be a commonality between the reports, ie. the same number is being called from, there's a possibility we can do some investigation there and backtrack where those calls are originating from...your phone call to us is definitely not time wasted," Kramer said.

If you receive a call similar to the Sugimuras, contact authorities right away.

If you have a scam you wish for our Call For Action team to investigate, call our newsroom at 578-0000 or our Call For Action line at 457-8211.