The percentage of Texans without health insurance fell statewide and in the Dallas-Fort Worth area in 2013 — before the official launch of the Affordable Care Act — according to data released Thursday by the Census Bureau’s American Community Survey.

The percentage of uninsured Texans has fallen every year since 2009, according to the ACS, from 23.8 percent to 22.1 percent in 2013.

In Dallas County, the total has dropped by more than 3 percentage points since 2009, when 30.3 percent were without health insurance, compared with 27.2 percent in 2013. Rockwall County’s uninsured rate dropped 4 percentage points over the same period.

But in Collin, Denton and Tarrant counties, the percentage of uninsured residents has been up and down over the five-year period.

Dr. Lloyd Potter, the Texas state demographer, said that while some people have received medical coverage through Medicaid, Medicare or the Children’s Health Insurance Program, data from the Dallas and Houston metro areas show reasons for concern.

“The first thing that came to my mind is we’re not seeing any real headway in getting higher percentages of people private insurance coverage,” Potter said. “And we’re still one of the states with the highest percentage of the population that doesn’t have insurance in some form. That’s problematic.”

The 2013 numbers from the ACS arrived the same week as another government study, conducted by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. It measured changes in uninsured numbers in the first three months of 2014, when the Affordable Care Act took effect.

Across the U.S., the percentage of uninsured adults fell from 20.4 percent to 18.4 percent in the first quarter of 2014 in the CDC’s National Health Interview Survey, in part because of the Affordable Care Act.

The data in the 2013 American Community Survey study included people with private health insurance and public coverage: Medicare, Medicaid, the CHIP program and state health plans.

Age and employment made considerable differences in the percentages.

In Dallas County, for example, 32.7 percent of people with jobs were uninsured, compared with 58.7 percent of people who were unemployed and 40.9 percent of those not in the labor force.

Children in Dallas County less than 18 years old had the lowest uninsured rate at 15.1 percent, as did children in other North Texas counties.

Overall, 14.9 percent of residents in Collin County were without insurance; 15.7 percent in Denton County; 12.6 percent in Rockwall County; and 20.7 percent in Tarrant County, the ACS estimated.

Nationally, Potter said, the Dallas-Fort Worth and Houston metropolitan areas rank near the bottom in medical insurance coverage.

That could be a factor of increasing income inequity in Texas’ major metropolitan areas.

“If you look at incomes in Harris County, you can see a real trend toward increasing inequity,” he said. “There are a higher percentage of people now in lower income brackets, and increases in the highest two income brackets.

“But with this shift to lower income brackets or the highest ones, the middle is decreasing.”