About 130,000 Americans pick up and move somewhere else every single day, the U.S. Census Bureau estimates. And guess who are among the most mobile? We itchy Californians.

Perhaps you're wondering what moving around has to do with Obamacare. Quite a lot, actually.

Health plan options — and prices — vary by geography, and the Golden State is chopped into a whopping 19 regions. Los Angeles is so large it accounts for two of those regions, and that doesn't include the Inland Empire or Orange County.



In this installment, I'll run down what happens with your insurance when you travel or move and whether you'll be able to see a doctor when you're in Boise, Berlin or even Berkeley.

Q: I am considering enrolling in one of the Covered California plans. How will my coverage work if I am out of state — or out of the country — and need medical care?

A: Well, I'll add another part to this question: What happens when traveling within California?

As I mentioned above, health plans sold on the open market and through our health insurance exchange, Covered California, vary by region. That means not all plans are sold in all regions. In fact, some have a limited geographic reach, including L.A. Care Health Plan and Sharp Health Plan in San Diego.



So, if you're traveling within the state and need care, it depends on what your insurance is and what doctor and hospital network it offers. If, say, you have a Kaiser plan, you can visit an in-network Kaiser doctor or hospital outside of your region and have the costs covered.

But if your insurer's network doesn't extend to your destination, you will only be reimbursed for emergency or urgent-care services, not routine visits, said Lizelda Lopez of Covered California.

So when you're traveling outside California, your insurer doesn't matter: You are only eligible to have emergency and urgent medical services covered. “None of our plans have out-of-state networks,” Lopez says.



By the way, this isn't necessarily new. Earlier this year, when I visited the East Coast, I got a scary infection that needed immediate attention. I called my insurer, which instructed me to choose from a list of specific ERs and urgent-care facilities. I dutifully complied but still had to fight to get my visit covered.

Lopez's advice? If you're faced with a medical necessity wherever you're visiting, double-check with your insurer to find out if a provider is covered. And be prepared for a fight afterward.

Advertisement

Q: What happens if an individual moves to another state after signing up for a plan? I'll be living in California for the first few months of 2014, but there's a definite chance I may be moving to Washington. Will it be possible to transfer my plan to a different state partway through the year?

A: Once again, I put forth an addendum to the question, and it may sound familiar: What if you move within Cali­fornia?

The answer also may sound familiar: It depends on your insurer. If your plan is also offered in your new locale, you keep it. If you want to change it, you'll have to wait until the next open-enrollment period.



If they don't offer the same plan in your new hometown, you're eligible for a special enrollment period and can sign up for a new plan.

Now back to the question at hand. If you move to another state, you will need to enroll in a new plan through that state's exchange or buy on the open market. If that state doesn't run its own exchange (Washington does), you would need to use the federal exchange, healthcare.gov, if it ever gets to working right).

Moving to another state also triggers a special enrollment period, so you'd be able to choose a new plan immediately.



Q:What about Americans living in another country such as Sweden, where health insurance is covered? Why should I be required to have insurance in the States when I don't even live there?

A: As most of you know, “Ask Emily” is geared toward a California audience. But people write from all corners of the country — and, it turns out, all corners of the world, as I have received questions from the likes of New Zealand, Thailand, Malaysia and Australia.

The answer here depends on how long you are out of the country in a given calendar year. According to the Internal Revenue Service, U.S. citizens who live abroad for at least 330 days within a 12-month period don't have to comply with the Obamacare insurance mandate, which requires most Americans to have health insurance as of Jan. 1.