A new report from the Commonwealth Fund ranks the U.S. healthcare system as the most expensive in the world — and the worst performing.

Compared with Australia, Canada, France, Germany, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Sweden, Switzerland and the United Kingdom, the U.S. was last or near-last in categories of health access, efficiency and equity, according to the report.

Especially in equity, America showed the biggest difference in care for high-income and low-income patients.

"The U.S. health care system is not the 'fairest of them all,'" the authors write. "At least from the viewpoint of those who use it to stay healthy, get better, or manage their chronic illnesses, or who are vulnerable because of low income and poor health."

The United Kingdom, which has national health insurance, ranked first, and Switzerland came in second. Switzerland has an insurance system similar to the U.S., but health insurers cannot profit off basic plans.

The study's authors say that our ranking is so low in part because we don't have universal health coverage; however, the data was collected before Obamacare fully rolled out. Rankings may thus rise in the future.

But the U.K. and the U.S. ranked low in terms of "healthy lives," which takes into account infant mortality, life expectancy at age 60 and death from preventable diseases.

America spends the most on health care while Austalia spends the least. (Commonwealth Fund)

The results weren't all bad for America: We ranked well in the "effective care" category, scoring high on preventative care efforts.

But "efficient care" was a problem for us — administrative hassles between doctors and patients got in the way, as did erroneous medical testing and overuse of the ER, the report said.

The U.S. spends most of its GDP on health care — 17.7% — while Australia spends the least, 8.9%.

We are picking up steam in developing new health information technology, but our quality assurance is still an issue. The report said we should take notes from other countries to improve our system in the coming years.

America ranked last in "efficiency, equity and outcomes" in 2010, 2007, 2006 and 2004, as well.

The full rankings are as follows:

1. United Kingdom

2. Switzerland

3. Sweden

4. Australia

5. Germany & Netherlands (tied)

7. New Zealand & Norway (tied)

9. France

10. Canada

11. United States

mengel@nydailynews.com