Starting Dec. 18 and running through Dec. 29, PennLive Opinion will count down the top 13 policy issues of 2013. Federal government dysfunction is #10 on our list.

The Big Story:

Dysfunction in the federal government disrupted life for many in central Pennsylvania

Act I: The "sequester"

The threat of slash-and-burn, automatic, across-the-board spending cuts wasn’t enough to get Congress to agree on a budget for this year. Those cuts, known as the “sequester,” forced thousands of civilian workers at Central Pennsylvania defense facilities to take weeks of unpaid furloughs and slashed services for the needy, like Head Start.

Act II: Government shutdown

Republicans in Congress forced a 16-day partial government shutdown in October as they tried to delay or defund the Affordable Care Act (aka “Obamacare”). Thousands of Central Pa. workers again were forced off the job (although Congress later agreed to pay them) and the region’s premier visitor attraction, Gettysburg National Military Park, closed. The fiasco put a $24 billion dent in the national economy.

Act III: Unemployment aid expires

Congress finally passed a budget in December, but facing implacable opposition by Republicans, Congress failed to extend unemployment benefits for those out of work more than 6 months. By the end of this month, this vital safety net will be yanked away from some 86,900 Pennsylvanians.

The Analysis:

Pennsylvanians are learning that the divided system of government created by the nation’s founders in the Constitution has a downside. When voters in a polarized electorate entrust power to different factions in the House, Senate and presidency, it’s difficult to get the routine business of government done.

What we said:

May 31, 2013 Editorial

“The exercise in federal budget blackmail known as the ‘sequester’ … has backfired and we're feeling the effects.

Thousands of civilian employees at the region’s defense installations will endure unpaid furlough days, cutting their pay by as much as 20 percent through the end of September. … the furloughs will drain millions of dollars worth of economic activity from the mid-state.

Oct. 2, 2013 Editorial

“Leave aside whether you like or dislike the Affordable Health Care Act. The president and Senate are defending a law duly passed by both houses of Congress, signed by the president and upheld by the U.S. Supreme Court. [By provoking the government shutdown] the law’s opponents in the House Republican majority are engaging in political blackmail.”

Dec. 3, 2013 Editorial

“What afflicts the Capitol now is its inability to reach agreement or common ground on even the most basic of matters. …

“The cumulative effect of inaction and mismanagement that extends from one end of Pennsylvania Avenue to the other is the slow and steady erosion of public trust in government and its institutions.

Feb. 13, 2013 Editorial

“Obama was correct when he noted ‘the greatest nation on Earth cannot keep conducting its business by drifting from one manufactured crisis to the next.’

“Blame for that extends to both ends of Pennsylvania Avenue. The White House and Congress share equal culpability.”