A labama has a way with words.

Rick Bragg can turn a phrase like nobody's business: "Momma kept a garden, which sounds romantic to people who have never held a hoe."

Harper Lee gave us Scout, and Atticus, for Pete's sake. The state can claim Forrest Gump and Crazy in Alabama and Fried Green Tomatoes. If we really reach we can claim a piece of Truman Capote, and of John Green.

So it stinks to hear that people don't read the way they used to. A Huffington Post/YouGov poll found recently that more than a quarter of all American hadn't read one single book in the last year.

Not one.

But Justin Bieber has 50 million followers on Twitter, where the writer's art is telling all you need to say in 140 characters or less. As in – and this is a real one:

dear cops. my beliebers wont hurt me. all is ok

It's a mad, mad, mad, mad world. So maybe, if we want to look at the world around us in ways that will make the world look too, we need to step back. Perhaps we can use life lessons taught us by Mad Magazine way back in the day when a twitter was what you got when you saw your girlfriend walked by. Mad Magazine had a feature called "The world's shortest books" that explained, in Twitter-like brevity, the real truth of the world:

"The Truths I have told," by Richard Nixon.

Or:

"A History of Racial Justice in Alabama and Mississippi."

Since the Literacy Council of West Alabama tells us now that one of every four people in this state are functionally illiterate, we need our own short books to tell us our story.

Here's a start. I welcome your suggestions:

"A Complete Guide to recent BCS Championship Games that don't involve teams from Alabama."

That's not just short. It's fiction.

"Larry Langford's Good Ideas," by anybody but Larry Langford.

It would serve as a companion to the world's longest book: "Larry Langford's Good Ideas," by Larry Langford. (The convicted former mayor of Birmingham's ideas included a replica of the Trevi Fountain and the 2020 Olympic Games – which doesn't look so dumb in the shadow of Sochi)

"Business Ethics," by Richard Scrushy.

The convicted HealthSouth founder could write that one on the back of a stamp. I'd still only read the Cliff's Notes.

"Advice for Children," by Tallulah Bankhead.

"How to Win Votes and Influence Politics," by the Alabama Democratic Party.

"Class," by Auburn tree-killer Harvey Updyke. That one is Illustrated – briefly but graphically -- by New Orleans teabagger Brian Downing.

"Embracing diversity," by the Hoover Board of Education.

"Everything You Wanted to Know About Obamacare, But Were Afraid to Ask," by Gov. Robert Bentley. It is the sequel to Dr. Bentley's "What the Hippocratic Oath means to me."

Rep. John Rogers' "The Art of Elocution." Rogers' "Art of Election," on the other hand, is pretty long.

"A Warm Welcome," by Sen. Scott Beason is wafer thin. It is even shorter when translated into Spanish. The title – "No dejes que la puerta te pegue cuando salgas" – is longer than the book. (Don't Let the Door Hit You on the Way Out).

"Colorblind," by Democratic Party kingpin Joe L. Reed.

"Things I Love About Environmentalists," by Alabama Public Service Commission President Twinkle Cavanaugh.

"Things we Love About Twinkle Cavanaugh," by environmentalists.

And finally, the shortest Alabama book of our age:

"A Guard's Guide to the Care and Feeding of Inmates," by the The Tutwiler Prison staff.

Hey. It ain't "War and Peace."

John Archibald is a columnist for Alabama Media Group. jarchibald@al.com.