The last United States recession ended in June 2009. This was the so-called Great Recession, which began in December 2007 after the sub-prime mortgage collapse, and reached a climax in September 2008 with the panic surrounding the collapse of Lehman Brothers and AIG. The Great Recession lasted 18 months compared to the average postwar recession of 10 months. Gross domestic product declined 4.3% in the Great Recession, a significantly larger drop than any recession since 1945.

The end of any recession marks the start of a new recovery. Since mid-2009 economic cheerleaders have consistently suggested that the recovery was gaining strength and that growth was moving back to its long-term trend of about 3.5% per year. In the summer of 2009, talking heads spoke of “green shoots.” In early 2010, Treasury secretary Timothy Geithner predicted a “recovery summer.”

Every year since, economists have predicted strong growth in the second half of the year and every year those expectations have been disappointed. In fact, the current recovery has been one of the weakest on record with total jobs, labor force participation and real incomes all below the peaks they reached in 2007, and growth has been well below its potential. There has been a recovery in the stock market, and housing prices have recovered some of their losses, but these trends should be viewed as asset bubbles resulting from Fed easy money policies and not solid indicators of real growth.

In fact, there is good reason to believe that the economy is heading for another recession soon, rather than the more robust growth economists keep predicting. Throughout this recovery, the economic fundamentals have never been strong. More than 50 million Americans are on food stamps, 26 million Americans are either unemployed, underemployed or have given up looking for work, 11 million Americans are claiming disability payments — effectively a new form of unemployment insurance, and labor force participation is at the lowest level since 1978 when women began to enter the workforce in great numbers. These data are consistent with a depression. By themselves, these fundamentals do not mean the economy is technically in recession, but when combined with other developments, it appears that a new recession may be looming.

The first issue is longevity. The average postwar recovery lasted 57 months and this recovery is now 54 months old. This does not mean that a new recession must begin soon, but it is certainly a sober backdrop against which to consider other data. It means that a recession in 2014 is a likely possibility.

Other factors are equally downbeat. The Gallup organization reports that 2013 holiday spending plans are down 10% from 2012 levels and 19% from the levels of 2007. The last two times Gallup showed a year-over-year slump in holiday spending plans, the economy did enter a recession soon after. Other recent data show declining home sales and declining home prices. These data are all consistent with a new recession despite booming stock markets.

Another prominent factor is what economists called “regime uncertainty.” This refers to a highly uncertain business climate caused by government policy dysfunction independent of normal business risks that all executives face. The list of uncertainties is well-known including debt ceiling clashes, government spending fights over continuing budget resolutions and statutory sequesters, environmental regulation, the fate of the Keystone pipeline and the uncertain costs of Obamacare. The point is not whether specific policies are good or bad — business people can usually roll with the punches when it comes to bad policy. The point is that the outcomes are uncertain and businesses cannot commit to new investment and new hiring when they cannot ascertain the costs.

Beyond these domestic difficulties, global growth is also slowing. The Chinese economy is undergoing a slowdown and the Japanese economy has recently resumed its decline after the optimism of the Abenomics launch in late 2012. Emerging markets have also fallen victim to the currency wars conducted by the Fed and are trapped between declining exports from a too strong currency and inflation if they try to cap their currencies against the dollar. Around the world, deflation is gaining the upper hand on inflation. This produces lower nominal gross domestic product, which exacerbates debt-to-GDP ratios and requires more austerity to avoid sovereign debt crises. United States exporters from Boeing to GE to Hollywood suffer when the world slows down.

The best way to make sense of this anemic recovery is to understand that it is not a normal business cycle recovery at all, but the continuation of an economic state more properly defined as a depression. There is much confusion about the definition of the word “depression.” Many assume it means continuous declines in GDP, but that is incorrect. It actually means a sustained period of below-trend growth punctuated by technical recessions. The best example is the Great Depression from 1929 to 1940, which included two recessions from 1929 to 1933 and 1937 to 1938. The periods 1933 to 1936 and 1938 to 1940 were technically “recoveries” but economic growth never reached its potential until war mobilization in 1941. Stock prices and real estate prices did not fully recover until 1954, 26 years after their prior peaks.

Unfortunately history may be repeating itself. After the recession of 2007 to 2009, we may be heading for the second recession — within-a-depression in 2014. The reasons are similar to conditions in 1937 consisting of a combination of fiscal tightening, regime uncertainty and global spillovers. This does not mean that stock prices will not continue to go up. Once difference between 2014 and 1937 is that the Federal Reserve has learned to keep the money spigots wide open. But, in watching the stock markets, investors should be aware that they are witnessing another bubble in the making. Enjoy it while it lasts, because it will end badly. Early-to-mid 2014 may be good time to take profits, stay liquid and adopt a more defensive posture.

James Rickards is portfolio manager for the West Shore Real Asset Income Fund and the author of “Currency Wars: The Making of the Next Global Crisis” from Portfolio/Penguin Random House. Follow on twitter @JamesGRickards.