Omar Epps and Frances Fisher in “Resurrection.” Photo by Guy D’Alema

To open the tomb on “Resurrection,” or not open the tomb?

Getting the tomb open, the obvious step to discovering if dead Jacob is in two places at once, is the major plot point threading through this episode. There’s no resurrected person of the week, thank goodness.

Bellamy wants to test the remains against the living Jacob. The Langstons object. And Elaine isn’t very interested in knowing what happened to undead Dad, Caleb Richards, either. I can’t decide if this is plausible or not. If you weren’t sure you wanted to know, would you go to lengths to stop from finding out? It’s worth considering. Because after all, what if he’s one of those clever simulating alien-types from Star Trek. You know? Maybe your returned loved one is in reality a blob of squeaky gelatin. This week’s episode is a little deeper on atmosphere, a little slower on plot, than the pilot. That’s all to the good.

Fred the sheriff is angry in an overkill kind of way. He tells his daughter that her mother had post-partum depression, and is mad at her when that doesn’t stop her from wanting to open the tomb. For him it’s about desecration, not fact-finding. For Lucille and Fred Langston, not wanting the tomb opened is about emotional pain.

And we finally got Jacob out of his death clothes and into new little boy clothes as he goes to play soccer with other little boys. But it’s not easy being newly not-dead: the other parents call their kids off the field. I wonder what exactly they think their kids could catch from resurrected Jacob? I guess the families are scared in a general way. Bellamy suggest they lie about who Jacob is, for now. I don’t know, is it just me, or would most kids want to run up and quiz the new boy about being dead, I mean, how cool is that?

Rev. Tom tells Lucille, Jacob’s mom, that some people in the congregation were also kind of freaked out, and thinks pretending Jacob is someone else is a good idea. And he refuses to meet Jacob, although he was once Jacob’s best friend, e though Jacob is sitting right there. But then he does stop by later. While Tom sets up a video game, Jacob recalls how a he used to set up the film in a favorite teacher’s class. Tom hadn’t thought about her for years, but “she was my favorite teacher,” Jacob says. Aw, poor kid. If it really is him, this memory isn’t 32 years old, for him. Lucille runs hurriedly from the kitchen hearing raised voices of “no” and “back up” and is relieved to find it’s just Jacob and Tom playing a video game together. “This is the first time you’ve played this?” Tom says. Yep. Kids are that good at picking up electronic games.

The older dead not dead person, Caleb Richards, is more articulate than Jacob, and actually wears hospital clothing when they examine him, unlike Jacob who stayed in that damn sweatshirt for a week. Maggie, the doctor (are there no conflicts of interest in Arcadia?) is puzzled by how he had had a heart attack three days ago when he said he woke up. She too wonders if they cremated the wrong person. Elaine says all that matters is her dad is back and he’s different. And, she says, maybe some things are more important, when Maggie asks her if she wants to know the truth. Later, she sees his jacket lying on a chair and flashes back to him wearing it at an open casket funeral, where she put a note in his pocket. She digs into the pocket, but the note is not there. Ray tells Elaine that he’s been watching “that man” and he’s not dad, he’s pretending. Maybe it is just a squeaky blob of gelatin for real. Out of the mouth of the unstable, eh? But maybe these people don’t know they are imposters Dad is digging in the yard something that looks like a grave when he has a flashback to having a heart attack. That seems to unnerve him, but he keeps digging, and stops when he finds something white in the hole—a piece of a shirt? I couldn’t tell. Later Dad catches Ray snooping in his room. And we see Dad pull the note from Elaine out of his Bible, and fold it up. He seems to have seen it before.

Maggie finds the man her mother had an affair with. He tells her he’s not her father, but he waited by the river until someone found her. He did not leave her. “She found us,” he tells someone we can’t see.

The second time Jacob is at the playground, Lucille tells Bellamy they’ve decided Jacob shouldn’t have to lie. Then we see Elaine’s dad talking to him—shudder. Bellamy runs over. What did he say? “Lie,” Jacob replies.

We end at the grand tomb opening.

What do you think? Are people not nearly curious enough? Is the atmosphere on? What was the white thing in the hole? Are the dead people who they claim to be?