Buy Photo File photo of Kroger in Waynesboro. (Photo: Mike Tripp/The News Leader)Buy Photo

WAYNESBORO - Union employees at the Waynesboro and Staunton Kroger stores could be heading to the picket line.

The Waynesboro and Staunton stores are part of 41 Kroger stores that have been negotiating a contract with corporate officials for increased wages and benefits.

Wednesday, members of the Local 400 United Food and Commercial Workers Union rejected Kroger's offer and voted to authorize a strike in the 41 stores in the region, according to the UFCW website.

The vote Wednesday doesn't mean area Kroger stores will immediately strike.

"Kroger’s latest proposal would have provided only slight wage increases and no paid sick days for store associates," the website said. "It also fell short of renewing the company’s commitment to providing health insurance for its retirees."

​Kroger has refused to provide its associates with paid sick days, and is proposing to force all retired employees off of the company-provided healthcare and onto Affordable Care Act exchanges funded by taxpayers, the website said.

"By rejecting this insulting offer and voting to authorize a strike, we sent a strong, clear message to Kroger. We demand a fair deal and we are willing to fight for it," the website said.

Now, Kroger has reopened negotiations, which will resume May 23.

Those part of the Local 400 have been working since early May to fight for better wages and benefits after corporate presented a last-minute proposal that would have provided only slight wage increases and no paid sick days for store associates, the website said.

The contract covers 41 Kroger stores in the region stretching from Kingsport, Tennessee to Harrisonburg. Approximately 3,000 of the affected associates are union members with Local 400 of the UFCW, the website said.

Follow Laura Peters @peterslaura and @peterpants. You can reach her at lpeters@newsleader.com or 213-9125.

Read or Share this story: http://www.newsleader.com/story/news/local/2016/05/18/waynesboro-kroger-stores-could-strike/84550480/