In an interview last week on MSNBC, Rep. Alan Grayson (D-FL) rejected the notion that he is the Democratic Party’s version of Sen. Ted Cruz (R-TX).

In fact, Grayson is so disgusted at the suggestion that said Cruz is “trying to hasten the apocalypse” and compared him to Jim Jones, a religious cult leader responsible for the deaths of 909 people.

“Ted Cruz represents the element of the Republican Party that’s trying to hasten the apocalypse,” Grayston told MSNBC host Richard Lui. “These are people who think that Obamcare is helping to save lives, and they want to destroy it anyway. These are people who understand a government shutdown causes chaos to the economy, and they want to do it anyway. These are people who understand defaulting on the national debt would drive unemployment sky high, and they want to do it anyway.”

Lui noted that Cruz was recently given the “Statesman of the Year” award by the Sarasota County (FL) Republican Party, despite criticism from prominent Republicans. The host asked how Grayson dealt with criticism from his own party.

“Well, I haven’t gotten that kind of criticism from my own party. But, in any event, calling [Cruz] the ‘Statesman of the Year’ would be like calling Jim Jones the ‘Religious Leader of the Year,’ for much the same reason,” Grayson said. “He’s trying to create sort of a mass suicide cult called the Tea Party and lead it. I don’t think I can be accused of anything similar to that.”

The far-leftist Florida Democrat went on to say that the Democratic Party “is not a fringe group,” adding that “[i]f there were an Olympic gold medal for demagoguery, Ted Cruz would win the gold.”

Grayson is known for lobbing bombs at political opponents. In 2009, he said that Republicans opposed Obamacare because they want the sick to “die quickly.” That sort of absurd rhetoric cost him his seat in 2010, though he managed to slither his way back into the House in 2012.

More recently, since going back to Washington, Grayson has compared the Tea Party to the Ku Klux Klan and welcomed the rise of “stealth socialism” in the United States.

H/T: Conservative Intel