Pavlov says President Barack Obama’s Affordable Care Act has made the 40-hour work week an endangered species. (Photo: David Guralnick / Detroit News)

The greatest bipartisan achievement of the 1990s was welfare reform, and it was also the most successful social and economic experiment of the post-war era. In fact, Michigan and then-Gov. John Engler were national leaders for reform at the time. You’ll probably remember that liberals protested furiously and claimed that if we insisted people work for their welfare benefits that thousands would be starving and freezing to death in the streets — even in the summer! But contrary to their predictions, people got off welfare, got jobs, joined the middle class, and we had a strong, growing economy that worked for everyone.

But since the very first day of the Obama administration, they’ve worked to un-reform welfare and usher in a new era of dependence. Frankly, it’s the only policy of theirs that’s worked exactly as intended. Today, seven years into the economic “recovery,” a record 47 million Americans still collect food stamps, the disability insurance trust fund is going broke because of the record number of people collecting disability benefits, and a smaller percentage of working age adults are in the work force than any time since the 1970s.

And consider the city of Seattle, where city leaders triumphantly achieved their goal of a fifteen-dollar an hour minimum wage. We now have employers coming forward telling about how they have employees asking to have their hours reduced, because at the new higher wage, they might lose some of their welfare benefits. The sad thing is that stories like this don’t even shock us anymore.

If the ’90s was the era of welfare reform, this is truly the era of the Obama phone, and that era can’t come to an end fast enough.

Their economic policies have systematically destroyed American jobs, crushed small businesses and the Affordable Care Act has made the 40-hour work week an endangered species. They destroy our jobs, and then they expect us to be happy with their handouts. But Americans don’t want handouts. We want jobs.

To that end and to strengthen our economy, I’ve been proud to join my colleagues to reform Michigan’s job-killing tax code. Now Michigan’s unemployment rate is lower than the national average for the first time since 2000. That, and once again we’ve reformed welfare in Michigan. Welfare caseloads are down a stunning 70 percent. We clamped down on Bridge Card abuse. And we’re finally strictly enforcing time limits for welfare benefits.

It’s all about a fight for jobs — not handouts — and we have to win this fight or we’re going to lose the middle class.

Together, let’s insist on work requirements for all able-bodied adults collecting any support from taxpayers. Let’s enforce time limits as well, so that welfare helps people transition back to work, and not become a way of life.

Let’s agree that the culture of corporate welfare, bailouts and handouts from Washington has to stop. Others can talk the talk, but in Michigan, we’ve fought the fight.

Read or Share this story: http://detne.ws/1iW1wQQ