ROCHELLE PARK, N.J., Aug. 17, 2015 /PRNewswire/ -- INSYS Group, Inc. announces a new, national healthcare practice under the leadership of Brian Fabiano as Managing Partner.

"We have been steadily expanding our presence in the healthcare industry," said Linda Magnusson-Rosario, President and CEO, "particularly in the space where healthcare comes together with Big Data analytics. So it's time for us to go national. And Brian has done a terrific job with our healthcare customers as an INSYS client partner, so it's time to recognize that through this promotion."

Fabiano's background is in business development, with a focus on increasing utilization, boosting productivity and improving customer satisfaction. He has also worked in recruiting and vendor management, and is well versed in the technologies and systems supporting cloud computing, mobility and Big Data.

Before coming to INSYS in October 2013, Fabiano worked in business development at MISI Company, a provider of consulting and technical resources for the Fortune 500 and the public sector. MISI is part of the NTT DATA Group, and Fabiano also worked at NTT DATA America as a senior sales executive. Prior to that engagement, he was an account executive at ExxonMobil. He has a BS in Marketing & Management from Rider University.

Fabiano is enthusiastic about his expanded role at INSYS, which will give him more room to build out and develop the company's healthcare practice. He currently oversees more than 80 field consultants working at some of the country's largest healthcare payers and providers. "It's a very exciting time in healthcare," said Fabiano, "and technology has never been more important. Whether it's the deployment of electronic medical records, adapting systems to support the requirements of the Affordable Care Act or dealing with the issues raised by Big Data, our clients are looking for our insights to help them solve real business problems."

Fabiano will continue to work out of the INSYS offices in Rochelle Park, but will spend most of his time where he always does: meeting with clients and consultants in the field.

About INSYS

INSYS Group is a Women-Owned Business Enterprise which supports Fortune 100 clients through its three operating units: Insys Consulting provides the human capital needed in information technology for a broad range of verticals, including financial services and pharmaceuticals. Truthnote Partners addresses business and technology issues by helping with market innovation, operational efficiency and business agility. Veracite Partners specializes in the niche market of financial consulting, providing skilled resources with experience in performance analysis, risk management and regulatory compliance.

For more information, please visit www.insys.com.

SOURCE INSYS Group, Inc.