Jennifer Rubin writes the Right Turn blog for The Post, offering reported opinion from a conservative perspective.



Jennifer Rubin

Getting into the Christmas spirit, we thought we would pick out gifts for some prominent people, so here goes:

For Donald Trump, finding something for the man who has or can buy anything is a challenge. Nevertheless, he plainly does not have a copy of the U.S. Constitution, so let's get him either that or a life-size cutout of Russian President Vladimir Putin.

For Sen. Ted Cruz, R-Texas, we will look for a time machine that allows him to go back to 2013 to edit all his prior votes, statements and interviews concerning legalization of 11 million people here illegally so that his record aligns with his present version of events.

For House Speaker Paul Ryan, some noise-cancelling headphones might help. He'll need to screen out all the political noise and nonsense as he embarks on a conservative reform agenda next year. USA Today reported, "When Congress returns in January, Ryan said he expects quick work on criminal justice reform and legislation to improve screening of Syrian refugees. He also mentioned consideration of a new resolution to authorize the use of military force against the jihadist Islamic State, and proposals to repeal and replace the Affordable Care Act." To achieve those items plus a tax reform plan, he surely will need whatever help he can get to prevent distraction.

For our magnificent military whose needs are so great and varied, it's hard to know where to start. Cash, lots of it over the next 10 years or so in this case, is always good in such circumstances. Most vital, however, is a commander in chief who supports them and pursues military objectives with determination.

For Mike Huckabee, Carly Fiorina, Sen. Rand Paul, R-Ky., Rick Santorum, George Pataki and Sen. Lindsey Graham, R-S.C., a one-way ticket home from Iowa on Feb. 2, the day after the caucus, will come in handy. Likewise, Ohio Gov. John Kasich could use a ticket home to Ohio right after the New Hampshire primary.

For Sen. Marco Rubio, R-Fla., a police radar detector for his car would have come in handy a few years back. For now, maybe some first-round draft picks for his beloved, hapless Miami Dolphins.

For every member of Congress and all GOP candidates, a copy of "The Conservative Heart" by Arthur Brooks, the most important conservative book written in years.

For the Republican National Committee, Christmas came early with another exhibition of confusion and ham-handedness from its rival, the Democratic National Committee. Open warfare broke out between the campaign of Sen. Bernie Sanders, I-Vt., accused of snatching Hillary Clinton's voter data and the DNC, which briefly denied Sanders access to voter information. (The Post reported, "In early Saturday morning statements, both parties relayed that the DNC - facing a federal lawsuit from the Sanders camp - had agreed to end its suspension of the campaign's access to key voter information contained in a DNC-controlled database, including data the Sanders campaign had gathered about its own supporters.") The best gift the RNC could hope for is another year of Rep. Debbie Wasserman Schultz (Fla.) at the helm of the DNC.