Photo

HANOVER, N.H. — Hillary Rodham Clinton has steadfastly ignored Bernie Sanders, the Vermont senator who is also vying for the Democratic presidential nomination, even as he has surged in the polls. But she sent a clear signal on Friday that she was not planning to cede any ground to her liberal rival.

While New Hampshire has long been hospitable to the Clinton family – her husband called himself “the comeback kid” after finishing second in the primary here in 1992, and she won the 2008 primary – Mrs. Clinton’s appearance here came as Mr. Sanders has been surging in the polls.

“I will fight hard against what I see as the injustice and unfairness in our society,” Mrs. Clinton said, discussing her record and seemingly mindful of Mr. Sanders as she did. “I take a back seat to no one when you look at my record of standing up and fighting for progressive values.

Mrs. Clinton delivered the unbridled defense of her record as she addressed a crowd estimated by her aides at more than 850 in Hanover, the leafy New Hampshire town that is home to Dartmouth College.

Mrs. Clinton’s aides have struggled since before she announced her candidacy with the reality that her sky-high early poll numbers would be almost impossible to sustain. They have sought to diminish the expectations for her, and have sought to avoid chasing distractions.

The Vermont border is just across the Connecticut River from Hanover, and several attendees at Mrs. Clinton’s event on Friday said they were either from Vermont and were curious, or were supporting Mr. Sanders.

Mrs. Clinton’s speech demonstrated the challenge she faces: She must keep a wary eye on Mr. Sanders without attacking him, but she must also seem engaged and rouse her supporters, so attacks on the Republican field on issues like the Affordable Care Act have been her approach.

She kept to that script here on Friday, warning that a Republican president would repeal the health care law, and she denounced the administration of George W. Bush for “poor management” of the economy that led to the recession.

“I will defend it and I will do everything i can to improve it,” Mrs. Clinton said of Mr. Obama’s signature health care law, calling it an issue of “fairness and humanity, also of economics” and praising the Supreme Court for recently upholding it.

Republican calls for “repeal, repeal, repeal mean nothing – unless they elect a Republican president,” Mrs. Clinton warned, saying ominously, “If the country elects a Republican president, then they will repeal the Affordable Care Act.”

Her voice rising at times, Mrs. Clinton called for new gun control laws as she spoke in a state where many residents own guns. And she sounded a note of muted praise for a potential nuclear deal with Iran, while vowing to defend her record on “progressive values” against anyone.

Holding a microphone as she spoke from the stage at The Bema, an amphitheater-style spot near the college campus – where, according to a Clinton aide, the high school graduation of Mrs. Clinton’s Vermont-bred campaign manager, Robby Mook, took place – she said that Republican policies had a history of failure.

“Then Democrats have to come in and fix what’s broken,” she said, noting that at the end of her husband’s two terms there was a “surplus that would have paid off the national debt had it not been rudely interrupted by the next administration.”

Republicans “just don’t know the theory of original sin, because we wouldn’t have had to have a recovery if we hadn’t had the kind of poor management and bad economic policies that put us into the ditch in the first place,” she said to applause.

Mr. Obama, she said, “deserves a lot more credit than he’s usually given” for pulling the economy back.

She also pledged to continue discussing gun control, saying, “We have to work very hard to muster the public opinion to convince Congress” to support universal background checks for gun buyers.

“I think it is the height of irresponsibility not to talk about it, so I will talk about it,” she said.

As for Iran, Mrs. Clinton walked a careful line. She said she supported the Obama administration in its efforts to get a deal to curtail Iran’s nuclear capabilities, calling it a “singular step in the right direction,” but warned that such a deal would not change the fact that Iran was an “existential threat to Israel.”

After the speech, Mrs. Clinton visited the Dairy Twirl ice cream parlor in the nearby town of Lebanon, where she was asked by a reporter about the large crowds that Mr. Sanders has been drawing. “I always knew this was going to be competitive,” she said.

But Mrs. Clinton, who was introduced at the Dartmouth event by a campaign organizer, acknowledged that organization was a failure of her 2008 campaign and said her team was focused now on organizing around the country — the clear implication being that she did not intend to be surprised this time around.

“One of the things I certainly learned from the last campaign is how important it is not just to have events but to organize every single day, including around the events,” she said.