The pool of candidates for blood glucose screenings has widened.

The U.S. Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF) last month issued new guidelines recommending that adults ages 40 to 70 years who are overweight or obese be screened for abnormal blood glucose as part of their cardiovascular risk assessment.

According to the task force, patients should be screened even if they're asymptomatic. If patients are found to have high blood sugar, they "should be referred to intensive behavioral counseling interventions to promote a healthy diet and regular exercise."

The new guidelines are an update of a 2008 USPSTF recommendation which called for screening for diabetes in asymptomatic adults with hypertension. But since then, USPSTF says that six new studies have shown "consistent benefit of lifestyle modifications to prevent or delay progression to diabetes and longer-term follow-up has increased confidence that such interventions can improve clinical outcomes."

In light of these new studies, USPSTF says it now concludes that there is "moderate net benefit to measuring blood glucose in adults who are at increased risk for diabetes."

In publishing the recommendations in Annals of Internal Medicine, USPSTF says it "does not consider the costs of providing a service in this assessment" and "recognizes that clinical decisions involve more considerations than evidence alone." Even so, such recommendations raise practical questions about how screenings might be implemented in clinical practice, and of course, how it would be paid for.

When asked about how such services might be covered, an HHS spokesperson told HealthLeaders Media via email that: "The final recommendation by the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF), an independent group of experts, confirm that because of the Affordable Care Act, issuers must cover, without cost sharing, screening for abnormal blood glucose as part of cardiovascular risk assessment in adults aged 40 to 70 years who are overweight or obese. After screening, patients with abnormal glucose will also be referred to intensive behavioral counseling, which insurers will also cover without cost sharing."

HealthLeaders also reached out to Michael Pignone, MD, a member of the task force and a professor at the University of North Carolina-Chapel Hill, to discuss. The transcript below has been lightly edited.

Q: How would mass screenings work practically? Only by clinicians' referral? Or can an overweight/obese person request testing on their own?

A: The Task Force's recommendations are developed for use in primary care settings by clinicians and to educate patients on the benefits and harms of screening. Through our final recommendations, we hope to provide medical professionals and patients with the science behind the benefits and harms of this preventive service, so that patients can make informed choices about the care they receive. Patients who are concerned about diabetes should talk to their doctor.

Q: The recommendations say that "patients found to have high blood sugar should be referred to intensive behavioral counseling interventions." What happens next?

A: Task Force recommendations address only services offered in the primary care setting or services referred by a primary care clinician. Because intensive interventions may not be practical in many primary care settings, patients can be referred from primary care to community-based programs for these interventions. The Task Force defines such interventions as a combination of counseling, healthful diet, and physical activity, and are intensive, with multiple contacts over extended periods.

We are committed to providing recommendations based on the best available evidence to primary care professionals and to patients so that together they can make informed decisions about the benefits and risks of this preventive service. Patients should consult with their clinician on follow-up care and additional monitoring.

Q: What does USPSTF mean when it says it concluded that there is "moderate net benefit to measuring blood glucose in adults who are at increased risk for diabetes?" Is that in dollars? In lives? Another metric?

A: The Task Force's recommendations are based on an assessment of the strength of the evidence and on the balance of benefits and harms of the preventive service. For this topic, the Task Force found inadequate evidence that measuring blood glucose will help improve poor outcomes or prevent death from cardiovascular disease mortality or cardiovascular morbidity.

However, there is evidence that measuring blood sugar in adults at increased risk of diabetes, and treating those who have abnormal blood sugar with intensive lifestyle interventions, may decrease their risk of progression to diabetes. Benefits of behavioral interventions include reductions in blood pressure, glucose and lipid levels, and obesity and an increase in physical activity.

This report is brought to you by HealthLeaders Media.