Topics: AlterNet, Apology, Chris Christie, George Washington Bridge scandal, GOP, Politics, Politics News

This article originally appeared on Alternet

New Jersey Governor Chris Christie has long been the toast of the mainstream media, who liked to describe him as a straight-shooter not afraid to make tough decisions. The scandal that Christie finds himself ensnared in–his aide and his buddy at the Port Authority ordered the closing of a bridge that caused a massive traffic jam in Fort Lee–has hardly changed the mainstream media’s treatment of him. Christie’s political friends also continue to stick up for him.

Here’s 6 examples showing how the media, and other politicians, can’t fall out of love with Christie, a star in the Republican Party who is likely to run for president in 2016.

1. Rudy Giuliani: It Was a Prank

The basic contours of the bridge scandal in New Jersey are by now well-known. Christie’s deputy chief of staff, Bridget Kelley, along with David Wildstein, a high-school friend of the governor’s who was appointed to Port Authority, closed lanes on the George Washington Bridge which caused traffic jams in Fort Lee, New Jersey. They took those actions to punish Fort Lee’s Mayor, Mark Sokolich, who did not endorse Christie’s re-election bid.

Former New York City Mayor Rudy Giuliani, though, sees the whole scandal as a harmless joke. Speaking on CNN last Thursday, Giuliani described the scandal as a “stupid political prank that backfired.”

“Politically stupid things, political pranks that turn bad, all that other stuff [happens in] every administration,” Giuliani added. Unmentioned by Giuliani is that the “prank” slowed emergency response teams and caused children to be late to school.

2. Mika Brzezinski: Christie Responded Better Than Obama

The MSNBC pundit is a good friend of Christie’s, and she defended him after the governor’s marathon press conference. She favorably compared Christie’s response to the scandal to President Obama’s response to the alleged IRS scandal.

“Obama said he didn’t know about it, but he didn’t do what Chris Christie did. Which was [to] say, ‘But I’m responsible, and I don’t know what I did in my office, and I’ve got to do a lot of soul-searching to figure out why people felt they could do this,’” said Brzezinski.

3. Joe Scarborough: Let’s Look At Obama

Scarborough joined his colleague Brzezinski in apologizing for Christie.

The “Morning Joe” host said that “if we are going to be critical of Chris Christie, we have to be critical of a culture in Washington D.C. where Barack Obama has allowed one scandal after another to break and then say, oh, I didn’t know anything about it.”