Walsh (Photo: Michael J. Walsh)

After 20 years as mayor of De Pere, because I still enjoy the work I do as mayor and being very proud of my achievements, I believe this gives me a very good reason to run for another term as mayor.

Over the years we have continued to come up with new and exciting ideas to not only enhance the operations of the city of De Pere but also our citizens’ quality of life.

Some examples of the enhancements we have made to the city are: We are now using natural gas in our city vehicles, we have added the Riverwalk, the Medical College of Wisconsin, the Kress Family Library, Reid Street Crossing, Southwest Park Development, and we have started a new summer series of East/West Music Fest.

I would also like to continue the city’s high success rate of economic development. We have established TIF districts, which have provided the city with more business development in our downtown and have enabled the city to expand its business parks. The city and new business developers need to work together to make growth possible. The city of De Pere has a very good reputation as being easy to work with and that is why developers want to locate here. We work collaboratively with them and make suggestions and recommendations that will help to enhance their projects.

We continue to develop partnerships with other municipalities and have done so with the Joint 911 Communications Center, Central Brown County Water Authority, joint supply purchasing with other communities, room tax usage discussions, and the building of the Resch Center and KI Convention Center.

I feel a real sense of pride when I view the Claude Allouez Bridge, the upscale development changes in the downtown, the success of the downtown, especially with establishing the BID district, and the emergence again of our Main Street Program (Definitely De Pere), and also the large businesses that have located here, such as Green Bay Packaging, Belmark corporate headquarters, Foth, Walmart, Menards, and Festival Foods.

Over my 20 years, we have annexed over 2,000 acres, have had $784 million in new construction, have had more than $112 million in private investments and more than $42 million in public investments in our downtown, and there has been over 5.3 million square feet of industrial and commercial development.

My goal from day one was to leave the city a better place than when I first became mayor. I think I have accomplished this goal, but there is more that I would like to do in order to continue to make the city of De Pere a great place to live, work and play.

About Michael J. Walsh

Michael J. Walsh is currently the mayor of De Pere and is a lifelong resident of the city.

Read or Share this story: http://gbpg.net/1MswZs6