,

WHEELING - The first day of the 114th Congress saw Sen. Shelley Moore Capito drop the "-elect" from her title as she was sworn in as West Virginia's first female U.S. senator amid what she described as the "chaotic" atmosphere of a snow-blanketed Washington, D.C.

She also becomes the state's first Republican senator since John D. Hoblitzell Jr. was appointed to continue an unexpired term in 1958, and the first elected by voters since W. Chapman Revercomb in 1942.

"It obviously is a very exciting day for me," Capito, who represented West Virginia's 2nd District in the House for 14 years before defeating Secretary of State Natalie Tennant in November's election, told reporters in advance of the noon swearing-in ceremony.

Article Photos Photo Provided

Sen. Shelley Moore Capito, R-W.Va., is sworn into office by Vice President Joe Biden during a Tuesday ceremony in the Old Senate Chamber at the Capitol. Her husband, Charles Capito, holds the Bible.

Earlier Tuesday, Capito announced her appointment as counsel to new Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell, R-Ky. She will be part of a four-member group that also will include Sen. Rob Portman, R-Ohio, offering input and guidance to the GOP leadership team.

Capito said the Keystone Pipeline bill, introduced by Sens. Joe Manchin, D-W.Va., and John Hoeven, R-N.D., was identified as a high priority when that team met Monday. The bill is slated for a Wednesday hearing and Thursday vote in the Energy and Natural Resource Committee - of which both Manchin and Capito are members.

"It was defeated by one vote in the last Senate, and we will take this legislation up in hopes that the president will sign this," Capito said. "It's a jobs bill, it's an infrastructure bill."

Sixty senators signed on as co-sponsors of the pipeline bill, and 63 have indicated their support thus far, according to information provided by Manchin's office.

"We have everything to gain by building this pipeline," Manchin said. "Every state, including West Virginia, would benefit economically from this activity. It is my sincere hope that we can once and for all move forward with this important project."

Capito said she's unsure, however, whether it will receive the 67 votes necessary for a two-thirds, veto-proof majority.

"I think that remains to be seen. ... We'll get it to the president's desk and see what happens," she said.

Capito said she's looking forward to a more open legislative process, with more opportunities for debate and amendments to bills, than existed under former Majority Leader Harry Reid, D-Nev.

Immigration and healthcare are other issues high on Republicans' priority list, according to Capito. She expects the Senate will consider a funding bill that would make it difficult for President Barack Obama to move forward with his executive order on immigration, but she said the Senate likely will wait until the Supreme Court rules on the constitutionality of subsidies for health care coverage to move forward on changes to the Affordable Care Act. That may not happen until May.

Although she expects the Senate to take up a full repeal of the health care law at some point, as the House has done dozens of times, Capito has no illusions about the prospects of such a bill receiving the president's signature. Instead, she expects the Senate will attempt to roll back some provisions of the healthcare law through smaller measures, such as defining full-time employment as 40 hours per week, repealing the medical device tax and getting rid of the "individual mandate" requiring all citizens to carry health insurance or pay a penalty.

"I think what we're going to do is try to throw out what's not working, keep what's working and have a better process," Capito said.

Despite the talk of fighting the president on health care and immigration, Capito insisted she's committed to working in a bipartisan manner - including with Manchin, the state's now-senior senator.

"We will have a united front for our state," she said.