It’s an achievement anyone on its pound-shedding diets would envy: in a single day on the stock market, Weight Watchers has dropped 27% of its body mass:

The huge drop comes in the wake of seriously grim results announced after the close of markets on Thursday, and projections that things are set to get worse. What’s wrong? In short, it is getting tougher to convince people to pay monthly subscription fees – in the range of $40 a month for its flagship product — to access dietary advice and support groups, when new digital tools do it for free.

As the WSJ’s George Stahl reports:

The New York-based company has struggled to retain paying members in an era of free smartphone apps and gadgets that track calories. Late Thursday, Weight Watchers projected earnings to fall more than 50% this year, citing declining revenue and increased spending on products aimed at reinvigorating the company. “We don’t like our performance so far in 2014, and we are working hard right now to improve it,” President and Chief Executive Jim Chambers said on a conference call Thursday. “Our plans for the 2015 product innovation and healthcare initiative are on the right track.” Weight Watchers executives have been considering an array of strategies to stop the declines, including making it easier to sign up people, offering more personalized weight-loss programs and courting corporations and health-insurance providers to subsidize memberships. Thursday, executives indicated progress with its strategies but noted the projects will require higher spending this year, offsetting the company’s other cost-cutting plans.

Weight Watchers doesn’t just have to contend with free calorie-counting apps and online support forums. The wave of wearable gadgets that have been identified as one of the year’s biggest tech trends are also pushing into its territory, giving people tools to measure daily exercise activity, calorie burn rates and more.

But the company isn’t focused on competing with free mobile calorie counter apps, as CEO James Chambers said on its earnings call on Thursday evening, according to a CapitalIQ transcript:

With respect to the free app from a product perspective, what I’ve said is we certainly compete on one level for consideration with respect to all the noise that’s happening there. But on another level, free apps, needing them, it’s just not our strategic objective. This is an enormous market, and we are the leader. We’re focused on building this market by delivering results, delivering weight loss for people and making them feel better about their lives, making them feel healthier. So we compete with them for consideration, but that’s not the strategic objective, to beat the free app phenomena. We can do much, much better.

Instead, the company is looking at much bigger opportunities. One of them: Serving the millions of Americans whose Affordable Care Act-compliant health insurance plans now include weight loss services, as well as the wider market of health plans and company-sponsored employee health initiatives.

As Colin Watts, who heads the company’s Health Solutions business, said at an investor day late last year:

As we look at major market trends in healthcare, there are a couple that are important points to note. Over the past several years, the healthcare system has embraced the importance of prevention services. In fact, as you may know, in recent years, obesity has increasingly been recognized as a true medical condition, culminating in the disease recognition for obesity announced by the American Medical Association this past June. Healthcare reform has taken all of this a step further by building requirements in the law, ACA, for obesity screening, referral and counseling to be included as a required essential health benefit in all plans, offered via the newly formed health insurance exchanges or marketplaces. These essential health benefits are approved by the federally sanctioned organization that specifies the types of prevention and wellness services eligible for coverage, the United States Preventive Services Task Force or USPSTF. A little bit of a mouthful. After completing an exhaustive review of the scientific literature on obesity management, the USPSTF has recommended programs that provide intensive behavior therapy with clear clinical proof of efficacy as appropriate care for obesity. We believe Weight Watchers is one of the only national providers of intensive behavior therapy with comprehensive clinical support.

Mr. Watts said the Health Solutions unit, which targets health plans and corporate accounts, aims to be a $300 million business by 2018, up from about $75 million today.

See also:

Mobile Apps Take Their Toll on Weight Watchers – WSJ