Owner Tom Peters, right, points to old Jim Morrison photographs while helping Barbi Lawrence and her husband, Ray, shop for vinyl records Thursday at the new beat book shop location at 1200 Pearl St. For a video about the new location, go to www.dailycamera.com. ( Jeremy Papasso / Daily Camera )

Boulder's beat book shop, an independent bookseller that's operated on Pearl Street for almost a quarter-century, has moved into a bigger spot.

The bookstore first opened in 1990 at 1713 Pearl St. and then 1717 Pearl St. It has now relocated to Suite 10 of the underground shops at 1200 Pearl St.

The move took owner Tom Peters four weeks, but the store remained open everyday.

"We were open at the old place until we were done moving out of there," Peters said. "As soon as we opened the door here, we never have refused any customers. We tried to make sure that we stayed open the entire time so it wouldn't interfere with our flow of being open for 25 years."

The nearly 1,500-square-foot new location is the size of the beat book shop's first two stores combined.

Pearl Street Mall shoppers and book enthusiasts might recognize the address as that of the former Left Hand Books, the progressive bookstore that closed its doors in April 2013 after 34 years of business.

Boulder's beat book shop 1200 Pearl St., Suite 10 303-444-7111 beatbookshop.com

With the new space available, Peters is trying to display more of his inventory that the smaller spaces did not allow.

The opportunity to expand to a bigger space partly inspired the move, but it was mostly due to difficulties with bringing the heat and electricity in the store up to building codes, Peters said.

He started moving out of 1717 Pearl St. on Sept. 25.

"Everyday during pre-service I would watch him coming out with all of these books," said Bobby Stuckey, owner of Frasca Food and Wine and Pizzeria Locale, both across the street from 1717 Pearl St.

Stuckey opened Frasca a decade ago and described Peters as "the Pope of the east end of Pearl."

"He checked in on everybody and connected everyone there," Stuckey said. "He was so warm to us when we opened there."

It took 60 rented book carts to move the eight floor-to-ceiling shelves' worth of books.

The beat book shop has been selling books on AbeBooks.com, an online marketplace for independent booksellers, for more than 10 years and recently started selling on Amazon. The online retail giant acquired AbeBooks in 2008.

"It didn't make sense to not sell on Amazon when they own the small company we were selling books on," Peters said.

The store has 8,000 books listed online, Peters said. And, flipping through crates of records on display, he estimated he has 3,500 records for sale in the store, with thousands more in storage.

Peters came to Boulder 29 years ago to study at the Jack Kerouac School of Disembodied Poetics at Naropa University with Allen Ginsberg and William Burroughs, primary figures of the Beat Generation.

The below-ground location of the new store and the exposed brick along one wall make Peters think of the post-World War II cultural phenomenon.

"The Beat movement in the '50s, you think about it happening in underground cafes, and I think about revolutions happening underground," Peters said. "The Beat Generation was an underground movement, and now I'm literally underground."

Along the walls hang collectible literature memorabilia, mostly from the Beat Generation, for sale. They include signed photographs of Ginsberg — given to Peters to sell in the store — one of two posters printed for a 1974 Henry Miller reading at the University of California, Los Angeles, and a portrait of Hunter S. Thompson that was hanging in Thompson's home when he died.

Those, along with the books and records he sells, have been collected by Peters over several decades.

When asked what's next, his response was to keep doing what he enjoys — selling books and records to people — for the rest of his life.

"Every time I sell somebody a book, I think that that book might or might not change their life," Peters said. "Hopefully, it'll change their life for the better."