MEDFORD, Ore., -- The National Institute on Mental Illness estimates 25% of Americans have a diagnosable mental illness. This includes dozens of diagnoses and sub-diagnoses as defined in the Diagnostic & Statistical Manual of Mental Illness, or DSM-5. All can run from mild to severe in manifestation but the most pervasive are schizophrenia, bipolar disorder, and major depressive disorder. Many people with these disorders have crises and end up needing acute inpatient care. There is only one facility in southern Oregon capable of that kind of treatment.

Asante's Behavioral Health Unit, or BHU, is an acute crisis stabilization facility inside the Rogue Regional Medical Center in Medford. There are 18 beds and they are always full. Patients come in from civil commitments, voluntary check-ins, and the ER's Psychiatric Care Unit. The PCU has three beds used for preliminary consultation and it is also, always full.

Laurel Nickles is the BHU's clinical manager. She oversees the staff of doctors, nurses, aids, social workers, and case workers who all specialize in psychiatric care. Nickles was hesitant about letting cameras inside. The BHU is extremely protective of its patients which vary widely from homeless men and women to CEO's, teachers, doctors, stay-at-home parents, community leaders and law enforcement officers. Nickles agreed to allow our cameras in because she says the unit has been shrouded in shadows and stigma for far too long.

The Behavioral Health Unit loses $1.5 million dollars a year. Part of this is because of the cost of care and lack of reimbursement. Another factor is the lack of options following a stay at the BHU. There is a severe lack of respite housing and transitional housing. There are also few peer orientated organization to help with the transition. Nickles says the BHU could stabilize a patient but without the support and housing outside the unit releasing that person is not ethical. Meaning beds are occupied by stable but at-risk people who often are staying for free or at a severely reduced cost.

Despite the increase in those seeking care, which is largely attributed to the expanded reach of the Affordable Care Act, most experts and advocates agree the percentage of people with mental illness has not changed over the past several decades. What has changed is how our society provides care for those with mental illness.

From the 1960's through the 1990's, a shift occurred as State Hospitals, charged with caring for people with mental illness, started to close. The overrun hospitals discharged patients back into their communities. Federal funding and resources were supposed to follow but largely never materialized. This left communities, families, and individuals fending for themselves for decades. With not enough resources people started falling through the cracks. Many self-medicate with drugs and alcohol. Others find themselves in the ER after a suicide attempt or in the middle of psychiatric break. Either way it takes a toll on an already taxed mental health care system.

As of this fall, the entire Medford Police Department has been certified in Crisis Intervention Training. The goal of CIT is to change the interaction between authority figures and those who have a mental illness. Officer Stephen Meador can see several calls involving some level of mental illness each night. During the call he touches base with a liaison from the Jackson County Mental Health who is on duty 24/7. Often, the officer has to make a judgment call. If a person is brought in on a mental health hold there is only one place for them to go but the Psychiatric Care Unit, or PCU at Rogue Regional Medical Center is almost always full. The 18 beds in the Behavioral Health Unit upstairs are also constantly occupied. Sometimes police officers are forced to wait in an ER room, the hall, or even the ER waiting room with a person on a mental health hold. This can be for hours. MPD says there just isn’t enough room for the volume of people who are taken into custody on a mental health hold.