Ohio, it turns out, is a pretty good place to live if you want to find a decent job and cover your costs comfortably.



Business Insider points to this ranking by personal finance site MoneyRates of the 10 best and 10 worst states for making a living in 2015.



The ranking is based on five factors: average wages, state tax rates, cost of living, unemployment rates, and incidents of workplace injuries.



By those measurements, Ohio is the ninth-best state in the country. It benefits from a below-average cost of living and state tax rates that are lower than most of its counterparts in the top 10. (At least those that have an income tax; the top three states in the MoneyRates ranking — Texas, Washington and Wyoming — don’t have state income taxes.)



The worst state to live, by this measure, is Hawaii, which has a sky-high cost of living — the price of living in paradise, apparently.





Good thing someone researched his work

A former Iowa State University scientist with Cleveland ties was sentenced Wednesday, July 1, to more than 4½ years in prison for making false statements in research reports.



Dong-Pyou Han, 58, who altered blood samples to make it appear he had achieved a breakthrough toward a potential vaccine against HIV, also must pay $7.2 million to a federal government agency that funded the research, the Associated Press reports.



Government prosecutors “said Han's misconduct dates to 2008 when he worked at Case Western Reserve University in Cleveland under professor Michael Cho, who was leading a team testing an experimental HIV vaccine on rabbits,” according to the story.



“Cho's team began receiving NIH funding, and he soon reported the vaccine was causing rabbits to develop antibodies to HIV, which was considered a major breakthrough,” the AP says. “Han said he initially accidentally mixed human blood with rabbit blood making the potential vaccine appear to increase an immune defense against HIV, the virus that can cause AIDS. Han continued to spike the results to avoid disappointing Cho, his mentor, after the scientific community became excited that the team could be on the verge of a vaccine.”





Big money

Iowa State recruited Cho in 2009.

Reuters reports that U.S. doctors and research hospitals “collected nearly $6.5 billion in payments for services rendered to pharmaceutical and medical device companies in 2014,” according to the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services Open Payments report released this week.



Cleveland Clinic, the report found, was among the largest recipients of such payments.



The Clinic “collected $25.1 million in research payments and $12.9 million in general payments,” Reuters reports. “Its largest payment of $1.2 million also came from Siemens, followed by $941,311 from biotech Biogen Inc.”



The report, in its second year, lists 11.4 million payments to 607,000 physicians and more than 1,100 teaching hospitals made by 1,444 companies.



Reuters says the Open Payments program, which was created under the Affordable Care Act health care reform with the aim of improving transparency, “requires drug and device manufacturers to report payments to health care providers for things like speaking engagements about their products and research grants.”



The report “allows individuals to track payments to their physicians by drug companies,” according to the news service. The need for greater transparency “was spawned by concerns that physician prescribing habits and choices could be driven by payments from pharmaceutical and medical device companies,” Reuters says.





Sneak attack

The owner of a Cleveland company is quoted in this New York Times story about makers of custom sneakers cashing in on customers’ growing appetite for one-of-a-kind shoes.



The paper notes that retail sneakers are a $29 billion market in the United States. Customization within the sector is growing, “reflecting the demand for one-of-a-kind goods — spurred by millennials on one end and baby boomers on the other,” according to Elizabeth Spaulding, a retail partner at the consulting firm Bain & Co.





Consumers generally want more control and choice in what they purchase.“There’s been a big push toward customization in many industries,” Spaulding tells the paper, citing as an example the hugely successful restaurant chain Chipotle, where customers build their own meals. “And when you think about the market for sneakers, there is already a heavy emphasis on choice and individualism.”That trend has been a big help to Jacob Ferrato, owner of JBF Customs in Cleveland, who started customizing athletic shoes eight years ago, when he was 16.From the story:He no longer paints them but rebuilds them with high-end exotic leathers like ostrich, python and alligator, and just introduced his own line of custom-built sneakers.Mr. Ferrato’s shoes start at $1,000, and clients have paid as much as $7,000 for a pair. He does no advertising, but has 120,000 followers on Instagram. That, along with Facebook and Twitter, is his marketing.“I’ve grown because of people talking about me on social media — that’s been everything. And the fact there are so few things you can buy that are truly unique,” he said. “People just want something no one else has.”





You also can follow me on Twitter for more news about business and Northeast Ohio.