The time is upon us: iOS 9 is officially unleashed on the public. As we’re learning more and more about the nuances of the new operating system, we discovered some really neat features you should know about.

While there are dozens or hundreds of interesting changes and helpful additions in iOS 9, we tried to pick the best three that you need to know about right away. From a big improvement to your battery to a smart assistant that is actually smart - these features are going to make you wonder what you ever did without them.

1. Say goodbye to terrible battery life

It’s a known fact that iPhones traditionally have solid battery life. But with faster hardware and more powerful software, it’s held even or slipped a bit in the last few phones. And no matter how much there is, it always seems like you need just a little more.

With that in mind, the lovely developers thought of ways to extend the battery without shorting on tons of other cool features. The first thing Apple did was rework iOS 9 to use the hardware, and therefore the battery, more efficiently.

Apple experts estimate that with this new system, you’ll get over four hours of additional battery life. That’s already great, but it’s not all Apple had up its sleeve.

This time around, they included a neat addition to the software that’s a Low Power Mode. What that means is when your battery is running a little low, you can turn this option on and it will disable battery-sucking features like animations, notification syncing and it will lower the screen’s brightness.

To enable the Low Power Mode, go to your main Settings page and click Battery. There will be an option called “Low Power Mode” and you just need to toggle the switch on.

Now when you’re running low but aren’t near a wall socket, you can still eke a little more life out of your gadget. Of course, if you’re on the go a lot and running out of juice, it helps to bring along a backup battery. Check out some of the great ones we sell in the Komando Shop like the PowerFlask that can double your battery life.

2. Siri actually makes sense to use now

If you never think to use your iPhone’s smart assistant Siri until after you’ve already completed a task, don’t worry. You’re one of the many iPhone users who didn’t see the point in finagling with a virtual assistant to do something you could accomplish in seconds yourself.

Apple seemed to pick up on this frustrating fact and revolutionized Siri to be more understanding of the context of your question or statement.

Now she can pull up incredible specific information at the drop of a hat and complete tasks quickly - and without you having to repeat yourself 546,650,783 times. She will recognize your request, and more importantly the meaning behind it, and fulfill your wishes.

You can ask for things like settings reminders, pull up pictures and videos, open programs such as email and social media sites, get help with math and unit conversions, search the iTunes store for that app you were looking for and a million other helpful tasks.

You’ll never have to fumble through your iPhone trying to do those things again. Now you’ll have an actual smart assistant that can do all of those tedious tasks for you.

3. One “helpful” feature to keep any eye out for

This feature is supposed to help speed up your Internet, but it could be costing you data without you knowing about it.

The feature is called Wi-Fi Assist and it works by switching between Wi-Fi and cellular data to overcome a weak Wi-Fi signal. This prevents annoying lagging when downloading pages and watching videos but it can also do a number on your data usage.

Wi-Fi Assist is automatically turned on when you update your iPhone to iOS 9. That means it may be charging you right now without you having to turn on anything. According to Quartz, an iPhone owner that uses about 1 gigabyte a month can eat up 3 GB within the same time frame.

To disable this feature, go to your main Settings page>>Cellular. Scroll down until you see Wi-Fi Assist and toggle off.

Important: This feature is only included on the most recent Apple operating system, iOS 9. If you have iOS 8 or lower, you will not see the Wi-Fi Assist option under Cellular.

Now, you’ll be free from unannounced data charges and bills that are through the roof.

Kim Komando hosts the nation’s largest radio show about the digital lifestyle, heard on 435 stations in the USA and globally on American Forces Radio. Find your local radio station, read more digital news, get the podcast and more at Komando.com.