Fast-growing Americans for Prosperity opens location in Greensburg

Email Newsletters Sign up for one of our email newsletters.

In a move that political observers said reflects the importance the Republican Party is placing on the upcoming presidential election, Americans for Prosperity, a conservative, free-market advocacy group, has opened a field office in Greensburg.

It is the first office on the western side of the state for the national organization that counts 2.3 million members, including 188,000 in Pennsylvania. The group, which opposes big government and supports repealing Obamacare, has offices in Harrisburg and Philadelphia.

“We've had staff out here since May of 2014,” said state director Beth Anne Mumford. “We have a lot of active activists in Westmoreland County.”

The group is expanding statewide and “growing very fast,” said Adam Nicholson, a regional communications manager with the national office.

Mumford said the office at 905 E. Pittsburgh St., where a grand opening was held Thursday, will be open indefinitely. “Our plan is to be here for the long term,” she said.

The organization is well- funded, but its impact in Western Pennsylvania is hard to measure, said Kristin Kanthak, associate professor of political science at the University of Pittsburgh.

“It's hard to say what the effect will be. We haven't seen anyone with this much money before,” she said.

With Pennsylvania expected to be a battleground state in the 2016 presidential election, grassroots groups that can educate and advocate as well as provide volunteers will be a big benefit to any candidate, local, state or national, Kanthak said.

The Greensburg office “gives us opportunity to meet thousands more concerned citizens and better advocate ... against big labor, bureaucrats, and other special interests who want to raise their taxes, undermine shale gas economic growth and give away their tax dollars in corporate welfare,” Mumford said.

County Republicans, whose ranks have swelled in the past decade, welcomed the organization.

“They are good partners, slightly different mission,” said Westmoreland GOP Chairman Michael Korns. “We're always trying to get Republicans elected; they can focus on specific issues. But more boots on the ground is always welcomed.”

Westmoreland was a longtime stronghold for the Democrats until 2000, when George W. Bush was the first GOP presidential candidate in decades to take the county vote.

Since then, the GOP has slowly gained a strong hold on county government, though its party membership still lags.

Democrats still hold a nearly 28,000 edge in voter registration. Democrats number 119,611, while Republicans have 91,941 registered voters, according to the county Elections Bureau.

That number has been trending more toward the Republican party.

Five years ago, Democrats had a voter registration edge of more than 42,000 in the county. A decade ago, there were 54,000 more registered Democrats than Republicans.

Republicans in Westmoreland County scored a stunning courthouse sweep in 2011, when the party won a majority on the three-person board of commissioners for the first time in 60 years, along with all five row offices on the ballot.

Voters this year will elect a board of commissioners, a sheriff, a treasurer, a controller, a recorder of deeds and a register of wills.

Democrats said the group will join what is expected to be a very spirited election season.

“They have every right to be here. ... We just don't agree,” said Lorraine Petrosky, vice chairwoman of the Westmoreland County Democratic Committee.

Craig Smith is a staff writer for Trib Total Media. He can be reached at 412-380-5646 or csmith@tribweb.com.