BLOOMINGTON, Minn. (AP) - The hottest item at Bud Grant’s garage sale on Thursday was the Hall of Fame coach’s autograph.

Shoppers lined up to have the former Minnesota Vikings coach sign the team souvenirs and outdoor gear they bought. Even a gun.

The 87-year-old signed a poster for 7-year-old Preston Oberloh, of Rapid City, South Dakota, whose family happened to be in town. His father, Aaron Oberloh, said he thought it would be cool to get next to the coach and get a picture, even though at 33 he wasn’t even born when Grant led the Vikings to four Super Bowl appearances.

If people didn’t buy anything, Grant’s signature came at a price.

“Now if you buy my stuff, these autographs are free. But if you just come here to get an autograph, and don’t buy anything, then I charge you 25 dollars,” Grant said as $20 and $5 bills piled up on the table in front of him.

Grant, an avid outdoorsman, signed a floating fishing chair that Kristen Strain, of Hudson, Wisconsin, bought for her 10-year-old son, Austin, as well as a Vikings drink glass for her 12-year-old daughter, Taylor. Strain said they’re originally from Rochester and find it a little strange living as Vikings fans in Packers territory.

“My kids have issues with the green and the gold,” Strain said.

It was Grant’s 10th garage sale. He billed it as his last. It began Wednesday evening and runs through Friday.

Grant said his goals were simple: Get rid of stuff and make some money.

One table Thursday held Vikings memorabilia, including 40th anniversary posters from 2000 and Game 900 T-shirts from when the Vikings played the Lions in 2004. That merchandise belonged to a dealer. Grant said he let him come to draw a crowd.

Grant’s own stuff included fishing reels, power tools, wildlife prints and the usual garage sale items. A Vikings Artic Blast snowmobile jacket and pants were priced at $225 together. The original price tags, totaling $330, gave away that he never wore the items.

But Grant had fired the 12-gauge shotgun that Leslie Davis of Apple Valley bought for $395, still in its original box. Grant signed it on the stock.

“I don’t know if I’ll use this now that he’s autographed it,” Davis said with a laugh.