A top New Jersey newspaper editor is knocking the New Hampshire Union Leader’s endorsement of New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie’s presidential campaign.

Tom Moran, editorial page editor for The Star-Ledger, criticized the coveted endorsement from the influential newspaper in a signed column, writing that he called the publication’s editorial page editor, Grant Bosse, to discuss the editorial.

“The paper knows almost nothing about his record as governor,” Moran wrote. “The paper has been paying close attention to Christie's speeches in New Hampshire and his visit to the editorial board. And that's a dangerous game when it comes to a slick character like our governor.”

ADVERTISEMENT

Moran reprimanded the New Hampshire paper for neglecting to mention Christie's controversial pension reform plan or the Bridgegate scandal, in which a top Christie aide was fired following politically motivated lane closures on the busy George Washington Bridge.

During the call with Moran, Bosse said the lane closures had “nothing to do with the governor” and that “I don’t know if we went into the weeds on pension reform.”

Moran also panned the editorial for not focusing on the New Jersey governor’s jobs record. Bosse said during the call with Moran that "politicians don't create jobs, so we didn't want to give that any credibility,” according to Moran.

“And this editorial confirms my worse fears about this presidential race,” Moran wrote. “It's all about performance, not substance. What else could explain the fact that nearly two-thirds of Republican voters say their first choice is Donald Trump Donald TrumpTrump: I can put 15 states in play in November Clinton: I'm ready for Trump's 'fantasy' campaign Trump sticks by 'Pocahontas' nickname after being challenged MORE, Ben Carson, or Texas Sen. Ted Cruz Ted CruzFiorina returns to attack Clinton's 'lust for power' Trump clinches GOP nomination Eleven states sue Obama over transgender bathroom directive MORE?”

The Union Leader’s endorsement has historically helped GOP hopefuls in the polls. Christie is in eighth place nationally, with 2.7 percent support, in an average of polls, but he fares slightly better in an average of New Hampshire GOP primary polls, with 5.3 percent, according to RealClearPolitics.