Cost of recycling increasing, but costs of not recycling even greater

A Waste Management employee uses a front end loader Tuesday, Dec. 16, 2014, to pick up single stream recycling to load into a compactor at the Larimer County Landfill in Fort Collins. (Jenny Sparks / Loveland Reporter-Herald) The cost of recycling has grown, but local officials warn about the even greater costs associated with not recycling. Did you know? • The year the Rocky Mountain News closed, the Larimer County Recycling Center saw a drop in total volume of recycled materials of nearly 3,000 tons. • This year, Larimer County's recycling center will process 36,143 tons of recycled materials. About 7,200 tons are from Loveland households via the city recycling program. • The first year Loveland rolled out its recycling program, 50 percent of the total waste picked up was diverted from the landfill. Now, 60 percent of the volume is recycled, including yard waste, and 40 percent sent to the landfill. • Larimer County's recycling program has brought in $15.76 million since it was launched in 1990 and has cost a total of $18.18 million during the same time. • Many different items, including electronics, paints and cooking oil, can be recycled as well as the traditional paper, plastic and metals. For details, visit: larimer.org/solidwaste/recycling.htm or cityofloveland.org/recycling. The money made from turning recycled goods into new items has been decreasing due to changing markets, and local entities are expecting to bring in even less money for recycled materials in the near future. Advertisement The dollar cost, however, is balanced with the bigger-picture cost to resources and the environment as well as the dollar cost of filling up the current landfill and having to build another, more expensive facility, officials said. "It behooves us even more to keep the good stuff out of the landfill because it is going to cost us even more," said Mick Mercer, Loveland's director of solid waste. Stephen Gillette, Larimer County's director of solid waste, pulls a wasp trap from the glass bin in the recycling area Tuesday, Dec. 16, 2014, at the Larimer County Landfill in Fort Collins as he talks about costs and problems associated with recycling. (Jenny Sparks / Loveland Reporter-Herald) When the current Larimer County landfill in south Fort Collins is full (estimated 10 years from now), a new landfill with its engineering and other costs could more than double the price to dump trash in the landfill, said Tyler Bandemer, the city's solid waste superintendent. So, the longer residents can keep the current landfill alive by dumping less, the more money they will save in the long run, he said. "It's just smart business to save resources and not treat everything as a one-time resource," added Mercer. There, too, is the cost of eating up resources by not reusing and recycling, explained Stephen Gillette, Larimer County's director of solid waste. "There's finite resources in this world," said Gillette, comparing the dangers of not recycling to the effects of settling the frontier. "We settled the East Coast, and we used up the land, and then we moved on. There's only so much aluminum and steel in this world, and we can't keep burying it. There's people who would give their eyeteeth for these materials." Education is a key factor to reducing what goes into the waste stream and the landfill, and Larimer County's Garbage Garage is dedicated to that eduction. The thousands who visit there each year learn creative ways to reuse goods. "Recycling is the third R," said Gillette. "It's not the first R. It is 'reduce, reuse, then recycle.' We forget the first two." The Hard Costs Larimer County opened its recycling center at the landfill in 1990 when officials made the decision that it was best to divert products that can be recycled. The recycling program runs alongside trash disposal, with the entire Solid Waste Department operated solely on money from fees and investments, and no tax dollars. Nearly every year since the recycling program started, it has operated at a deficit, with trash fees subsidizing the difference. During the first full year, 1991, the recycling program brought in $5,450 and cost $116,348. The gap fluctuated over the next 22 years, and the only two years the program brought in more than it cost were in 2012 and 2013 due to a large wildfire and the 2013 floods, according to information from Gillette. Over its lifetime, the program has pulled in $15.76 million and cost $18.18 million — a difference of $2.42 million. That deficit is expected to increase next year with a new contract with recycling provider Waste Management — a contract that more accurately reflects the current market. Waste Management processes and markets all the materials that come through the Larimer County Recycling Center at the landfill, including those from haulers such as the city of Loveland. Their contract with the county dictates how much they will pay the providers for those recycled materials. The new contract, signed Tuesday, will guarantee that Waste Management's costs are covered before paying out rebates to providers. This will staunch the recycling company's losses but hit the budgets of Larimer County, Loveland and other entities and private companies that use the facility. In many cases, there will be no rebate unless the market turns around, Gillette said. Mercer is expecting that to be the case for Loveland. This year, the city will bring in about $300,000 in recycling rebates — a small portion of the $1.5 million recycling budget but still a large amount of money that will have to be made up somehow, possibly from increased fees. The bulk of the budget is from fees to the residents for curbside recycling. Gillette hopes the market will turn around in the near future and rebates will rise accordingly. "It is all part of supply and demand," he said. "This roller coaster is at a low point, or lower point than it has been. We don't know if it's going to drop lower or start to climb back up." A Global Market Mark Snedecor compares the market for recycled materials to the market for crude oil, which also fluctuates based on supply and demand. "It's very much a global commodities situation," said Snedecor, area director of recycling for Waste Management for Colorado, Arizona, Nevada and Utah. For recycling, the factors include what is being recycled as well as where it is being shipped for final processing. Over the past 20 yeas, many paper mills and factories that made items from recycled materials in America closed because the manufacturing costs were lower in China and other countries in the Far East. But as these foreign mills cornered the market, they became more selective about what they would accept and began turning away loads that were contaminated with dirty or nonrecyclable materials — at the cost of the sender. Residents can affect this part of the cost by making sure to recycle clean materials and to put them in the correct places. No more pizza boxes crusted with cheese in the bins, and no more cellphones tossed in with aluminum cans. Another factor is what items are being recycled. With the increase in electronic media, fewer newspapers are being recycled. These are some of the cheaper materials to repurpose into something new. Plastic, which is more expensive, is increasing. Waste Managment reports that plastic made up 12.7 percent of the waste stream in 2011, up from 10.5 percent the year before. However, the volume of that plastic was 25 percent of the waste stream. And it takes more plastic bottles to reach a ton, and each ton is more expensive to process, according to Waste Managment. Like any global market, the recycling costs and demand could change in the future. While Mercer can't see the future, he believes that some of the production of recycled goods might move back to America as the cost of shipping them to China increases and the profits decrease. "I don't know for sure that it will or when," Mercer said. "But it may make sense to do it here again." Pamela Johnson: 970-669-5050, ext 526, johnsonp@reporter-herald.com, twitter.com/RHPamelaJ.