"If we do that, we will be able to increase wages for millions of Americans. We will be able to leave everyone better off without making anyone worse off."

"Here is the best way to raise wages. Make America the best place in America to start a business or expand an existing business. Tax reform, and regulatory reform. Bring our debt under control. Fully utilize our energy resources to reinvigorate manufacturing. Repeal and replace Obamacare. And make higher education faster and easier to access, especially vocational training. For the life of me I don't know why we stigmatize vocational education. Welders make more money than philosophers. We need more welders and less philosophers.

"If I thought that raising the minimum wage was the best way to help people increase their pay, I would be all for it. But it isn't. In the 20th century it is disaster. If you raise the minimum wage you're going to make people more expensive than a machine. And that means all this automation that's replacing jobs and people right now is going to be accelerated.

The Weekly Standard http://assets.weeklystandard.com.s3.amazonaws.com/tws15/images/logo-large.png

The Weekly Standard

2015

Washington, DC

Politics

http://www.weeklystandard.com/rubio-we-need-more-welders-and-less-philosophers/article/1062072

2015-11-10T22:09

2015-11-10T21:13

Rubio: 'We Need More Welders and Less Philosophers'

During Tuesday night's Republican presidential debate, Marco Rubio articulated his disagreements with increasing the minimum wage, and explained his alternative ideas. If I thought that raising the minimum wage was the best way to help people increase their pay, I would be all for it. But it isn't. In the 20th century it is disaster. If you raise the minimum wage you're going to make people more expensive than a machine. And that means all this automation that's replacing jobs and people right now is going to be accelerated. Here is the best way to raise wages. Make America the best place in America to start a business or expand an existing business. Tax reform, and regulatory reform. Bring our debt under control. Fully utilize our energy resources to reinvigorate manufacturing. Repeal and replace Obamacare. And make higher education faster and easier to access, especially vocational training. For the life of me I don't know why we stigmatize vocational education. Welders make more money than philosophers. We need more welders and less philosophers.

2016 Elections, debates, Marco Rubio, Philosophy, SHOSHANA WEISSMANN

http://cdn.weeklystandard.biz/cache/280x280-157e79466275b108655c4876900e0d11.jpg