OXON HILL, Md. -- At the annual Conservative Political Action Conference (CPAC), potential Republican presidential candidates competed to stand out with the most compelling criticism of President Barack Obama.

Gov. Bobby Jindal marquee word was "repeal."

"We must repeal every single word of Obamacare," said Jindal to applause. He echoed that sentiment for the Common Core education standards, which he once supported, but now believes has created dangerous federal mandates that forced his then 2nd grade son last year to explain how he determined 18+4 is 22 in a fuzzy and convoluted exercise.

Jindal, and Sen. Ted Cruz, R-Texas, a clear favorite of the large crowd, both hit the president hard. Said Cruz of Obama: "Lawless imperator, or emperor."

But both were also dismissive of the current Republican leadership in Congress.

Jindal complained that GOP leaders are "waving the white flag of surrender on their election promises to repeal of the Affordable Care Act and seem to be giving up the fight to block the president's executive order on immigration, which he labels amnesty.

"It is time for them to govern the way they campaigned," Jindal said to applause. Later he added, "It is time for our Republican leaders in Congress to grow a spine."

Said Cruz: "There is a mendacity about Washington. They want to take a show vote but they don't actually want to follow through on what they say."

Jindal, who Friday is slated to offer his proposal to close a large deficit in the state's budget, seemed to strive to deliver the toughest criticism of the president, repeating a line he made outside the White House on Monday that the president unfit to be commander in chief.

Jindal told the crowd of several thousand that he took no joy in saying this, but that Obama has "shown himself incapable of being our commander in chief," based on his inability to properly describe the battle against ISIL for what it is -- a war against militant Islam.

Jindal won applause, especially when he repeated his belief that Americans shouldn't used hyphenated descriptions to describe them. "We're not Indian- Americans, Asian-Americans, African-Americans, we're Americans," Jindal said. When he said his parents often told him that he should thank God almighty because he was born in the greatest country in the world, several hundred in the crowd stood and cheered.

But his fierce criticism of the president didn't please everyone.

"He's a little too angry," said Aimee Slatkavitz, a student at Roger Williams College in Bristol, Rhode Island who is still figuring out who her favorite Republican candidate is. "I think young people are not going to agree with him completely though some older conservatives might."

Hy Drusin, a self-described conservative activist from New York City, said he had no trouble with Jindal's tough rebukes of the president. "None at all. You wouldn't be able to print what I would say about the president," Drusin said.

Mike Bayham, a Republican state committeeman from Chalmette who writes for the Hayride politcal blog, said Jindal clearly "pushed the envelope" by being so critical of the president on the White House grounds -- following Monday's meeting between the president and governors. That's okay for many conservatives, he said.

Bayham said Jindal might have differentiated himself, along with Cruz, from the rest of the GOP field by also taking on the congressional Republican leadership. Bayham said the question remains whether Jindal, who is pretty far down in the polls among likely and potential GOP candidates, will be competitive with Republicans like New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie and Wisconsin Gov. Scott Walker who can claim winning states that, unlike Louisiana, are far from solidly Republican.

Also speaking at the Conservative Political Action Conference were Christie, Walker, Cruz, Sen. Mike Lee, R-Utah, former Alaska Gov. Sarah Palin, Maryland neurosurgeon Ben Carson and Hewlett-Packard chief executive Carly Fiorina.

Among the speakers for Friday's session are former Florida Gov. Jeb Bush and former Texas Gov. Rick Perry.

Fiorina, who lost as a Republican Senate candidate in California, turned her attention from Obama to former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton, the front-running Democratic presidential candidate.

"Mrs. Clinton, name an accomplishment. And in the meantime, please explain why we should accept that the millions and millions of dollars that have flowed into the Clinton Global Initiative from foreign governments doesn't represent a conflict of interest," Fiorina said.

Carson, a surgeon, said the GOP alternative to the Affordable Care Act for providing health care to those who can't afford it should be compassion.

"It is our responsibility to care for the indigent. It is not the government's responsibility," Carson said.

C-SPAN has Jindal's, Walker's and Palin's remarks here.