County Executive Chris Abele (left) and County Board Chairman Marina Dimitrijevic. Credit: Milwaukee Journal Sentinel

By

With state legislators expected to review funding options for a new downtown arena in a few weeks, Milwaukee County Executive Chris Abele says his staff is working on what he called alternative models that will get the entire project funded.

Abele has declined to detail what that funding plan is and what role the county would play. That concerns County Board Chairwoman Marina Dimitrijevic, who said Abele was moving on a plan without any County Board input.

Moreover, the Abele plan is distinct from Mayor Tom Barrett's proposal, disclosed Thursday, for the city's contribution to an arena project.

Barrett said he continued to favor Gov. Scott Walker's initial $220 million state bonding proposal. Barrett said the city would be willing to provide $17 million in infrastructure in or around the probable arena site just north of the BMO Harris Bradley Center, a city-owned parking ramp at N. 4th St. and W. Highland Blvd. worth $7.4 million, and a $1.1 million city-owned parcel of land once occupied by the Sydney Hih building in the Park East corridor.

The city and county together, Barrett said, would contribute $50 million.

From the city's point of view, the $50 million is key. That amount plus the combined $250 million commitment from Milwaukee Bucks' owners Wes Edens and Marc Lasry and former owner Herb Kohl equals $300 million. That is the amount Walker's proposed legislation calls for before the state would release $220 million.

In the meantime, Assembly Speaker Robin Vos (R-Rochester) and Senate Majority Leader Scott Fitzgerald (R-Juneau) are reviewing alternative bonding plans that would reduce the state's commitment from Walker's initial $220 million. Walker has said he believes a viable alternative will emerge.

Asked about the mayor's plan, Abele said in an email that he first learned about it after Barrett's news conference Thursday.

"We are working on alternative models that can get the entire project funded and we continue to share those models with the governor, legislators, the city and the Bucks owners. We will continue to work hard to do whatever we can to ensure that this project gets done," Abele said.

Patrick Curley, Barrett's chief of staff, reiterated on Saturday what Barrett said last week: Over the next few weeks various ideas and numbers will be discussed, debated and vetted in meetings both in Madison and in Milwaukee.

"The mayor and county executive have directed staff to do just that; agreeing that property taxes will not be increased for the arena project," Curley said. "Mayor Barrett appreciates County Executive Abele's efforts to get this project completed and will continue to work with him and the other parties to protect the interests of taxpayers and the city."

At the county level, Dimitrijevic and Supervisor Patricia Jursik, chairwoman of the County Board's Economic and Community Development Committee, both said they were operating in a vacuum, not knowing what Abele has in mind.

"This isn't about me," Dimitrijevic said. "The diverse taxpayers of Milwaukee County and the local representatives they elected must have information and a real voice in this decision."

She added: "I am only aware of the possibility of the Park East land playing a role in an arena financing package and remain committed to pursuing that option. If there have been any other commitments of Milwaukee County taxpayer resources, they have been made unilaterally by Chris Abele and without my input."

Jursik said Abele "has not said anything to us. He is doing this on his own. Of course we get the grief if we don't sign off on what he wants to do."

Don Walker is on a fellowship established through Marquette University Law School's Sheldon B. Lubar Fund for Public Policy Research. The fellowship is aimed at providing support for journalism projects on issues of civic importance. All the work is done under the direction of Journal Sentinel editors.