A Chinese proverb says, “May you live in interesting times.” We certainly do. Historians will look back on this time as “the Obama criminal years.”

How lawless is the Obama administration? Many of the dirty deeds and scandals of Obama & Co. are public knowledge. Let’s start with the most astonishing.

Many citizens are aware that because of ObamaCare, millions of Americans are losing their health care coverage. Is this incompetence, or criminal fraud?

One thing is certain: it would be fraud if a private sector CEO knew that millions of customers would lose their insurance, yet repeated the same lie over and over -- “If you like your health insurance, you can keep it. Period.”

Why would we not hold a politician to the same standard?

That brings up the question “IS THIS PRESIDENT TOO BIG TO JAIL?”

But this fraud isn’t just about money and power. It’s about cancer patients, our fellow citizens who may lose their lives as well as their health care coverage because of ObamaCare.

Even innocent children with cancer are among the victims of ObamaCare.

Yes, it turns out ObamaCare is one big death panel. With their policies being cancelled, these sick Americans are losing the very doctors, hospitals and treatments that have kept them alive.

What if some of them die from the stoppage of treatment? What if some die from stress and worry? What if some commit suicide from depression?

These are complicated questions. But isn’t the person whose lies and misrepresentations harmed them, at least partly responsible for their deaths?

So, IS THIS PRESIDENT TOO BIG TO JAIL?

This president has no shame. How many Americans know that a cancer patient merely discussing the disastrous ramifications of ObamaCare in public (thereby embarrassing Obama), is now being persecuted by the IRS?

Yes, it’s true. Bill Elliott is that terminally-ill cancer patient. He was audited by the IRS within days of an appearance on Fox News.

The IRS scandal is far more widespread than the American public knows. It is not just about Tea Party groups.

The IRS was used by Obama to go after any citizen daring to criticize him in the national media.

I’m one of those victims. These actions by a president are absolutely criminal. Richard Nixon’s articles of impeachment included the exact same charge of using the IRS to punish critics and silence free speech. But terminally ill cancer patients?

Obama has sunk to new lows. I'm a big boy. What he did to critics like me is disgusting and un-American. But what he did to a terminally ill cancer patient is disgraceful and unimaginable. This president is an out-of-control bully, pure and simple.

Will anyone show the courage to investigate and prosecute Obama?

“IS THIS PRESIDENT TOO BIG TO JAIL?”

But wait (as late night infomercial pitchmen like to say), “There’s more.” When the citizens went to the "state of the art" ObamaCare web site for help, to try to save themselves, they found it defective.

It turns out the website was built so poorly, the personal information of consumers can be easily stolen. And it’s not just online scam artists we’re worried about. The “Obama navigators” themselves might do the stealing -- after all, it turns out many of them have criminal records.

Rather than hiring one of many highly-qualified American high tech Internet companies, why would Obama give a NO BID contract for hundreds of millions of dollars to a firm with less than stellar credentials?

Surely the reason couldn’t be that it’s the firm of one of Michelle Obama’s Princeton Black Alumni Association buddies?

Don’t you wonder how many of those millions of taxpayer dollars are committed to Democrat causes, or are now sitting in a Swiss bank account?

Can you imagine if this happened at a private sector company?

Can you imagine the outrage and criminal accusations coming from consumer protection advocates?

Can you imagine how quickly the federal government would shut down the business?

The criminal would have been “perp walked” out of his office in front of waiting journalists and photographers. He’d be facing a lifetime in prison.

So, “IS THIS PRESIDENT TOO BIG TO JAIL?”

As bad as it is, ObamaCare is just another of the nonstop scandals of this administration. Any one of these scandals would have already forced a Republican president out of office. Obama owns all of them.

Benghazi. More absurd lies than ObamaCare, a possible arms deal with rebels gone bad, and the cover-up of murder.

Fast and Furious. Another government arms deal gone bad, responsibility for the murder of a U.S. border guard, another blatant cover-up.

The NSA scandal. Obama listens into all of our calls and communications. I hope he’s listening to mine. He’ll hear the word IMPEACHMENT come up in every sentence.

The AP scandal. Obama and paranoid buddies like Attorney General Eric Holder are even illegally spying on their adoring Kool-Aid drinking friends in the media.

The IRS scandal. It’s not just about targeting his political opposition. It’s about the much more serious scandal of using the IRS to change the outcome of the election. Obama’s goal was to neutralize the powerful Tea Parties to prevent a repeat of the 2010 GOP landslide.

Guess what? It worked.

Obama used the IRS to kill conservative momentum, intensity, and enthusiasm, silence criticism in the media, and starve conservative fundraising. These guys put the "thug" in Chicago.

The Census Bureau scandal. It appears government employees faked the unemployment numbers in the weeks leading up to the election to re-elect a president who wouldn’t know what a job looked like, if it hit him in the face.

How could one leader be involved in this many lies, frauds, scandals, and cover-ups? There’s enough here for a century of presidents!

Forget impeachment, it’s time for criminal prosecution. There’s enough here to put a CEO away for multiple life sentences. Bernie Madoff would blush at what Obama has pulled off (so far).

The question is, “IS THIS PRESIDENT TOO BIG TO JAIL?”