Donald Trump is the blond-haired, blue-eyed angel that has been sent here to save the Republican Party. He speaks for the meek, the common man, the downtrodden and those who are suffocating under the pressure of political correctness in the United States. They call themselves the silent majority.

He is the David standing toe-to-toe with Goliath — the establishment and for what it stands. Even the name “establishment” aptly describes the mammoth that he is fighting against. It is a representation of everything big, brown, filthy and out of touch with the current reality that its people face. Yet, there stands Donald Trump, the imperfect man, who is taking on the establishment, the elites and the mega donors who would like to keep the American ship tilted in their favor as they cruise along.

To save the Greed over People (GOP) party from itself, Donald Trump comes flying in on his chartered plane, the “Trump Force One.” The savior of the Republican Party and to some, the republic, must be a gift from God. God has sent him at the most critical junction in American politics with illegal immigration on the rise, several wars throughout the world, stagnant wages, the healthcare job killer, unemployment and the threat of Islamic extremist terrorism. The irony here is that God has a wicked sense of humor.

The man that has been sent to save the republic is in fact a blond-haired, blue-eyed monster. He is a Frankenstein, a concoction of the different extremist rhetoric the GOP has been touting since President Barack Obama came into office. He is in fact a perfect reflection of the GOP, which makes the accusations against Trump absurd to an objective bystander. The same GOP that claims that the introduction of Obama’s healthcare bill killed thousands of jobs fails to acknowledge that unemployment is in fact at its lowest point in decades and the Affordable Care Act actually has spurred the economy forward.

Data shows that job participation has been on the rise, and the argument over employees hiring more part-time workers to avoid paying health insurance was proven false as the rate of part-time employment has been at a steady decline, with full-time employment taking its place.

Wages have also been on the rise, albeit slowly, but that is because the U.S. is still in its recovery stage, and the economy has demonstrated steady job production for the past 72 months, the longest streak of job growth in recorded history. Once the job market reaches a tipping point, then wages will increase as companies will be competing for the smaller pool of available workers.

Furthermore, illegal immigration is on the decline and in fact has been declining for the past nine years, but you wouldn’t believe that from listening to the rhetoric from the right and Republican candidates. Instead, these politicians prey on the fears of citizens who unfortunately need a scapegoat to hang for the changing demographics and dynamics in the United States that are the result of a multitude of tides reaching our shores, such as globalization, automation, the information age and the devaluing of the high school diploma.

Islamic extremist terrorism is also still far less of a threat to an American than the unrestrained availability of guns in the U.S.; there are enough guns to arm all 320 million citizens. But what is the point of providing facts when the Republican base has been fed extremist versions of reality, twisted facts, deflection of criticism and a playbook based on attacking the left, the media, the President and the truth?

Now the Frankenstein monster that they created is using that same playbook to the T — T for Trump. He says what he wants, regardless of the truth, and when confronted with the truth, preys on the fears of the citizens, going on the attack — attacking the left, attacking the media and attacking his enemies.

The GOP recently tried to restrain the tide it felt was crashing on it in the form of a Trump nomination and trotted out the establishment figurehead Mitt Romney to make his case to the Republican base. According to CNN’s recounting of the speech, Romney spent 20 minutes calling Trump a “phony and a fraud” with multiple business failures, a divisive figure and one whose economic stance would put the U.S. into another recession and whose foreign policy ideas would endanger Americans. Lest we forget Romney’s talk of the 47 percent in 2012, his stance on continuing wars in the Middle East or his company, Bain Capital, that actually invested in companies that helped outsource American jobs to India and China. That’s the spokesperson that was brought out to bring down Donald Trump. Pot, meet kettle.

This election cycle has been fascinating as we see a party battling with its identity. The party has found its messiah in Donald Trump, who has come to redefine what it means to be Republican. But as was said earlier, God does have a wicked sense of humor. This messiah might turn out to be chaos incarnate.