Buy Photo Union County has sold Runnells Specialized Hospital to a private firm. (Photo: FILE)Buy Photo Story Highlights Runnells Hospital cost county taxpayers $30 million over the last two years.

The sale to a private firm will save taxpayers an estimated $52 million.

Most hospital employees will keep their jobs but dozens have sued over unpaid overtime.

Union County officials this week finalized the $26 million sale of Runnells Specialized Hospital in Berkeley Heights to a private company in a deal that is expected to save county taxpayers an estimated $52 million over the next five years and generate new property tax revenue for the township.

The deal was announced earlier this year as a solution to cutting the county's ties to the money-losing hospital.

The hospital will remain open and about 209 out of 391 employees either have been rehired or transferred to other jobs in the county while 63 have retired, county officials said.

As part of the deal, Center Management agreed to a deed restriction that will require the hospital to remain a long-term care facility, to set aside a certain percentage of beds for Union County residents and indigent patients, guarantee a five-year capital improvement plan, and commit to sharing revenue with the county for any new health care services added to the hospital.

"The bottom line is that we've made the best decision possible toward maintaining the financial viability of the hospital, keeping it open and guaranteeing the continuum of quality care for its patients," Freeholder Chairman Christopher Hudak said.

The county said the hospital lost more than $30 million over the last two years as a result of loss of federal and state Medicaid funding for long-term care facilities. The sale of the century-old hospital comes as many other hospitals in the state are merging as a result of declining reimbursements and related factors.

In June, 40 Runnells employees filed a class action lawsuit in federal court claiming the hospital failed to pay overtime. The lawsuit is pending in U.S. District Court in Newark.

The sale comes after a two-year process in which officials at one point considered having the Union County Improvement Authority run the hospital.

Last month, the county chose to lease the hospital's Cornerstone Psychiatric Unit after Center Management was unsuccessful in getting the state to agree to let them run the unit. County officials said state funding for psychiatric care will help keep down the cost of running the unit.

Read or Share this story: http://mycj.co/16u7nqW