By of the

Madison — A Georgia consultant will carry out a study on how to save taxpayers money on health coverage for nearly 100,000 state employees, including a proposal to move away from private health plans.

That single change would involve shifting from Wisconsin health maintenance organizations to a self-insured model in which the state works with a large private administrator, likely a large out-of-state company. Last year, GOP Gov. Scott Walker said he was considering a self-insured coverage program for state employees but made no decisions.

That major shift is just one of a host of changes to state insurance plans that will be studied by the Segal Co. of Atlanta to keep state employees healthier and taxpayers happier.

A spokesman for the state Department of Employee Trust Funds said Segal would make its first report to the board governing state employee insurance this spring. The firm also is looking at ways to prevent illness among the insured, better manage chronic diseases and steer state employees to more cost-effective health plans and procedures.

"The primary objective of the benefits consultant is to analyze data from a variety of sources to develop and recommend strategies to improve health outcomes and increase the efficient delivery of quality health care to participants in the state's health insurance program," Mark Lamkins of Employee Trust Funds said.

Lamkins said he would provide the cost of the Segal study soon.

Also Wednesday, a separate report from a conservative think tank recommended ways for the state to avoid hidden costs of insuring retired state workers.

Health coverage for the state's 96,000 employees will cost $1.33 billion in premiums in 2014, representing a major expense for taxpayers and a major potential source of profits for the insurance industry.

Tom Korpady, who for almost three decades ran the state's insurance system using competing private companies, has questioned whether the state should drop it.

Korpady, who retired several years ago, said the state dropped a self-insured model after experiencing a 22% increase in costs in 1981 and a 30% increase in 1982.

The Walker administration has sought further exploration of the idea in part because a self-insured program could avoid some taxes and penalties under the Affordable Care Act, otherwise known as Obamacare.

The state's current approach gives employees a choice between different private HMOs aligned with local providers. That forces them to compete on price and quality, particularly in the Madison area.

Under a self-insured program, the state would pay the actual cost of providing health care to its employees, instead of paying premiums to HMOs. The state and its employees would routinely set aside money — similar to premiums — to cover those costs and likely end up hiring an outside administrator, possibly from out of state, to run the program.

The board's insurance plans also cover some local government employees, but there's been no detailed discussions yet of how a switch to self-insurance would affect them, Lamkins said.

The idea has drawn criticism from labor groups such as the Wisconsin State Employees Union.