4 things to know about TrumpCare

Throughout his campaign, Republican presidential candidate Donald Trump has promised to repeal the Affordable Care Act and replace it with "something terrific." But what exactly is that terrific plan?

Although Mr. Trump has not revealed the specifics of the plan, The Hill recently unearthed clues about DonaldTrumpCare and outlined four things to know.

1. Health insurance can be sold across state borders. During the most recent Republican debate, Mr. Trump said he hopes to "get rid of the lines around the states so that there's serious, serious competition." He added: "So, instead of having one insurance company taking care of New York or Texas, you'll have many. They'll compete. And it'll be a beautiful thing," according to The New York Times.

But many — including Sen. Marco Rubio — haven't been satisfied with Mr. Trump's plan. "So that's the only part of the plan? Just the lines?" he asked at the Houston debate.

2. Health savings accounts will remain in place. At a CNN town hall meeting, Mr. Trump said he wants to keep health savings accounts around, according to The Hill.

3. Obama's insurance mandate may or may not be included. Through an ACA mandate, everyone is required to have health insurance. Mr. Trump said he "like[s] the mandate" during a CNN town hall meeting.

But he changed his mind later, claiming he only likes the ACA's ban on insurers discriminating against consumers with preexisting health conditions. "I want to keep preexisting conditions," Mr. Trump said at the Republican debate last week. "I think we need it. It's a modern age. And I think we have to have it."

4. TrumpCare has oscillated between being a single-payer system and a non-single-payer system. In the past, Mr. Trump has advocated for a single-payer system. At the first Republican debate, he claimed "[i]t works in Canada. It works incredibly well in Scotland. It could have worked in a different age."

But during the Houston debate, he denied the statement. "Donald, true or false, you've said the government should pay for everyone's healthcare," said Sen. Ted Cruz. "That's false," Mr. Trump replied.

More recently, Mr. Trump said his plan is "not single-payer," but that he will "take care of people" and "will not let people die on the streets."

More articles on leadership:

Who asked you anyway? What's at stake when executives remark on other executives' decisions

How Google used data to build the perfect team

Poll finds views of 'Medicare for All' more favorable than 'single-payer' — even though they are the same thing

© Copyright ASC COMMUNICATIONS 2016. Interested in LINKING to or REPRINTING this content? View our policies by clicking here.