After a short but fiery outing Wednesday against the Padres, Jair Jurrjens’ stint with the Rockies turned into a short one.

Jurrjens was sent down to Triple-A Colorado Springs less than a week before making his debut with the team. After the Rockies traded for the former Atlanta all-star on July 2, Jurrjens became Colorado’s 13th starting pitcher this season on July 4.

The move makes room for the return of Carlos Gonzalez on Friday. Gonzalez, who started Wednesday for the Sky Sox, will likely move to right field when he returns.

Brett Anderson (broken finger) will start Sunday against the Twins in his return to the Rockies. But he’s taking the spot left open by Yohan Flande, who was optioned to Triple-A on Tuesday. The Rockies won’t need to decide on a pitching replacement for Jurrjens until after the all-star break next week, when they go to Pittsburgh. But the spot could go to Eddie Butler.

In two games, Jurrjens threw a combined 9 1/3 innings, with 20 hits, 11 runs, nine strikeouts, three walks and a 10.61 ERA.

On Wednesday against San Diego, Jurrjens threw 4 2/3 innings with six strikeouts. But he was not efficient, throwing 96 pitches.

“I felt better than last time,” said Jurrjens, who left his start on July 4 and went to the hospital because of breathing problems. “The fifth inning, I was a little bit tired. I just needed to get used to it.”

He was packing his bags right after talking to reporters about the Rockies’ 6-3 victory over San Diego.

Jurrjens allowed two home runs, to Jake Goebbert in the fourth and Seth Smith in the fifth, both solo shots.

“I felt improvement in my command and I kept the ball down. Just two pitches cost me two runs,” Jurrjens said. “I felt really happy with my command, especially against all those lefties. I was able to keep making the same pitch over and over again and keeping them off-balance.”

He also very nearly gave up a bomb of a home run to Yasmani Grandal, who pulled a hit to the second deck in right field. But umpires, on first glance and on video replay, ruled the hit foul.

“That’s baseball,” Jurrjens said. “It’s a game of inches. I came back and struck him out.”