What one question would you want to pose to leading chief executive officers?

ROSABETH MOSS KANTER: I want to ask leading CEOs the question they should be asking themselves. What is going to destroy your business, and are you taking steps to do it yourself before others do it to you? How do you avoid being another Kodak, which stayed fat and happy in Rochester, N.Y., while digital developments were digging the film company’s grave in Silicon Valley? One of my favorite corporate leaders ran a successful venture-capital arm that saved his company by buying into new technology he could bring into the company mainstream. He was fond of saying, “Dream your worst nightmare, and invest in it.” If nightmares are keeping you up at night, that might be telling you to get used to the idea of converting them into daydreams.

Once we’ve dealt with strategic change, I want to know from Mr. or Ms. CEO about his or her own exit. I don’t mean that to be grim, just realistic. Legendary Apple CEO Steve Jobs had several years to anticipate his (sad) demise. He groomed a successor who could take over while he was still there and maintain his legacy, yet begin to depart from it in subtle ways. For example, Tim Cook is less flamboyant, more willing to invest in improvement while waiting for blockbusters, more culture-oriented, and cares about team skills.

So my second question to leading CEOs is: Do you have a short list of successors? Will you let go rather than hang on too long? And how are you going to be sure that they will be up to the challenges of what are certain to be surprises following your departure?

And I want to know what leading CEOs are doing to improve their countries, an important concern, especially in America. Not just giving away spare change, but making real change.

Rosabeth Moss Kanter (@RosabethKanter) holds the Ernest L. Arbuckle professorship at Harvard Business School, where she specializes in strategy, innovation and leadership for change.

Read the latest Leadership Report.