Trump's unorthodox health care apprenticeship

With help from Brianna Ehley and Rachana Pradhan

TRUMP's NO APPRENTICE ON HEALTH CARE — Donald Trump’s unorthodox approach to health reform: He says he wants to lock the experts in a room until they figure out a solution.

Story Continued Below

But which experts does Trump trust? Pro’s Paul Demko tried to track down who’s advising Trump on health care. Here’s a list of confirmed health policy advisers:

·

·

·

Even though Trump’s shut them out so far, wonks of all ideological stripes say they’re willing to be locked in that room if a President Trump should summon them someday and say, “You’re hired.”

“As long as he provides food, and toilets,” said Timothy Jost, professor emeritus at Washington and Lee University School of Law, and an ACA supporter. More from Paul: http://politi.co/1KCeTTT

TRUMP DISSES MANDATE — AND OTHER REPUBLICANS' STANCE ON HEALTH CARE, TOO. Trump says he wasn't endorsing the ACA individual mandate at last week’s CNN town hall when he said “I like the mandate."

“There's no mandate, no mandatory anything” in his health plan, Trump told CNN’s Jake Tapper on Sunday. “We were talking over each other … It was my fault.”

But Trump also said that Republicans need to stop bashing national health coverage. “That’s part of the problem with the Republicans,” he said on NBC’s Meet the Press. “Somehow they got fed into this horrible position” where they’re against coverage expansion.

Cruz keeps trying to link Trump with Clinton on health care — “I think if we nominate a candidate that has the same record as Hillary Clinton on partial birth abortion, the same record as Hillary Clinton on Obamacare and socialized medicine … I don't think that's a path to victory,” Sen. Ted Cruz said on CNN on Sunday.

— But one Cruz delegate says Ted’s wrong on health care. Steven Tucker, a health insurance broker and Tea Party activist who’s on the Cruz Illinois leadership team and delegate slate, says he’s fed up with the senator’s claims on Trump’s health care plan.

"He's actually still repeating a lie that Trump is for single-payer and socialized medicine and a plan that's exactly like Sanders and Hillary, which is a lie,” Tucker told the Washington Examiner. “I wish that [Cruz] would stop that and correct the record," he added, saying that he remains a Cruz supporter.

NEVADA: CLINTON WINS HEALTH CARE VOTE — Hillary Clinton’s victory in Saturday’s Nevada caucuses was partly because she was perceived as the better candidate on health care. Overall, about 23 percent of caucus-goers said that health care was the most important issue facing the country; Clinton won about six in 10 of these voters.

WELCOME TO MONDAY PULSE — The field is slimming. Candidates are dropping out. A crucial decision looms. Of course, I’m talking about The Bachelor — America’s second-most important competition. Think you know the outcome of tonight’s big matchup? Send tips to ddiamond@politico.com or @ddiamond on Twitter.

FDA VOTE TODAY - This isn’t the story we’re used to hearing: Majority Leader Mitch McConnell is propelling a White House nominee right through opposition from at least three Democrats and one member of his own party.

A procedural vote on Robert Califf as FDA commissioner is set for late Monday. That sets up his confirmation by Wednesday — or maybe sooner. It shows just how badly the regulated industries want a confirmed leader at the top of the agency.

— Not everyone's on board: Four senators — Kelly Ayotte, Joe Manchin, Ed Markey and Bernie Sanders — have placed holds on Califf, who started out with an easy path toward confirmation but faced delays and opposition largely because of the growing opioid crisis. And at 12:30 p.m. today, Manchin and Markey will air their grievances, which Califf hasn’t satisfied despite rolling out FDA’s opioids “action plan” this month.

CMS PROPOSES 1.35 PERCENT HIKE TO MEDICARE ADVANTAGE — That’s according to guidance issued by CMS on Friday. The administration also is proposing a "coding trend" to account for discrepancies with the traditional fee-for-service program. CMS estimates that when that measure is factored in, the actual increase in payments to plans will be 3.55 percent.

— What’s next: We’re now into the 45-day notice period, and comments are due to CMS by March 4. And remember: Proposed rates aren’t necessarily indicative of final numbers. Last year, CMS initially proposed a 1.7 percent MA rate hike; the final bump came in at 4.2 percent.

** A message from National Community Pharmacists Association (NCPA): More transparency is needed into generic drug pricing and reimbursement rates set by drug plan middlemen. Bipartisan legislation (H.R. 244) would enhance oversight of federal health programs and help ensure pharmacy reimbursement for generic drugs reflects market fluctuations. Visit www.ncpanet.org/pharmacyaccess. **

WYOMING NIXES MEDICAID EXPANSION — AGAIN. Two last-ditch amendments failed in the state senate on Friday, effectively ending hopes of expanding the program this year. The Wyoming Tribune-Eagle notes that the same legislators have spent several years making the same arguments for and against the program — although support is continuing to build. For instance, the Republican chair of the state senate appropriations committee says that he now believes that Medicaid expansion will reduce the state’s deficit.

— States that could still enact Medicaid expansion this year? A handful of legislatures, including Idaho, Missouri, and Utah, may still consider expansion bills.

FIRST IN PULSE: EXPERTS CALL FOR MAJOR CHANGES TO LONG-TERM INSURANCE, MEDICAID — The Long-Term Care Financing Collaborative this morning will release its proposal for new ways to pay for long-term supports and services.

The collaborative — which includes Harvard’s Sheila Burke, Brookings’ Stuart Butler, and the Urban Institute’s Howard Gleckman — will lay out their ideas about revitalizing the private long-term care insurance market, modernizing Medicaid's safety net, and moving toward catastrophic protection for all. More details on the collaborative here: http://bit.ly/24lnjFE

SHUMLIN TRIES TO THREAD NEEDLE ON SINGLE-PAYER AND HILLARY — Vermont Gov. Peter Shumlin says that like Bernie Sanders, he still wants a single-payer health care system for the nation. But it isn't translating into a presidential endorsement for his home state senator. He's endorsed Hillary Clinton, Pro’s Rachana Pradhan reports.

“I’m also a realist,” Shumlin said during Politico’s State Solutions conference on Friday. “Do I think this Congress is going to adopt a single-payer health care system? The answer’s no.” Shumlin's with Clinton, who’s been attacking Sanders’ single-payer plan as an unrealistic fantasy. But Shumlin dismissed that characterization, saying that Clinton and Sanders have had a “respectful conversation” about differences in their policy views.

GOVS WANT GUIDELINES FOR OPIOID PRESCRIBING — Governors at the National Governors Association winter meeting this weekend voted to create standard guidelines for prescribing opioids as part of a nationwide effort to combat the prescription drug abuse epidemic, Pro’s Brianna Ehley reports.

Shumlin proposed the idea during a panel on opioid abuse. "We agree on this stuff so why wouldn’t we say we’re going to put together prescribing protocols for every state. Let’s figure it out," he said. The NGA health committee is expected to come up with opioid prescribing guidance and the full NGA will vote on it at their summer meeting.

HIGHMARK TO CUT DOCTORS' PAY FOR OBAMACARE PATIENTS — The Pennsylvania-based health plan, which says it lost about $500 million on Obamacare exchange plans last year, will reduce payment rates to participating physicians by 4.5 percent.

Highmark says the move helps ensure that the exchanges remain a viable investment. But the executive director of the Allegheny County Medical Society told the Pittsburgh Tribune-Review that the pay cut could force doctors to set quotas for how many patients they cover.

KASICH OFFICIALLY CUTS FUNDS FOR PLANNED PARENTHOOD — Ohio Gov. John Kasich on Sunday signed a bill that would redirect about $1.3 million that Planned Parenthood currently receives from Ohio's health department. The move isn’t a surprise, but it’s another reminder that Kasich — despite the perception that he’s the most pragmatic candidate left in the GOP presidential race — is no moderate when it comes to abortion.

— But the bill might not take effect. Planned Parenthood has successfully fought other states’ efforts to defund the organization, and it’s expected to do the same in Ohio.

VIDEOMAKER SAYS HE’S GOT MORE FOOTAGE OF PLANNED PARENTHOOD — David Daleiden, the 26-year-old activist who’s released a series of Planned Parenthood sting videos, tells the Washington Examiner’s Paige Cunningham that he’s still got “plenty of unreleased footage,” some of which is currently under court order.

Daleiden — who’s facing felony charges for the undercover videos — says that his “biggest goal” was to get the public talking about Planned Parenthood’s role in procuring fetal tissue. “It had been 15 years since the last time the trafficking of aborted fetal tissue had been in the news or had been a major topic in public discourse,” he told the Examiner. http://washex.am/1Qv0ift

DID PLANNED PARENTHOOD REPORT COST RESEARCHER HIS JOB? — Rick Allgeyer, director of research at the Texas Health and Human Services Commission, helped author a report that implied that Texas’ restrictions on Planned Parenthood were leading to a spike in the state’s birth rate. The study appeared in the New England Journal of Medicine in early February and sparked political controversy; last week, the Texas Tribune reported that Allgeyer would be stepping down.

Allgeyer also faced disciplinary action for working on the study on taxpayer time, according to an agency spokesperson.

THE ADVENTURES OF OPIOID-INDUCED CONSTIPATION MAN — What it’s like to be the butt of a Super Bowl commercial. (As the actor tells The New Yorker, it’s not as crappy as you might think.) http://bit.ly/1Q8zE9X

THIS WEEK ON OFF MESSAGE: "If Don King had been born white he’d be Donald Trump … " Rev. Al Sharpton talks with Glenn Thrush about what drives Donald Trump in today’s episode of the Off Message podcast. Sharpton also discusses Bernie Sanders’ Brooklyn roots and his record on race, and what it’ll take for one of the candidates to receive his endorsement. Plus: he weighs in on Black Lives Matter and evaluates the Obama administration on criminal justice. Listen to the full interview and get every episode by subscribing to the podcast on iTuneshttp://apple.co/1PVPVeq or Soundcloud http://bit.ly/1PIvQhr.

WHAT WE'RE READING

Flint was a preventable public health disaster. Why do government agencies fail? A former top health official in Maryland explains common factors:http://bit.ly/1WCvGaf

"Break up the insulin racket," endocrinologist Kasia Lipska argues in the New York Times, noting that the price per dose has effectively doubled in the past five years as PBMs have consolidated control: http://nyti.ms/2185ZVp

Is Oscar Health on the right track? Zach Tracer digs into the insurer's new network strategy: http://bloom.bg/1QU2PKj

Providers trying to achieve ROI on population health should know the "game [is] rigged", two prominent researchers and the CEO of the Penn health system argue in NEJM: http://bit.ly/1XH48BB

Nearly all payers believe telehealth is a worthy investment — but Medicare is dragging its feet, Bob Herman writes: http://bit.ly/1mRPz0s

** A message from National Community Pharmacists Association (NCPA): While approximately 80 percent of prescription drugs dispensed are generic drugs, the reimbursement system for these medications is largely unregulated and a mystery to pharmacists and patients. The lack of transparency also raises questions as to whether drug plan middlemen, pharmacy benefit manager (PBM) corporations, are overpaid by Medicare and other federal health programs. Moreover, when generic drug prices spike, PBM corporations are slow to update reimbursement rates, leaving community pharmacies with payments that don’t cover costs and unsustainable financial losses. H.R. 244 would increase transparency and facilitate timely payment updates. Learn more at www.ncpanet.org/pharmacyaccess. **