On Monday, former U.S. Rep. Steve Southerland, R-Fla., endorsed Dr. Neal Dunn to take on U.S. Rep. Gwen Graham, D-Fla., next year and his Republican primary opponent isn’t happy about it despite past words of support for the former congressman.

First elected to Congress in 2010, Southerland went down in a narrow loss to Graham last year. Southerland had garnered some speculation that he would seek a rematch but, in July, he announced he would not jump in the contest.

Southerland announced on Monday that he was backing Dunn, a physician based out of Panama City.

“This is not just another former congressman endorsing a candidate,” said Southerland. “I have examined the field thoroughly and feel strongly that Neal Dunn is the best conservative Republican candidate and is the only candidate I have endorsed for this race. He and his wife, Leah, are conservative Christians with a long family history of military service and sacrifice. He also has a distinguished career as a surgeon treating many thousands of North Florida families. He knows firsthand the failures of Obamacare and is the candidate most capable of repealing and replacing that broken system with one that is patient centered and market based.



“Neal and Leah are business owners who know how hard it is to start and run a successful business, meeting payroll, growing jobs and working through the maze of government regulations,” Southerland added. “Neal's background in the military, medicine and business is crucial to these times. His life perfectly qualifies him to speak for and fight for North and Northwest Florida families. Neal is a conservative with solutions that work and because of our shared belief in hard work and honest dealings, I stand behind Neal Dunn 100 percent.”



“I thank my dear friend, Steve Southerland, for his support of my campaign,” said Dunn. “I share former Congressman Southerland’s sentiments about North and Northwest Florida and just how important it is for our district to be well represented in Washington by strong conservative leadership. I know what it takes to make our community healthier and our economy stronger, and the need to repeal and replace Obamacare and for businesses to thrive and grow. And, I pledge, if elected, to help restore America’s faith in Congress. We must get government out of the business of health care and stop putting mandates on our business community that hamper job growth and economic prosperity. I am also concerned about the growing threat posed to our families by the dark shadow of terrorism. My lifetime of experience has prepared me to address this.”

But Southerland’s endorsement didn’t sit well with Tallahassee attorney Mary Thomas who is also seeking the Republican nomination.

Lisa Morrison, a spokeswoman for Thomas, came out firing at Southerland after the endorsement.

"It's no surprise political insiders and lobbyists are supporting Neal Dunn, he is one of them,” Morrison said. “After all Dunn lobbied for the expansion of Obamacare in Florida and donated to Democrats. That's what insiders do. Conservative Republicans want someone to stand up for them, not Washington politics as usual, which is why Mary Thomas is going to win. Only Mary Thomas will fight to repeal Obamacare, end Common Core, and say no to amnesty for illegals."

But Thomas was singing a different tune in July when Southerland announced he would not seek a rematch with Graham.

"I want to thank Congressman Southerland for his service and for his leadership,” Thomas said after Southerland decided not to run in 2016. “This decision could not have come easy for him. When I spoke with Congressman Southerland several weeks ago, we discussed many issues that directly impact our area that we both share a passion for, including our fisheries, water issues, and supporting our military bases. Over the next several days and weeks my campaign will work hard to earn the backing of Congressman Southerland, his supporters and voters looking for conservative leadership in Washington."

Sunshine State News reached out to Morrison on Monday but she did not respond by the deadline.

Also on Monday, Thomas signed conservative group Eagle Forum’s “Stop Common Core Pledge.”

"Federal control over our education system has failed,” Thomas said on Monday. “It's failed our students, their parents, their communities and it's failed the taxpayers. Let's eliminate the Department of Education and let local communities and families make the education choices that are right for them. Let's repeal Common Core once and for all."

“I pledge to: oppose Common Core in all its forms and no matter what name it is given; limit or eliminate the various aspects of Common Core that are currently being implemented including, but not limited to, data collection, directed vocational education, and nationalized assessments/standards (e.g. PARCC and Smarter Balanced); and make public my opposition to Common Core,” the pledge reads.

Reach Kevin Derby at kderby@sunshinestatenews.com or follow him on Twitter: @KevinDerbySSN