With the first batch of the National Football League‘s preseason games in the books, it’s that time for every armchair general manager who wants to win their fantasy league to begin assessing the draft, keepers and a strategy for the season.

Associated Press

The Numbers is no different. We plan for bye conflicts at the key skill positions. We check strength of schedule to look for teams poised to surprise to the upside. We look for sleepers, deep sleepers and value picks.

One thing we’ve never really considered: the likelihood of injury. Sure, we know some players are prone to missing time and others are more durable. But never have we truly planned for the possibility.

But thanks to this article from our colleagues in the ever-excellent WSJ Sports department, we now know there’s a way to incorporate injury risk into our game-planning. In the prose of WSJ colleague Michael Salfino:

A new algorithm designed by SportsInjuryPredictor.com tries to give fantasy players an edge when it comes to injury avoidance. It incorporates the complete injury history of every NFL player, going back to college, at the offensive skill positions (quarterback, running back, wide receiver and tight end). The recency and type of injury are key predictive factors, along with anticipated workload and body-mass index (smaller players are more injury prone). Last year, it “was able to predict (injuries) 75% of the time.” A number of high-profile players may have big reason to worry in 2015. For example, Pittsburgh Steelers running back Le’Veon Bell, who scored 11 touchdowns last year while gaining 2,215 yards from scrimmage (854 as a receiver), is given an 88% chance of injury. The New York Giants’ electrifying receiver Odell Beckham Jr. had 1,305 yards receiving in 2014 after missing the first four games, also was assessed an 88% injury risk. Even worse, the odds that an injury will be more severe, measured by games lost, increases as this probability gets higher. Compare that with New Orleans Saints quarterback Drew Brees, whose injury-free history since 2010 gives him a 1% risk.

So, fantasy fiends, check out this new tool and for more cool numerically oriented sports columns, check out The Count.

Meantime, The Numbers will be reconsidering keeping Mr. Beckham in our league. Actually, given catches like this, he might be worth the risk.