Please enable Javascript to watch this video

I’ve heard from a lot of you fans over the weekend, and you’re the people I serve, not the Avalanche. I work for the Denver Post and the fans reading it, nobody else.

While I am like all of you in professing amazement at what a great job this team did this year, from the coach on down, the way the final weekend finished bothered a lot of you. Number one on the list of complaints: the decision by coach Patrick Roy to play Reto Berra Friday night in San Jose.

Berra certainly doesn’t look like he deserves to be in an NHL uniform right now. His numbers were bad for Calgary before the Avs surprisingly gave up a second-round draft pick to get him, and they got even worse with Colorado in his two starts. In less than four periods played over two games, Berra allowed seven goals on 32 shots and finished with an 0-2-0 record.

A few days before the Avs’ final road trip, Roy said the rotation would be Giguere-Varlamov-Berra-??? for the final four games. Giguere and Varlamov won their two starts and, combined with St. Louis’ meltdown in the final week, meant that Friday’s game in San Jose had not only divisional implications, but possibly conference title implications.

Therefore, it was reasonable to assume that Roy might not go with Berra after all against the Sharks. He’d only played one NHL game since February, and Giguere had certainly had plenty of previous rest – plus he’d been playing well of late.

But Roy stubbornly stuck with the decision to play the Swiss rookie, and it was a disaster. Ten minutes into the game – two goals on five shots – Berra was on the bench. Giguere played well in relief and the Avs battled gamely, but the fact is the spirit of the team was taken away very early because of Berra’s bad play. Roy alluded to the fact that Giguere had played a few nights earlier against the Oilers as a reason why he might have been given the night off, but does anyone think Giguere is tired right now? He has barely played in the second half and he’s probably not going to play the rest of his career unless Varlamov gets hurt in the playoffs. He could have played the final three or four games and been fine – and it would have given the Avs a better chance to win instead of having Reto Berra in net.

Here’s my main piece of criticism though: Berra’s roster spot should have belonged to someone else in the final week. It should have belonged to, say, a Karl Stollery from Lake Erie or maybe a Duncan Siemens. By bringing up a defenseman for the final weekend and moving Berra to the minors where he belonged all along, the Avs could have rested a guy like, say, Jan Hejda in the final game or two.

Instead, with Berra still taking up space unnecessarily and with only Stefan Elliott having been recalled from the minors on the weekend (to fill in for the injured Tyson Barrie), Hejda was forced to play Sunday against the Ducks and, sure enough, he got hurt by a slap shot to the upper body (most likely a hand, but it’s still unclear at this point).

The Ducks rested all their top guys today, and the Avs should have done some of the same. Hejda’s injury may not be serious (that’s the early word anyway), but it was an unnecessary risk to play him all along. He’s in his mid-30s, played a lot of hockey this year, and deserved a day off today. Instead, the Avs got lazy and didn’t want to call bodies up from Lake Erie.

Patrick Roy for the Jack Adams, heck yes. He would get my vote. But the stubborn decision to play a guy who didn’t deserve to — who got a THREE-YEAR CONTRACT before he even played a game with the Avs — made for a disappointing final weekend of an otherwise stupendous season.