Under a story about a New Jersey mom who was fired from her job as a receptionist with Hampton Inn Bordentown, NJ.com users renewed a debate about whether small businesses should accommodate nursing mothers.

Should employers provide new moms time and space to pump?

Under the Affordable Care Act provision, companies are required to provide "reasonable" break time and a place for pumping, but employers with fewer than 50 people aren't subject to the new rules if the provision would "impose an undue hardship."

MORE: What are your rights in N.J. for breastfeeding at work?

The managers of the Hampton Inn in Bordentown where Ariana Gossard worked before being fired last week were not available for comment Wednesday morning. Gossard, who worked there for two years, said the hotel has about 25 employees.

So what do you think? Should all companies, even small businesses, accommodate new moms to pump or is it too much of a hardship? Vote below in our informal, unscientific poll.

Here's what NJ.com readers are saying:

CaptainZee

This is a tough one. I'm all for paid family leave. However. She was out almost 6 months for having a baby. Then when she came back she wanted extra breaks. That's tough to swallow as an employer.

letsbehonest2015

Can we please not slap her on the wrist for asking her company to be flexible. She wants to work. This is where our govt needs to step in. I'm sure the hotel is not that busy who stays at Hampton inn anyway? Not to mention she could where a headset to answer calls and place a brb sign on front desk and monitor camera. Also manage her break around when customers check in and out

NJMaMa

Let me first say I appreciate her desire to breastfeed her child. The decisions she made should not be a burden on her employer. Stop expecting the rest of the world to work around you and what you want. She should have given much more thought to her job and situation prior to having a child. This shows a complete lack of responsibility.

tag1

First off as an employee you do not have the right to demand anything from and employer. The law as I understand it only protects the job you had before your maternity leave, meaning the shift, hours, and job responsibilities, so when you go to your employer and day I want to change my shift type (evening to day) hours of availability ( i can only work certain day when before I could work any day) and potentially change my status from full time to part time, the employer does not need to accommodate that, It would have been morally correct and just plain nice to have accommodated the new Mom's demands, legally that is a different story.

As for the demands that she would require two to three 20 min additional breaks to pump breast milk a day. Three 20 min breaks equals to 1 hour of break time on top of what she was receiving before. If she is working full time she should be receiving a lunch and at least 1 break.. Pump at those times or split her lunch so she can have extra time. Reality of being a working Mom, most employers do not give a rats behind if you need a certain schedule because of child care reasons, your kid is sick or you have a Dr. appointment for your child. Welcome to reality

NJ Native

It seems strange that this woman could be gone from her job for 5-6 months, yet when she comes back she can't take two 15 minute breaks? Doesn't she even get a lunch or bathroom break? She can eat lunch during the 15 minutes she is pumping and then take the rest of her lunch break 15 minutes later in day?

I am confused how there is not a single person in that hotel that can relieve her for 15 minutes - how about training someone to just be her back-up? I have a feeling another hotel would have hired her once they heard her story - but now that there is this lawsuit she runs the risk of being like kryptonite.

pdsubbu

Looking at her nature of job and the leave allowances already provided, that itself is too much. Her position requires her to be available through out her work time. If she is not able to do it, then the company has every right to send her off. That RULE by itself overrides every other law or rule. Thousands are laid off these days without any reasons and we are here discussing about laying off a front office receptionist, for her taking "breast pumping" breaks.

ChrissysFantasy

Breastfeeding is not a permanent situation. You mean to tell me this hotel couldn't make a simple accommodation for an employee? My wife owns a small business, and goes out her way to accommodate her employees. Not because of laws, but because she is human and values her employees.

Cristina Rojas may be reached at crojas@njadvancemedia.com. Follow her on Twitter @CristinaRojasTT. Find The Times of Trenton on Facebook.