Monmouth County approved a 2015 budget that includes $4.5 million in new tax dollars, the first such increase the county has had in five years. (Photo: Getty Images/Ingram Publishing)

Monmouth County approved a 2015 budget that includes $4.5 million in new tax dollars, the first such increase the county has had in five years.

The Board of Chosen Freeholders received little feedback on the $488 million budget during the official public hearing Thursday night at its meeting in Spring Lake.

But while residents largely remained quiet — James Martin of Spring Lake Heights, a regular at freeholder meetings, questioned some of the line items — the county leaders themselves expressed some reluctance about increasing taxes.

EARLIER STORY: How much will Monmouth County taxes increase?

"I'm not totally happy with the budget the way it is," said Freeholder Lillian Burry, who ultimately voted for the budget with three other freeholders. "On the other hand, we did come up with the very best budget under the circumstances."

The budget will levy $307 million overall in taxes, which is an increase of just under 1.5 percent over last year. What that means for individual taxpayers won't be known until Monmouth County finalizes its overall assessment and determines how the tax levy will be divvied out among the 53 municipalities.

Freeholder John Curley cast the lone vote against the budget, saying he thought it was a bad year to increase taxes as a large portion of Monmouth County begins to see the impact of the Assessment Demonstration Program, a pilot program that revamped how the county assigns value to property.

The budget does reflect some savings because of the freeholder's decision to privatize its two nursing homes, a move Curley has been pushing for more than five years.

But Curley said the timing was "a bit too late" and that the county could have saved more money had the nursing homes been privatized earlier. He said the county has been using too much money from its surplus fund over the years.

"You can't live on a credit card. You can't live on your savings account," he said.

RELATED: Monmouth County nursing home sale: 7 things to know

Freeholder Tom Arnone said he agreed with Curley's take on the use of surplus funding, but pinned that fault on earlier freeholder boards. He said the current administration has been incrementally working towards using less from surplus, and helps the county maintain its top-notch fiscal rating.

Monmouth County has a AAA bond rating with all three credit rating agencies, an honor only a handful of counties in the country can claim.

"We are going in the right direction," he said.

Read or Share this story: http://on.app.com/1z2rQjY