Simplifying Senior Living Is Valuable Resource, Committed To Helping Seniors and Their Families

By Space Coast Daily // January 6, 2016

'The client comes first, every time'

BREVARD COUNTY, FLORIDA – According to the National Center for Assisted Living, more than 735,000 Americans live in an assisted living facility, and 70 percent of those residents move in directly from a private home.

Selection of the right senior living facility, plus the physical and emotional adjustments of moving, can be daunting.

Melbourne-based Simplifying Senior Living streamlines that process at every step.

Their experienced staff guides families by researching facilities and applying their substantial experience to avoid missteps.

This saves time, includes the benefit of experience, and includes the following:

• Finding living options based on budget, personal preference, and clinical needs

• Personal Touring Assistance

• Updates on Veteran assistance & other programs

• Offered at no cost to the consumer

“The client comes first, every time. We take a personalized approach through educating our clients and helping them discover the 150-plus senior living facilities available locally,” said Justin Linzmeier, Operations Director.

Through their partnership with Indequest Nurse Case Management, they encourage their clients to partake in a clinical assessment so that they can access a client’s clinical needs and thus recommend the right facility.

VETERAN STAFF

Kara Anderson, a native Brevardian and 20 year management veteran of the assisted living industry, is the founder of Simplifying Senior Living. Justin Linzmeier, Rachel McLain and Kim Hoff round out her accomplished management team.

“Understanding the licensing of Florida facilities is key to successful placement,” said Dr. John H. Potomski, Jr., founder of Brevard’s Long-Term Care Symposium.

“Kara Anderson, as a long-time administrator and certified ALF Core Trainer for the State of Florida, is a trusted resource and very knowledgeable in compliance. This lends valuable perspective to seniors that national placement agencies just do not have.”

Anderson launched Simplifying Senior Living with a skilled team that collectively has 50 years’ experience.

“Our philosophy is to be committed to helping seniors and their families throughout Central Florida,” said Anderson.

Her devotion to the elderly is reflected in the frequent compliments her firm receives.

“Rachel McLain is a godsend, I am so grateful for all she has done for me and my family,” said Christine Adams, who worked with McLain to assist her mother in finding the right senior living facility.

Anderson said that her team’s extensive knowledge of assisted living facilities – in licensing, compliance and operations – sets them apart.

“I am proud that our staff is complimented for having extensive experience, plus broad knowledge of rules and regulations,” said Anderson.

SERVICES FOR FACILITIES

Simplifying Senior Living also provides training and continuing education for facility owners, administrators and key staff. The firm offers assisted-living specific business knowledge via their compliance and education services.

They offer assisted living facility Administrator Core Training, the required curriculum to become an administrator.

Their work helping seniors is just as busy.

“Kara’s team has mastered the art of assisting seniors in finding appropriate care and placement in assisted living facilities,” said Dr. Potomski.

“I have known Kara for many years, and she is one of the most reliable, honest and sincere professionals I’ve had the pleasure to work with.”

For more information log on to SimplifyingSeniorLiving.com or call 321-327-2917.

Click here to contribute your news or announcements Free