Wesley Berg’s family has pictures of him holding a lacrosse stick when he wasn’t yet a year old. Not long after that, he was actually using one.

He got started young with another sort of stick too.

“I played hockey since I was old enough to walk,” Berg said Tuesday at the University of Denver’s Peter Barton Lacrosse Stadium.

In British Columbia, Berg was raised in the Vancouver suburb of Coquitlam, where the lacrosse-hockey double is common, with “box” lacrosse, the indoor game played on a hockey rink, as the natural middle ground.

“I skated and played hockey my entire life until lacrosse took over,” Berg said. “When I played junior (lacrosse) my first year, we went to the national championship and won, and that goes into August. I was 16 or 17, and that’s when you have to decide if you’re going to play junior hockey. I kind of lost interest in competitive hockey then.

“I’d played my first year of midget (hockey), and then I broke my collarbone one year and missed half the season. I just played on a friend’s team and played high school hockey, which is more like a beer league sort of thing. After that, I’d committed to going here for lacrosse, and I haven’t played hockey since. That’s kind of sad, but I might get some more time to play in the future.”

Berg and the Pioneers — the lacrosse Pioneers, not the hockey Pioneers — face Notre Dame on Saturday in a Final Four semifinal at Lincoln Financial Field in Philadelphia.

If they win, the Pioneers will play the Johns Hopkins-Maryland winner in the NCAA championship game Monday, and Berg will have a chance to celebrate a national title two weeks before he graduates from DU with a degree in construction management. He probably will join the Denver Outlaws of Major League Lacrosse for the rest of the 2015 season.

Berg will leave DU as the school’s career leader in goals, with 180 in 71 games going into the weekend, and points (247). Last year, he was a member of Canada’s gold medal team in the world championship.

“There aren’t too many days left of it,” Berg said, “and the last couple of years, it’s been sad watching the seniors go, guys you’ve played with and lived with the last little while. That’s always a sad part of it, but if you win the national championship, that definitely takes the focus off leaving and leaves the excitement of winning.”

Berg came to DU as one of the first recruits to commit after Bill Tierney took over as coach in 2009. He said Tierney “was kind of in the transition period of coming to Denver when I started to talk to them. … When I visited here, it was (Tierney’s) first year, and it was another aspect of coming here. You hear a lot about him and what he had done for Princeton, and that was another thing that made me want to come out here.”

Berg’s role initially changed this season after Connor Cannizzaro, who played for Maryland last season as a freshman, transferred to DU and was immediately eligible. The 6-foot-1, 190-pound Berg stepped back from attack to midfield for the first part of the season, but he has been listed at attack — with Cannizzaro — since. They have combined for 105 goals, with Cannizzaro getting 55 and Berg 50. And it’s perilous to get too hung up with position labels, because the Pioneers do a lot of interchanging among the six offensive positions.

“I think we have great chemistry,” Berg said. “He’s a nightmare to cover behind the net, and there’s no defender in the league that can really match feet with him. With him doing that, he can either go to the net or if they slide to him early, I’m good at slipping into the middle and kind of tapping in empty netters or finding a soft spot from outside. He’s got great vision and finds me.”

Berg also played midfield earlier in his DU career.

“It’s nice at midfield. A lot of times you have a short stick on you, and it’s just a different aspect,” he said of the four-stick limitation on “long poles” in NCAA lacrosse. “You’re dodging downhill, and as attack you’re slipping and delaying, dodging from behind the net. I’ve always liked playing both, changing it up and keeping it exciting.”

When Connor Cannizzaro signaled his hope to leave Maryland and join his older brother, Sean, in the DU program, Tierney ran it by Berg.

“I went to Wesley first,” Tierney said. “He’s our leader. When he said to me, ‘Coach, Connor’s a great player, a great kid. I just want to win, it’ll all work out,’ that to me validated all the other things we do.

“Look, young men are young men. You have your highest scorer, your All-American, your Tewaaraton (lacrosse’s Heisman-type award) candidate, your Canadian World Games team member, he could have easily said to me, ‘You know what, Coach, we have it good the way we have it, let’s pass on this one.’ And I would have. Thank God he didn’t.”

Terry Frei: tfrei@denverpost.com or twitter.com/TFrei

Berg file

A look at the career of University of Denver lacrosse player Wesley Berg:

Year Goals Assists Points 2012 26 11 37 2013 56 16 72 2014 48 20 68 2015 50 20 70 Totals 180 67 247 Source: DU

Final four semifinals

Denver vs. Notre Dame

Lincoln Financial Field in Philadelphia, 11 a.m. MDT on Saturday; ESPN2

DENVER

National seed: No. 4 Record: 15-2, 4-0 Big East

Quarterfinal result: Denver 15, Ohio State 13, at Sports Authority Field at Mile High

NOTRE DAME

National seed: No. 1 Record: 12-2, 4-0 Atlantic Coast Conference

Quarterfinal result: Notre Dame 14, Albany (N.Y.) 10, at Sports Authority Field at Mile High

Previous meeting: Denver 11, Notre Dame 10, overtime, March 7 at DU’s Peter Barton Lacrosse Stadium

USILA coaches poll (May 4): Notre Dame ranked second, Denver third. (No. 1 Syracuse is not in the Final Four.)

Second semifinal: Johns Hopkins vs. Maryland The Denver Post