Topics: DAME, eric garner, Gender, Jordan Davis, Race, Renisha McBride, Trayvon Martin, Politics News

This piece originally appeared on DAME

Theodore Wafer, 54, is currently on trial for second-degree murder after shooting 19-year-old Renisha McBride in the face when she knocked on his door for assistance following a car accident last November.

Yet her name is not shouted in collective rage like Trayvon Martin’s or Jordan Davis’s. Instead, hers hovers, barely above a whisper, along the edges of national dialogue as contentious conversations surrounding gender reciprocity in justice movement work takes center stage.

The kind of zero-sum, gendered activism advocated for in some of these discussions is irresponsible and ill-advised, benefitting nothing but the white-supremacist capitalist hetero-patriarchy those of us vested in justice and equality seek to dismantle. The targeted invisibilizing of black women, however, remains an undeniably clear and present danger that should not be ignored.

As Renisha McBride’s life is reduced to half-hearted, malicious media coverage and social-media fodder, the silence from some who claim to care about the violence inflicted upon black women grows louder. And positioned as it is against the unified outrage surrounding the brutal slaying of Eric Garner, the devaluation of black women’s lives stands in stark relief.

More from DAME: “I Worry That I Know How the Story Ends for Ray Rice and Janay Palmer”

This difference in engagement is why Nat Turner is a legend and the stories of Mary Turner, Laura Nelson, and others remain buried beneath the bodies of thousands of black men throughout history. Our stories, our lives, our bodies, and the psychic and physical violence perpetuated against us are seen as proximal issues as the fight to protect Black Manhood from a system designed for its failure saps our energy.

In a world where patriarchy reigns supreme, the systemic emasculation of black men—via strategic methods of unemployment, mass incarceration, and cold-blooded murder at the hands of law enforcement—defines the real Hunger Games. Rules are modified to protect not only those men in power but the façade of power itself.

Black women are often viewed as collateral damage as interlocking systems of sexism and misogyny are replicated in our communities. Our pain is situated as secondary, our trauma non-urgent, and our deaths? Our deaths at the hands of police, strangers, and, yes, even at the hands of men who claim to love us, are often noted, then swiftly filed away under: “We’ll Fight For Her Later.”