Let's be frank. Since the time of Freud, physicians have been biased in their treatment of men. Males got sick, Females were hysterical. Now years later, the dark, dirty little secret will be revealed. But not just yet.

Women were hysterical back then. Why not? It was a man's world. Men worked, they brought home the bacon. Women lounged in the house, cooked that bacon, did the washing and cleaning and in their spare time raised the children. When parents took ill it was grandma not grandpa that took charge.

But you're living in the 21st Century. It's a brave new world. So a male Republican-led Congress has voted for as restrictive an abortion law they could possibly devise in a vain attempt to thwart The Affordable Care Act and impose their will on the women of this country.

Who cares? You know The President will veto the bill. Why be incensed at the sheer audacity of their action? So the men want to turn the clock back to 1950. After all, as a child June Cleaver always seemed so happy to you.

Let them go ahead and try. Won't they be surprised once you know the secret? No, it's not Carter's Little Liver Pills. It's something far more potent. But wait!

Before I answer the elusive question, please indulge me for a moment more and allow me to make a couple of observations.

In my humble opinion, despite nearly a half century of incredible advances, never before in recent history have women's rights been under such constant and virulent attack. Some of it's subtle and lots is obvious, ludicrous and insulting, vis a vis recent politicians disdainful and demeaning comments about women, rape and reproduction. Do some homework. Spend a night or two listening to FOX News.

Here's the scary part. History tends to repeat itself if we are not constantly vigilant. I coach many female college age students and often find they take all their rights and privileges for granted. They've always had them. Their parents or grandparents -- many of them Baby Boomers -- haven't shared their experience of the protests, struggles, Roe V. Wade or the fight to pass the ERA.

It's your responsibility to open a dialog, create family time, tell stories of the years of turmoil and angst, make young people aware that the relative equality that exists now didn't just happen. It took blood sweat and tears. Bring Gloria Steinem alive through discussion not textbook.

If you don't, we as a society are doomed to repeat the errors and travesties of the past. When was the last time you discussed the Tea Party's agenda with your daughter or granddaughter? The onus is on you!

Now, to be perfectly honest and above board, the title of this brief essay was a little misleading. I thought it was a good way to get you to read what I had to say because I believe it's so vitally important.

However, as a man of my word, I will answer the question. Of course you always have to look at the source. I'm just one Baby Boomer muddling along through life and accumulating opinions through the lens of my personal experience.

As a male Baby Boomer I'm looking for vitality, vivaciousness, excitement and a certain joie de vivre that so often disappears as we get older. Jaded is the term that often comes to mind.

Do we want a woman to be attractive? Of course. Don't you want a man to be attractive? However, attractive is a relative term. I'm not going to be disingenuous and say that a chemical reaction isn't important. It is! But remember, chemical reactions come in all styles, shapes and sizes.

Furthermore, I believe that just because we age, we don't lose the longings of our youth. Perhaps some do. Not me, or those men and women with whom I come in contact on a daily basis. Much of what attracted us 30 years ago is no different today.

So what then is the magic potion I promised you? That little elixir that might change your life forever. Finally the answer!

Ingredients:

1 cup caring

1/2 cup sharing personal news, trials and tribulations.(Let's face it; guys usually aren't as communicative or chatty as gals. It's unfortunate, but it is what it is.)

aren't as communicative or chatty as gals. It's unfortunate, but it is what it is.) 1 1/2 cup intellectual curiosity

2 cups scintillating conversation

0 cups kvetching (please check dictionary if term is unfamiliar)

1 cup pampering

1 cup humor

1/3 cup dark chocolate (This is for you since I see it listed in every woman's singles ad.)

1 cup exercise

Willingness to watch reruns of The Three Stooges and The A - Team

Removal of opera and sarcasm from your vocabulary

Learning the difference between a home run, a soccer goal and a touchdown

Directions:

Take all ingredients, add some of your own and feel free to delete any of those listed. Mix together in any order and then: Be Yourself!

Feel free to change quantities or substitute ingredients at your discretion. It's your life!

Male Baby Boomers appreciate real, honest and interesting women who look at the second half of life as a prelude to all the great things yet to come.



I thank you for reading this article and welcome all comments.

Earlier on Huff/Post50:

Where To Meet Singles Over 50

Where To Meet Singles Over 50

1 of 5 New Blood At The Party Sometimes it feels like the foundation of your social life is so strong that you no longer find the opportunity to meet new and exciting people. Throw a barbecue or party in which guests bring a friend that no one in the group knows. Alternatively, tag along with a friend the next time their office has a company picnic or function -- this is a great way to meet somebody who you know is responsible enough to hold down a career and who you can 'check out' with an acquainted friend before you agree to a date. Share this slide:

Alamy

Follow David Kanegis on Twitter: www.twitter.com/MINDACROBATICS