The health care industry makes up between one-fifth and one-sixth of the total U.S. economy. Joel Saget/AFP/Getty Images

Health care spending will rise 6.8 percent in 2015, effectively reversing the five-year contraction in costs in that category, according to a study from PricewaterhouseCooper’s Health Research Institute released Tuesday. This is up from the 6.5 percent growth the professional services network company expects for 2014.

The growth projection is primarily based on increasing costs for specialty drugs to treat infections like hepatitis C, which affects about 3.2 million Americans, as well as an improved economy and more confident consumers, who may choose not to delay care as much.

“We saw in 2007 for many years the health care economy contracted just as the rest of the economy was in a recession and sort of slowly pulled out of it,” Ceci Connolly, managing director of PwC’s Health Research Institute and a co-author of the report says. “Now that overall economy has improved and come back significantly, we see for 2015 that health spending is also loosening up.”

The health care industry comprises between one-fifth and one-sixth of the total U.S. economy, Connolly says, and its rate of price inflation outpaces overall inflation by about four percentage points. And, she says, there’s reason to believe that’s growth will track closer to overall economic growth but there’s still “ways to go.”

Courtesy of PwC Health Research Institute

“We continue to be encouraged that the health care industry is now focused on value or as I like to put it, getting our money’s worth for our health care dollars,” Connolly says. “And even though we anticipate modest uptick in 2015, it really is modest, and that is encouraging.”

The report, which is based on an analysis of health care costs in the large employer insurance market, found that spending on specialty drugs would quadruple by 2020. While only 4 percent of patients use specialty drugs like oncology treatments, those drugs account for 25 percent of total drug spending. And, according to the report, pharmacy spending comprises 15 percent of total private health insurance costs.

While total health spending will probably grow as more people gain insurance under the Affordable Care Act, the report said it may have “little effect on employer health spending.”

High-deductible plans are on the rise, and according to a PwC survey within the study, 44 percent of employers across all industries are considering such plans as their only insurance option for employees over the next three years. According to Rick Judy, a principal in PwC’s Health Industries practice, this means consumers are getting more engaged in their health care choices.

“When the consumer is engaged in that decision making, it exposes discrepancies in the market, either around cost or quality, and drives the industry toward better cost and quality,” he says.

The net growth rate, accounting for benefit design changes like higher deductibles that hold down total spending growth by shifting the costs to patients, is expected to be 4.8 percent, the report showed.

An aging society that requires more care; hospitals’ increasing acquisitions of in-house physicians who can charge higher hospital rates; and expensive new technologies are other factors that continue to drive health care costs into the future, the report showed.