Beachgoers flocking to the Jersey Shore this weekend are being warned about potentially dangerous rip currents that could be spawned by Hurricane Arthur.

Clear skies are expected to return today, making it likely New Jersey's beaches will be packed. However, forecasters at the National Weather Service say the storm-churned Atlantic is likely to bring high risk for swimmers on what should be an otherwise beautiful beach day.

The hurricane came nowhere close to slamming the Garden State, but it did bring bouts of heavy rain and gusty winds to some areas as it passed far off the Jersey coast on Friday. Conditions improved by late Friday afternoon, and forecasters said sunny skies were expected for the rest of the holiday weekend.

Some flooding occurred in Cape May and other coastal areas of south Jersey, where most of the rain fell, and high surf advisories were expected to remain in effect until Saturday afternoon.

No major storm-related problems were reported Friday, and all beaches remained open, despite small crowds. Concerns about the storm spurred many towns across the state to reschedule their Fourth of July fireworks until later in the weekend.

FACTS & TIPS ABOUT RIP CURRENTS

About 100 people each year in the U.S. drown because of rip currents, and about 80 percent of swimmers who must be rescued in the ocean are caught in them, according to the United States Lifesaving Association, a nonprofit lifeguard group. Here are five things to know about rip currents:

What is a rip current?

A rip current is a channel of water that flows out into the ocean from shore. The motion and waves of the ocean are constantly changing the sand at the bottom. Water going back out to sea takes the shortest path, and sometimes all that water flows into a narrow area, like a depression between two sand bars, creating a rip current that can pull swimmers away from shore. Rip currents can be anywhere from about the length of a car to over half a football field, said Monty Reed, lifeguard coordinator for North Myrtle Beach, S.C.

Is it the same as an undertow?

It is not an undertow. A rip current will pull swimmers out to sea but won’t pull them under, Reed said. The currents are temporary and follow the dips and rises of the ocean floor instead of a constant flow. That’s why the term “rip tide” is a misnomer, because tides are caused by the gravitational pull of the moon.

What if you get caught by a rip current?

If you have a boogie board or other flotation device, hold on, Reed said. The current won’t pull you under. “People drown from fear and panic. They don’t know what to do,” Reed said. Instead, ride it out. The water will eventually stop pulling you out. Or, swim parallel to shore to get out of the rip current. But don’t swim against it. Some rip currents flow at 8 feet per second, which is faster than Olympic swimmers.

Is it safe to swim now that Hurricane Arthur has moved out to sea?

The Atlantic Ocean could be dangerous even with Hurricane Arthur moving away, Reed said. The churning waves from the storm will create new sandbars and depressions, causing rip currents to pop up suddenly.

How can I stay safe?

Reed said it is always best to swim near a lifeguard stand. Also, talk to lifeguards, who can tell you how bad conditions are before you get in the water. And listen to their advice. Reed plans to tell swimmers not to get in above their knees or waist, depending on the conditions. "Stay close to shore, where you can manage yourself in the waves, and that will keep everyone safe," Reed said.

Star-Ledger staff writers Seth Augenstein and Len Melisurgo contributed to this report.