Months after October's flooding, the Midlands is still seeing problems every time it rains -- especially Riverwalk Park and Amphitheater in West Columbia.

RELATED: See photos from October's historic flood.

Last week's rain brought even more floods to the area. Park officials say rising water levels along the Congaree River are still high and there's flooding prevalent throughout the park.

Since the flood back in October, the Riverwalk Park has been on a sort of roller coaster. After the initial flood, they were able to reopen the Amphitheater portion of the Riverwalk, but it has been closed several more times because it keeps experiencing flooding problems.

Crews monitoring the Riverwalk say there are pedestrian bridge issues to the north and erosion problems toward Cayce. Since October, crews have cleaned up everything from mud, debris, and trees. They also found a lot of erosion problems and the river level is not helping.

"We are getting additional erosion from that," Jamie Hook, director of the West Columbia Public Works Department, said. "And mainly we've got a lot of tree balls that were exposed down by the river because of the erosion. So now with these rains and all now, we're getting additional trees that are falling and things like that more frequently than in typical times. Other than that, it's just the typical mud that's washed up and cleanup and things like that. But that's been the biggest issue."

Hook says accessibility to the river is another major problem, so they're not going to be able to bring in a lot of large equipment -- extending the amount of time it could take before the park is fully opened again.

"The city is doing all it can do right now to open it as soon as we can," Hook said. "We know that people enjoy the Riverwalk, we want them to. We know it's one of our jewels that we have as a city and as quick as we can I promise you we're going to get it open. It's been unreal lately and the intensity of the rains lately. It's just something I've never seen."

Hook says he believes it could be 6 months until everything is back to normal and folks are able to use the Riverwalk Park in its entirety.

Copyright 2015 WIS. All rights reserved.