For Jo Ann Jenkins, heading up the AARP is nothing but a fitting final chapter to her career in Washington.

That’s not just because Jenkins, at 56, is herself a member of the lobbying juggernaut that represents people 50 and older.

ADVERTISEMENT

In fact, Jenkins likes to note that she and AARP were both born in the same year: 1958. And, Jenkins adds, she’s a female chief executive of a nearly-38-million-member-strong organization that’s been dominated by male leaders since its founding by Ethel Percy Andrus.

“Coming to AARP, it all seems more relevant,” Jenkins said last month in an interview at the group’s Washington headquarters.

Jenkins took over the top slot at the AARP in September, after both heading up the organization’s charitable arm and serving as its chief operating officer. Before that she had several stops in the federal government, including three agencies and the Library of Congress.

In her interview, Jenkins acknowledged the challenges the group faces in being a voice for everyone who’s made it to 50, a group that represents an increasing share of the U.S. population — currently around a third, according to the Census Bureau — and comes in all races and with a wide range of political beliefs.

But while the new chief executive said she was seeking to put her own stamp on the organization, she showed no interest in narrowing the AARP’s interests and scope, after some critics have said that the group hurts itself by having too broad of an agenda.

Instead, Jenkins said she wants the AARP to concentrate on health and financial security and personal fulfillment — or “health, wealth and self,” as she puts it — and makes no apologies for her group’s support of President Obama’s healthcare reform law or for preserving Social Security benefits for current seniors.

Even more broadly, Jenkins believes the country needs to recalibrate how it discusses aging, given that people could have one or even two more careers if they retire at 55. “Fifty is the new 50,” Jenkins likes to say. “It’s not the new 30 or the new 40.”

That comes after her tenure at the AARP Foundation, where she made helping low-income people over the age of 50 her top priority.

“Our ability to live longer is probably one of mankind’s biggest accomplishments,” Jenkins said. “And yet, it also has to prepare us to live another 30 or 40 years past what we thought about as traditional retirement.”

An Alabama native, Jenkins first came to Washington for an internship while she was still a student at Spring Hill College in Mobile.

After graduating, Jenkins worked briefly at the Alabama Power Co. as a collections agent for people behind on their bills. But after just a paycheck or two, Jenkins says she jumped at the chance to come back to Washington and work under Ronald Reagan.

After that, she worked at a string of positions within the federal government that prepared her for her current gig, including at the Housing and Urban Development Department, where she dealt with housing issues for the poor.

At the Transportation Department, where she worked with then-Secretary Elizabeth Dole, Jenkins concentrated on increasing the number of women working at places like the Federal Aviation Administration and the Coast Guard.

Immediately before heading over to the AARP Foundation, Jenkins was the chief operating officer for the Library of Congress, a job she says taught her more than a little about holding a nonpartisan post in a partisan city.

“You never knew who in two years your boss was going to be,” she said of her 15 years at the library.

Jenkins has no doubt that training will serve her well at the AARP, which is still feeling the effects of its decision to back the Affordable Care Act and is facing a Congress fully controlled by Republicans — many of whom want to overhaul Medicare and Social Security.

The decision to get behind healthcare reform enraged many of the group’s conservative members, to the point that the AARP acknowledged in 2009 that it lost tens of thousands of members over its stance. Anger on the right got so pronounced that a group of House Republicans in 2011 urged the IRS to take another look at the AARP’s tax-exempt status, suggesting the seniors organization stood to profit off the healthcare law with its supplemental insurance offerings.

But as Jenkins noted, the AARP is used to that sort of criticism. Well before the debate over ObamaCare even started, she noted, liberals knocked the AARP for backing GOP efforts to expand prescription drug benefits under Medicare. That also points to a broader “greedy geezers” criticism that the AARP has faced — that it puts the interests of seniors over the health of the country.

“Obviously, AARP is a nonpartisan organization,” Jenkins said, brushing aside the criticism. “Sometimes we get pulled to the left, sometimes pulled to the right.”

With that in mind, Jenkins says it should be no surprise that the AARP would back a healthcare law that closes the so-called “doughnut hole” for prescription drug coverage for seniors and allowed children to stay on their parents’ insurance until they were 26.

As Social Security approaches its 80th birthday this August, Jenkins, like top lawmakers in both parties, hopes to shore up the program before it reaches a crisis point — a period analysts say is likely around two decades away.

Fewer people are now paying into Social Security per beneficiary, and seniors are living longer. But Jenkins said there’s widespread support among AARP members regardless of political affiliation about preserving benefits and noted that older voters are known for consistently heading to the polls.

“Whatever we do should not be cutting the benefits of those who are in the system now,” Jenkins said. “This is not an entitlement program. This is something that they have paid in and worked to.”