Charlie Crist is a Republican turned independent turned Democrat. He has been for and against the Affordable Care Act, for and against reproductive rights, and for and sort of against the 2009 economic stimulus. He bolted when times got tough and Washington looked tempting.

And he's a better choice for governor than incumbent Rick Scott? Yes.

Scott wants voters to focus solely on the fact that Florida's unemployment rate was 12 percent when he took office and is now 6.3 percent. Scott takes full credit for the decline and assigns Crist full blame for jobs lost during the previous four years.

It's true that Scott has been an aggressive recruiter over the phone and at foreign trade missions. He's also secured money for our ports and beaches. And tourism is at record levels.

A look at the full record, however, shows that Scott is claiming undue credit for job gains and too often has substituted political ideology for sensible policy.

When Scott took office in January 2011, the Great Recession officially was over. Presidents have some control over the national economy, but governors have little control over a state's economy. Florida hemorrhaged jobs because of the real estate crash and financial crisis, not because of Charlie Crist. Similarly, Florida has recovered along with the nation, though the state's 6.3 percent unemployment rate is now higher than the national average of 5.9 percent.

Charlie Crist spent his career as a Republican, winning a string of offices including the governor’s office in 2006. He left the Republican Party and ran a losing campaign for U.S. Senate in 2010 as an independent/no party candidate in 2010. By 2012 he was a Democrat and campaigned for President Barack Obama’s re-election. On Nov. 4, he is expected to announce his candidacy for the Democratic nomination for governor.

Florida would benefit from expanding Medicaid under the Affordable Care Act, which is why hospitals and doctors are pushing for it. It would give close to a million people access to health care so they wouldn't have to rely on emergency rooms, which don't provide the kind of coverage needed to stay healthy and out of hospitals. Though Scott briefly expressed support for expanding Medicaid, and the $51 billion it would bring to Florida over 10 years, he never pushed for it.

It's worth noting that Florida ranks among the highest in the nation in the rate of medically uninsured, and would rank even higher without the hundreds of thousands of new sign-ups under Obamacare. The 4 million who remain uninsured hurt our economy, especially hospitals that provide charity care. Yet Scott has refused almost all federal assistance for implementing the health care law, while offering no alternative.

Scott has missed other chances to help the economy, too. Since businesses invariably cite a well-trained labor force as their top priority, states need a first-rate education system to be competitive. Scott would note that, at his urging, the Legislature cut discretionary annual tuition increases at state universities. Scott also challenged state colleges to offer bachelor's degrees for no more than $10,000.

More than affordable, however, Florida degrees need to assure employers that the state's graduates have the tools to excel. Yes, Crist signed legislation allowing those tuition increases. But he did so at the urging of business leaders concerned about the quality of higher education after years of chronic underfunding by the Legislature. Scott exacerbated the financial squeeze by approving an unneeded new university, Florida Polytechnic. In 2012, he cut another $300 million from the universities' budgets.

In his first year, Scott also cut $1.3 billion from the budget for public schools. If reelected, he now promises record per-pupil spending. But most of the $2,500 teacher raises he bragged about last year never materialized. He also continues to favor charter schools and private religious schools over traditional public schools. And though he once supported Common Core Standards to ensure students learn critical thinking skills, he has bowed to tea party pressure about a federal overreach and backed away from leading a national consortium to create the new standardized test. Instead, Florida will pay Utah $5.4 million for test questions until we can devise our own.

Admittedly, today's Rick Scott is somewhat different from the one who ran in 2010 as a tea party candidate. He signed this year's highest-ever budget. He went from supporting an Arizona-style immigration law to allowing in-state tuition for children of illegal immigrants.

But this Rick Scott also signed legislation requiring ultrasounds for women having abortions, even if they aren't medically necessary. This Rick Scott signed an elections bill designed to suppress Democratic votes — the courts and the public forced a retreat – and attempted a politically motivated purge of voter rolls. This Rick Scott abolished the state agency that tried to ensure smart growth management. What does any of this have to do with jobs?

And if jobs matter most, why did Scott turn down $2.4 billion in federal money for a high-speed rail line between Tampa and Orlando, the first leg in a statewide system? The line was projected to create 23,000 jobs.

Today's Rick Scott also continues to hide political and personal business from the public, despite a promise of transparency and open access to all emails. Scott's transition team claimed that meetings in public buildings were secret. Scott staffers regularly use personal emails to conduct state business. Scott refuses to say where he's traveling on his private jet. And as the Miami Herald/Tampa Bay Times just reported, Scott's federal financial filings show him to be much wealthier than he states in his financial disclosure forms, and his supposed blind trust may enable him to profit from decisions he makes as governor.

For all of Crist's political contortions during his failed Senate bid, his record as attorney general and governor shows less partisan ideology and more concern for average Floridians.

Crist sought a balance on the Public Service Commission between utilities and customers. Under Scott, the commission has ruled consistently for utilities, even ignoring the consumers' representative. Crist sought to lower property insurance rates in 2007, and during his administration the insurance commissioner took on Allstate and State Farm. Scott at one point favored deregulation of property insurance, and refused to demand lower premiums as part of auto insurance reform. Scott also signed legislation that forbids the insurance commissioner from regulating health care premiums.