Abbot Pt. Photo: Greenpeace/Tom Jefferson

The Greens have warned the Great Barrier Reef may be added to the UNESCO World Heritage Committee danger list, as tourism operators threaten legal action against development approvals.

Association of Marine Park Tour Operators president Colin McKenzie said his group may take the Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Authority to court over its decision to allow the dumping of dredging spoil inside the marine park.

Mr McKenzie told Fairfax Radio it appeared the authority's members had “lost their marbles”.

The Great Barrier Reef

"The final authority had to be issued by the Authority. They had the ability to say no. The principal objective of the act is to provide long term protection and conservation of the environment, biodiversity and heritage value of the Great Barrier Reef region," he said.

Advertisement

"Now how the hell can the organisation responsible for ensuring that act is adhered to then allow anybody to go and dump millions of tonnes of rubbish on the Barrier Reef every year? That is just ridiculous."

Federal Environment Minister Greg Hunt had already given the North Queensland Bulk Ports Corporation approval to dredge the harbour at Abbot Point near Bowen, which was signed off by the GBRMPA on Friday.

Snorkelling on reef off Whitsunday island

Authority chairman Dr Russell Reichelt said the body had given the go ahead subject to its own environmental conditions.

Dr Reichelt acknowledged there had been significant community debate and concern about the proposal, but added the decision was in line with the Authority's view that development on the reef should be kept to existing industrial areas.

“As a deepwater port that has been in operation for nearly 30 years, Abbot Point is better placed than other ports along the Great Barrier Reef coastline to undertake expansion as the capital and maintenance dredging required will be significantly less than what would be required in other areas," Dr Reichelt said.

“It's important to note the seafloor of the approved disposal area consists of sand, silt and clay and does not contain coral reefs or seagrass beds.”

The Authority placed 47 environmental conditions on the project, which they said included measures to reduce the impact on biodiversity including coral, long-term water quality monitoring and offset measures for commercial fishermen if the dumping caused other problems.

The developments also put the Great Barrier Reef's world heritage status under threat, according to the Greens.

In a decision released last year, the WHC recommended the reef be included in the List of World Heritage in Danger in 2014 "in the absence of a firm and demonstrable commitment" from the state and federal governments to take action.

Both governments were due to report back to the WHC by this weekend and are expected to publicly release their reports on Sunday.

“We received a report on the state of conservation from the Australian government this week,” the WHC said in a statement.

“We are currently reviewing this report and all other available information regarding developments concerning the World Heritage site.”

The WHC's assessment will take place in May, ahead of its meeting in June.

Greens Senator Larissa Waters said an increase in the rate of development approvals in the vicinity of the reef in the past year, including the controversial Abbot Point coal port expansion, put its world heritage status at risk.

“The World Heritage Committee gave the Australian government really strong warnings about two years ago and it said 'no new ports, don't expand those ports where you're going to damage the reef and don't approve anything until you've got a proper plan for the reef, with no-go zones',” she said.

“Now sadly both the last government and the current governments have failed on all those counts so I'm afraid, come June this year, that the World Heritage Committee will have no choice but to put the reef on the list of shame, which would be an absolute tragedy for our tourism industry.”

Campaigning with the party's Griffith candidate Geoff Ebbs on Saturday, Senator Waters said she would introduce a bill when Federal Parliament resumes to strengthen reef protection legislation.

“Today is the day when we could have seen a World Heritage nomination for Cape York and sadly the government has chosen not to proceed with that despite the fact that traditional owners wanted that and were on track to finish the process and have that nomination ready to be submitted,” she said.

“I think it's a real travesty that the Abbott government would rather see the big miners go into Cape York and destroy those natural values and those cultural values rather than listen to the traditional owners who want their land protected.”