Federal environmental officials estimate it will cost about $3 million to set up and operate a temporary water treatment system for a year at the leaching Gold King Mine above Silverton.

The Environmental Protection Agency told The Denver Post on Friday it is still “evaluating treatment options” at the site where the agency spilled 3 million gallons of contaminants Aug. 5.

An EPA spokeswoman had said Aug. 14 that the agency was planning to build a commercial wastewater treatment system to mitigate metallic contaminants still flowing from the Gold King. The agency now says such a facility is still on the table, but not definite.

“If a water treatment facility is decided upon, it will likely be a temporary plant,” Nancy Grantham, an EPA spokeswoman, said Friday evening.

The EPA has said whatever treatment option they choose, it needs to be in place before winter when the current apparatus — several sediment ponds — will be obsolete or destroyed by the cold and snow.

Officials in Silverton and San Juan County, where the mine lies, have publicly called for a treatment facility below the Gold King and several adjacent mines, which leak hundreds of gallons of contaminated water every minute.

The EPA met with local officials Friday to discuss treatment options and how to move forward with further remediation in the area.

“I don’t think they know what to do at this point,” said Bill Simon, a coordinator for the Animas River Stakeholders Group, which has been working on remediation solutions in the Silverton area for decades. I think that’s good because it’s better to try and understand it before they come up with a solution that doesn’t work and spend a lot of money.”

Simon says locals are frustrated with the slow EPA response and feel there needs to be some immediate solution.

“It’s a complex situation,” Simon said.

One of the main questions is how the EPA will pay for the millions of dollars needed for work on the Gold King and other mines in San Juan County.

Grantham said the EPA “will likely” use Superfund appropriations for treatment at the Gold King.

Superfund sites are on the national priority list for hazardous waste cleanup.

Locals have pushed back against Superfund designation for roughly two decades out of fears that it could bring stigma and damage their tourism-based economy.

The EPA says using Superfund appropriations at the site does not mean the Gold King is being put on the national priorities list.

“To be on the (list), a specific process must be completed, which includes public solicitation of comments about the proposed site in the federal register,” the EPA said in a statement.

Officials have said, however, they are examining Superfund designation as a potential way to fund cleanup efforts.

The EPA has been picking up a growing tab for the response to the Gold King spill, which sent wastewater cascading through three states and the land of two American Indian tribes.

Jesse Paul: 303-954-1733, jpaul@denverpost.com or twitter.com/JesseAPaul