Consumer advocacy groups in California and Florida have taken various actions against health plans and their coverage of HIV/AIDS drugs and requirements for members who take them. And while Consumer Watchdog and The AIDS Institute, in conjunction with The National Health Law Program (NHeLP), are taking somewhat different approaches, they are united in the contention that these members are being discriminated against, and the Affordable Care Act (ACA) bans health plans from discriminating against people on the basis of disability. Both groups cite the placement of HIV/AIDS drugs on high formulary tiers as being discriminatory, and Consumer Watchdog also contends that mandated mail order “threatens the health and privacy of HIV/AIDS patients.”

So is there any reason why the discrimination argument couldn’t be made on behalf of any people with a condition that requires them to take a high-cost specialty drug?

Following pressure from Consumer Watchdog on behalf of employees with HIV/AIDS enrolled in the Blues plans’ Federal Employee Plan (FEP), the Blue Cross Blue Shield Association (BCBSA) is changing the formulary designation for that class of drugs. With the shift, which was effective last month, the drugs will be available to Blues enrollees in the Federal Employees Health Benefits Program at retail pharmacies as opposed to mandatory mail order and at a lower cost than they had been.

Previously the drugs were on the specialty drug list. According to Consumer Watchdog, as of Jan. 1, FEP members were required to get their specialty medications through mail order provided by CVS Caremark Corp.

In addition, the employees were subject to higher copayments “as a result of changes to drug-pricing ‘tiers’ that have the effect of discouraging federal employees with HIV/AIDS from enrolling in the FEP Blue plans,” according to a June 11 letter the group sent Scott Serota, president and CEO of the Blues association, and Larry Merlo, president and CEO of CVS Caremark.

The advocacy group maintains that potential issues with mail-order delivery include:

A lack of privacy because the drugs are often delivered in refrigerated containers, prompting questions by neighbors and coworkers, who “will come to suspect that the recipients are seriously ill”;

The potential for theft if a medication is left at a patient’s home when he or she isn’t there, which means that the patient “bears the financial risk if the drugs are stolen”; and

The loss of interaction with “community pharmacists who, working directly with patients, monitor potentially life-threatening adverse drug interactions and side effects,” as well as provide counseling and advice.

Prior to this, Consumer Watchdog had taken more forceful steps with two insurers, filing lawsuits against Anthem Blue Cross and UnitedHealthcare (SPN 6/13, p. 5). Both plans settled the cases, agreeing to allow people to opt out from receiving HIV/AIDS medications by mail order.

According to a notice from BCBSA, effective June 27, more than 30 HIV/AIDS drugs will shift from the specialty drug list to either Tier 1 generic drugs or Tier 2 preferred drugs, and members can obtain them through a retail pharmacy.

In response to multiple questions about the previous and new policies, the association gave SPN the following statement: “We work closely with the Office of Personnel Management to determine the benefits OPM wishes to make available to members of the federal workforce. In collaboration with OPM, we refine our benefit offerings regularly to ensure that FEP members receive the highest caliber care and can access the full range of medical services they need for their health, at an affordable premium. Formulary changes and specialty drug lists are re-evaluated on a regular basis.”

Groups Filed Complaint With OCR

In late May, the AIDS Institute and NHeLP filed an administrative complaint with the Office for Civil Rights (OCR) concerning four silver-level qualified health plans (QHPs) in Florida. An analysis by The AIDS Institute of 36 plans in the state showed that QHPs offered by four plans — Coventry Health Care, Inc., which offers the Florida QHP under the name CoventryOne and is owned by Aetna Inc.; Cigna Corp.; Humana Inc.; and Preferred Medical Plan, Inc. — “charge inordinately high co-payments and co-insurance for medications used in the treatment of HIV and AIDS.…The QHP drug benefits offered by CoventryOne, Cigna, Humana, and Preferred Medical impose overly restrictive utilization management which unduly limits access to commonly used HIV/AIDS medications. Moreover, by placing all HIV/AIDS medications, including generics, on the highest cost-sharing tier, CoventryOne, Cigna, Humana, and Preferred Medical discourage people living with HIV and AIDS from enrolling in those health plans — a practice which unlawfully discriminates on the basis of disability.”

So far, the premise of this argument has not been tested. But that’s not to say that it won’t be.

“I do not know how these various cases would be resolved were they to be contended legally,” Gary Claxton, vice president and director of the Health Care Marketplace Project for the Kaiser Family Foundation, tells SPN.

Tim Jost, Robert L. Willett Family Professor of Law, Washington and Lee University School of Law, tells SPN that “The ACA itself does not define disability. It does prohibit discrimination that would be prohibited by section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act, which is a precursor of the ADA [i.e., Americans with Disabilities Act]. The NHeLP complaint references the ADA and 504, and the Consumer Watchdog complaint references Bragdon v. Abbott, an ADA case. I, think, therefore, that the whole body of federal disability law, including the ADA, is relevant there.”

Anyone with a disability “could be a very large group,” contends Elan Rubinstein, Pharm.D., founder and principal at EB Rubinstein Associates. “Some diseases are treated primarily using prescription drugs that nearly all health plans assign to the specialty tier of the drug formulary, assuming that the drugs are covered under the pharmacy benefit. By extension,…does that mean that situations of people with any disease treated by drugs generally assigned to a drug formulary’s specialty tier, and where there are no nonspecialty drugs available, are de facto discriminatory and thus illegal?”

F. Randy Vogenberg, Ph.D., principal with the Institute for Integrated Healthcare, says there is “big testing” by states on what the ACA considers a disability “due to all the politicization in Washington as well as backpedaling by the White House. Economics are a huge driver to push for mandated coverage change since there are shrinking dollars to fund public along with commercial plans due to the ACA going forward.”

And the shrinking funds could be squeezed even tighter. Rubinstein tells SPN that “if specialty drug cost shares were held to nonspecialty brand cost-share levels, beneficiary cost share would be low as a fraction of total drug cost and low relative to health plan cost share for other covered services. Should specialty drug cost share be much lower than cost share for other covered services, due to the catastrophic nature of certain diseases? On the other hand, health plan benefit designs include stop-loss provisions that limit people’s out-of-pocket liability in such situations. While good for those patients, very low cost share for specialty drugs would increase payer benefit cost overall and result in premium increases.”

Rubinstein says that the disability argument could be made in conditions “where the only medication options are in the specialty tier — as is the case in HIV/AIDS and several other diseases.” However, he adds that “disability generating one’s right to nonspecialty cost-share could be very broadly interpreted by patients’ rights advocates, so while it would be ideal if health care services were all free or very low cost to the beneficiary, as is often the case in countries where health care is socialized (and where higher taxes pay for the socialized health care benefit), that isn’t the way it works in the USA.” It comes down, he says to the definition of “disability” — and “people will push and test the limits of the ACA’s language.”

Adam Solander, an associate at Epstein Becker Green, tells SPN that this is a “whole different set of complaints than we’ve seen before.” The lawsuits, he says, are a “byproduct of the environment and the shifting law.…In different areas, I think we’ll see more complaints,” and it will be interesting to see “how they figure out how the law applies to them. There are a lot of moving pieces that need to solidify.”

Bill Sullivan, principal consultant with Specialty Pharmacy Solutions LLC, tells SPN that he “completely agree[s]” with the groups’ contentions that the plans are unlawfully discriminating based on disability. Tiering medications “is justifiable if all patients are treated equitably,” contends Sullivan. “A preferred formulary is reasonable to steer patients to lower-cost options as long as they are therapeutically equivalent.…It makes sense to put therapeutically better (regardless of cost) and generic/lower cost options on a lower tier to incentivize their use.”

Situation Is a ‘Slippery Slope’

“All of this represents a slippery slope from a benefit design perspective,” says Vogenberg. “HIV/AIDS has remained a sensitive area, even more so than cancer, but both have taken hits due to the economy and negative economic impacts derived from ACA implementation.”

According to Sullivan, “Chronic patients in other therapeutic categories should unite” and follow the lead set by the California cases, he says.

He also points out in a client alert that patients who need specialty drugs “are being discriminated against compared to other patients with chronic illness that do not face caps on their care.…Is it time for chronically ill patients to form a class action?”

View Consumer Watchdog’s letter at http://tinyurl.com/nbqrwvs. Read BCBSA’s letter on the change at http://tinyurl.com/nvtlmlv. View The AIDS Institute’s complaint at http://tinyurl.com/n7pebbn.

© 2014 by Atlantic Information Services, Inc. All Rights Reserved.

The AIS E-Savings Club offers regular opportunities to buy AIS products and services at substantial savings. Click here to see the current specials — including a special offer on Specialty Pharmacy Trends and Strategies: 2014, a new resource from the editors of Specialty Pharmacy News.