Treadwell says he wants more serious discussion about tackling the debt. Treadwell trashes foe in primary

Alaska Lt. Gov. Mead Treadwell laced into a likely Republican primary challenger Thursday, warning that his expected entry into the Senate race will benefit tea party favorite Joe Miller and questioning the depth of his roots in the state.

News that Dan Sullivan will resign as the state’s natural resource commissioner came last week just moments before Treadwell took the stage in Anchorage to officially launch his bid.

Story Continued Below

“If it was their intent to stomp on our rollout, it backfired on them,” Treadwell told POLITICO in an extended interview at a law office in Washington.

( PHOTOS: Senators up for election in 2014)

Sullivan has assembled a campaign team and plans to formally announce his candidacy after giving up his day job on Sept. 24 to focus full time on politics. Miller beat Sen. Lisa Murkowski in the 2010 primary only to lose to her write-in campaign in the general.

The winner of the three-way GOP contest will face Democratic Sen. Mark Begich, who narrowly won in 2008.

“It would put us in a situation where we both have to put lots more resources into a primary situation than we would before,” said Treadwell, who presented himself as the most electable conservative. “Politically, this helps Joe Miller. And most importantly, it helps people who want to help Mark Begich by fomenting division in the Republican Party. They can certainly do that.”

Treadwell, 57, noted that he moved to Alaska as a teenager.

( Also on POLITICO: Joe Miller heading to Las Vegas)

Sullivan was born in Ohio and moved to Alaska in 1997 after completing active duty in the Marines. He went to Washington to work in George W. Bush’s administration, serving as an assistant secretary of state under Condoleezza Rice from 2006 to 2009. He returned to Alaska to be appointed attorney general by Sarah Palin and moved to the Department of Natural Resources in 2011.

“I’ll put my 40 years of working in Alaska … against anyone,” Treadwell said. “I’ve got a jar of mayonnaise in my refrigerator that’s been there longer than Dan Sullivan’s been in Alaska.”

Sullivan responded in an email late Thursday night: “While serving as Alaska’s Attorney General and current Commissioner of the Department of Natural Resources, I have maintained a strict policy of declining media requests regarding politics and non-state of Alaska matters, but I will say this: after moving to Alaska over 16 years ago, I learned something new today — not to eat any of Mead Treadwell’s sandwiches.”

Clearly annoyed about Sullivan getting in the race, he noted that Rep. Paul Ryan, Gov. Scott Walker and Republican National Committee Chairman Reince Priebus would not run against each other in Wisconsin because they all know their lanes.

“There’s just no need for any one of those three guys to run against each other, and I look at Sullivan as someone we were happy to recruit back to Alaska and there’s no reason for him to run for this job,” he said. “If we have to go out there and contrast our record, I’m very happy to put my record out there and let the voters decide.”

Treadwell said he will be “surprised” if Gov. Sean Parnell, who is up for reelection and passed on running for the Senate seat, gets involved in the primary. Treadwell also said he does not believe Sarah Palin will weigh into the contested primary.

“She’s keeping her options open,” said Treadwell. “I’m honored that her father-in-law, Jim Palin, was a sponsor of one of my fundraisers. I like and respect the governor and her family and will continue to work very hard in my race and we’ll go from there.”

Asked whether he would risk shutting down the government to defund the Affordable Care Act, Treadwell walked a careful line.

“There’s still two weeks left in September,” he said. “I would push as hard as I could to get Obamacare on the table. I don’t want to shut down the government.”

Treadwell said he wants more serious discussion about tackling the debt and health care.

“Do I like this kind of tactic? No, I believe that you need to have bipartisan conversation and sit down,” he said. “But the fact is that until the Democrats want to come in and sit down about these two issues, you’re going to continue to see these kinds of tactics.”

Treadwell is traveling around the country to raise money — he’s recently been in Chicago, Columbus, Ohio and Oklahoma City — but lags far behind the incumbent. Begich had $2 million cash on hand at the end of June, after raising $993,000 in the second quarter. Treadwell raised $170,000 during the period.

“I have seen some polling data that has us ahead, and I feel very comfortable saying we are the conservative who can win the primary and beat Mark Begich, and I can doubt any other candidate can show you polling data that says the same thing,” Treadwell said.

He said there are various pushes in Alaska to have statewide ballot initiatives alongside the GOP primary, including the legalization of marijuana, changing the minimum wage, altering water permitting rules and repealing changes to the way oil companies are taxed.

“That has the potential to change the composition of voters in the primary, which is interesting,” he said.