WASHINGTON – Sen. Bill Cassidy, R-La., vowed Tuesday (June 9) to work for legislation that insures Americans won't immediately lose their Affordable Care Act health subsidies if the Supreme Court rules against the Obama administration in a high-stakes challenge to the 2010 health law.

A ruling by the nine justices is expected within the next three weeks on a lawsuit that questions the legality of subsidies in the 34 states, including Louisiana, with federally run marketplaces. The law authorizes income-based subsidies to purchase coverage at state-run marketplaces. Supporters of the law maintain that the clear intent of Congress was to allow subsidies for both state-run and federally run marketplaces.

Cassidy said it would be wrong to suddenly cut off subsidies for Americans who need them to afford health insurance.

"I'm a doc and I would first say that if that patient is in the middle of chemotherapy for breast cancer, I want her held harmless," Cassidy said. The senator suggested legislation can be quickly passed to provide a transition period in which subsidies could continue if the High Court rules against the administration.

Cassidy Tuesday introduced his Patient Freedom Act, which would give states three options if the Supreme Court rules against the Obama administration: Establish a state exchange so that their residents could continue to receive subsidies, do nothing and allow coverage to end for those enrolled in Obamacare, or enact Cassidy's bill. He calls it a "free market health care solution."

It would send states money, now earmarked for the Affordable Care Act, which would be distributed to health savings accounts created for residents.

Cassidy responded to a reporter who suggested his bill could never be enacted because no Senate Democrat has signed on as a co-sponsor and the president would surely veto the measure if it somehow passed.

"Every Democrat is kind of whistling by the graveyard, saying they expect the Supreme Court to rule for the administration," Cassidy said. "I think it would be naïve to expect them to make a commitment early on."

President Barack Obama in a speech Tuesday chastised Republicans for "stubbornly ignoring reality'' by continuing to express warnings of job losses and other problems he says never materialized.

Obama said that the health law's goal of making health insurance affordable comes down to morality.

"The rugged individualism that defines America has always been bound by a shared set of values, an enduring sense that we're in this together, that America is not a place where we simply turn away from the sick, or turn our backs on the tired, the poor, the huddled masses," Obama said. "It is a place sustained by the idea: I am my brother's keeper. I am my sister's keeper -- that we have an obligation to put ourselves in our neighbor's shoes and see each other's common humanity."

But Cassidy said the Affordable Care Act is hurting people, raising premiums dramatically for those who earn too much to qualify for a subsidy to purchase health insurance.