STRONGSVILLE, Ohio -- RPM International Inc.'s shareholders applauded when Chairman and Chief Executive Frank C. Sullivan announced that the company's directors had hiked its cash dividend for the 40th straight year. They were pleased by news that RPM is projecting earnings-per-share growth of 10 to 14 percent this fiscal year.

But what the standing-room-only audience of nearly 1,000 investors Thursday was most excited about was Rust-Oleum's newest product, a two-step "super hydrophobic" waterproof coating called NeverWet.

When Sullivan announced that the first four people to ask questions from the ballroom floor would get a free box of NeverWet, several attendees elbowed their spouses and whispered: "Think of a question -- I want some of that stuff!"

The mood at the shareholders' meeting, held the day after the Medina holding company announced record revenues and earnings per share for the first quarter of fiscal 2014, was buoyant and folksy.

"Ninety percent of our shareholders (or their proxies) are represented at this meeting, which is extraordinary," Sullivan said.

He took more than a dozen questions from the audience, from people asking why there weren't more women on RPM's 14-member board (Jerry Sue Thornton is the only woman, but they are looking for more), to the company's global expansion plans (RPM still wants to expand into China and East Asia), to what he thinks of the Affordable Care Act (he said it adds costs without helping RPM employees).

RPM, a global company whose subsidiaries include some of the world's largest producers of specialty coatings, sealants and building materials, on Wednesday reported that its net sales for the first quarter grew 11.3 percent to $1.17 billion.

Net income for the quarter that ended Aug. 31 soared 204 percent to $103.1 million, and diluted earnings per share rose 196.2 percent to 77 cents per share. Part of the reason the company had such a robust first quarter is because results were compared to the previous year that was less-than-memorable. If RPM's first-quarter had been compared to adjusted results, growth would have been more modest, with net sales up 11 percent, net income up 21.6 percent and diluted earnings-per-share up 20.3 percent.

Sullivan, grandson and namesake of the company's founder, explained some of the circumstances that pulled down results in fiscal 2013, which ended on May 31. He also offered better news for fiscal 2014.

RPM took a $45.3 million non-cash charge for the partial write-down of its investment in Kemrock Industries and Exports Limited, a public company in India that it once owned 30 percent of. Kemrock's sales soared from $8 million a year to $240 million in 2011, until the Indian version of the U.S. banking crisis hit and crumpled its value.

Then RPM and its Tremco roofing subsidiary reached a $65.1 million settlement with the U.S. Department of Justice over government roofing contracts and pricing. The complaint was filed by a former Tremco employee who will receive nearly $11 million of that settlement under the False Claims Act.

After a $6 million internal investigation into what happened, "we have terminated a number of people at the roofing division who were directly involved, and the compensation of a number of top executives, including myself, was impacted -- and appropriately so," Sullivan said. He said that both chain-of-command and compliance procedures have been strengthened to prevent it from happening again.

RPM also took $19.5 million in restructuring write-offs when Rust-Oleum closed its factories in Rockford, Ill., and Roosendaal, The Netherlands. And the company's performance coatings group took at $6.1 million write-off for closing a Stonhard flooring operation after acquiring Viapol, a building materials manufacturer in Brazil.

"We make mistakes, we adjust, and we don't make those mistakes again," Sullivan reassured shareholders. He said that as the company expands into emerging markets such as India, Brazil, Saudi Arabia and one day, China, those huge opportunities come with huge risks. Without those one-time charges, the company's fiscal 2013 sales would have been up 8 percent, net income would have risen 14.5 percent and earnings-per-share would have increased 13 percent, he said.

"If you had acquired RPM (stock) last year and held it until yesterday, you would've had a 41-percent one-year return," Sullivan said. Over the past 10 years, "RPM has outperformed the S&P 500 by 87 percent, and our peers by 11 percent."

Sullivan also credited RPM's innovations and acquisitions for increasing its market share and profitability. New products include Stonhard Liquid Elements high-end decorative flooring for auto showrooms and retail stores; Euclid Chemicals' non-corrosive concrete microfiber, to replace steel rebar in concrete, and Rust-Oleum's NeverWet.

And thanks to its 2012 acquisition of Kirker Enterprises, a nail enamel maker in New Jersey, "we are now the largest producer in the world of fingernail products," Sullivan said. "Who could imagine? I was won over by the fact that this really is just paint. It just goes on a very interesting substrate."

"In light of our strong start to the 2014 fiscal year," RPM's board of directors raised its cash dividend to 24 cents per share, up 6.7 percent from last year's 22.5-cent quarterly dividend. The dividend is payable on Oct. 31 to shareholders of record as of Oct. 21. RPM is one of 48 companies out of 19,000 publicly-traded companies that have paid out increasing annual dividends for 40 years or more.

Rust-Oleum's NeverWet, which just came out this summer, creates a clear, durable waterproof barrier on metal, wood, aluminum, concrete, masonry, asphalt, vinyl siding, fiberglass, canvas and plastic. It retails for about $19.99 at Lowe's, Home Depot, Walmart and other stores. The technology is so new that even RPM doesn't know exactly how consumers will end up using it, but is talking to manufacturers about ways to incorporate the waterproof formula into products such as smart phone cases.

"It is a temporary treatment," Sullivan said. "You can put it on your boots and shoes, and if you don't like it, you can buff it off." Because it repels moisture, it could also be sprayed on mailboxes, snow blowers and driveways, although it would likely have to be regularly reapplied.

"Report back to us how effective it is and how long it lasts, because those are important things for us to know," he said.

When one shareholder asked: "Will it work on my dog?" Sullivan laughed and said: "I would not put NeverWet on any living thing."

Follow @janetcho