Six Republican presidential candidates or potential candidates are speaking at an economic summit organized by Florida Gov. Rick Scott.

Election 2016: Who has dropped out John Kasich became the latest 2016 presidential candidate to leave the race. Here's a look at him and the other former candidates who have also ended their campaigns. More

Scott invited business owners from around the state to Tuesday's summit.

The event featured former Florida Gov. Jeb Bush, Wisconsin Gov. Scott Walker, former Texas Gov. Rick Perry, former Arkansas Gov. Mike Huckabee, New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie and Louisiana Gov. Bobby Jindal. Sen. Marco Rubio was scheduled to attend but canceled to take part in a vote in Washington, D.C.

“If we want to have real health care reform, we need to scrap Obamacare,” Huckabee said.

Huckabee was the first candidate to address the audience. He aimed his message at his base: aging Americans, health care reform opponents and those who oppose entitlement programs.

“Just have everyone drop out today and endorse me, and we'll be done,” he joked.

Nearly all the speakers claimed they have the secret formula for creating jobs.

“We took power out of the big-government special interests and we put it firmly in the hands of the taxpayers. That’s what we did,” Walker said.

“It's kind of a, 'Here I am. Let me introduce myself' kind of event,” said University of South Florida political science professor Susan MacManus.

MacManus said candidates fear they could ruin their chances if they reveal too much about their strategies.

“It can be very harmful if you put out a proposal early, and it just immediately gets torn to shreds. So a lot of thought has to go into deep policy measures,” she said.

Huckabee was also the only candidate who would answer WESH 2's questions about a specific financial plan for the future.

“Nobody else is pushing for the Fair Tax. I think I stand alone in believing that we really do need to get rid of the IRS,” he said.

The Fair Tax is a plan that comes with a national sales tax and the elimination of income tax.

Rubio and Bush are the favorites to carry Florida's GOP presidential primary. Rubio has declared his candidacy, and Bush is expected to do so soon.

Bush got the final word on Tuesday, saying Washington, D.C., could learn from Florida’s model for growing jobs, which is in tax cuts.

“When you have rising incomes because of jobs growth, the demands on government lessen and people can pursue their dreams as they see fit. That should be the definition of the future for this country,” Bush said.

Most watched: Boy run over by car on NYC sidewalk

Florida's primary is a winner-take-all contest, and even if the state's favorite sons have a lock on the primary, other Republicans can't ignore the state because it is also a key to winning the general election as the largest swing state.

Related: Who's running in 2016?