By Dr. Anthony J. Cerone Jr.

I recently read an article about a survey stating that 25 percent of adults aged 18 to 64 did not understand seven basic health insurance terms: premium, co-payment, deductible, provider network, co-insurance, covered services and maximum out-of-pocket expenses.





Many aspects of employer-provided insurance have changed dramatically over the past several years. Therefore, I thought it would be a good idea this month to go over these terms with you.

1: Premium: This is the total amount of money you or your employer pays the insurance company typically each month or year in exchange for health insurance coverage. For the average family, annual premiums have edged beyond $16,800. Furthermore, health insurance companies around the country are seeking rate increases of 20-40 percent or more to accommodate new customers under the Affordable Care Act (Obamacare). Unbelievable!

2: Co-Payment: This is a specific charge that your insurance may require you to pay for an office visit or a prescription, after which they will pay the rest. Typically, it is a flat fee of $15-$20.

3: Deductible: This is a specific dollar amount that some insurance company expects you to pay each year upfront before they begin to make payment for claims. A typical deductible would be $500. Plans with no deductible generally have higher premiums.

4: Provider Network: This refers to the group of physicians who are contracted with your health insurance network to provide your care. The physicians agree to established protocols and charges for specific services while gaining large numbers of patients in return. As a member of a health plan, you are obligated to receive care from a network provider under most circumstances. Out-of-network coverage is usually approved if the service is not available within the network.

What do you call your doctor?

5: Co-Insurance: After meeting your co-payment, this is the amount that you must pay for services after the insurance company has paid their portion. Typically the insurance company may pay 80 percent of the allowable charge and you will be billed for 20 percent of the allowable charge.

6: Covered Services: These are typically treatments, visits and medications that the insurance company will make payment on. Typically, these services are consistent with current standard of medical care. Some services not covered may be considered investigational or experimental. Other non-covered services may include things such as treatment for infertility, treatment for addiction, cosmetic surgery, private duty nursing, and alternative/complementary medicine.

7: Maximum Out-of-Pocket Expense: This is an annual limit on all costs for which patients are responsible for under the insurance plan. The amount may typically be $2,000 for an individual plan or $4,000 for a family plan. This applies only to covered services. This includes deductibles, co-payments and co-insurance but not the premium. Beyond this expense, the insurance company will pay all expenses for the remainder of the year.

So there is a basic explanation of these common health insurance terms. While many of you are very familiar with this lingo, I hope this has been helpful to some. Have a pleasant spring!

---

Dr. Anthony Cerone is a semiretired urologist and a Clayton resident. His articles appear monthly and deal with health care issues. You can reach Dr. Cerone at amcerone@verizon.net with any question or topic you would like him to cover.

---

South Jersey Times may be reached at sjnews@njadvancemedia.com. Follow us on Twitter @theSJTimes. Find the South Jersey Times on Facebook.