CHARLESTON, W.Va. (AP) - Katie Lee is known around the world as the glamorous and witty co-host of the Food Network’s “The Kitchen.” But to fans in her home state of West Virginia, the 33-year-old prefers to be known as “Katie,” the farm girl who learned at home the true meaning of farm-to-table cooking.

“I grew up in my grandma’s kitchen, and she was always cooking something delicious. My family was always really into food and what we were eating. We ate simple food - whatever was in season, and whatever my grandfather was growing in his garden. I learned about farm-to-table eating before it was a trend,” Lee said.

Lee grew up in Milton and graduated from Cabell Midland High School in 1999.

Cooking was a way of life as she was growing up.

“My biggest cooking influence, my No. 1, is my grandma. Then it’s the farmers. When I go to the farm stand and see what’s available - that’s where I get most of my inspiration,” Lee said of her grandmother, Dora Harshbarger.

In the foreword to her first cookbook, “The Comfort Table,” released in 2008, Lee writes: “When I look back on my childhood, my fondest memories are those surrounding the dinner table. I come from a family of great cooks and big eaters. I grew up in a small town in West Virginia and most of my family lived in our neighborhood or very close by. I had my grandparents down the street, my great-grandmother next door, and my great-aunt and great-uncle one door down.”

“The Comfort Table: Recipes for Everyday Occasions” quickly followed for the budding culinary star in 2009.

Some of her favorite Mountain State holiday memories are close to the family comfort table as well.

“We always went to my grandmother’s for the holidays. She would make such an amazing meal and make it seem effortless, of course. No matter how many pounds of mashed potatoes she made, we always ate it all. It was also a tradition that my great-aunt would have a punch and cookies party - some traditional punch with sherbet and soda and a lot of great holiday cookies,” Lee said.

Making - and eating - Christmas cookies with her family was something she treasured too.

“My two favorite holiday cookies are the Mexican wedding cookies and the chocolate peanut butter balls. My Aunt Pat always made these for the holidays. They last for about two weeks in an airtight container - I remember being a little girl and running over to her house after school, peeking into her cookie jar and stealing a cookie. I knew around the holidays she’d always have them on hand,” Lee said.

Many West Virginians tune in to watch Lee on “The Kitchen,” which airs Saturdays at 11 a.m. on the Food Network. Along with Lee, the show is co-hosted by Sunny Anderson, Jeff Mauro, Marcela Valladolid and Geoffrey Zakarian.

The fun one-hour series focuses on all things culinary and features recipes written by Lee and the show’s other chefs.

“The show keeps me really busy because I’m writing new recipes every week,” Lee said.

Each episode takes place in the show’s casual set, where the five co-hosts come together for recipe demonstrations, guest interviews and lively discussions.

“We’re all friends outside of the show - there’s a real camaraderie. When we’re making the show, we’re usually having so much fun that the producers need to remind us that we’re filming a TV show and have to stop laughing and joking around,” Lee said.

She has even had her mom, Kim Becker, on as a guest.

“I want everyone to know that West Virginia has so many gifts to offer - the food that’s indigenous to the area, like corn bread, collard greens, pinto beans . they should be celebrated because they are so good.

“My mom actually just started volunteering at a farmers market in Huntington called The Wild Ramp. All of these farmers from around the area bring stuff to sell. My mom is making baked products and selling them there, too. I hope everyone seeks out West Virginia farmers,” Lee said.

As we approach the long winter, West Virginia foodies can think about Lee’s new cookbook on summertime foods. It will be released in the spring.

“‘The Endless Summer Cookbook’ is inspired by my love of summer. It’s filled with tons of fun, easy, fresh recipes. Lots of recipes use the grill - like barbecue ribs, grilled chicken dishes. Lots of yummy salads and easy desserts too. Right now, I’m really focused on my cookbook. We’re in the final stages of editing,” Lee said.

She also writes a column for Self magazine and published her first novel, “Groundswell,” in 2011. She is a graduate of Miami University with a bachelor’s degree in English and journalism.

Although she resides in the Hamptons, visiting her family is high on her priority list for the holidays.

“Yes, my family still lives there. I visit a couple times a year - I wish there was a direct flight,” Lee said.

Even though she has dined all over the world in some of the greatest restaurants, “Grandma’s kitchen is still my favorite.”

For additional information about Katie Lee and “The Kitchen” visit www.foodnetwork.com/chefs/katie-lee.html .

___

Information from: The Charleston Gazette, http://www.wvgazette.com