ENLARGE Janice Min and Taylor Swift at the Billboard Women in Music Luncheon WireImage

It was a big weekend for the singer/songwriter Taylor Swift—she turned 25 on Saturday.

And leading up to her quarter century, when she threw what seemed like the best party anyone has ever had, with Jay Z, Beyoncé and Justin Timberlake (inspiring our 2015 New Year’s resolution: “befriend Taylor Swift”), she made two major New York appearances. First, at the 2014 Billboard Women in Music Luncheon at Cipriani Wall Street, where an incredible highlight was watching Aretha Franklin sing Ms. Swift an impromptu “Happy Birthday.

Then to close out her 24th year, Ms. Swift was the headliner of Z100’s Jingle Ball, performing until just after midnight, ringing in her birthday on stage at Madison Square Garden.

There was a surprising amount of overlap at these two events, which goes a long way to show that dynamic ladies are having a particularly exciting year in music.

Among the other honorees at the lunch, besides Ms. Swift, who also performed at Jingle Ball, were the 21-year-old pop star Ariana Grande; the 20-year-old, Nantucket-born Meghan Trainor, whose “All About that Bass” was a huge hit this year; the British singer Jessie J; the 24-year-old Australian recording artist Iggy Azalea; and the 22-year-old Brit Charli XCX, who is perhaps best known for her song “Boom Clap.”

This was a long event. It started at 11 a.m., with about 90 minutes of milling about, and we weren’t out the door until around 3 p.m., after a panel discussion with the honorees (moderated by Matt Lauer) that ended with Ms. Franklin’s serenade, plus a selfie in homage to Ellen DeGeneres at the Oscars.

ENLARGE Beyoncé and Lee Anne Callahan-Longo Getty Images

ENLARGE Idina Menzel and Savannah Guthrie Getty Images

But this was a full meal: performances by Jessie J, Ingrid Michaelson, Colbie Caillat and Hayley Williams of Paramore, and impassioned, girl-power speeches by nearly everyone.

“I wrote this down because I was afraid I would make eye contact with Beyoncé and forget everything,” said Ms. Williams.

Did we mention Beyoncé was there, too?

Idina Menzel was recognized by the magazine as achieving the “breakthrough of the year,” for her monster hit rendition of “Let It Go” from “Frozen.” Ms. Menzel said that it was a little bit strange to be considered “a breakthrough artist at 43.”

“It’s not so much about a breakthrough publicly, but a personal breakthrough,” she said.

Through years of both success and “obscurity with no work,” she’d been asked the question “What kind of artist are you?”

“And the resounding answer at the age of 43 is ‘I don’t know,’ ” she explained, adding that it had taken her this long to realize that it isn’t good to be able to easily categorize and describe yourself. It’s about, like her hit song, following “my heart and my gut and my truth.”

It sounds a little cheesy in retrospect, but in the moment Ms. Menzel’s sentiments felt genuinely unmanufactured and like, well, a breakthrough.

ENLARGE Iggy Azalea and Taylor Swift WireImage

ENLARGE Ariana Grande WireImage

ENLARGE Jessie J and Meghan Trainor Getty Images

If the Billboard luncheon was about stepping into maturity, that evening’s Jingle Ball, as per usual, was about trying to remain a kid.

This year’s lineup felt particularly strong. Besides the aforementioned artists, others on the bill included Pharrell Williams (who did a song with Gwen Stefani), Maroon 5, Sam Smith, and OneRepublic. Because of those more mature acts, the audience, while still comprised of lots of children, appeared to skew a little bit to the older side. But old fogies like us can still enjoy what the young folks listen to, right?

“We’ve been doing [Jingle Ball] for 10 years,” said Adam Levine, who was wearing a red flannel shirt, “which means we’re older than some of you.”

Because the bill is so long—it starts at 8 p.m., ends just after midnight—each act has to keep it short. It’s like a pu-pu platter of pop music.

“Thank you for spending 15 minutes with us,” said Ryan Tedder, the lead singer of OneRepublic after his set.

There are always things at Jingle Ball that make no sense. Why, for instance, should the D.J. Calvin Harris perform if he’s just going to stand behind a booth, with headphones and say “This time, I want to see you go crazy, New York,” in between playing his hits “Summer” and “Blame?”

But there are so many pleasures, too, that you can’t criticize Ms. Swift for wanting to celebrate her birthday at Jingle Ball. Some of the best things include a) no B-sides, b) watching little tots who know all the words sing along to songs like “Black Widow” by Ms. Izalea, with Rita Ora, and c) reading the tweets as they go by on the Jumbotron.

“Adam Levine, be my husband please,” read one, to the Maroon 5 singer. “We’re both wearing flannel so I think we should get together and have great looking, flannel-wearing children,” said another. Talk about swoon.

Write to Marshall Heyman at marshall.heyman@wsj.com