Topics: Jennifer Lawrence, the daily dot, The Hunger Games, Entertainment News

This article originally appeared on The Daily Dot

The Hunger Games is on the verge of breaking a record: If this year’s first installment of Mockingjay performs in line with previous entries in the franchise, The Hunger Games will be the first series in history to win the yearly box office two years in a row. Even Star Wars and Lord of the Rings never managed that feat, and the honor would put director Francis Lawrence in elite company: Only Steven Spielberg has ever helmed back-to-back yearly box-office champs: E.T. and Raiders of the Lost Ark.

That kind of elite company should make Hunger Games star Jennifer Lawrence the biggest action star in the world (and she’s already the most successful action heroine in history). So why is she not thought of as one? She’s an Oscar-winner, the Internet’s best friend, and an accomplished butt-plug collector, but she’s has yet to be in the same breath with Rambo.

We know that female-led action films can do incredibly well; check out the Alien and Terminator franchises if you need evidence of that. And we know, by extension, that women can kick ass and take names in action movies, from the spectacularly gonzo Kill Bill (Vol. 1 or 2, take your pick) to the slick Tomorrow Never Dies. Yet, despite the fact that many actresses specialize in action films, have built their careers in action, and are highly regarded for their skills, they aren’t called “action stars.” They’re actresses, superstars, and movie stars, but rarely are they actually celebrated for being queens of action.

Our relationship to female action stars (yes, I’ll say it) says a great deal about how we view women in film, but also women in society. Actresses are often stuffed into a box of femininity, and the woman warrior is considered to be the antithesis of feminine; think Grace Jones in A View to a Kill: tough as nails, with fly fashion to boot, but framed in very butch, masculine terms. Filmmakers seem to struggle with how to handle women in action movies when they aren’t objects or minor characters, and audiences can’t cope with them either.

It would be a mistake to shove action stars like Angelina Jolie and Uma Thurman into the “action” box just as it would be to force them into the “lady actors” box. Action actresses are so much more than these simple aspects of their acting careers, but it’s frustrating to see their contributions to the action canon simply erased; even just the words “action star” are usually associated with men, not women.

The list of women who are specifically known for their action work, not just those who’ve displayed a dynamic range (like Lucy Liu, who is equally adept on Elementary and Charlie’s Angels, or Shailene Woodley, who sparked a worldwide handkerchief shortage in The Fault in Our Stars and then went on to play the tough-as-nails Tris in Divergent), includes some big names.

Major, headlining, box office-crushing names, like Angelina Jolie, Scarlett Johansson, Pam Grier, Jennifer Lawrence, Linda Hamilton, Sigourney Weaver, and Uma Thurman. Meanwhile, others are hardly to be sneezed at: Katee Sackhoff as Starbuck on Battlestar Galactica was the epitome of the action star, while Michelle Yeoh (who, notably, does many of her own stunts) is a famous actress in her own right and Milla Jovovich has led the Resident Evil series to considerable success.

Women in action aren’t anything new, either; Pearl White was one of the earliest action stars, period, in The Perils of Pauline. She starred in pre-WWI films and led the charge for women in film, but almost immediately thereafter, women were relegated to more sedate, quiet roles. Soon, film stars were hired more for the purpose of being screen sirens than action heroes, and it wasn’t until the rise of actresses like Pam Grier in the 1970s that women started taking the boxing gloves back. It’s notable, too, that blaxploitation films marked the return of women action heroes, and that producers today are increasingly turning to black stars to fill female action roles.

It’s not that women can’t star in action films, or that female-led films aren’t capable of holding up at the box office. The Terminator franchise, when adjusted for ticket inflation, has brought in $826 million at the box office, domestically. Linda Hamilton played a not insignificant role in the success of the franchise, yet she’s not billed as an action star any more than Alien‘s Sigourney Weaver, who brought in $914 million at the box office (again, adjusted for ticket inflation).