For Project 90 clients seeking residential treatment to cope with substance abuse, timing is of the essence. But as the long-standing nonprofit faces a perfect storm of trials with needing to relocate a key facility while strapped for funding, supporters are concerned downsizing and delays are looming. Since 1983, Project 90’s largest residential and intake facility has been at the O’Toole Center, a property just south of San Mateo’s Central Park that’s slated to be redeveloped in the coming year. Between the O’Toole Center and another residential facility at 15 and 31 Ninth Ave., Project 90 stands to lose 34 beds and offices for nearly 15 employees as the sites’ owner will be constructing a new office building and large apartment complex. While finding another building that provides both housing and office space will undoubtedly be a challenge in a county with rising rents, Project 90’s Executive Director Jim Stansberry said he’s also struggling to secure funding as many believed the Affordable Care Act would provide support. In addition, demand is being exacerbated due to new laws like California’s Proposition 47 that reduced some drug-related crimes to misdemeanors — landing many with addiction problems back on the street or in environments where they’re exposed to triggers that could lead them back into using. With numerous challenges ahead, some are fearful the organization that provides life-saving resources to the county will soon be overlooked. “I don’t know what I would have done or what would have happened if I didn’t go to Project 90. I just can’t say enough about the program. It saved my life,” said Mike Devlin, a San Mateo resident who graduated from the program in 1994. “Where are these people going to go that need treatment in San Mateo County? You’re going to see them at the hospital, you’re going to see them in jail. … To lose a critical resource like this would be crazy.” Location, location, location Stansberry said he’s long had a positive relationship with the O’Toole Center’s landlord, Trans World Assurance Company but, due to its redevelopment plans, Project 90 needs an alternate building. The property, which used to be a convalescent home, has unique amenities and finding a substitute will be challenging. “Everybody knows the cost of residences in San Mateo County is skyrocketing. So then it becomes a question of can you find a facility that fits, and then what would you need economically to be able to sustain it?” Stansberry said. While many may find it undesirable to have a substance abuse treatment center move into their neighborhood, Stansberry said Project 90 has had a positive reputation and it’s inherently safer to keep those who are struggling off the street. About four years ago, Project 90 was able to provide nearly 100 beds spread between several properties for those coming out of detox or in need of transitional housing. With its budget cut to around $1.5 million, less than half of what it was a few years ago, Project 90 can only afford about 38 beds and consistently has a long waitlist. Timing is critical The loss of resources is an extreme detriment to those seeking services and who need a place to break their cycle. Just this year, a man who finished detox was waiting for a bed to open up at Project 90. The few weeks delay eventually ended as the man died after not being able to get into a program, Stansberry said. “If it was any other disease and people were not getting treated, people would be questioning it,” Stansberry said. “I know the county is looking at [funding options], but they don’t realize the clock is ticking.” Devlin agreed timing is critical, particularly for those who may be looking at homelessness or are susceptible to relapsing after going through detox. “I didn’t trust myself after I left [detox]. Timing is everything,” said Devlin, who has held a steady job in pest control and continues to attend weekly Project 90 alumni meetings. Ensuring those who need help receive it contributes to society and Project 90’s unfortunate downsizing over the years is concerning, said Suzanne Flecker, a resident of the nearby Hayward Park neighborhood and the wife of San Mateo Councilman Rick Bonilla. “I feel strongly that the services that [Project 90] provides to San Mateo citizens enable individuals to heal and become productive members in our community. These services are desperately needed and fewer and fewer services of this kind are available. It would be a huge loss to San Mateo and the Peninsula at large if [Project 90] were to cease to exist,” Flecker wrote in an email. Downsizing while awaiting the ACA Officials from Project 90 and Our Common Ground, another rehabilitation center with several sites throughout the county, are worried the ACA is having unintended consequences. Health professionals are hopeful those who need assistance will obtain Medicaid or Medi-Cal insurance that for the first time, would cover substance abuse treatment costs. Instead, the state is still awaiting a waiver that would allow providers like Project 90 to receive reimbursements based on a region’s cost of doing business and provide more than 16 beds. Stansberry said it’s difficult to proceed when the nonprofit’s finances are in jeopardy. “The Affordable Care Act is still kind of in limbo as to what they’re going to do for residential programs. So it’s like trying to make a commitment when you don’t know what the rules are or what the compensation is going to be,” Stansberry said. “It’s left us to a point where we’re going to have to downsize.” Project 90 supporters are hopeful the county, cities and residents will recognize the value of providing resources to those in need and accept that while they may not share the plight of an addict, they’re still important members of the community. “I go to alumni meetings every [week] and I’ve never seen [attendance] this low in 20 years. It’s scary and it’s not because there’s less alcoholics and addicts out there; it’s that less people can get in to the program,” Devlin said. “It would be such a loss to the community if it went away. Where do these people go? Shouldn’t we be responsible for each other? There’s new buildings constructed everywhere and rents are going up. I would just love to be able to see Project 90 survive.” Visit projectninety.org for more information about rehabilitation services and Project 90. samantha@smdailyjournal.com (650) 344-5200 ext. 106