AUSTIN, Texas--(BUSINESS WIRE)--Today Keep the Promise PAC announced plans to launch a contest for grass roots supporters of Ted Cruz to produce television, radio and online content supporting the Senator in his campaign for President. “Rather than have a political consultant send a message to the public, we want to hear from the voters themselves,” said Dathan Voelter, Treasurer of Keep the Promise.

From its formation, Keep The Promise, the Super PAC supporting the candidacy of Senator Cruz, has made clear that its purpose was to support the efforts of the millions of courageous conservatives across the country who are ready to take back their country from the DC establishment, lobbyists and special interest groups.

Keep the Promise is calling upon the Senator’s campaign to make a library of creative available to the public for free on its website for this grass roots effort, inspiring the voice of the Senator’s millions of conservative supporters to produce messages promoting the Senator’s conservative principles on issues such as faith, immigration, local control of education, and religious liberty.

Once the Cruz campaign uploads the library of creative to its website, Keep the Promise will announce an exciting nationwide contest that will include airing the most inspiring messages on television, radio and online.

Ted Cruz should be the next President of the United States because he is anchored by principle and conviction, courageously standing firm against the DC establishment, Obama’s illegal amnesty, and ObamaCare.

As one of the nations most accomplished constitutional lawyers, Senator Cruz has spent his life defending US sovereignty, religious freedom and Second Amendment rights at the nation’s highest court, the United States Supreme Court.

Keep the Promise Super PACs have received contributions in excess of $37 million. As required by federal campaign finance law, Keep the Promise’s network of Super PACs will file their disclosure reports with the FEC in July. Donors, vendors, and other relevant information will be disclosed at that time. You can learn more about Keep the Promise by visiting our website www.keepthepromise.com.

Paid for by Keep the Promise PAC. Not authorized by any candidate or candidate's committee.

www.keepthepromise.com