The FDA approved naltrexone for alcoholism treatment in 1994.

In the 1959 movie "Rio Bravo," crooner Dean Martin, who wasn't half bad as an actor, played an alcoholic gunfighter.

It's been a long time since I saw the movie, which also starred John Wayne as a county sheriff. But I remember that Martin was a quick draw and a crack shot, provided that he first drank another kind of shot, or two.

But when he tried to lay off the booze, his hands shook and he couldn't hit a bottle off a horse railing with his six-shooter from 20 feet away. Accordingly, he was a huge liability as Wayne's deputy.

The need for a drink to calm one's nerves, to instill courage or to brace someone for a climactic moment has been a constant, if peripheral, theme, in movies, books and popular culture.

And it resurfaced prominently in the smash hit TV series "Mad Men," in which there was a cocktail shaker in every ad man's office and in the foyer of each of their apartments or homes.

The impression was that you couldn't come up with a creative slogan or begin a constructive meeting without a Scotch on the rocks, unless, of course, you drank your whiskey "neat."

Is booze the fuel that people need to do great things?

Did Hemingway and Fitzgerald need liquor to write those great American novels?

Did Picasso have to guzzle three snifters of absinthe for every one of those priceless sculptures and paintings he created?

I pondered such questions after a road trip with an acquaintance I'll call Bill, whom I met several years ago and who's an intelligent, interesting and very friendly guy.

We set out early in the morning, headed onto the interstate, and Bill seemed to be in an uncharacteristically bad mood. He questioned my choice of destinations, and he made back-seat driver comments about my car handling.

Both would be ordinary features of a conversation between two men, except that Bill's tone was acerbic, on the threshold of attack mode. Something was not right.

Then Bill suddenly announced that it was time for refreshments and poured a libation from his thermos in which he had prepared a cold, vodka-spiked concoction.

As though experiencing the euphoric jolt from a hypodermic needle, Bill was instantly transformed.

Not only did he become exceedingly amicable toward me, but he was also suddenly philosophically hopeful, launching from one discussion to the next, detailing vacation, travel and major purchase plans for his near future.

Maybe, I thought, the science and literature about alcohol's evils might just happen to be wrong, or at the very least, might not apply to everyone.

Maybe the gunslinger in Rio Bravo or the companion in my passenger seat benefited from a dose of the oldest "medicine" to render them healed or whole.

But we know none of that to be true.

Writing for The Atlantic magazine ("The Irrationality of Alcoholics Anonymous," April 2015), Gabrielle Glaser made no claim that alcohol enhances creativity or hand-eye coordination.

Instead, she reported on a study by American neuroscientist John David Sinclair that found that alcohol gives a temporary feeling of well-being by stimulating endorphins in the brain that, in turn, fortifies certain brain synapses.

"The stronger these synapses grow, the more likely the person is to think about, and eventually crave, alcohol — until almost anything can trigger a thirst for booze and drinking becomes compulsive," Glaser wrote.

In other words, Hemingway, Picasso and the gunslinger in the western film did not require booze for their special skills — they craved it for every hour they were awake.

For this reason, some countries, including Finland, have been treating alcoholism for the past 20 years with a drug called naltrexone, which blocks those endorphins triggered by alcohol.

By taking naltrexone an hour before imbibing, alcoholics crave liquor less and less, so that they are soon able to limit consumption to about 10 drinks per week. Some quit entirely.

Glaser reported a 78 percent success rate in the treatment of alcoholism with naltrexone. Compare that to the success rate of Alcoholics Anonymous, which is between 5 to 8 percent, according to data compiled by retired Harvard psychiatrist Lance Dodes.

So why don't we treat alcoholism in this country with a proven scientific cure rather than rely on a religious-oriented, 12-step program instituted in 1935 that fails in the great majority of cases?

After all, the U.S. Food and Drug administration formally approved naltrexone for alcoholism treatment back in 1994.

Glaser offers several theories as to why American doctors seldom prescribe naltrexone — foremost among them our country's history with the devil's brew, being intertwined with morality, criminal prohibition, spirituality and human weakness, all mixed into a cauldron of shame.

So, it's felt that our alcoholics must do penance, essentially, and suffer through AA's all-or-nothing cure that has been nearly an all-out failure.

Glaser also mentions the lucrative alcoholism rehabilitation industry, in which some institutes charge up to $40,000 per month, using the AA approach. Whereas, a full treatment program with naltrexone in Finland goes for around $2,500.

Glaser predicts that because passage of the Affordable Care Act has insurance companies insisting on paying only for treatments that actually work, there's a scientific light at the end of the dark and frightening tunnel of alcoholism.

David McGrath, a former resident of Evergreen Park and Oak Forest, is an emeritus professor of English at the College of DuPage. mcgrathd@dupage.edu