LANSING, MI — Another poll, another sign that Michigan’s gubernatorial election is shaping up to be more of a “barn burner” than many pundits had originally predicted.

Republican Gov. Rick Snyder leads Democratic challenger Mark Schauer by one percentage point, according to new results from Public Policy Polling, while Democratic U.S. Rep. Gary Peters leads Republican Terri Lynn Land by seven points in Michigan’s U.S. Senate race.

Both Republicans picked up support when third-party candidates were excluded.

The spread in the governor’s race was within the margin of error, so the results point to a statistical dead heat between Snyder and Schauer, which is consistent with other recent polls. Real Clear Politics has Snyder up by an average of less than one point.

“Snyder finds himself in trouble after winning by an overwhelming margin in 2010 because several of his major accomplishments have proven to be very unpopular,” according to PPP, which said respondents were generally unenthusiastic about the state's new right-to-work law and so-called pension tax.

Peters' seven-point lead in the U.S. Senate race is more unusual. He has led Land by an average of 2.8 points in recent polls, according to Real Clear Politics, and Land led by one point in an online panel results released earlier this week.

PPP, which does private work for Democrats but earned high marks for the accuracy of its public polling in 2012, surveyed 687 likely Michigan voters using landlines and the internet between Thursday and Sunday. The poll has a margin of error of plus or minus 3.7 points.

Thirty-seven percent of respondents self-identified as Democrats, compared to 29 percent Republican. Michigan is a blue state, but an eight-point partisan spread is wider than some other polls, and critics have accused the firm of over-representing likely Democratic turnout.

Overall, 43 percent of respondents said they would vote to re-elect Snyder in November, while 42 percent indicated they would pick Schauer. Another six percent picked third-party candidates, and nine percent were undecided.

Snyder won more support when third-party supporters were asked to pick a major-party candidate, with 46 percent of respondents saying they’d back his re-election, compared to 44 percent who said they would vote for Schauer if the election were held today.

PPP RESULTS The candidates for Governor are Republican Rick Snyder, Democrat Mark Schauer, Libertarian Mary Buzuma, Green Party candidate Paul Homeniuk, and U.S. Taxpayers Party candidate Mark McFarlin. If the election was today, who would you vote for? Rick Snyder 43%

Mark Schauer 42%

Mary Buzuma 3%

Paul Homeniuk 1%

Mark McFarlin 2%

Undecided 9%

Horse race, with third-party supporters asked if they'd vote Snyder or Schauer Rick Snyder 46%

Mark Schauer 44%

Not sure 10%

The candidates for U.S. Senate are Republican Terri Lynn Land, Democrat Gary Peters, Libertarian Jim Fulner, Green Party candidate Chris Wahmhoff, and U.S. Taxpayers Party candidate Richard Matkin. If the election was today, who would you vote for? Terri Lynn Land 36%

Gary Peters 43%

Jim Fulner 4%

Chris Wahmhoff 1%

Richard Matkin 2%

Undecided 13%

Horse race, with third-party supporters asked if they'd vote Land or Peters

Terri Lynn Land 40%

Gary Peters 45%

Not sure 15% Source: PPP surveyed 687 likely voters from September 4th to 7th. The margin of error for the survey is +/- 3.7%. 80% of interviews for the poll were conducted over the phone with 20% interviewed over the internet to reach respondents who don’t have landline telephones.

The PPP numbers suggest that Snyder’s move to phase out a long-standing exemption on some pension income may be hurting him with a wide swath of voters. Seventy-four percent of respondents said they opposed “the increase in taxes on retirement income from pensions that was passed in 2011.”

The “Healthy Michigan” plan to reform and expand Medicaid under the Affordable Care Act is “one issue where Snyder is winning some support across party lines,” according to PPP. Fifty percent of all respondents said they supported the expansion, while 26 percent said they were unopposed.

In the race to replace retiring U.S. Sen. Carl Levin, 43 percent of respondents said they’d vote for Peters, compared to 36 percent for Land. Seven percent said they’d vote for a third-party candidate, while 13 percent were undecided.

When third-party supporters were asked to go major party, Peters’ lead narrowed to five points, with 45 percent of respondents backing the Bloomfield Township Democrat and 40 percent saying they’d vote for Land, a Byron Center Republican.

“Michigan is a Democratic state to begin with, and Peters is getting 12 percent of the Republican vote, while only 5 five of Democrats say they're going to vote for Land,” according to PPP. “…One issue playing to Peters' considerable advantage is the minimum wage — voters support increasing it to $10 an hour by a 58/34 spread.”

On Sunday, new internet panel results from YouGov showed Land with a 1 percentage point lead over Peters. The poll talked to 108,725 voters between Aug 18 and Sept 2 across the U.S. There were 2,897 people interviewed from Michigan. YouGov is the only pollster to have shown Land with a lead since April.

According to different political tracking groups, the race either leans Democratic or is a toss up. The New York Times and FiveThirtyEight both say Peters has a 66 percent chance of winning. The Huffington Post says the race is even and the Cook Political Report and Real Clear Politics says it’s a tossup.

PPP is one of the only firms that is also polling some of Michigan’s down-ticket statewide races, which voters tend to pay less attention to this far out from the November 4 election.

Republican Attorney General Bill Schuette and Democratic challenger Mark Totten both won support from 36 percent of respondents in the poll, while 10 percent of respondents sid they’d vote for a third-party candidate and 18 percent were undecided.

Republican Secretary of State Ruth Johnson leads Democratic challenger Godfred Dillard by three points, 39 percent to 36 percent, according to PPP, with seven percent saying they’d vote for a third-party candidate and 18 percent undecided.

Click here to see full results from the PPP poll.

Jonathan Oosting is a Capitol reporter for MLive Media Group. Email him, find him on Facebook or follow him on Twitter.