Even as a pigtailed child, Ashley Gallagher was self-conscious about a certain fullness in her face.

“I was cute as button — and there was my double chin,” she said.

As an adult, she faithfully performed facial exercises purported to tighten the area under the chin. She stood straight, head held high, to make the bulge less apparent. Nothing worked.

By middle age, Gallagher, 51, the owner of a pet-sitting business in Torrance, California, was avoiding mirrors and considering liposuction, but she worried about the effects of anesthesia and the recovery time. Then she discovered another option: a series of fat-reducing injections intended to slim down a double chin.

She enrolled in a trial, and by the third treatment session, “I noticed a dramatic difference,” she said. “It was receding.”

The Food and Drug Administration has approved the injection, called Kybella, for the reduction of moderate to severe fat deposits under the chin. The active ingredient, deoxycholic acid, dissolves fat, permitting dermatologists and plastic surgeons to resculpt the chin area without surgery.

“For highly selected patients who have under-chin fat without sagging skin, this will work,” said Dr. Rod J. Rohrich, a professor of plastic surgery at the University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center in Dallas. He was not involved in clinical trials.

Tiny needles containing deoxycholic acid — up to 50 per session — are inserted into the fat deposits under the jawline. Treatment entails two to six monthly sessions of roughly 20 minutes each. Patients must commit to multiple visits.

In studies conducted for FDA approval, the most commonly reported side effects were bruising, pain and swelling. Dr. Derek H. Jones, a dermatologist and a principal investigator in a trial of the drug’s effectiveness, found that people with the most fat had the most swelling. It usually cleared up in 48 to 72 hours.

“That makes sense, because you’re destroying more fat cells,” said Jones, a paid consultant who will teach injectors and who treated Gallagher. In his experience, the first treatment was the most painful.

The injections will be commercially available in late summer, after doctors are trained. The price is not yet set.

Not every patient is a good candidate for this treatment, several experts said. If a patient has excess fat and loose skin, Rohrich said, “you’ll have a crepey neck and need a neck lift” after fat is reduced with the shot. Neck lifts can cost $5,000 or more.