Killeen mayoral candidate Scott Cosper said the biggest challenge facing the city is its water capacity.

Cosper, 45, who filed for election Jan. 29, sat down with the Herald last week for a question-and-answer session.

He said he decided to run because he wants to continue serving the city he’s “worked hard” for over the past 14 years in various capacities.

“I have been involved in many, many capacities, and I believe I have the ability and the relationships to be a regional leader,” he said. “I’m familiar with working with people in the community, and I think that I can take those skills and reach out to the citizens and understand what everyday citizens go through each and every day.”

Cosper, a local business owner, serves on various boards, including the Heart of Texas Defense Alliance, the foundation board for Texas A&M University and the Killeen Temple Metropolitan Planning Organization policy board. He also served as a councilman from 2000 to 2006. He returned to the council and served as mayor pro tem in 2008, but was recalled in November 2011 along with four other council members.

“That was a trying time in our city’s past,” Cosper said. “Unfortunately, we were in a situation that had no good answers. ... We did what we thought was best at the time and we have moved forward.”

Cosper said the city’s biggest challenge is water capacity.

“We are very close to triggering a mandate with (the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality) to have to construct a new water plant and provide additional capacity,” he said. “... I know the city has plans that are currently in progress to address that issue, but we need to go all the way into finalizing the agreements with (Bell County Water Control and Improvement District No. 1) and get the plant under construction.”

Cosper said he believes his accomplishments make him the best candidate to fulfill the city’s mayoral duties.

“I am certain that I have the ability to lead the city,” he said. “I am excited about the opportunity to continue moving our community forward with (its) great low cost of living and the opportunity for people to live the American dream right here in Killeen.”