Sangrea, left, and Salty Vulgaire of the Boulder Burlesque perform to the Amy Winehouse song "Back to Black" at the Sinners Ball-Masquerade Party last year. (Courtesy photo)

If you go What: Exotica Erotica Ball When: 9 p.m.-2 a.m. Friday, Oct. 25 Where: Shine Restaurant & Gathering Place, 2027 13th St., Boulder Tickets: $20 Info: exoticaball.com

It's an event with partial nudity and an adult theme. And it's back.

It seems only fitting during the Halloween season that a Boulder tradition is being reincarnated.

Hello again, Exotica Erotica Ball.

OK, you got us. The adult-themed, masquerade event that captivated Boulder for 16 years was actually known as the Exotic Erotic Ball, but we'll get to that detail later. What you need to know is that the party that catered to Boulder's wild side returns Friday at Shine Restaurant & Gathering Place, and it's $20 to attend, instead of the $50 it was back in the day.

Exotica Erotica is the brainchild of Steve Wallis, who made a trial run last year with a similar event called the Sinners Ball-Masquerade Party.

"It seems as if there was a void in Boulder after the event stopped happening," says Wallis, owner of Colorado Events. "There were a lot of people who were loyal fans of it, and I didn't think anyone was organizing it. A couple years went by and it didn't seem like anyone was going to make it happen, so I took it upon myself to do it."

In its prime, the Exotic Erotic Ball, a fundraiser for the Boulder Museum of Contemporary Art, drew upwards of 1,000 revelers, who entered the Boulder Theater on the Friday before Halloween wearing risque costumes and body paint.

But BMoCA officials canceled the 2007 event, citing declining attendance and high production costs. In 2006, for example, attendance had dwindled to about 200 for an event that had been renamed simply "The Ball" and was held at the museum.

After five Halloweens without the hedonism of the Exotic Erotic Ball, Wallis decided enough was enough.

So he set out to fill Boulder's hollow Halloweens last year with the creation of the Sinners Ball-Masquerade Party. With Boulder Burlesque and Shine Restaurant and Gathering Place, the host site, backing him, Wallis made his pitch on Facebook:

"The next generation of Boulder's Exotica Erotica Ball has arrived -- A masquerade party of pure decadence and risque interactive entertainment! Explore your exotic side with the extraordinary Sexy Sinners from Boulder Burlesque and over 150 people in naughty costumes. Leave your inhibitions at home ... "

Happy with the event that drew an estimated couple of hundred people, Wallis decided to try again this year -- and Shine was more than eager to help.

"They brought a big crowd, they were a nice group to be around," says John Malek, Shine's assistant events coordinator. "They were polite and respectful, so of course we want to respect the community and take care of the people who want to be taken care of."

This year, Shine will have new drinks, called "potions," concoctions of herbs mixed with different extracts that are non-alcoholic but mix well with alcohol.

Wallis decided to move forward this year by taking a step back: He re-branded the Sinners Ball to the more familiar Exotica Erotica Ball.

He couldn't go by the original Exotic Erotic moniker because it's copyrighted by Perry Mann Productions in San Francisco, so Wallis chose the next best route: He added the letter "a" to the end of the words.

"Everyone kept referring back to the original name," Wallis explains. "That seems what the public wants to follow so that's what we did, we went back to the roots."

And, that being the case, Wallis and friends are promising Boulder the opportunity Friday to "explore your exotic side, wildest fantasies and dirty little secrets."

Entertainment will include Boulder Burlesque, of course, as well as pole dancers, DJs, a "Dungeon of Desire" and a fantasy costume contest.

Oh, and costumes are required, though we're sure those are left to one's imagination.