Baby boomers appear poised to leave their mark on yet another institution — the insurance industry — as they age into Medicare eligibility.

The roughly 75 million boomers born between 1946 and 1964 are driving demand for Medicare Advantage, a version of government-funded medical coverage for people 65 and older.

Private insurers offer Medicare Advantage, which adds perks to traditional Medicare plans, making them attractive to millions of customers nationally. The market has huge potential if federal officials continue to offer political support for the program.

The swelling demand has, in turn, fueled speculation of a major consolidation among health insurers eager to take advantage of the trend.

That consolidation — the shape of which is still uncertain — could have major ramification in the Hartford area, where thousands of jobs are tied to the industry. A merger of two local companies could lead to significant job losses, while a timely and well-received acquisition by either Aetna or Cigna could strengthen their position in the insurance landscape.

At the center of recent consolidation rumors is Humana of Louisville, Ky., which has the second largest enrollment of Medicare Advantage customers after UnitedHealthcare, the subsidiary of UnitedHealth Group of Minnetonka, Minn., which has offices in Connecticut.

Humana, the fifth largest health insurer by membership, would be a huge addition to any of the suspected buyers, two of them anchored in Greater Hartford: Aetna and Cigna. The third is Anthem, parent company of Anthem Blue Cross and Blue Shield in Connecticut.

"I think one of the interesting pieces with Humana is the Medicare Advantage program, where a lot more seniors now than, say, five or 10 years ago are interested in the kind of Medicare Advantage plans that are out there, and Humana has a nice position in that market," said Laurence Baker, a professor of health research and policy at Stanford School of Medicine.

None of the companies rumored to be interested in such an acquisition are talking, saying they can't comment on market speculation.

On June 8, Humana entered a quiet period because of inquiries from the media and analysts regarding a possible sale. The period will last until the company reports its second-quarter earnings, according to a company filing June 8 with the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission.

Obamacare Factors In

The first baby boomers reached 65 — the usual age for Medicare availability — in 2011, and the U.S. Census Bureau projects that by 2030, more than 20 percent of Americans will be at least age 65, up from 13 percent in 2010.

But that is not the only factor fueling demand for health insurance, and different types of health insurance plans.

The Affordable Care Act, often called Obamacare, mandated that everyone have some type of medical coverage. To make coverage more attainable, the federal government expanded Medicaid for low-income individuals and families while also providing tax credits, or subsidies, for private insurance plans sold either through healthcare.gov or a state exchange, such as Access Health CT in Connecticut.

"There are certainly changes in the environment in terms of the number of people who are looking for insurance plans in different ways," Baker said.

Insurers, hospitals and the Affordable Care Act are changing the way medical care is funded.

In the past, insurers paid hospitals and doctors' offices a fee for each medical service provided to a patient. That system encouraged clinicans to provide more services for more money, driving up costs. Increasingly, hospitals and doctors' offices are being paid incentives by insurers to hold down costs and maintain quality care, defined by various clinical metrics. One such example is an "accountable care organization," an agreement between a medical payer and a medical-care provider that links payments to metrics for the quality of patients' care as well as an overall reduction in total cost for a population of patients.

"I see some insurance companies really working hard around this," Baker said. "So, I guess one of the questions that might be out there around a merger like this is whether it really creates new opportunities to work with providers to form these kind of organizations."

Regardless of whether Humana is bought by Aetna, Anthem or Cigna, the deal will get a good look from anti-trust regulators, said Robert Town, a health-care management professor for the Wharton School at the University of Pennsylvania.

"It's going to get a good look, and it wouldn't surprise me if they're going to have to divest something, somewhere, somehow," Town said.

The U.S. Department of Justice is likely to review an acquisition of this size, if Humana is bought by one of the other top five health insurers in the nation, Town said. State insurance regulators and states' attorneys general are also likely to take a look at the deal, he said.

A deal to sell Humana to any of the three — Aetna, Anthem or Cigna — would provide some "synergies" in cost and revenue at a deal price as high as $250 per share, Ana Gupte, a financial analyst with Leerink Partners wrote in a note to investors on June 1. The company has about 149.8 million shares outstanding, putting the possible sale price at $37.45 billion. On June 8, Humana's market cap, or worth, was $31.8 billion.

Also, Humana, if it sells, might only be the first of multiple changes in the industry. Gupte wrote that a Humana acquisition could be a "trigger event for further strategic actions by other players."

If Anthem acquires Humana, there could be a merger of Cigna and Aetna; UnitedHealthcare and Cigna or UnitedHealthcare and Aetna, for example, Gupte wrote. If Cigna buys Humana, a merger between UnitedHealthcare and Aetna is the "most likely transaction," she wrote.

And if Aetna buys Humana, Gupte said, there is the possibility of a merger of Cigna with either Anthem or UnitedHealthcare.

Cash To Spend