PR Web

Jeffersonville, Ind. (PRWEB) August 20, 2014

PetFirst, the nation's fastest growing pet insurance company, announced today its program with Safeway Inc. , a Fortune 100 company and one of the largest food and drug retailers in the United States . In the exclusive program, PetFirst will showcase its pet insurance plans through Safeway's Priority速 Total Pet Care brand. Information on the pet insurance is available in all Safeway stores and online at http://www.prioritypetinsurance.com.

Safeway customers can expect benefits such as next day coverage for accidents with illness coverage that begins on the 15th day; up to 90 percent reimbursement based on their actual vet bill as opposed to a fee schedule; and most importantly, coverage on hereditary, congenital, and breed-specific conditions through the Lifetime policy. In addition to these great benefits, Safeway customers who are members of the just for U速 program will receive an immediate five percent discount on their pet insurance policy.

Through this program, Safeway expands its Priority速 Total Pet Care brand by adding pet insurance to their line of offerings, which currently includes a full assortment of pet food, treats and supplies at a great value. Offering pet insurance, which reimburses dog and cat owners up to 90 percent of their veterinary expenses, allows Safeway to provide products and services that encompass pet health and pet care.

"It is a natural fit for PetFirst to offer pet insurance product information at Safeway locations," said Katie Grant , CEO of PetFirst. " Safeway provides customers with great pet food products and fills pet prescriptions through the pharmacies. Pet insurance is another product that will round out the Priority速 Total Pet Care brand at an affordable price for customers."

Pet insurance plans offered through the Safeway program will insure cats and dogs of all ages, including senior pets. The cost of covering a pet varies based on the pet's breed, age and geographic location. Plans include coverage on hereditary, congenital, and breed-specific conditions. Safeway customers will find information available in the store's pharmacy, or they can go online at http://www.prioritypetinsurance.com or by calling 1-855-508-7387.

According to Packaged Facts, an independent market research company, PetFirst is the pioneer of introducing pet insurance through retail channels.

"We are proud Safeway has chosen PetFirst to be the brand behind a well-known and recognized brand like theirs," said Grant. "It is our mission to exemplify our own brand values, as well as maintain and enhance the brand identity and values of our partners."

With U.S. pet owners expected to spend $15.3 billion on veterinary care this year, pet insurance is a valuable financial tool for dog and cat owners.

For more information on pet insurance through Safeway , visit http://www.prioritypetinsurance.com or call 1-855-508-7387.

Read the full story at http://www.prweb.com/releases/2014/08/prweb12109452.htm