The Hillary Clinton campaign isn’t tolerating Ted Cruz’s lies. The Clinton camp blasted Cruz for reinventing history in order to hide his real record.

While campaigning Iowa, Cruz said:



Hillary Clinton embraces abortion on demand in all circumstances up until the moment of birth. Partial-birth abortion with taxpayer funding, with no notification for parents in any circumstances — 91% of Americans say that’s nuts. So what do they do, they try to shift it. The war on women wasn’t that; it was contraceptives. Now listen, I have been a conservative my entire life. I have never met anybody, any conservative who wants to ban contraceptives.

….

Last I checked we don’t have a rubber shortage in America. When I was in college we had a machine in the bathroom, you put .50 cents in and voila! So yes, anyone who wants contraceptives can access them, but it’s an utterly made-up nonsense issue.

….

Imagine for a second you’re Hillary Clinton. You’re trying to think, ‘How do I run?’ Well, you can’t run on the economy because we have the lowest percentage of Americans working any year since 1977. You can’t run on Obamacare because millions of people have lost their jobs, lost their health care, lost their doctors, seen their premiums skyrocket. You certainly can’t run on foreign policy because every country you touched as secretary of state is a disaster.

The Clinton campaign responded by unloading on Cruz.

In a statement, Hillary for America spokeswoman Christina Reynolds said, “Ted Cruz’s colorful comments can’t hide his revisionist history on the sustained Republican effort to restrict access to women’s health care. He threatened to shut down the government to defund Planned Parenthood. He tried to roll back protections that prevent women from being fired for using contraception. He claimed that emergency birth control was an ‘abortifacient,’ which is both medically and scientifically incorrect. As Cruz tries to police women’s health care decisions and deny a war on women, Hillary Clinton will fight every day to protect them against this seemingly endless Republican assault.”

Ted Cruz completely invented his own new reality. The facts are that Cruz supports a personhood amendment to the Constitution that would ban birth control. Ted Cruz thinks contraception is the same as abortion induced drugs.

Less than three months ago, Cruz tried to shut down the government over defunding Planned Parenthood.

Ted Cruz has stolen the pages from Donald Trump’s playbook and is now making it up as he goes along. The media never challenges Cruz’s made up “facts,” so it is up to Democrats like Hillary Clinton to set the record straight.

Mitt Romney tried to compulsively lie his way to the presidency in 2012, and that got him routed by President Obama. Republicans have upped the ante and moved from lying to complete detachment from reality in 2016.

If Cruz wants to pick a fight with Hillary Clinton on contraception, he will live to regret it.