Western Stars owners hope to help make town an art destination

Now there's one more reason for all those tourists headed toward the mountains to stop as they pass through Lyons.

In November, a new art gallery opened at 160 Main St., in a long, rustic building formerly occupied by Mama's Cafe and Outlaw Saloon. Called Western Stars Gallery & Studio, the facility offers several spacious rooms where paintings, jewelry, mixed-media and other forms of fine art are on display and for sale. There's also a boutique gift and antique shop and a teaching studio, where patrons gather every Thursday night to indulge in wine and art during Sip 'n Paint classes.

"I wish we could throw a big lasso around all those people driving to Estes Park and pull them in," Clara Thomas said as she looked out the window at the westbound traffic on Main Street.

As one of three owners of Western Stars, she knows how much the gallery has to offer these should-be visitors.

Its inaugural feature exhibition is a display of animal paintings by Ezra Tucker, a Monument resident who got his start working at Hallmark Cards and later produced illustrations for major international corporations. His paintings hang among work by other artists whom Western Stars selected with an eye to quality, Thomas said.

"We're here to enhance Lyons as an art destination," she said. "There really isn't another place like this."

Western Stars' other co-owners are Chrystal DeCoster and Betsy Hubner, the chair and vice chair, respectively, of the Lyons Arts & Humanities Commission, which is charged with beautifying town streets, promoting Colorado artists and educating the public on arts matters.

"I have a good pulse on Lyons," DeCoster said. She saw the need for something like Western Stars, and she sensed the community preferences it should satisfy.

Ezra Tucker's painting "Run Rabbit Run #2" hangs near Nancy Krause-designed jewelry in the Western Stars Gallery & Studio, which opened in November in Lyons. (Quentin Young / Staff Photo)

"It's got to have a funk factor," she said, concluding, "The time's right, the location's right."

Western Stars' funk factor is apparent in some of the unique art on its walls — how's half a horse saddle affixed to a recycled red board for "never saw anything like that before." A common complaint about art galleries is that they're snobbish or off-puttingly highbrow. Not Western Stars. If you're comfortable walking into a Cracker Barrel, you'll do just fine here.

But the studio doesn't dumb-down the experience. Tucker's art, for example, while traditional and accessible, supports the owners' assertions of quality.

As a freelance illustrator, Tucker created images for Disney, Lucas Films, the National Park Service, Pepsi and other household-name clients. He made Clydesdale horse art for Anheuser-Busch billboards and other promotional material, which was among his personal-favorite commercial work, he has said. He also has illustrated books, including 1996's "The Adventures of Little Nettie Windship" by Cheryl Ladd and 1998's "Star Wars Dark Forces: Rebel Agent" novella by William C. Dietz and Ezra Tucker.

Tucker has described his style as "nouveau Victorian realism," and this is a good description of his paintings at Western Stars. The paintings are reverent portraits of animals in near-statuesque stillness, as if Tucker were painting not the living animals themselves but his own solemn affinity for them. An owl swooping down toward prey, in "Run Rabbit Run #2," appears as if on a pedestal of air. A grizzly bear is as static as a diorama figure. The creatures are painted to be realistic but not real. Tucker is contemplating them not as beasts in the wilderness but as notions of life on earth. They're ideas of animals. And in the artist's idealized visions of their wise visages, we view something of ourselves.

Jewelry by Tucker's wife, Nancy Krause, is also on display.

The Ax and Oar restaurant also recently opened in a wing of the Western Stars building, and the eatery and gallery are something of partners in their joint occupancy of the space. They have an open connection through the gallery's studio space, and the proximity is especially handy during the Sip 'n Paint events, Thomas noted. She invites patrons to exercise their palates and palettes from 6:30 to 8:30 p.m. Thursdays. Cost is $35.

Quentin Young: quentin@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/qpyoungnews