Not That Brandon Marshall.

It might as well be the Broncos linebacker’s name.

Last September, the Broncos signed Brandon Marshall to their practice squad.

Not That Brandon Marshall.

“I get that all the time,” Marshall said. “That’s going to change one of these days. One of these days, I’m going to have a name in the NFL, too.”

With Danny Trevathan sidelined six to eight weeks with a leg fracture suffered during practice Tuesday, Marshall with his speed and athleticism will have the first chance to become the Broncos’ starting weakside linebacker.

WATCH: Brandon Marshall talks to The Press Box

He wouldn’t be the first Brandon Marshall to start for the Broncos. The Broncos had a receiver named Brandon Marshall. During his time here from 2006-09, he was known as much for his off-field trouble as his 100-catch seasons.

That Marshall is now with the Chicago Bears, where his career has continued to flourish while his life has seemingly calmed.

The Broncos’ new Brandon Marshall has a chance of becoming a nickel linebacker and special teams player in Trevathan’s absence.

“I’ll be ready,” Marshall said. “Whether it’s with the ones or the twos, I just want to roll with this football team.”

Tamme, Sanders return. Broncos tight end Jacob Tamme returned to practice Tuesday. He had been back-and-forth with the team since his wife Allison gave birth to their second child, Lyla Rae last week.

“It’s just a family issue,” Tamme said. “Everything’s good.”

Broncos receiver Emmanuel Sanders also returned to practice on a limited basis after missing time with a strained quad.

Running backs Monte Ball (appendectomy) and C.J. Anderson (concussion) observed but didn’t participate in practice.

Footnotes. Broncos players are off Wednesday. They practice again at 10:25 a.m. Thursday. … Peyton Manning on the series of fights that occurred in practice Tuesday: “I don’t like them to tell you the truth. You do it in a game, it usually costs you something important. It costs you a drive, costs you field position. I am in to treating practice like a game, so I am not a fan of it.”