BROOMFIELD — Once again, Rep. Doug Lamborn is going to face a primary challenge from retired Air Force officer Bentley Rayburn, who blistered the congressman in a fiery speech Friday.

The two Colorado Springs Republicans made their pitch during the 5th Congressional District assembly. Lamborn won 63 percent of the vote to Rayburn’s 37 percent.

“I know this has been a tough conversation, but I think we needed it,” Rayburn said after he questioned Lamborn’s performance in the district and in Washington.

“Not only do we want people with conservative, solid values, but we want people who will lead and who will stir things up. We want action.”

Lamborn pointed out that as a state lawmaker he sponsored the largest tax cut in Colorado history, and as a congressman he has fought the Obama administration.

“Folks, I’ve been voting right, I’ve been fighting liberals and I’ve been getting results,” Lamborn said.

In the 3rd Congressional District, U.S. Rep. Scott Tipton, R-Cortez, also has a primary fight against David Cox. Tipton received 66 percent to Cox’s 34 percent.

El Paso County delegate Cheri Ofner wasn’t happy that the two incumbents ended with opponents in the GOP primary June 24. She said Republicans should be saving their money to unseat two Democratic incumbents, Gov. John Hickenlooper and U.S. Sen. Mark Udall.

Lamborn was first elected to Congress in 2006 when Rep. Joel Hefley retired. He defeated Rayburn and four other challengers in the GOP primary. Two years later, Lamborn again defeated Rayburn and another challenger.

El Paso County Clerk Wayne Williams nominated Lamborn in 2006 and again Friday.

“Eight years ago, I said, ‘As we prepare to send a new congressman to Washington, it is critical that we send someone we know will zealously advocate our conservative values,’ ” Williams said.

Lamborn has been that advocate, he said.

Rayburn, a retired major general, questioned why Lamborn hasn’t helped raise money for embattled Congressman Mike Coffman and other Republicans, and why Lamborn won’t debate.

But delegates were clearly upset when Rayburn said he wouldn’t put his wife on the payroll, a swipe at Lamborn’s spouse, Jean, who has helped with fundraising and payroll.

Rayburn said with the right leader in Congress, El Paso County and the 5th District can be a “real powerhouse.”

“We ought to be,” he said. “We’re one of the safest districts in the country.”

That’s because Republicans dominate the 5th District. It is in central Colorado and includes Chaffee, El Paso, Fremont, Park and Teller counties. The district is home to five military installations.

Lynn Bartels: 303-954-5327, lbartels@denverpost.com or twitter.com/lynn_bartels