Ubl Steps Down As CEO Of AdvaMed, Joins PhRMA

By Suzanne Hodsden

After 16 years at the helm of the Advanced Medical Technology Association (AdvaMed), Stephen Ubl will be stepping down, effective Oct. 15, and taking over as president and CEO of Pharmaceutical Research and Manufacturers of America (PhRMA). Ubl will succeed John Castellani, who announced his retirement from PhRMA earlier this year.

Both AdvaMed and PhRMA released statements Friday, giving credence to the rumors that Politico had published earlier in the week. Though a PhRMA spokesperson said that “a decision [had] not yet been made,” inside sources told Politico that the organization was waiting until member companies had been informed before making a formal announcement.

Vincent Forlenza, AdvaMed’s board chairman, released a statement thanking Ubl for his 16 years of service and lauding his accomplishments as the leader of AdvaMed. Specifically, Forlenza credited Ubl with the formation of the AdvaMed Code of Ethics, his work to repeal the medical device tax, and the launch of a medical technology conference, AdvaMed 2015.

“During Steve’s time at AdvaMed, the association experienced significant growth in membership, policy development capabilities as well as advocacy impact,” said Forlenza in the statement. “As CEO, he created dedicated divisions to address the unique needs of the diagnostics industry and emerging growth of companies — AdvaMedDx and AdvaMed Accel, respectively.”

The New York Times reported that the pharmaceutical industry is receiving a powerful lobbyist with “shrewd political instincts and lowkey manner” at a time when many top pharma companies are coming under fire over increasing drug prices.

“Steve’s extensive experience, depth of knowledge and patient-centered approach to advocacy will serve him well in leading the association at a time when our industry is bringing tremendous medical innovation to patients, the healthcare system and society,” stated Kenneth Frazier, chairman and CEO of Merck and board chairman of PhRMA.

Ubl said he’s making the change during an exciting time in the biopharmaceutical industry and remarked that many life-saving innovations are poised to enter the market. “I look forward to working with PhRMA member companies and the broader health care advocacy community to advance public policies that will improve patient’s access to medicines and foster the continued development of new treatments and cures for patients,” he said.

Politico reported that the post-Obamacare era in the healthcare industry has seen a shakeup in industry leadership positions. America’s Health Insurance Plans, The American Hospital Association, and the Generic Pharmaceutical Association have all experienced a changing of the guard. Additionally, earlier this month, National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) director Thomas Insel announced that he is joining the newly formed Google Life Sciences.

In his statement, Forlenza commented that one of Ubl’s many strengths was his savvy for building and nurturing strong leadership. “Over the years he has built a very strong team. The experience of Advamed’s senior leadership team and AdvaMed’s actively engaged Board of Directors leaves it well positioned to continue our important work.”

According to Forlenza, a nationwide search for Ubl’s replacement is currently underway.