Though an Arkansas Hospital Association survey shows a marked decrease in emergency room visits and hospitalizations by uninsured patients, it is too early to tell exactly how much the state will owe, if anything, for the early years of the state’s politicized “private option.”

Arkansas Surgeon General Dr. Joe Thompson says the Arkansas Health Care Independence Program, aka the private option, was called a “critical lifeline” by several hospital CEOs since the Affordable Care Act has built-in reductions in Medicare payments.

“First and foremost we’re maintaining many of our front-line providers across the state. It’s had a real impact on people’s lives to stay working and productive,” Thompson said in a Friday interview.

The federal government will pay all costs of the program for the first three years, provided the program stays within a budget cap.

“If we are over the estimated cap, we can renegotiate with the federal government the proposed growth in the program,” Thompson said. “It’s not a bailout. It was intended in the waiver of the contract.”

A waiver from the Center for Medicare & Medicaid Services allows an estimated 225,000 Arkansans earning up to 138 percent of the federal poverty level to use Medicaid money to buy private insurance. Arkansas is the first state to use the approach. More than 155,000 Arkansans have applied and been found eligible.

After three years, the state will begin paying a portion of the cost of the program that will increase gradually to 10 percent in 2020.

Opponents such as State Sen. Bryan King-R, Green Forest, have said that taxpayers are paying for the private option in any case, and that the total cost of the program is on track to run $100 million or more over budget by the end of the program’s first year.

“The waiver renegotiation is a misleading term for a bailout from the federal government,” King said Monday.

King said the $100 million figure was drawn using the initial actuarial cost estimate of $437 per month per person from the state-hired actuarial firm Optumus. Largely because of a higher average age of those enrolled, 39 instead of the projected 37, that figure has since risen $24 per person. King and several other state legislators have called for a new cost analysis.

Max Greenwood, spokeswoman for Arkansas BlueCross BlueShield, said Monday it was difficult to come up with an actuarial estimate because “it was a new population that hasn’t been insured and there was no data.”

Craig Wilson, director of Access to Quality Care for the Arkansas Center for Health Improvement, says the waiver anticipates demographic differences to adjust the waiver cap from $477.63 per member per month, “which protects the state from cost differences from estimated versus actual.”

Initial estimates of the program’s price tag were made with three variables in mind “for which there was no good source of information,” Thompson said, including the inability to work pre-existing conditions into the formula. The Affordable Care Act required “complete essential health benefit plans,” the surgeon general added.

King said he felt that Optumus “purposefully low-balled the figures” to get the private option passed.

“It’s misleading, and they’re wanting to spend federal money that the federal government doesn’t have,” King said.

The Arkansas Insurance Department eliminated dental care benefits from the private option for adults next year in an effort to control spending. However, dental will continue to be a benefit option on the Arkansas HealthConnector insurance exchange, said Heather Haywood, state Insurance Department spokeswoman.

A medical loss ratio report from health insurance carriers will be done at the end of the calendar year and will better inform legislators of any overage that could be experienced.

“If they owe the state money back, there is no override whatsoever and we actually are well underneath the cap,” Thompson said. “This is the first time this has been done in the United States. We’re in a transition period.”

According to Wilson, the baseline number for any projection of state risk for any overages not associated with demographic differences would be from the $477 waiver cap, not the $436 projection from early 2013.

“There is no other alternative to the Private Option that has been offered by anyone,” Wilson said.

Slashing the private option and not expanding Medicaid would void any insurance policies obtained.

According to an April report from the Department of Human Services, expenditures associated with the private option slightly exceed budget targets but will fall within the targets when allowable adjustments are made. Rep. John Burris, R-Harrison, is one of the architects of the private option. He has said he is confident that insurance premiums will continue to drop and that Arkansas will not have to pay any of the costs for the program’s first three years.

Although initial reports from an Arkansas Hospital Association survey indicate uninsured hospital visits are down 24 percent over last year, only about half of the state’s 83 acute-care hospitals responded.

Fort Smith’s two acute-care hospitals, Sparks Health System and Mercy Fort Smith, did not take part in the state survey. Donna Bragg, director of communications for Sparks, said the survey was sent to the Sparks CEO during a transition period and was not directed to the correct department.

Available data from Sparks’ parent company, Community Health Systems, however, indicate the survey is representative among the 29 states it serves that expanded Medicaid.