(Photo: Andy Marlette/Pensacola News Journal)

Hypocrisy at its best

It puzzles me how folks can be so willing to believe that President Obama is not an American, demanding that he produce his birth certificate and still having doubts about where he was born. At the same time, they don’t expect candidate Trump to release his tax returns. The reasoning from Mr. Trump is that he is in the middle of an audit. An audit does not prevent releasing his return. This goes right to the root of his problem, a lack of character and a dismissive attitude toward anyone who questions his integrity. Is there something Americans shouldn’t know about his business dealings? What this shows me is that hypocrisy is alive and well in our nation. What’s good for the goose should be good for the gander. Or in this case the duck.

- Randy Clay, Cape Coral

Foreign aid

U.S. Senate candidate Congressman Jolly got my attention recently when he announced that he was asking for a boost in U.S. aid to Israel from $3.1 billion a year to $5.1 billion a year for 10 years, a 65 percent increase. So far, in direct aid, we have given Israel $143,320,430,000. This amount includes $16,650,160,000 in interest to finance the aid given during the years in which we did not have a budget surplus.

In addition to the direct aid, we have loaned Israel $2,105,000,000. All of this amount was during years when we had a budget deficit. The U.S. has guaranteed Israel loans of $600 million for housing loans, $5.5 billion for military debt reduction loans, $9.2 billion for Soviet Jew resettlement loans, and $9 billion for economic recovery loans, for a total of $24.3 billion.

Total assistance to Israel amounts to $167,620,430,000. We’ve been very generous to Israel. Jolly and other politicians rant about growing our national debt while continuing to advocate borrowing more money from China, Japan and others to give to foreign countries.

- C. C. (Doc) Dockery, Lakeland

Dr. Tavel’s social disaster

Dr. Tavel’s proposal for a single payer health system is ridiculous. (April 21, Single-payer system is best option for health care) One has to look no further than the VA to see the mess a government-run health system would create in the U.S. Every point Tavel makes is without any substantial proof that a single payer system would improve health care for the average American citizen which, after all, is the whole point of any system.

Obviously he has no regard or understanding of the benefits of our free enterprise economy that drives any economic activity to provide a better product and/or at lower cost in order to remain competitive. If there are problems in the system as operated prior to Obamacare, they are dwarfed at the mess Obamacare has created.

As to cost, there is no way to calculate what such a system would cost, either in dollars or human cost. The only thing we can be sure of is that the benefits would be less and the costs higher than predicted as always occurs with any government program. One likely result would be the masterminds running the system deciding as costs spiral out of control which among us deserve medical treatment at all.

- Neil Miller, North Fort Myers

One man show

To the local ABC, CBS and NBC news media:

Why do you think it is necessary to have two news anchors on your news shows? National networks get by with one. If you only had one they couldn’t talk and giggle unprofessionally with each other. Send the weather entertainer somewhere else in the studio until it’s his turn so he can’t be involved with the unprofessional ignoring of the audience. The “one big happy family on the news broadcasts” stinks. Revamp your news programs. Get some class.

-Frank Roth, south Fort Myers

Bernie nation

As I read Leonard Pitts recent column (May 4, Bernie Nation can’t get behind Hillary Clinton) on the Sanders campaign, my first thoughts were, “hey, finally, maybe he makes some sense”. That lasted about a nano second.

Mr. Pitts, like most of the press, still does not get it. He thinks he does. But his last lines of the article belie his capacity to be honest.

He bemoans the fact the Sanders supporters can’t accept the fact they lost “fair and square.” I know Bernie supporters and they are as fed up with the system as we on the anti-establishment right are.

To say Bernie lost “fair and square” is about as true as “you can keep your doctor” or “read my lips”.

The party bosses are going to make sure that only Hillary gets the nod. Unless of course she loses every state moving forward.

Remember politicians only do things that they think will help them get elected, first. Everything, including the country, comes second. That is what most people think of the way we are now governed.

Bernie supporters are a bit on the young and idealistic side, but they know a fix when they see one.

Too bad the condescending Mr. Pitts can’t. He forgets the one thing that the Trump/Cruz and Bernie supporters have in common is they won’t vote for the establishment candidate, be it a Bush or a Clinton.

- Walter J Sivigny, Cape Coral

Read or Share this story: http://newspr.es/27Iewzf