Updated at 7:20 p.m.

This blog post has been updated to reflect that the meeting will be Tuesday night. The Prime Prep website listed the meeting as Wednesday. The Uplift Fort Worth website lists it as Tuesday.

The Wednesday meeting posting has been taken down on the Prime Prep website.

——————————

The leadership of Prime Prep Academy has dropped its highly unusual plan to hold its next meeting at 10 p.m. tonight.

That meeting has been cancelled, and a new one was posted for 6:30 p.m. Tuesday at the Dallas campus. Interim Superintendent Ron Price, a former Dallas ISD trustee, said the change was made to ensure the “public has an opportunity to participate.”

Prime Prep officials said this weekend's meeting was urgent and would allow them to regain access to the charter school's bank account. Many administrators were fired or have resigned in the last couple of months. The current leadership is unaware if anyone on staff still has access to Prime Prep's account.

Saturday's meeting was initially planned for 6:30 p.m. But the notice was posted at 10 p.m. Wednesday, which fell short of the 72-hour notice mandated in state law.

Price and board chairman T. Christopher Lewis said they would delay the meeting until 10 p.m. to make it legal. Late Friday afternoon, the meeting time on the agenda was changed to 10 p.m. Saturday.

A state open meetings guide created by the Texas Attorney General's office says a “governing body has no authority to change the time of its meeting without posting the new time for at least 72 hours before the meeting.” A body can started a meeting a little late, but there aren't any specific guidelines.

Lewis and Uplift Fort Worth, Prime Prep's parent nonprofit, are already being sued by another board member over claims of violating the state's Open Meetings Act.

The charter school, co-founded by retired NFL star Deion Sanders, is also under investigation by the Texas Education Agency.

Price and Lewis said they are trying to restructure the school, which has campus in Dallas and Fort Worth, and put it on a solid academic and financial footing.

The Dallas campus, where Wednesday's meeting will be held, is located at 330 E. Ann Arbor Ave., near Interstate 35.

zp8497586rq