Congressman Kelly’s statement on his vote to pass #Omnibus





House Passes Funding Bill to Provide for National Defense



WASHINGTON – Rep. Trent Kelly (R-MS) released the following statement after House passage of the Omnibus Appropriations Act for FY2016:



“My vote in favor of the omnibus bill was about one thing- keeping this country safe. It is what I pledged to do both as a Member of the Mississippi National Guard and as your Member of Congress. The omnibus bill provides essential defense funding to combat threats from ISIS and other enemies and reforms the Visa Waiver Program to more adequately screen travelers visiting the U.S. Due to increasing threats from radical Islamic terrorism at home and abroad, our military and supporting government agencies must be prepared and ready to address complex challenges.”



Representative Trent Kelly represents Mississippi’s First Congressional District. He serves on the House Committee on Agriculture and the House Small Business Committee. This is his first term.



###





12/18/15



Posted December 19, 2015 - 7:26 am

RELEASE:House Passes Funding Bill to Provide for National DefenseWASHINGTON – Rep. Trent Kelly (R-MS) released the following statement after House passage of the Omnibus Appropriations Act for FY2016:“My vote in favor of the omnibus bill was about one thing- keeping this country safe. It is what I pledged to do both as a Member of the Mississippi National Guard and as your Member of Congress. The omnibus bill provides essential defense funding to combat threats from ISIS and other enemies and reforms the Visa Waiver Program to more adequately screen travelers visiting the U.S. Due to increasing threats from radical Islamic terrorism at home and abroad, our military and supporting government agencies must be prepared and ready to address complex challenges.”Representative Trent Kelly represents Mississippi’s First Congressional District. He serves on the House Committee on Agriculture and the House Small Business Committee. This is his first term.###12/18/15 YallPolitics.Com now uses Facebook for comments. Log into Facebook to comment here.