Topics: #demtownhall, 2016 Democratic primary, Bernie Sanders, CNN town hall, Election 2016, Elections 2016, Hillary Clinton, Video, Elections News, News, Politics News

There was yet another televised Democratic presidential showdown Sunday night. This time a town hall hosted by CNN and TV One at The Ohio State University as hosts Jake Tapper and Roland Martin reminded viewers repeatedly.

While by now both candidates’ basic stump speeches can be recited by even the most casual fan of Saturday Night Live, Sunday’s event was saved by pointed questions concerning African-Americans in this country from Martin (like on the issue of minorities being locked out of unions and political consulting) and from the town hall audience.

The candidates received questions from a man who said he was both a one percent religious and ethnic minority in this country, a millennial small business owner and a Democrat who says she’s been badly hurt by Obamacare.

Here are the 4 best voter questioners from CNN’s #Demtownhall:

Victim of police shooting:

The first voter question of the night came from Terina Allen, whose brother Sam DuBose was shot in the head by a University of Cincinnati police officer during a routine traffic stop for a missing license plate last summer.

“As Americans, we are – it’s expected that we can speak out against terrorists, we can speak out against murders and killers of all forms except when that killer is a police officer,” Allen said, noting her brother would have turned 44 on Saturday. “As president, what would you do to create a zero tolerance policy for unjust police killings, and to help to create a system of accountability that is greater than what we have right now,” Allen asked Sanders.

The Vermont senator pledged to Allen that in a Sanders administration every death in police custody will result in “an automatic Department of Justice investigation.”

“My Department of Justice will investigate every killing of an American held in police custody or killed while being apprehended,” Sanders vowed, repeating an audacious pledge he’s made in the past.

As it stands now, no federal agency even tracks all officer-involved shootings or deaths in police custody. In fact, the Justice Department usually only intervenes in such cases if local officials ask them for assistance or if it is clear local departments are incapable of handling the investigation themselves.

A former heroin addict:

Crystal Oertle, a heroin addict for over 12 years, bravely stood up shared that as a mother who used to take her child with her to buy heroin daily she understands that she was “lucky not to be in prison,” and asked Sanders, whom she she said she plans to vote for, about the failed war on drugs.

“My question is what you plan to do with the failed drug policy that tends to want to incarcerate addicts instead of rehabilitate them,” Oertle asked Sanders:

Sanders: We must look at addiction as a “health issue not a criminal issue” #DemTownHall https://t.co/avxdNOphmH https://t.co/e9PHQK0hIA — CNN Politics (@CNNPolitics) March 14, 2016