Bringing a candidate’s family into a political campaign is an unwritten no-no, but that didn’t stop Jake Rush from putting Congressman Ted Yoho’s son into the fray.

Rush, a Gainesville lawyer who is challenging first-term incumbent Congressman Yoho in the Aug. 26 District 3 Republican primary, put out a radio ad July 8 that talks about all the things Yoho allegedly doesn’t want to talk about.

Among several allegations that Rush says Yoho committed — from voting to fully fund Obamacare to thinking Iran should be allowed to have nuclear weapons — Rush slips in that the congressman “doesn’t want to talk about how his son got a cushy internship on Capitol Hill despite his lengthy arrest record.”

It’s been an unwritten rule forever that candidates’ families are off limits, especially younger children, said Susan McManus, a distinguished professor in political science at the University of South Florida.

But like other time-honored traditions, things change, and adult children have increasingly become fodder for opponents, she said.

“Over time, that has started to evaporate, but the bottom line is people still don’t appreciate it,” McManus said. “They regard it as unnecessary.”

Rush said the internship is a legitimate campaign issue and an example of how Yoho acts when he is in D.C.

“Ted Yoho’s nepotism issue is just further proof that he thinks he’s not accountable to anyone,” Rush said in an email to The Sun.

Yoho didn’t take issue with the charges Rush leveled at him about his voting record or views on Iran but did take exception to having his 24-year-old son called out on his internship and arrest record. It was a big enough breach of political etiquette to Yoho that he decided to address the radio spots on his campaign website, and he posted a response on his Facebook page Tuesday.

“As a rule I do not respond to personal attacks. However, my opponent has chosen to make negative remarks in the media with regard to my son. Since I believe morally and ethically that family members should never become the target of such campaign attacks, I have agreed to publish my son’s response below,” Yoho said.

Yoho’s campaign manager, Kat Cammack, said Yoho was upset about the nepotism charges. As a newly elected congressman he didn’t have the pull to get his son an internship, she said.

“Dragging family members in crosses the line,” Cammack said.

In fact, Rush’s attack on Yoho’s son backfired, she said. Yoho’s Facebook post about the attack has garnered 700 likes for the congressman and 200 comments of support, she said.

Yoho’s son, Tyler Marlin Yoho, responded by setting the record straight about both his internship and his police record.

That “cushy” internship his father got him? Not so much, Tyler Yoho said. Tyler had an unpaid internship that he says he was offered after striking up a conversation with North Carolina Rep. Robert Pittenger during a train ride while in Washington last January for his father’s swearing-in ceremony.

Tyler went on to say he got the internship after graduating from college and slept on his parents’ couch for six weeks.

“I was in the office at 8 a.m. every morning, sorted hundreds of pieces of mail, listened to angry constituents on the phone, fetched coffee, worked on research projects for legislative staff and handled an assortment of administrative duties. I left the office late each night and tried my best to learn as much as I could,” Tyler wrote.

Tyler chalked up his criminal record to poor decisions he made as a college student. He was arrested in 2009 and again in 2012 on charges of disorderly conduct and resisting arrest without violence. In the 2009 case, he pleaded no contest and was granted deferred prosecution. In the second case, he again pleaded no contest and had adjudication withheld.

He also said no one tried to scrub his record, which is available for anyone to see on the Alachua County Clerk of Courts website.

“No attempt has been made to cover up my record, unlike your efforts to scrub your ‘embarrassing’ past, as quoted by the Gainesville Sun on April 2, 2014,” Tyler said, taking a swipe at Rush’s past as a live-action role-playing enthusiast.

In the Sun article, Rush admitted to deleting Web content regarding his role-playing past in an elaborate vampire game and some sexually threatening messages he allegedly sent to other players online.

Rush, also a former deputy for the Alachua County Sheriff’s Office, said Yoho’s camp used the role-playing past as a distraction from real issues.

“After their April 1 smear, the Yoho campaign’s complaints about negative campaigning are further hypocrisy,” Rush said.

Rush has characterized himself as a straight-shooting Christian conservative, and he has accused Yoho of not being conservative enough for North Central Florida, having voted to fund the Affordable Care Act.

In a letter to Tyler, Rush encouraged the younger Yoho to take advantage of his dad’s time in Congress. “Not everyone is a congressman’s son who gets a congressional internship and the State Attorney, Jeff Siegmeister, to represent them when they violate the law,” Rush wrote.

Siegmeister is the state attorney for the Third Judicial Circuit in Lake City, representing Columbia, Dixie, Suwannee and Taylor counties. He was not state attorney at the time he represented the younger Yoho, Cammack said.

“If Ted Yoho sends anyone, including his son, to call this campaign a liar, they can expect a factual rebuttal backed by evidence,” Rush said.