The folks at MSNBC are so comfortable at this point repeating White House talking points they don’t even try to hide it.

On MSNBC Live Monday, substitute host Brian Shactman, after reading administration propaganda about ObamaCare, asked a Democratic Congresswoman – who is also a member of the White House strike team pushing said propaganda – “What are we doing to get that message out there a little more?” (video follows with transcript and commentary):

BRIAN SHACTMAN, SUBSTITUTE HOST: As the White House continues its renewed public relations campaign to promote ObamaCare, the number of Americans signing up is on the rise. According to the Kaiser Family Foundation, more than 243,000 have signed up for private coverage through the exchanges, and more than 567,000 have been determined eligible for Medicaid since the October 1st rollout. Joining me now, Congressman Rosa DeLauro (D) of Connecticut, one of the House Democrats on the White House strike team promoting the healthcare law this month. Congressman DeLauro, thanks for joining us. CONGRESSWOMAN ROSA DELAURO (D-CONNECTICUT): Thank you. Delighted to be here. SHACTMAN: Thank you. Now, according to the White House, today's push is all about the success of Medicaid expansion. 26 states and D.C. have taken advantage, while 24 states, all run by either Republicans or Republican legislatures, have declined the expansion. I also want to point out these stats the White House just released. If all 50 states were on board, 5.4 million uninsured Americans would gain coverage. Eight in ten of those would be paying less than $100 a month. All of which would actually save states about $10 billion over the next decade. So my question, Congresswoman, is what are we doing to get that message out there a little more?

C'mon, Brian. At least pretend you're not a shill for this White House.

Or is that just flat not required at MSNBC at this point, and the orders from the top are to shill away?

Sure seems that way, doesn't it?

What really would have been funny if the Congresswoman would have responded, "Actually, Brian, I'm not sure there's anything more you and your colleagues at MSNBC could be doing to help us advance the White House's message. But thanks for asking."

As you might imagine, that wasn't her answer.

(HT Weasel Zippers)