Isabella Bird and Rocky Mountain Jim story romanticized Estes Park

Editor's Note: This is the six in a series looking at the history of the Estes Valley.

History - like art - is in the eyes of the beholder. Each observer portrays events from his own personal point of view, and each researcher has the benefit or disadvantage of the subjectivity of the material he studies. Conflicting or embellished accounts can often cloud real issues, even today.

For Estes Park, probably the most romanticized era of its early history is encapsulated in the story of Rocky Mountain Jim and Isabella Bird. It is a story set in the glamorous "wild west" era of America and it contains all the elements of adventure, romance, and intrigue that make up any good story.

Opinions vary on much of it is true, but what is clear is that what people wrote about Estes Park in its early development shaped the world's regard of the area and set the stage for what was to come for the next 150 years.

Isabella Lucy Bird, the daughter of an English clergyman of some standing, was born in 1831 in Yorkshire. By the time she was a young adult, she had been suffering with an unspecified illness - a malaise that today would probably be treated with a variety of pharmaceuticals but in her day, travel was ordered by her doctor.

When she did so, her mood and health lifted with each beautiful place she visited; when she returned home, her illness returned. In her twenties, she first came to America and her account of that trip was published in "An Englishwoman in America."

Advertisement

But it was her trip to Colorado in 1873, told through her letters home to her sister Henrietta and compiled for "A Lady's Life in the Rocky Mountains" that had the most impact on Estes Park.

In the book, she described the unsurpassed beauty of Estes Park and the colorful characters she encountered in vivid detail, firing the imagination of adventurers worldwide.

Upon arriving Estes Park, Bird stayed with Griff Evans (as all travelers to the area did at the time) and there she met James Nugent whom was known locally as "a desperado."

Jim Nugent (Barb Boyer Buck / Estes Park Trail-Gazette)

Her description of him must be exaggerated - he fits too perfectly into an archetype of duality to be entirely true, down to his physical appearance.

Half of Nugent's face had been torn away by a bear in 1871; Nugent barely survived the encounter which took place in the wilderness near Grand Lake. The other side of his face was supremely handsome and he wore his curly blond hair long. He was the epitome of the then-dying breed of mountain man and trapper. He wore skins and furs, in many layers of torn and unkempt clothing. His nickname "Rocky Mountain Jim" was probably given to him by the Native Americans to distinguish him from so many other trappers named Jim, like James Bridger.

He had two distinct personalities, as well - often described by Evans and other contemporaries as being a compassionate and intelligent man, but other times as dangerous and unpredictable. His behavior changed with drink, and he reportedly recklessly shot his guns and threatened Evans and other settlers while in his dark moods.

But with the ladies he was eloquent and chivalrous, and many - even perhaps Evans' 17-year-old daughter Jennie - were powerless to his charms.

Bird was no exception and it is clear her time with Nugent made an impact on her life. Judging from the edits of her original letters to her sister to create "A Lady's Life," it may be Bird thought twice about her fascination with Nugent after she got home and read reports of some of his more unsavory actions.

But in Estes Park, Nugent paid court to Bird, favored her with his poetry, professed his love for her, and even helped her reach the summit of Longs Peak - the third woman to ever do so.

Nugent was the last vestige of the mountain-man in the area and he clashed with local settlers; he had a small cabin at Muggins Gulch, east of Estes Park, and in some ways acted as a gatekeeper, questioning those arriving in the park as to their motives. If he was drunk, this was a frightening encounter.

He was a champion of the land, its wild beauty and creatures, and when he got wind of Lord Dunraven's plan to amass large tracts of land for a private hunting preserve, Nugent was a loud opponent of the plan. He wrote eloquent, exaggerated articles about the scheme which were published in newspapers in Colorado, and threatened those local settlers he suspected of working with Dunraven - including Evans.

In 1874, Bird returned to England, reluctantly leaving Nugent. "He is a man any woman could love" but only a foolish one would marry, she wrote. She cited his propensity for drink, his dark past (which varies in the telling, even from him), and his inability to change as the reasons for her opinion. But he had extracted a promise from her that they would visit each other again before death.

Death was right around the corner for Nugent, he was shot by Evans later that year. One bullet lodged in his brain and as Nugent lay dying for the next several months, he continued to write about the land-grabbing scheme and accused Lord Dunraven for being behind his assassination.

While vacationing in Switzerland, Bird experienced a vision of Nugent coming to her on his deathbed to say goodbye, as promised.

The mystery surrounding Nugent's murder - some say that Evans was trying to protect his daughter, others say Dunraven's agents urged Evans to kill Nugent to stop him from writing about the land acquisition - and the adventures of Isabella Bird described in her book lodged Estes Park firmly into the world's imagination. The story was like a beacon calling additional visitors to the area, which benefitted the settlers who took them in.

Completely true or not, this small piece of Estes Park's story had what it took to make the difference in its future development.

Sources: "This Blue Hollow: Estes Park, the Early Years, 1859-1915," James H. Pickering (1999); "The Story of Early Estes Park," Enos Mills, 1905; "A Lady's Life in the Rocky Mountains," Isabella Lucy Bird, 1876.