While leaving Lehigh Valley Hospital-Cedar Crest in Salisbury Township after a typical day at work, Kathryn C. Worrilow was walking through the parking lot when she noticed fumes wafting from the freshly resurfaced asphalt of the MedEvac helicopter pad.

A reproductive physiologist, Worrilow at the time was scientific director of Lehigh Valley Health Network's in vitro fertilization laboratory. She was bothered by the polluted air and wondered if contaminated air could contribute to the sporadic dips in clinical pregnancy success rates that she was seeing in her IVF patients.

After years of research, Worrilow proved that there was a direct correlation between declines in pregnancy success rates of her patients and times when there were nearby fires, roadwork or any event that emitted chemicals into the air.

With nothing on the market that could purify the air enough in the lab for what an embryo needs to survive, in 2008 Worrilow came up with her own solution – and designed, patented and produced LifeAire Systems LLC. It's the only-of-its-kind air purification and inactivation system that can eradicate Anthrax spores, giving a 50 percent increase in clinical pregnancy success rates.

“I was completely driven to do this [LifeAire] and come up with a solution,” Worrilow said.

Today, LifeAire is in IVF labs across the nation and in several parts of the globe. And now, the company and its technology are ready to enter other sectors of health care by not only purifying the air in clean rooms of IVF labs, but other spaces – including in hospitals, nursing homes, pharmaceutical laboratories and pharmacies.

With a health care industry trying to adhere to the three objectives of the 2010 Affordable Care Act – better cost, better care and a healthier population – Worrilow's product fits well with achieving those goals, according to LifeAire's chief of operations, Philip Coburn.

“LifeAire is the only thing that addresses all three things and doesn't ask you to change anything,” Coburn said of LifeAire Systems that can be installed in ducts above the ceiling or on top of the roof.

According to Worrilow, her IVF lab had every air filtration system that it could, but still was not enough for the needs of the embryo – which she refers to as “the most sensitive cell in all of human physiology.”

After consulting with many professionals, Worrilow in 2008 launched two prototypes of LifeAire Systems, installing them in two IVF practices in New York. She spent the next two years collecting data to ensure that the technology was successful.

By 2010, Worrilow was ready to launch LifeAire commercially.

She reached out to friends and colleagues for advice on starting a company and found a core group of business advisers to help with strategy.

“You know what you know, but it's important to know what you don't know,” Worrilow said.

Worrilow then reached out to five high-end manufacturers in the Greater Lehigh Valley. She took time in choosing one that would understand the impact of the product that it would be making and the lives that it would touch.

“I wanted someone who gets it,” Worrilow said. “They are not just building a stainless steel box. I wanted them to understand the environment it was protecting.”

She chose H.T. Lyons of Upper Macungie Township, which manufactures the stainless steel cabinet that holds what Worrilow calls the “secret sauce” of the LifeAire System.

H.T. Lyons provides computer-aided design modeling services and specialty sheet metal fabrication services that can manufacture products on demand. LifeAire outsources the engineering and manufacturing of the inner parts of the product.

“The relationship between LifeAire and H.T. Lyons has been great because our two businesses are a perfect complement to each other,” said Craig Kauffman, manager, major projects development for H.T. Lyons. “The LifeAire technology has enhanced H.T. Lyons' reputation as a provider of design-build services to the health care and life sciences markets.”

Although there are ultraviolet robots on the market that rid of biological contaminants and standard air filtrations that can remove particulates, bacteria including clostridium difficile still can pass through and enter the air, Coburn said.

Enter LifeAire Systems.

According to Coburn, LifeAire would be revolutionary in hospitals and also in nursing homes, where C. diff is prevalent in the elderly population.

LifeAire also can be used in a pharmaceutical manufacturing company to purify the air in the packaging area. And when chemotherapy drugs are developed and compounded on site at a pharmacy, LifeAire can sterilize the area.

Stem-cell growth is not unlike the growth of the human embryo, Coburn said, so LifeAire would be revolutionary to provide clean air during this process.

“This was done for our patients. That was my driving force then and it still is today,” Worrilow said. “If it can make a difference in patient care, that's what gets me up every day.”

After commercializing in 2010 and operating out of a virtual office for the first two years, Worrilow in 2012 launched a brick and mortar LifeAire Systems in office space on Glenlivet Drive in Upper Macungie Township.

She has five employees (four are full-time), and her growing company has placed 26 systems in 22 locations.

Worrilow said that although many doctors and scientists are doing IVF differently, with LifeAire Systems they all have one thing in common – complete control of air quality.

“My entire career you always strive to improve, to remove variables,” she said. “We thought air quality was impactful.”