ISTOCK

MATT HOUGAN: Robo-advisers are hot. Whether you’re talking about startups like Betterment and Wealthfront or entrenched giants like Charles Schwab, the idea of having your money managed by software rather than a person is one of the biggest stories in finance.

The knock against robo-advisers, however, has always been what happens in a crisis. When markets pull back, will investors be comfortable trusting an algorithm to manage their money or will they want a human adviser to call?

The robos got their first real gut test in August, when the S&P 500 fell more than 6% on the month. That included the extremely painful Aug. 24, when the Dow plunged more than 500 points.

I’ve been a robo client for almost a year now, and witnessed the pullback first-hand. Here was my experience:

I try to be a disciplined investor, but when the markets start crashing, I get the same panicked feeling as most people. Could this be 2008 all over again? Could I lose half of my money? I start checking my account more and more frequently. I feel an urge to do … something. It’s hard to just sit there and lose money!

When Aug. 24 hit, I had all those feelings. But when I logged into my robo account, I was put at ease. Most software-based advisers are programmed to harvest losses when markets pull back, and when I logged in, I saw my account doing just that. My old ETF positions were being sold and rotated into new ones. Tax losses were piling up. There were articles on the site explaining what was going on.

Somehow–and this surprised me–the fact that my portfolio was following a plan scratched my itch to react. It almost didn’t matter what it was doing. It was clear that there was a plan, and the program was making the most of it. I felt no urge to bail. I was actually excited to see the tax losses pile up.

I called around to a few of my friends who have human advisers, and their experiences weren’t nearly as good. Two phoned their advisers but hadn’t heard back. One was fretting to himself. Their portfolios weren’t doing anything.

I firmly believe in the ability of human advisers to provide real value to clients. I think the industry has a bright future. But if advisers want to compete going forward, they are going to have to co-opt the best things that robo-advisers do: tax-loss harvesting, automatic updates on portfolio moves, mass communication. If not, I believe they won’t be able to compete.

Matt Hougan (@Matt_Hougan) is president of ETF.com.

Read the latest Investing in Funds & ETFs Report.