CHARLOTTESVILLE — Larry Sabato is not an easy man to stump. The longtime University of Virginia professor has been analyzing American politics for decades, but he says he doesn’t know what to expect out of the bizarre, highly publicized Republican presidential campaign.

Most of the hype is centered around Donald Trump, the real estate billionaire who has captured the attention of the disaffected GOP base with hard-line rhetoric on issues such as immigration. Trump, the political outsider known for hurling personal insults at foes via social media, holds a steady advantage over the closest competitor, Ben Carson, in most polls, according to Real Clear Politics.

Though Sabato said he expects Republican voters to support a more traditional candidate when the primaries actually roll around, he said he doesn’t know who that might be.

“I call Trump the premiere long-shot front-runner,” Sabato said in a recent interview. “I’d be very surprised if he’s the Republican nominee.”

Voters’ early embrace of outsiders like Trump and Carson shows rank-and-file Republicans are dissatisfied with their own party.

“Republicans are deeply angry about the Obama presidency ... and disgusted with their own leadership,” Sabato said. They are particularly angry with Rep. John Boehner, R-Ohio, and Sen. Mitch McConnell, R-Kentucky, for what voters perceive as a failure to stop key measures pushed by the Obama administration.

Boehner, who has been speaker of the House since 2011, announced recently that he is resigning his seat at the end of October. Boehner said the “turmoil” surrounding his leadership could damage the party. McConnell, the Senate majority leader, is vulnerable, as well.

The Democratic race, which seemed like a foregone conclusion, is heating up, as well, as front-runner Hillary Rodham Clinton drops in the polls and Sen. Bernie Sanders, I-Vermont, gains momentum.

Sabato said he expects Clinton to pull through despite the controversy surrounding allegations that she used a private email server to conduct sensitive business during her time as secretary of state.

Still, this early primary season has provided more entertainment and intrigue than most.

“This has been as intense as the normal general election period,” Sabato said.

Virginia Senate

The seats of all 100 state delegates and 40 state senators will be on ballots in November, and Democrats are hoping to gain control of the Senate. Gov. Terry McAuliffe’s political action committee, Common Good VA, has invested about $1.8 million in the Virginia Democratic Party and various races around the state.

Geoffrey Skelley, Sabato’s colleague at UVa’s Center for Politics, said Democrats’ chances of taking the state Senate from Republicans — who already have a tight grasp on the House of Delegates — are “pretty mixed.”

Sen. John Watkins, R-Powhatan, is retiring, leaving the district he has represented since 1998 vacant. The district has skewed Democratic in recent presidential and U.S. Senate races.

“With the Virginia Senate narrowly in Republican hands 21-19, a takeover opportunity such as this for Democrats is key,” Skelley said. “If they win this seat while holding the line elsewhere, they will regain a majority with a 20-20 Senate tie by virtue of Lt. Gov. Ralph Northam’s tiebreaking vote.”

On the other hand, incumbent Democrats are vulnerable in a couple of races. Sen. John Edwards, D-Roanoke, has irritated some members of his own party with his views on gun control, while his Republican opponent, Nancy Dye, “has been making inroads,” Skelley said.

The 29th District, which includes Manassas, also is a close race as incumbent Democrat Charles Colgan retires.

A Democratic majority in the Senate could open the door for expansion of the Medicaid rolls, a key part of the Affordable Care Act. The U.S. Supreme Court ruled in 2012 that states could decide whether to expand Medicaid, and Virginia Republicans have resisted, arguing that the cost of the program is spiraling out of control.

But a Democratic majority in the state Senate wouldn’t guarantee anything, as Republicans likely will retain a huge majority in the House.

“Even with control of the Senate, it will be tough sledding for Democrats to get Republicans in the House of Delegates to agree to Medicaid expansion,” Skelley said.