On Wednesday, I had the opportunity to be on "The O'Reilly Factor" on Fox News to discuss President Barack Obama's legacy with Princeton University historian Julian Zelizer. As is always the case on cable, there is never enough time (or viewer interest) available for nuanced thoughts. Television talk is to opinion writing what a picture is to a movie: a split-second snapshot hinting at a much larger story. But when it comes to stacking up Obama's record of achievements and weighing his historical import, it's necessary to move beyond the cable snippets and the declaratory statements of committed partisans to arrive at some semblance of accuracy.

The rather surprising reality is that Obama's presidency has been a lot like the mirror image of George W. Bush's presidency. And that's not a compliment, despite Bush's recent bump in his favorability ratings and the warm nostalgia that has seemed to overtake those on the Republican side of the aisle.

Still, you can't truthfully say that these presidents did nothing in office. In fact, both did a great deal, but most of what they did only their fellow partisans and ideologically-aligned supporters agreed with. Further, the process and the methods by which each pursued his policies promised on the campaign trail were often constitutionally dubious and, from a precedent perspective, highly problematic.



[GALLERY: Barack Obama Cartoons]

As I argued in a chapter I wrote more than five years ago, Bush was "both politically competent and a political failure ... [but] even in failure – [his presidency] was not without lasting impact." Said another way, much of what Bush did (big government conservatism) and the way he did it (from the ignoring of Republican Sen. Jim Jeffords's concerns about the major tax cut in 2001 and the hospital bedside intimidation of Attorney General John Ashcroft to the blind loyalty to Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld in regards to the Abu Ghraib torture scandal) worked in the short-term, but later backfired on his presidency and on his party.

From an historical perspective, Obama's tenure has been equally short-sighted and strategically foolish. Whether it was nixing all Republican input on the stimulus bill or passing the Affordable Care Act absent the transparency that was promised, or engaging in questionable executive actions (orders and other memoranda) to delay provisions, alter enforcement priorities and change enacted laws, Obama's governing decisions have regularly made all but the most strident of progressives a bit queasy.

As can be seen from liberal pundit Ezra Klein's takeaway from the shady, arm-twisting House vote that occurred on Medicare Part D during Bush's presidency, "Americans don't really care about process, and people forget about even serious abuses of legislative power ... Democrats, who are currently trying to pass health-care reform ... should take note."



[SEE: Republican Party Cartoons]