Topics: 2012 election, Barack Obama, Books, Debates, Double Down, Mitt Romney, Entertainment News, Politics News

A recently published excerpt from “Double Down: Game Change 2012,” the Mark Halperin and John Heilemann book that goes behind the scenes of the 2012 presidential election, reveals the intense drama that unfolded between Oct. 14 and Oct. 16 in 2012, the 48 hours between President Obama’s disastrous first presidential debate in Denver, and his upcoming New York debate with GOP candidate Mitt Romney.

Published in New York magazine, the excerpt reveals that Obama, who despite being “most self-contained president in modern history,” was riddled with self-doubt and almost gave up on the debate that could, according to advisor David Plouffe, “lose the whole fucking election.”

Until the Denver debate, former president Bill Clinton thought Obama was “luckier that a dog with two dicks”:

Before Denver, Clinton had watched in wonder as Obama caught break after break. Although the economy wasn’t roaring back, neither the European banking crisis nor the unrest in the Mideast had caused it to nosedive. Meanwhile, Romney’s ineptness staggered Clinton. After the release of the 47 percent video, he remarked to a friend that, while Mitt was a decent man, he was in the wrong line of work. (“He really shouldn’t be speaking to people in public.”) As for Obama, Clinton trotted out for his pals the same line again and again: “He’s luckier than a dog with two dicks.”

According to Democratic style coach Michael Sheehan, Obama was “creepy” in Denver’s debate:

Watching from the set, the renowned Democratic style coach Michael Sheehan scribbled furiously on a legal pad, each notation more alarmed than the last. Reflecting on Obama’s interplay with the questioners, Sheehan summed up his demeanor with a single word: “Creepy.”

First Lady Michelle Obama’s advice in response to the Denver debate was “It’s not about David Brooks; it’s about my mother”:

The first lady worried about her Maximus and his return to the Colosseum. In truth, she had fretted over the debates even before Denver. In July, around the time her husband’s prep started, she met with Plouffe and expressed firm opinions. That Barack had to speak from the gut, in language that regular folks could understand. Had to avoid treating the debates like policy seminars. Had to keep his head out of the clouds. (Michelle’s advisers paraphrased her advice as “It’s not about David Brooks; it’s about my mother.”) FLOTUS loved POTUS like nobody’s business, but she knew his faults well.

Even after significant prep, Obama bombed again during a mock debate with campaign staffers. To drive the point home, speechwriter Jon Favreau transcribed the debate and used it to ridicule the president:

The full transcript was in hand within 45 minutes—and became a source of gallows humor. As the clock ticked well past midnight, Favreau stagily read aloud some of Obama’s most dreadful answers. Soon his colleagues joined in, with Axelrod, Benenson, and Plouffe offering recitations and laughing deliriously over the absurdity and horror of the circumstances.