PUNE, India, January 21, 2016 /PRNewswire/ --

According to a new market research report "Population Health Management Market by Component (Software, Services), by Delivery Mode (Web-based, Cloud-based), by End-User (Healthcare Providers, Healthcare Payers, Employer Groups) - Analysis & Global Forecasts to 2020", published by MarketsandMarkets, the global market is expected to reach USD 31.63 Billion by 2020 from USD 11.13 Billion in 2015, at a CAGR of 23.2%.

Browse 41 market data Tables and 41 Figures spread through 135 Pages and in-depth TOC on "Population Health Management Market"

http://www.marketsandmarkets.com/Market-Reports/population-health-management-market-263411936.html

Early buyers will receive 10% customization on this report.

The implementation of the Affordable Care Act (ACA), incentives and investments by the federal government for adoption of HCIT, and the rapid rise in the aging population & subsequent increase in chronic diseases is driving the market growth. Furthermore, increased focus on value-based medicine and personalized medicines is expected to create an array of opportunities for players in the Population Health Management Market.

The global Population Health Management Market is segmented on the basis of component, delivery mode, end-user, and region.

Based on component, the market is categorized into software and services. In 2015, the software segment accounted for the larger share of the Population Health Management Market. The software segment is also expected to grow at the highest rate. The high growth rate can be attributed to the increasing adoption of population health management solutions mandated by the Affordable Care Act (ACA).

On the basis of delivery mode, the market is segmented into web-based, on-premise, and cloud-based. The web-based segment accounted for the largest share of the population health management in 2015. However, the cloud-based segment is expected to be the fastest growing segment from 2015 to 2020. The high growth rate of cloud-based segment is attributed to its advantages such as on-demand self-serving analytics, no upfront capital investment for hardware, and extreme capacity flexibility.

Based on end-user, the market is segmented into healthcare providers, healthcare payers, employer groups, and government bodies. The healthcare providers segment accounted for the largest share of the population health management in 2015. However, the employer groups segment is expected to be the fastest growing segment from 2015 to 2020. The high growth of the employer groups segment can be attributed to various clinical and financial benefits offered by population health management solutions to the employers.

On the basis of regions, the global market is divided into North America, Europe, Asia, and the Rest of the World (Latin America, Pacific Countries, and Middle East & Africa). In 2015, North America accounted for the largest share of the Population Health Management Market, followed by Europe and Asia. North America is expected to grow at the fastest rate during the forecast period. The fastest growth rate of North America can be attributed to the implementation of the ACA, Hospital Readmissions Reduction Program (HRRP), and increasing aging population.

Ask For PDF Brochure: http://www.marketsandmarkets.com/pdfdownload.asp?id=263411936

However, safeguarding patient information is a major concern, which limits market growth to a certain extent. Also, huge investments in infrastructure to set up robust population health management programs are expected to pose as a key challenge to the growth of the Population Health Management Market.

Some major players in the Population Health Management Market include McKesson Corporation (U.S.), Verisk Health Inc. (U.S.), Health Catalyst LLC (U.S.), Cerner Corporation (U.S.), Allscripts, Inc. (U.S.), WellCentive, Inc. (U.S.), Conifer Health Solutions, LLC (U.S.), IBM Corporation (U.S.), i2i Systems, Inc. (U.S.), OptumHealth, Inc. (U.S.), and Healthagen, LLC (U.S.).

Browse Related Reports:

Care Management Solutions Market by Component (Software & Services), Delivery Mode (On-premise, Web, & Cloud), End-user (Payer, Provider, Employer Groups, & Government Bodies) - Trends & Global Forecasts to 2018.

http://www.marketsandmarkets.com/Market-Reports/care-management-solutions-market-19482811.html

Patient Engagement Solutions Market by Component (Hardware, Software & Services), Delivery Mode (On-premise, Web, & Cloud) & by End-user (Payer, Provider, Patients,& Others) - Trends & Global Forecasts to 2019.

http://www.marketsandmarkets.com/Market-Reports/patient-engagement-solutions-market-105975994.html

About MarketsandMarkets:

MarketsandMarkets is world's No. 2 firm in terms of annually published premium market research reports. Serving 1700 global fortune enterprises with more than 1200 premium studies in a year, M&M is catering to multitude of clients across 8 different industrial verticals. We specialize in consulting assignments and business research across high growth markets, cutting edge technologies and newer applications. Our 850 fulltime analyst and SMEs at MarketsandMarkets are tracking global high growth markets following the "Growth Engagement Model - GEM". The GEM aims at proactive collaboration with the clients to identify new opportunities, identify most important customers, write "Attack, avoid and defend" strategies, identify sources of incremental revenues for both the company and its competitors.

M&M's flagship competitive intelligence and market research platform, "RT" connects over 200,000 markets and entire value chains for deeper understanding of the unmet insights along with market sizing and forecasts of niche markets. The new included chapters on Methodology and Benchmarking presented with high quality analytical infographics in our reports gives complete visibility of how the numbers have been arrived and defend the accuracy of the numbers.

We at MarketsandMarkets are inspired to help our clients grow by providing apt business insight with our huge market intelligence repository.

Contact:

Mr. Rohan

Unit No. 802, 8th Floor,

Tower - 7, Magarpatta City SEZ,

Hadapsar, Pune - 411013,

Maharashtra, India.

Tel: +1-888-6006-441.

Email: sales@marketsandmarkets.com

Visit MarketsandMarkets Blog @ http://mnmblog.org/market-research/healthcare/healthcareit

Connect with us on LinkedIn @ http://www.linkedin.com/company/marketsandmarkets





SOURCE MarketsandMarkets