While the federal government won’t report on Obamacare enrollment until it’s managed to have a month under its belt, California decided to go ahead and disclose activity for the first five days under the Affordable Care Act in the Golden State.

Peter V. Lee, executive director of Covered California, the state’s health exchange, told reporters that 16,311 applications were completed with household eligibility determined while another 27,305 applications were partially completed between last Tuesday and the end of the day on Saturday. That comes to a total of 43,616 for five full days. Online, Covered California’s web site had 987,440 unique users during that time, Lee said.

CoveredCA Peter V. Lee, executive director of Covered California

Is that a lot? Lee said he was expecting next to nothing in terms of interest and expected very few to sign up for care, thinking it would have to build up over time. To him, the response has been overwhelming.

“You can’t derail something when the train has left the station,” Lee said. “And the train has left the station.”

Among the stats Lee disclosed were 59,003 phone calls to help centers. He said the wait time was reduced to roughly four minutes on Friday from as much as 40 to 50 minutes on Oct. 1, Obamacare’s first day. That made for an average wait time on the phone of about 15 minutes. He hopes to get that down to 30 seconds.

Further, 430 companies registered by Tuesday for coverage under the Small Business Health Options Program, Lee said.

What was unclear, however, is how many of the individual applications were processed via the Covered California web site and how many were done through call centers. No breakdown was offered and officials couldn’t be immediately reached for comment after the press conference.

The breakdown may be critical in determining whether web applications are being processed since the federal site HealthCare.gov continues to have technical troubles.

Follow Russ Britt on Twitter @russbrittmktw

Follow Health Exchange on Twitter @MWHealthBlog