BOCA RATON, Fla. – Ohio Gov. John Kasich continues to demur about a presidential bid in 2016, even after efforts here this week to distinguish himself from other Republicans who are considering a run for the White House.

"I'm not entertaining that now," Kasich said in an interview with reporters from the Northeast Ohio Media Group, the Columbus Dispatch and Bloomberg. "I'm governor."

It was the last of multiple questions aimed at shining light on Kasich's intentions. His potential rivals used the Republican Governors Association conference, held at an opulent seaside resort, to court donors and sketch out early phases of their campaigns.

But Kasich offered no hints about his own plans and told reporters that he had no private conversations this week about his prospective candidacy. And he answered flatly – "No" – when asked if he had a timetable for deciding whether to run.

"I just really want to step on the gas and accomplish a lot more" as governor, Kasich said. "I'm not thinking about, OK, 'well if I run for president, when am I going to Iowa?'"

He also was cagey when asked whether others encouraged him to run.

"I get a lot of encouragement to be able to be out there talking about these things, these ideas," said Kasich, who ran briefly for president 15 years ago. "Encouragement, what's that mean? 'Run that marathon, son!' It's really nice when people are encouraging. But I think the most important thing is to get these ideas out there that I have."

The Dispatch reporter pressed Kasich on whether a run was "off the table."

Said Kasich, coyly: "I'm not having anything on, off, up, down or anything else."

Kasich prompted some of this pressing by at times giving answers that seemed to foreshadow him staying in Ohio. On Wednesday, for example, he signaled that he would be open to a pathway to citizenship. As recently as 2010, he opposed citizenship for children born in the United States to illegal immigrants. Consider Kasich's response Thursday when prodded about what seemed to represent a softened stance.

"Why do I have some change on any of these things? Maybe I got a little smarter or something," said Kasich, 62. "Maybe I got a little better. Maybe I'm a little bit wiser. Hopefully, I'll get better over the next four years, huh?"

Four years, of course, suggests a full second term as governor. Then again, this fits the kinder, gentler, wiser pitch Kasich brought to the RGA meeting this week.

Back home, Democrats weren't buying Kasich's new image.

"John Kasich takes and leaves his Tea Party whenever it's politically convenient for him to do so," Ohio Democratic Party Chairman Chris Redfern said. "What will be most telling is whether the governor's presidential ambitions will get in the way of the crucial renewal of President Obama's Medicaid expansion for Ohioans."

Kasich expanded Medicaid under Obama's Affordable Care Act, putting himself at odds with others in his party who saw it as an embrace of big government.