ENLARGE BAM and other Brooklyn cultural institutions generated more than $300 million in economic activity in 2013, according to the Downtown Brooklyn Partnership. Craig Warga for The Wall Street Journal

Downtown Brooklyn cultural institutions drew more than 4.5 million visitors and generated more than $300 million in economic activity last year, according to a report to be released Thursday by the Downtown Brooklyn Partnership.

The report, based on data from 36 of the area’s 60 arts groups, analyzed the economic impact of institutions’ operating budgets, construction, retail sales and concessions.

The survey area included a cluster of neighborhoods in and around the Brooklyn Cultural District, which has been transformed in recent years by a cultural building boom spurred by hundreds of millions of dollars in private investment, donations and city capital funds.

The Brooklyn Cultural District is demarcated by Dekalb Avenue and Hanson Place on the north and south, respectively, and Fort Greene Place and Flatbush Avenue on the east and west.

Among the arts spaces that have opened there in the past two years: a permanent home for the previously itinerant Theatre for a New Audience, and BAM Fisher, a 250-seat theater, rehearsal and performance space for the Brooklyn Academy of Music.

The organizations who contributed to the report’s findings booked more than 8,000 hotel-room nights around downtown Brooklyn for performers and production staff in 2013, according to the report.

ENLARGE

“Art and culture have been a transformative element in the whole revitalization of downtown Brooklyn,” said Karen Brooks Hopkins, president of the Brooklyn Academy of Music, which anchors the cultural district.

“You have venues ranging from 200 seats to 18,000 in a five-block radius,” she said, referring to the nearby Barclays Center.

The Downtown Brooklyn Partnership is a nonprofit development corporation that promotes the area. Its president, Tucker Reed, noted that neighborhood arts groups welcomed nearly 200,000 international visitors last year.

Heavy investment in the cultural district, both private and public, has led to a host of new venues. The city, beginning with the Giuliani administration, has allocated more than $100 million in the district for arts facilities, public space and affordable housing.

The 36 cultural groups spent $480 million on construction from 2009 through 2013, according to the study. Those projects included the new BRIC House in the former Strand Theater, and a renovation of the Brooklyn Historical Society’s landmark building.

“It’s been absolutely thrilling,” said Dorothy Ryan, managing director of the Theatre for a New Audience, which opened its new home, the Polonsky Shakespeare Center, last fall. In its inaugural year, which featured a buzzy production of “A Midsummer Night’s Dream” by Julie Taymor, the group’s audience doubled to 50,000. Its operating budget this year is $6.3 million, compared with $3.5 million before the building opened.

The study also looked at free programming: The 36 arts groups together presented 3,445 performances and conducted programs for 81,000 children.

Tom McKnight, executive vice president for planning at the city’s Economic Development Corp., said the study shows that “downtown Brooklyn has really moved beyond what had been envisioned as a central business district.”

“What you’re seeing in Brooklyn,” he said, “is really a new, more innovative, more mixed-use model. It’s places where people are living, it’s places where people are playing, it’s places where people are taking advantage of the cultural offerings.”