This Week in Crain's: August 18, 2014 Listen to the Podcast or Download

The patient—a heavy smoker and an alcoholic—frequently neglected to take his medications, and had no one to help him at home in Jamaica, Queens. Like clockwork, he landed in the hospital every three weeks.

"I felt every time I saw him I was starting over again," said Dr. Julie Patel-Pannullo, the man's primary care doctor. "That was my frustration as his physician."

But several months ago, a nurse in Dr. Patel-Pannullo's medical practice, AdvantageCare Physicians, broke the cycle. The patient came in to meet with the nurse every Friday for about 15 minutes as she organized his medications in a pillbox, contacted his pharmacy and simply gave him the extra attention he sorely needed.

The nurse's successful intervention was driven not by some new medical protocol, but by a companywide initiative aimed at improving customer service at AdvantageCare, a nearly 3,000-employee medical practice with offices throughout the city and Long Island.

Last year, AdvantageCare hired restaurateur Danny Meyer's consulting arm, Hospitality Quotient, or HQ, to train its entire staff—including doctors—on how to be more empathetic. The full-day workshops draw from the hospitality industry, teaching medical staffers, for example, to offer patients options rather than a curt "no" to a request.

The idea that a patient is a guest who can take his or her business elsewhere, and that doctors are responsible for cultivating customer loyalty, remains a novel idea in health care, though one that is gaining traction.

"We didn't learn anything like this in medical school," said Dr. Patel-Pannullo.

The new focus on customer service is a response to the Affordable Care Act, which gives consumers greater access to health care and spawned more competition among insurance companies, hospitals and medical practices like AdvantageCare. One provision of the reform law is that patient-satisfaction surveys now have teeth, determining the size of providers' Medicare reimbursement.

This all means big business for Mr. Meyer, who held a cocktail party in June at his Manhattan restaurant the Modern, where he gathered a group of 42 HQ clients and potential customers in finance, health care, restaurants and other industries to network. "You are here," he said at the time, "because we want more of your business."

HQ has found a lucrative niche in the four years it has existed. About 70% of its revenue is now derived from health care companies.

"It is a very profitable business," said Susan Salgado, managing partner of HQ.

Changing workshops

She declined to disclose the company's revenue but said it had doubled each year since it launched in 2010. EmblemHealth is a client, as is the North Shore-LIJ Health System. In June, the huge hospital organization responded to the growing pressure to provide exceptional customer service by hiring its first chief experience officer—a former senior executive with Ritz-Carlton hotels.

AdvantageCare has signed up for 100 customized workshops this year alone. HQ also offers public classes, which cost from $325 per person for a three-hour session to $3,250 for a three-day program.

"It is a huge financial commitment, but it's that important to us," said Eileen Garland, the medical practice's vice president of project management. "This will be the cornerstone of our success."

Indeed, since the Queens patient began weekly visits with the AdvantageCare nurse, he has been hospitalized only once, said Dr. Patel-Pannullo. He even went on his first vacation in a decade, to Florida, and returned with gifts for the staff.

"Teamwork is at the heart of everything we teach," said HQ's Ms. Salgado.

Certain buzzwords are used in HQ workshops, many of which originated from Mr. Meyer's 2006 book, Setting the Table: The Transforming Power of Hospitality in Business. There are "51 percenters," who go above what is expected of them; the "charitable assumption," or assuming the best in people; and "skunking," which describes people who complain and ruin employee morale.

Dr. Patel-Pannullo said she has learned to trust her staff more to avoid "micromanaging" them. The HQ training also changed her perception of her patients.

"I'm using the 'charitable assumption' function every day, reminding myself to think twice before sticking to protocols and procedures, and to let my patients have a say in what it is I'm planning for them," she said.

'Skunk-free zones'

Tom Marino, vice president of operations at AdvantageCare, added it now has "skunk-free zones." "And I'm going to call you out on it if you are skunking," he said.

Changing the corporate culture at AdvantageCare, he believes, will give the medical group an edge against new competition, including the growing number of urgent care facilities that are popular with consumers because of their convenient hours.

"They are popping up on every corner, and many of them are clean, fast and have friendly workers," Mr. Marino said. "That's what we are up against."

As AdvantageCare adds new employees, said Ms. Garland, its human-resource managers now look for "someone who has a warm personality," and with a nod to Mr. Meyer, people who have "hospitality in their DNA."

Get Crain's Daily Alert Sign up for our FREE daily email newsletter. A summary of the day's top business and political headlines from the newsroom of Crain's New York Business. More Newsletters ›

Comments