The law Republicans said would destroy the world, but of course made it better.

The law Republicans said would destroy the world, but of course made it better.

TODD: You made some dire predictions about health care. 2014 you said fewer people would have health insurance. According to plenty of surveys, more people have health insurance today than they did before it went down from – the uninsured rate went down 17 percent to just under 12 percent. You said it would destroy jobs. The first year it was implemented, the country added 3 million jobs. Why… BOEHNER: Obamacare made it harder for employers to hire people. The economy expands and as a result, you are going to have more employees because businesses have to. But if you can ask any employer in America, and ask them whether Obamacare has made it harder for them to hire employees, they’ll tell you yes. Because it’s a fact.

[Obamacare] will bankrupt our nation, and it will ruin our economy.

Pres. Obama's #hcr law is expected to destroy 2.3 million jobs.

I keep coming back to this because it is just so crazy. Last time I focused on his "ask any employer" line, today, I'll highlight another part:Here is Boehner's prediction about Obamacare:He also tweeted this So ... he first predicts that passing the law will "ruin the economy" and bankrupt us, but now he says "The economy expands and as a result, you are going to have more employees because businesses have to."

Um, dude? How can that economy be expanding if Obamacare was going to bankrupt the nation and ruin the economy? In fact, in one 14-minute press conference, Boehner uttered the words "job-killing" seven times! Nevermind the fact that the deficit is going down, and the ACA is a major reason for that.

Of course, Boehner isn't the only nutbag who made insanely wrong predictions about the ACA. Rush Limbaugh said the law would cost the nation "2.5 million jobs minimum’ and would be a ‘literal tragedy,'" while Glenn Beck said, "This is the end of prosperity in America forever, if this passes. This is the end of America as you know it."

Former Sen. Tom Coburn (R-OK) said, "There will be no insurance industry left in three years", and he said that five years ago. Former Rep. Paul Broun (R-GA) said, "It’s going to destroy our economy. … It’s going to push us into a total economic collapse," while Sen. Ted Cruz (R-TX) said "It will hurt the economy, it will kill jobs."

Sen. Rand Paul (R-KY) said, "I think that what's going to come out of Obamacare is worse than anybody can imagine. I think it will lead to bankruptcy in the states that are fully embracing it." Gov. Scott Walker (R-WI) said, "Firm after firm telling the White House, the administration this isn't going to work." Carly Fiorina was apoplectic, "I just don't think we can afford to wreck one-sixth of the economy and what is arguably a very excellent healthcare system." Gov. Bobby Jindal (R-LA) was besides himself, "The full extent of damage the PPACA causes to small businesses, the nation’s economy, and the American health care system will only be revealed with time."

So yeah, good one, guys. You don't get to predict dire economic collapse, then say "the only reason employers are hiring is because the economy is doing well." Well, no shit that's why they're hiring. Point is, the economy isn't where you claimed it would be. You were wrong. As usual.