Re-elect Cortez to Texas House

Photo: Tom Reel, San Antonio Express-News Image 1 of / 1 Caption Close Image 1 of 1 The Express-News Editorial Board urges voters to give state Rep. Philip Cortez another term in the District 117 seat. The Express-News Editorial Board urges voters to give state Rep. Philip Cortez another term in the District 117 seat. Photo: Tom Reel, San Antonio Express-News Re-elect Cortez to Texas House 1 / 1 Back to Gallery

SAN ANTONIO — State Rep. Phil Cortez has hit many bumps in the road since his political career began in 2007, and we have been among his harshest critics at times.

But we unequivocally urge voters in Texas House District 117 to re-elect Cortez, who shows seriousness about public service.

The San Antonio Democrat is being challenged by Republican Rick Galindo, a risk manager who fails to demonstrate even the most basic understanding of some crucial issues facing the state of Texas.

In a recent interview with the Express-News Editorial Board, Galindo was dismally unprepared when asked to discuss high-profile policy issues that face the state.

When asked about higher education and rising tuition, Galindo said, “I'll be honest, I haven't looked into that.”

And when asked about his position on expanding Medicaid under the Affordable Care Act, Galindo said, “That's an issue I would love to look more into.”

Galindo was ready to take a position on other issues. He supports allowing students to openly carry guns on college campuses, an irresponsible position.

District 117 voters can't afford to be represented by a lawmaker who hasn't bothered to study higher education and Medicaid policy — issues with a huge impact on Texans' lives — even as he seeks a seat in the Legislature.

Cortez, who serves on the House public health and homeland security committees, is knowledgeable about state issues and the needs of District 117.

Cortez is an adjunct professor at Texas A&M San Antonio and a captain in the Air Force Reserve.

Having served two terms on San Antonio City Council before being elected to the Legislature, Cortez is far more experienced and prepared to serve than Galindo.

The choice is clear in District 117. Cortez is the right pick.