U.S. Sens. Thom Tillis, left, and Richard Burr, both North Carolina Republicans (Photo: Citizen-Times photos)

There were enough different spending and policy provisions in the $1.1 trillion "omnibus" spending bill Congress approved Dec. 18 to give opponents and supporters something to point at to justify their votes.

And, that's what the four Republicans who represent Western North Carolina in Congress did. U.S. Sen. Richard Burr and 11th District U.S. Rep. Mark Meadows voted against the bill. U.S. Sen. Thom Tillis and 10 District U.S. Rep. Patrick McHenry voted for it. Their GOP colleagues were divided too: House Republicans favored the bill 150-95 and Senate Republicans voted for it by just a one-vote majority, 27-26.

The bill was the product of a series of compromises between Republican and Democratic congressional leaders and President Barack Obama. It repeals a ban on the export of U.S. crude oil, a Republican priority many Democrats opposed, but does not cut off funding to Planned Parenthood, which many Republicans had sought. Federal appropriations to Planned Parenthood do not fund abortions, going instead to contraception and educational services.

And, it keeps the federal government running until fall 2016.

Burr said the bill ultimately authorized too much spending and breached spending caps put in place in 2011. Many Republicans this year had favored spending more than the caps allowed on defense. Some Democrats said the caps were were too restrictive on domestic programs.

"There was much in this bill that I have supported, championed and voted for as standalone measures, including vital defense and intelligence related bills and reauthorization of the Land and Water Conservation Fund," Burr said in a statement, referring to a federal program that buys inholdings in national parks and additional land deemed worthy of protection. He was a leader in efforts to continue the fund.

"Unfortunately, these critical national priorities were buried in a massive 2,000-plus page omnibus package. The spending caps I voted for in 2011 were an important step towards fiscal sanity, but the omnibus obliterates those intelligent limits on spending," Burr said.

Tillis used somewhat similar words to explain an opposite vote.

“While this legislation spends too much and is far from perfect, I ultimately supported it because it was a bipartisan reaffirmation of our nation’s commitment to bolstering America’s national defense and supporting our brave servicemembers and veterans,” Tillis said. “This appropriations bill is especially beneficial to North Carolina’s military community, as it stops the planned removal of Apache Helicopters from the North Carolina National Guard in Raleigh and improves safety by constructing an air traffic control tower at Seymour Johnson Air Force Base.”

Tillis had pushed for those measures affecting the military and language requiring the Department of Veterans Affairs to develop a plan for improving training and rehabilitation of vets with service-related disabilities. He also had supported changes to the H2-B visa program for temporary, non-agricultural foreign workers intended to keep it running. The changes included in the spending bill could quadruple the number of workers hired using the visas.

Meadows wrote on his Facebook page he voted "no" because the bill does not address his "concerns over our national security, (Syrian refugees), privacy, immigration, the sanctity of life, spending" and other issues. "Washington cannot continue its borrow-and-spend practices that are bankrupting future generations of Americans."

McHenry said the bill "will help grow our economy and keep Americans safe." He touted the repeal of the oil export ban, increased military spending, limits on the Affordable Care Act and a freeze on U.S. Environmental Protection Agency and Internal Revenue Service funding and staffing as positive provisions of the bill.

"While not perfect, this bill keeps our government funded and allows Congress to return to regular order in the new year," he said in a statement.

"Regular order" refers to the previous practice of Congress dividing federal spending bills into several parts and avoiding the use of must-pass legislation to keep the government running. New House Speaker Paul Ryan has made that a goal for 2016, but said the process of funding the government for the current fiscal year was too advanced when he was elected to run the House Oct. 29 to allow for a switch this year.

Read or Share this story: http://avlne.ws/1YEdXiw