Topics: Congress, dhs, Editor's Picks, executive actions, GOP, Government shutdown, House, Immigration, John Boehner, Mitch McConnell, President Obama, Senate, Politics News

Everyone join me in giving a hand to the 114th Congress, who have bravely returned to work after a week’s recess. So what’s on the agenda? Well they have until the end of the week to figure out how to fund the Department of Homeland Security, and they have no plan yet, so that’s going to be a whole thing.

They like operating on deadline. Or should we put it: it’s the only way they can operate. Deadlines “focus the mind,” as all politicians (and journalists) know. Just when there doesn’t seem like an idea, one suddenly pops up when your back is against the wall. The nation awaits this next eureka moment. (Not really. Most people have no idea that appropriations for the Department of Homeland Security will lapse at the end of the week.)

The House-passed DHS appropriations bill, eliminating the Obama administration’s 2012 and 2014 deportation deferral programs, has been filibustered by Senate Democrats — and one Republican, Nevada Sen. Dean Heller — three times. It hasn’t even come close to getting 60 votes, as even the more conservative Democrats who allege to have problems with the executive actions have held the line with minority leader Harry Reid. Three times up, three times filibustered. That means there’s only one thing Mitch McConnell can do, and that’s… bring it up for a fourth vote today? That Mitch McConnell, he’s such a genius master of arcane parliamentary tactics, like spending three or four weeks bringing up the same failed bill to fail over and over again. Yes, it gives him the “Democrats voted to block funding for DHS four times!” talking point, but the man who promised that there would be no shutdowns under his watch is going to need more than that.

The usual treasonous RINO sellouts in the Senate, like John McCain and Lindsey Graham, are urging the party to take the “escape hatch” afforded them last week by a judge in Texas, who placed an injunction on the implementation of Obama’s most recent deportation executive action. In other words: pass a “clean” DHS bill, sans immigration riders, and let the courts to perform the dirty work of dismembering King Obama’s edict. The problem, though, is that where the likes of McCain, Graham, and other less tactically aggressive Republican senators see an “escape hatch,” conservative hard-liners see further proof that they need to use the appropriations process to finish off these programs once and for all.

And that’s why this latest suggestion, floated by Senate Republican aides to The Hill, may not be the panacea the GOP’s hoping materializes, but will at least reapportion blame from the Senate back to the House hotheads: