A government-appointed health panel went against the advice of pediatricians and advocacy organizations by releasing recommendations Tuesday concluding that not enough evidence exists to screen all toddlers for autism.

The conclusion marks the first time the panel, the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force, has made screening recommendations for autism, which the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention estimates affects 1 in 45 children. These types of recommendations by the task force – which is also responsible for setting guidelines for screening depression and various types of cancers – not only could encourage more doctors to screen children, but could ensure that it would be fully paid for by health insurance under the Affordable Care Act, President Barack Obama's health care law. Lack of specific recommendations means that insurers can decide whether or to what extent doctors are reimbursed for screening.

The group concluded more research is needed before the practice should be part of standard doctors' appointments in cases in which children ages 18 to 30 months aren't showing any signs of having the disability.

The position, released Tuesday in the Journal of the American Medical Association, is ultimately a statement saying current studies that the practice would be helpful are lacking, of poor quality or conflicting. Authors did say, however, that they encourage parents who are concerned about specific behavior to talk to their doctors.The task force says some studies show that less than 60 percent of doctors currently screen toddlers for autism.

The move wasn't entirely unexpected. A draft proposal by the task force in August also refused to take a side on whether toddlers who showed no signs of autism should be screened. But the recommendations conflict with those from the American Academy of Pediatrics, which for more than five years has recommended screening at 18 months, 24 months and any time a parent or medical staff is concerned. Toddlers should be evaluated even if they are not showing specific signs of having autism, such as avoiding eye contact, difficulty following instructions or wanting to be alone, the group has said.

"​​​For screening to be effective, by design it must be applied to all children – not only those who exhibit overt symptoms, or those an individual clinician judges would benefit," Dr. Benard Dreyer, president of the American Academy of Pediatrics, said in a statement.

No medical test, such as a blood test, can detect autism. Instead, pediatricians and psychologists evaluate behavior and develop a treatment plan that can include speech therapy or behavioral therapy. Experts don't know what causes autism, or why rates of diagnosis appear to be rising – whether because more children have it than they used to or because doctors know how to recognize it better.

Screening for autism entails parents filling out a questionnaire at the doctor's office called the Modified Checklist for Autism in Toddlers, or M-Chat. In it, parents answer a series of yes-or-no questions like, "Is your child interested in other children?" and, "If you turn your head to look at something, does your child look around to see what you are looking at?" Those in favor of screening toddlers say that this offers very little risk to patients and doesn't cost much, but groups who raise questions about it say that evidence first must show that any extra time doctors spend with their patients leads to better outcomes for children in school and improves their communication skills. They also are concerned that early diagnosis could be incorrect, and that children might be harmed if doctors were to ultimately conclude later in life that they don't have autism.

The advocacy group Autism Speaks released a statement saying it was disappointed in the task force's recommendations. The group has advocated to check for autism early in life because it says that helps children do better in the long run.

"Autism starts very early in brain development and its symptoms can be detected by age 2," the group's senior vice president of medical research, Dr. Paul Wang, said in a statement. "We have a broad consensus, based on research, that early intervention for autism results in better outcomes."