For Personal Healthcare Doctor Mark Pinsky, Patients Are Number 1

By Maria Sonnenberg // July 14, 2014

Loading the player ...

ABOVE VIDEO: Brevard County physician Dr. Mark Pinsky is a member of MDVIP, a national network of 650 physicians from Hawaii to Maine committed to practicing preventive and personalized healthcare, not just the treatment of disease, as is the case in most traditional primary care practices.

‘I Wanted A Hands-On Doctor With A Holistic Approach’

Cliff Hirsch was sick and tired of his former doctor.

“You were just a number in the office and he would spend just a couple of minutes with you,” said Hirsch.

“I had been wrongly diagnosed several times, including one time when it turned out I had acid reflux, but was told instead that I had an infection and I was given high doses of powerful antibiotics. I was fed up.”

Hirsch, who owns Island Tile, is a busy businessman, but he took time to search for a doctor who would give him the time he deserves and would be available, caring and experienced. He found who he was looking for in Dr. Mark Pinsky.

“I wanted a hands-on doctor with a holistic approach,” said Hirsch. “Dr. Pinsky spends time with you, listening to you, unlike many doctors. He takes time to ask questions.”

Pinsky has a philosophy very different from the “patient factory” approach that plagues medicine these days.

His practice is part of MDVIP, a national network of physicians committed to preventive, personalized healthcare.

MDVIP offers a customized, proactive wellness program and a primary care model that puts patients first and connects patients 24/7 with their physicians.

However, unlike typical “concierge” doctors who may not take insurance, MDVIP physicians accept private insurance and Medicare for office visits.

COMPREHENSIVE WELLNESS EVALUATION

An affordable annual membership of $1,650 includes a comprehensive wellness evaluation with advanced screenings and diagnostic testing that are not covered by insurance, followed by one-on-one physician counseling and a tailored wellness plan. Patients’ children ages 16 to 26 are seen as part of their parents’ membership fee.

Patients can get same-day or next-day appointments when they’re sick because MDVIP doctors are available when their patients need them, even after hours.

A waiting room in an MDVIP practice is not even called a waiting room because appointments start on time, and visits last a minimum of 30 minutes.

“With my previous doctor, I had to wait for an appointment and I wouldn’t be able to reach the doctor if I had questions,” said Hirsch. “With Dr. Pinsky, I’m seen right away. I have his cell phone, too, and he responds quickly to my texts.”

NATIONAL NETWORK

When Hirsch goes out of town, he has peace of mind knowing Dr. Pinsky will coordinate care, if needed, with other MDVIP doctors in the network from Maine to Hawaii, and he will receive the same personalized medical care he enjoys back home.

And if he needs to see specialists, Dr. Pinsky will be personally involved as his “quarterback” overseeing this care and helping him to navigate the complexities of today’s healthcare system.

Hirsch has been so impressed with the care he has received that he switched his two children over to Dr. Pinsky’s MDVIP practice.

As the dust from the Affordable Care Act settles, patients are expected to endure longer waits in the waiting room and shorter face-to-face time with their physicians. Hirsch wanted none of that.

“If you look at where medicine is going with healthcare reform and how doctors have to run their offices like a mill, you realize the value of a practice like Dr. Pinsky’s,” said Hirsch.

“This is a level of care that is significantly higher than other doctors.”

Because patients are seen the same or next day, there is no waiting in the waiting room. Telephone calls are answered by trained staff rather than an automated system.

Dr. Pinsky is accepting new patients at his practice located at 8045 Spyglass Hill Road, Suite 101, in Viera, Florida. To make an appointment call 321-241-0017 or log on to MDVIP.com/MarkPinskyDO

Click here to contribute your news or announcements Free