Sharyn Sutton and Marian Grant

March 10, 2015

Editor’s note: This post is part of a periodic Health Affairs Blog series on palliative care, health policy, and health reform. The series features essays adapted from and drawing on a recent volume, Meeting the Needs of Older Adults with Serious Illness: Challenges and Opportunities in the Age of Health Care Reform, in which clinicians, researchers and policy leaders address 16 key areas where real-world policy options to improve access to quality palliative care could have a substantial role in improving value.

Public engagement is necessary to improve care for individuals suffering with serious illness. Fortunately, several drivers of potential change exist for advocacy. In the following blog post, we outline some areas for change and specify advocacy efforts we can undertake to improve the overall face of palliative care.

First, palliative care here is defined as being a type of specialized medical care for people with serious illness. Its goal is to improve quality of life for both person and family. It is provided by a team of doctors, nurses, and other specialists who work with the patient’s other providers to provide an extra layer of support. Although some people think palliative care is only for those at the end of life, it is actually appropriate at any age and at any stage in a serious illness and can be provided together with curative or disease-modifying treatment.

The Affordable Care Act has spurred innovation in the public and private sectors in new care and payment models. Meanwhile, the aging population and their caregivers are encountering significant financial and logistical problems in obtaining care. These baby boomer caregivers also expect to have choice and control in their lives and will demand that the health system be responsive to their needs.

Early, concurrent palliative care has been shown to improve quality and patient/family satisfaction while also supporting system needs. This type of care delivers health reforms’ “triple aim” of improving care, health, and potentially reducing costs, making it highly desirable. Health care providers themselves are requesting more support with patient communication, shared decision-making, and providing support to patients with serious illness.

Causes for Concern

Now is the time to advocate for greater support for and access to palliative care services albeit with some important caveats. First, although advance directives (ADs) are important, we must shift our focus away from ADs and advance care planning (ACP). Little evidence supports the use of ADs but confirms public resistance to planning ahead for serious illness and death. People can’t imagine themselves as seriously ill or dying nor can they predict their future wants and needs, which change over prolonged illness.

Even if people have ADs, they are not helpful in the earlier stages of serious illness because they only address very limited, specific situations concerning life-prolonging technology. As a result, families who prepare ADs and have early conversations prior to serious illness can still find themselves unprepared. Research shows these well-intentioned actions offer little help with treatment decisions during the long and unpredictable course of the illness or even after the person cannot make their own decisions, including decisions about whether to resuscitate.

Next, we have to stop the focus on death and dying. Research documents people’s resistance and lack of interest in planning for terminal illness. Public engagement on end-of-life cannot compete with the vast array of more powerful messages relating to youth and health. Popular phrases like “60 is the new 30” reinforce that infirmity is for someone else. As a result, death and dying messages are most relevant to those who are actually facing or have just experienced a loved one’s death.

That group does not include the majority of patients with serious illness who are either not dying or do not know if they are actually nearing the end of their life. Most people who need palliative care are not dying but living (for a long time) with serious and complex illness. Public engagement must frame messages in the context of ongoing serious illness to which patients and families can relate. This means addressing the practical and emotional concerns such people are experiencing.

Another caution is to shift the focus from palliative care’s financial savings to its quality of care and choice. It’s true that numerous studies show cost savings from the addition of palliative care. However, it would be both a substantive and strategic mistake to sell early palliative care on its potential to save money. First, cost savings are a side effect—or epiphenomenon—of palliative care.

Second, linking any medical care to cost savings raises questions of motive. Palliative care “adds” services and personal attention. How can adding care cost less? Without understanding the complex reasons why palliative care reduces system costs, it raises public fears about rationing and “death panel” rhetoric.

Therefore, it would be more accurate and honest to focus on the truth—that palliative care improves quality of care, quality of life, survival, and the degree to which care is aligned with what matters most to patients and families—personal choice.

It maximizes individual control over their own lives and medical care. Improved quality of care and personal choice and control are not only an accurate description of palliative care’s purposes and benefits, but will always be more motivating to the public than cost savings.

So how should we advocate for palliative care?

Demonstrate that good care is possible

The most successful marketing focuses on experiences that are appealing, not ones that are negative. This is true for serious illness where people want positive information told through empowering stories. They do not want horror stories. They are interested in how to remain healthy and independent. This will require a shift in perspective on the part of health care advocates.

The first shift is to focus on what people want, not on what experts think they need. Audience research drives the way messages are designed and promoted in product marketing and politics. However, such research is rarely used in expert-driven sectors like health care.

Instead the focus of communication there is on “educating the public” to understand the expert’s perspective based on their knowledge and opinions. Palliative care advocates and funders need to instead invest in audience research for effective message development and should seek development funding and work with consumer marketing organizations to do so. Effective messaging is evidence-based and person-centered.

The second shift is to use palliative care success stories where the patient survives and thrives, as opposed to stories about good deaths. There are stories about people with serious illness being able to better tolerate curative treatment with the help of palliative care and who either lived a longer, better quality of life or were indeed cured. The public will be more interested and motivated by such stories than they will about stories describing “a good death.”

Provide clear direction to people about palliative care

People must be made aware that it is possible to receive the type of care that palliative care offers. Currently over 78 percent of adults in the United States do not know what palliative care is. At the same time, palliative care has a negative image among the minority of patients who have knowledge since it is often linked to hospice, which is a form of palliative care provided to those within the last months of life. Public engagement must brand palliative care as medical care that is concurrent with curative treatment for serious illness and that is an option at any stage of an illness.

Help people demand early palliative care despite provider resistance

While public efforts need to distinguish “palliative care” from “end-of-life” and “hospice care,” the same effort needs to be aimed at health care providers. Many still mistakenly believe that palliative care is end-of-life care, and offer it only when curative attempts are no longer viable. As a result, some providers are unwilling to refer a patient still undergoing curative or disease-modifying treatment to a palliative care team. It is extremely difficult for patients to access palliative care without their providers’ facilitation.

Provide clear calls to action that support market and system change

Once people understand that good care is possible, messaging needs to clarify where and how they can access it. Currently palliative care is available in more than 85 percent of large hospitals and 54 percent of all hospitals. But even within these hospitals, only a fraction of patients in need actually receive palliative care. Research is needed on what actions hospitals, providers, patients, and their families can take to ensure access to these services.

Hospitals house most non-hospice palliative care, so the first time patients and families encounter palliative care will likely be during a hospitalization. This needs to change as most serious illness is initially diagnosed and managed in the outpatient arena. Therefore, another opportunity for advocating palliative care is to increase the outpatient and community resources to provide and promote it there.

Systems changes need to be put in place to increase availability of early palliative care for serious illness. Current regulations from the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services do not always pay for palliative care delivered in skilled nursing facilities. The Medicare Hospice Benefit does not pay for concurrent curative and hospice care for adults.

Families dealing with serious illness may learn about the benefits of concurrent palliative care, but they will also learn that it is not available because of policy and reimbursement issues. There are few payment streams to support a robust palliative practice. Hospice organizations, who would be some of the most appropriate to offer palliative care, are limited by aspects of the Medicare hospice benefit. Advocates must be ready to leverage the resulting public demand for change into meaningful policy demands that increase both availability of and access to palliative care services.

Refocused public engagement can drive patients and family demand for concurrent curative and palliative care. This would force hospitals, health systems, and community providers to respond in an increasingly competitive marketplace. Leveraged demand should support more palliative care generalists and specialty level providers.

Such pressure should prompt legislators to change policy impeding palliative care for serious illness. New medical models like patient-centered medical homes and accountable-care organizations should be encouraged and reimbursed for including palliative care as an integral part of their service mix.

Policy should require systems to identify patients who could benefit from palliative care and ensure that they receive it. The end result would be improved care for those with serious illness and better use of increasingly limited health care resources.