Former Tigers star making mark in Orediggers' record book

Photo courtesy of Colorado Mines athletics NEARING END OF HER RUN AT MINES: Former Holy Family star Taylor Helbig is nearing the end of a stellar career at the Colorado School of Mines.

It seems like just yesterday that Taylor Helbig was doing her thing at Holy Family, guiding the Tigers to state title at Moby Arena in Fort Collins as Ron Rossi stomped up and down the sideline.

"I can't believe I'm already a senior, that it is almost over, and I only have the rest of the season left," she said.

Helbig is now on the brink of finishing her career at Colorado School of Mines, and when the Orediggers start back up in January, she'll hope to finish with a flourish.

And the 15-day break they get couldn't have come at a better time. On Dec. 5 against Western New Mexico, Helbig was fouled hard and suffered a broken elbow.

Done for the season, right?

Hardly. Not only did she step up to the line to shoot her free throws, she also finished the game.

"It was a pretty painful," said Helbig, who finished that game with 11 points and has been in a sling ever since. "Everywhere from just above my elbow all the way to my fingers was pretty numb after I fell and I couldn't really move my arm the rest of the game."

It epitomizes Helbig's game and her ability to lead her team. It was just two weeks earlier that Helbig obliterated the Orediggers record book when she knocked down eight 3-pointers en route to a school record 38 points in a 86-65 win over McMurry.

Advertisement

While the basketball accomplishments are great — and Helbig points to a win during her junior season at CSU-Pueblo as one of the proudest moments during her career — it is making it in the classroom at Mines that is even more of a feather in the cap.

"I knew it was hard going in, but I just kind of figured I would get up here and work my way through it," said Helbig, who expects to return to the Orediggers' lineup not long after the holiday hiatus. "I have definitely struggled at times, but I think basketball definitely has been what I thought it would be. I have really enjoyed all of it."

Calculus has been a bit of a bugaboo, but it has been overcome and recently she reached her biggest academic success by scoring a perfect 100 percent on an Environmental and Natural Resource Economics exam.

"I framed it and am giving it to my parents as a Christmas gift," she said.

Helbig, who would love to get into teaching and coaching after college, has already begun her mentoring process with her younger brother, Chris, and his upcoming recruiting process that is sure to engulf him.

"He only listens to me every once and a while," she said. "Him and I had a talk about it here a few months ago when the summer was ending and we just kind of sat down and talked about what sport he wants to play, what he thinks he wants to do. Whether he wants to go in-state or out-of-state and I am definitely more of a homebody than Chris is, and I wanted to stay in state to be close to my family. I am very family-oriented and wanted to be able to watch my brothers grow up and play in high school and I know how fast it went for me and it will probably be faster for them and I didn't want to miss that."

Taylor Helbig never forgets her roots and gets back to Holy Family as much as possible to watch not only her brother play, but also her former coach — who now has her cousin Jalyn Hall playing for him.

"(Rossi) called me after I set that record and he and I talked for 10 minutes about the game and all the other stuff," she said. "I definitely have a good relationship with everyone still at Holy Family."

Follow Jon on Twitter: twitter.com/JonEYunt