YWCA USA will celebrate the achievements of extraordinary leaders who serve as role models for women and girls at the Women of Distinction Awards Gala on June 13, at 6 pm at the Grand Hyatt Washington, as part of their 2014 Annual Conference.



"The Women of Distinction Awards honor women from all areas of civic life for their incredible service and leadership, and their unwavering commitment to making a difference in the lives of women and their families," said YWCA USA CEO Dara Richardson-Heron, M.D.



This year's honorees include Gaby Pacheco for Advocacy and Civic Engagement, Deloitte LLP, for Corporate Social Responsibility, Jaspen Boothe for Military and Veterans Affairs, and Sister Simone Campbell for Women's Empowerment (see bios below).



Robin Givens, television, film and stage actress and advocate, will host the Gala. She has served as spokesperson for the National Domestic Violence Hotline and was awarded the Vital Link Award by that organization for her over 20 years of work on behalf of women, children and families facing the challenges of domestic violence. She is also Co-Chair of Women Who Care.



YWCA USA will also recognize three local YWCA associations for their outstanding work in the areas of women's empowerment, racial justice, and advocacy. There are nearly 230 local YWCA associations in the United States providing critically important services and supports in communities large and small, urban and rural. Richardson-Heron said, "We are truly proud to celebrate and honor the vital and life changing impact that YWCAs across the country have every day in the lives of women, girls, families and communities."



The 2014 YWCA USA Women of Distinction Honorees are:



Advocacy and Civic Engagement: Gaby Pacheco



Gaby Pacheco, Co-Director of the Bridge Project, came to the U.S. at the age 8 from Guayaquil, Ecuador. Since 2004, she has gained national recognition for her advocacy for the DREAM Act and immigration reform. In 2012, she spearheaded the campaign that led to President Obama announcing the Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals (DACA) program.



Corporate Social Responsibility: Deloitte LLP, Accepted by Deborah L. DeHaas



The YWCA USA is proud to honor Deloitte LLP for their strong commitment to create and cultivate a diverse workforce, their efforts to provide career development and leadership opportunities for women, and for their invaluable partnerships with YWCAs around the country. Deloitte, through its philanthropy, community engagement, and positive policies, has made a tremendous impact in the lives of women and their families across the nation. Accepting on behalf of Deloitte is Deborah L. DeHaas, Vice Chairman and Chief Inclusion Officer for Deloitte LLP.

Military and Veterans Affairs: Jaspen Boothe



Jaspen Boothe is Founder and President of Final Salute Inc. As a member of the Army Reserves in New Orleans, Jaspen was mobilized to go to Iraq in 2005. That year, her life was torn apart by Hurricane Katrina and a cancer diagnosis that left her facing discharge from the military. Her struggle to find assistance, as a Veteran and single mother of two, inspired her to found Final Salute Inc. in 2010 so that other woman Veterans could find resources in times of need.



Women's Empowerment: Sister Simone Campbell

Sister Simone Campbell is the Executive Director of NETWORK, and a religious leader, attorney and poet with extensive experience in public policy and advocacy for systemic change. She is the author of the famous "nun's letter," which was critically important to passage of the Affordable Care Act, and she was instrumental in organizing the 2012 "Nuns on the Bus" tour. She is also the author of A Nun on the Bus: How All of Us Can Create Hope, Change, and Community.



About the YWCA

The YWCA is The Voice for every woman. For more than 150 years, the YWCA has spoken out and taken action on behalf of women and girls. The YWCA is dedicated to eliminating racism, empowering women and promoting peace, justice, freedom and dignity for all. Over 2 million people participate each year in YWCA programs at more than 1,300 locations across the U.S. For more information, visit ywca.org.