Reprinted from HEALTH PLAN WEEK , the most reliable source of objective business, financial and regulatory news of the health insurance industry.

Health insurer startups dot the landscape on public exchanges across the country, some with venture capital backing, others without. But the same factors that typically have prevented new carriers from joining the industry — including heavy regulation and the need for large reserves to pay claims — still exist, along with some new barriers, like provider consolidation and uncertainties about adverse selection among the newly insured, market watchers say.

Still, there are a handful of new entrants and smaller players looking for a bigger share of the market by gaining previously uninsured lives in public exchanges, and some startups envision the public marketplaces as a leaping-off point for off-exchange business as well.

In addition, there may be ample room for startups in ancillary businesses, like the insurance management service firm Gravie in Minnesota that promises to be a mint.com for the health insurance consumer. Mint.com acts as a one-stop, financial management service for consumers.

On the insurer side, Oscar Health Insurance, which was founded by entrepreneurs from the Internet world backed by $40 million in venture capital, is selling individual policies on the New York public exchange, but co-CEO Mario Schlosser tells HPW that could change. “Right now we are only on the exchange, but are looking to going off-exchange as well,” Schlosser says. He concedes that solvency requirements were a challenge, but that is why Oscar raised the amount of money it did. In addition, “We have some private reinsurance and federal reinsurance from the federal pot of money for three years to buffer for the risk of unknowns for the first year of operations,” he adds, referring to the Affordable Care Act’s (ACA) reinsurance, risk-adjustment and risk corridors provisions.

Startups Require Major Money

New York offers an example of two new carriers taking advantage of ACA reforms. There, the state-run public exchange will include not only Oscar (HPW 9/23/13, p. 1) but also a plan launched by North Shore-Long Island Jewish Health System (HPW 8/19/13, p. 1). Cathy Murphy-Barron, principal and consulting actuary for Milliman, Inc., tells HPW that the duo demonstrates the two potential categories for start-ups. Oscar, she says, is born out of an idea to offer consumers new technology-driven features and services and comes with venture capital backing, while the provider organization is exploring the insurer side of the business. Providers “realize in the future that changes in the ACA will put more and more of their revenue at risk,” and the hospital system wants to take advantage of payer-side opportunities.

New Carriers Face Many Roadblocks

David Jones, Jr., chairman of Louisville, Ky.-based venture capital firm Chrysalis Ventures and former chairman of Humana Inc.’s board, tells HPW that one of the questions about exchanges, and off exchanges as well, is if the new marketplace and its level playing field will be attractive to entrepreneurs.

He sees two possible paths for startup insurers, one where the insurer contracts with a risk-bearing local health system — for which the insurer is essentially a reseller, like in the telecom industry where reselling a network is routine — and the other where, as now, the insurer builds its own network and adds value through technology-enabled population health management.

One major challenge to startup insurers is provider consolidation. “The hospital systems have consolidated by market, so it may be harder if you start in a city where maybe there are only two hospital networks and you have very few members,” Jones says. “And the state insurance regulators do a good job of ensuring capital adequacy, so you have to put up a fair amount of capital in the beginning just to comply with regulatory minimums. It makes the business a little more capital intensive to start than you would think for a subscription business where all of your customers pay you in advance.”

In addition, starting an insurance carrier with venture capital money “became unsexy a long time ago,” he says. But that may change with the exchanges where attracting younger people to the risk pool is a top concern, and could fuel opportunities for creative entrepreneurs

Major Insurers More Likely to Profit

Vishnu Lekraj, senior analyst for Morningstar Inc., adds that profitability “is not too high to begin with for individual insurance. And there is going to be pressure on the exchanges,” such as meeting ACA regulations, the possibility of adverse selection, competition and standardization of health plan coverage options.

The larger national insurers are best-positioned on exchanges, given their sizable reserves and enough membership to scale their business and tap into their underwriting expertise to gauge adjustments required to plan pricing and design, Lekraj tells HPW.

One of those “creative” new entrants that may make a mark in the new marketplaces and beyond is Oscar. Schlosser says the original intent of the company was to help fix the user interface of the health insurance system, but grew to include offering a completely new insurance option built not only on technology, but on easier-to-understand shopping tools, free unlimited telemedicine options with a doctor 24/7 and access to providers on a condition-by-condition basis.

“Very early on we realized the tremendous undertaking it is to build a health insurance company…so we teamed up with a number of very experienced executives from the health insurance world: the former chief actuary of Emblem [Health], the former chief medical officer of Emblem, executives from MVP [Health Care].”

New Insurer to Sell in New York

Oscar is selling individual plans in the five New York City counties, along with Rockland, Westchester, Nassau and Suffolk counties, all on the public exchange.

“You can see not just our rates but every other health plan in New York state,” Schlosser says. “Consumers can go in and type in all options. In the nine counties [where they are active] we are some of the two or three lowest-cost options in terms of rates,” he adds.

As for Gravie, the Minnesota-based company will help individuals select, buy and pay for their own health insurance and represents a venture spurred on by the changes in the marketplace.

Gravie has raised $2.6 million in a round of financing led by FirstMark Capital, and says it is already working with several Minnesota-based employers, with plans to extend the service to several other states this fall.

Abir Sen, co-founder and CEO of Gravie, and a founder of other groundbreaking firms in the insurance sector including private insurance exchange Bloom Health, tells HPW that Gravie allows employers to move away from an employer-sponsored group insurance model and lets their employees access the advantages of the individual market, whether on or off-exchange.

“As such, the employer no longer has a need for a traditional insurance broker. However, we do partner with many brokers that are bringing Gravie to their employer customers,” he says.

When asked if he was surprised that more venture capital has not gone into the health insurance sector, Sen replies that Gravie is at the forefront of a wave of innovation in this space.

“As Gravie and others gain success, we expect more venture capital to pour into this space,” he says.

Capital Requirements Are a Drawback

But Sen points to the low return on capital as a barrier for insurer startups on and off the exchanges, a fact that has been true historically.

“If you had a few million dollars to invest, would you spend it on a number of tech startups in Silicon Valley or have it sit as reserve capital at a single insurer? However, this also creates opportunities for investors and entrepreneurs that are willing to sail against the tide and make a bet against conventional wisdom,” he adds.

The number of insurer startups has ebbed and flowed over the years, Jones says, and the rule is that the smaller companies usually get gobbled up by the bigger ones eventually.

This has held true in the last decade, with deals including UnitedHealth Group’s 2004 purchase of Oxford Health Plans, Inc. for $4.9 billion and its $300 million acquisition of Definity Health, a start-up consumer-directed health plan, in the same year (HPW 12/20/04, p. 6) to Cigna Corp. buying HealthSpring for $3.8 billion in 2011 (HPW 2/3/12, p. 5).

For hard-hitting news and strategies on federal, state and private health insurance exchanges, check out Inside Health Insurance Exchanges at the AIS Marketplace.

© 2013 by Atlantic Information Services, Inc. All Rights Reserved.