DOTHAN, Ala. (AP) - The winding, shadowed, natural trails on Dothan’s new Forever Wild property are exactly what Kim Meeker and a few other city officials envisioned when they began putting together the complex land deal a few years ago.

Part of Dothan ‘s Forever Wild trails will be open to the public Oct. 3 with a grand opening and a few planned activities. Work is still being done that will eventually link 11 miles of natural trails together, but walkers, hikers and bikers will still be able to enjoy the land next month.

“I think, 50 years from now, we will look back and see this as one of the best things we did,” Dothan Mayor Mike Schmitz said Wednesday during a sneak peak event for the trails.

Meeker, assistant director for Dothan Leisure Services, spearheaded the effort to bring the deal together. It began with 40 acres of city-owned land inside the city limits near the old Beaver Creek Wastewater Treatment Plant. The land seemed to be a natural spot for green space or a passive park. However, when Wells Fargo Bank added 60 nearby acres to the 40 already owned by the city, the wheels began to turn.

Eventually, about 400 acres were secured and submitted to Alabama ‘s Forever Wild program, which identifies land to be protected forever as a natural preserve. Dothan ‘s Forever Wild property is located between Flowers Chapel Road and Fortner Street .

The primary feature of the property will be separate trails linked together by bridges. A small looped family trail is proposed off Flowers Chapel Road . A longer winding looped trail is proposed for the middle of the property and a larger 5-mile winding looped trail is proposed for the east end of the property.

The trails will typically be open from daylight to dark unless they are undergoing maintenance. Forever Wild will help construct a parking lot and trail heads next month. The bridges connecting the trails are being funded by the Wiregrass Foundation and are currently under contract. The trails have been forged with the help of the International Mountain Bikers Association.

While anyone can take advantage of the trails beginning Oct. 3, the Southeast Alabama Mountain Bikers will be hosting “Take a Kid Mountain Biking Day” as part of the opening festivities. James Wells, club president, said mountain bikes will be available for children to ride the trails. Donations have helped purchase a few bikes for use on the trail, but the Southeast Mountain Biking club continues to accept mountain bikes and/or donations to purchase bikes. Wells said each bike costs about $350.

“It’s a way to experience fun, freedom and fresh air,” Wells said.

An additional feature of the Forever Wild property is the construction of a “pump track” for BMX bike riders. The dirt track has bumps, turns and hills and is built in such a way that it can be navigated without the biker having to pedal if the biker maneuvers (or pumps) his or her bicycle correctly around the track.

___

Information from: The Dothan Eagle, http://www.dothaneagle.com