Local health care leaders sounded the alarm Friday about emergency room crowding, asking the community to help preserve a precious resource for patients who need it most.

According to the county’s Health and Human Services Agency, 53 percent of ER visits made in the region between 2004 and 2014 were for non-emergencies. The volume of ER visits surged 40 percent during that time, dwarfing a 7 percent increase in the county’s population.

Crowding causes longer waits for patients, clogs up the works for first responders delivering patients to hospitals and results in extra costs for the health care system that are passed on to consumers in the form of higher insurance premiums.

Use of emergency rooms has risen so quickly because of several factors, said Dr. Wilma Wooten, the county’s public health officer.

Many have blamed the increase on the Affordable Care Act, which expanded health insurance coverage to millions more Americans through Medicaid — known as Medi-Cal in California — and government-run health exchanges.

While Obamacare is likely part of what’s driving the trend, Wooten noted that ER crowding has existed long before that law’s requirements took effect in 2014.

“It’s not just one thing that is responsible for this increase,” she said.

Wooten and other health experts cited the public’s lack of understanding about when to use emergency services, coupled with many people’s tendency to not have a formal relationship established with a primary-care doctor so that medical issues can be dealt with on a preventive basis outside of a hospital setting.

Also, the county’s population simply has grown — overall and particularly the number of elderly patients with chronic conditions. There has been a heightened demand for mental health services as well.

Medi-Cal reimbursements are also part of the problem, said Dimitrios Alexiou, president of the Hospital Association of San Diego and Imperial Counties. California’s reimbursements are 49th lowest in the nation, and that pushes more people into emergency rooms because they don’t have enough primary-care doctors who will accept Medi-Cal. Alexiou said the number of Medi-Cal patients in local ERs jumped from 27 percent in 2013 to 38 percent in 2014, and the figure likely surpassed 40 percent last year.

Like Wooten, he said health literacy is a big issue.

“We have seen, through our needs assessment process, that of those surveyed, approximately 56 percent don’t know when to use an (emergency department) versus urgent care versus a clinic. Over 40 percent of those surveyed don’t have a primary-care physician,” Alexiou said.

Wooten said she is convening a group of affected organizations to collectively work toward reducing non-emergency visits to the ER.

She also said she does not believe the current challenge has affected patient safety. Wooten pointed out that all emergency departments are required to use triage systems, which prioritize the sickest patients over those with lesser maladies. This system continues to work as designed, she said.

“I don’t think there have been any deleterious impacts on patients,” Wooten said.

The extent to which Obamacare has worsened the local and national ER crush may not be fully visible in the data released by the county Friday. ER admission statistics run through 2014, the first year that Obamacare expanded access to Medicaid programs and began requiring health coverage under threat of a fine for people who go without health insurance. Enrollment in Obamacare programs went up in 2015, but any impact that increase had on local ER use remains undetermined.

Other groups have recently indicated that the Affordable Care Act has deepened the ER overuse problem.

Last year, a national survey of 2,099 emergency doctors by the American College of Emergency Physicians reported that 28 percent of respondents said the volume of ER patients in their hospitals “increased greatly” since the health law took effect. And 47 percent said the volume “increased slightly.”