This Week in Crain's: March 24, 2014 Listen to the Podcast or Download

CHART See how each city agency connects to each other.



Alicia Glen, the city's new deputy mayor for housing and economic development, is on a charm offensive.



She met with a horde of housing advocates and nonprofit developers in early March, many of them thrilled by the opportunity to turn left toward the mayor's offices when entering City Hall, rather than right toward the City Council, as they'd grown accustomed to during the Bloomberg years.



Next, the former Goldman Sachs executive sat with the five borough presidents, some of them tickled to be served coffee. Apparently, under the old regime, not even an offer of Sanka.



Finally, she convened the city's real estate titans—Gary Barnett, Douglas Durst, Rob Speyer and dozens more—to discuss how they'd be affected by the de Blasio administration's push to build and preserve 200,000 units of affordable housing over 10 years.



The first two groups heartily embraced the administration's ideas. The third has been, perhaps predictably, more hesitant. "There's a little bit of kvetching [about] things that have bugged them," Ms. Glen told Crain's from her City Hall office. "And that's actually constructive. We can't know every little thing that might make it harder for us to actually advance our agenda."



Ambitious housing initiatives aren't the only thing Ms. Glen must sell. Higher taxes, expanded employer mandates on wages and paid time off, and more rigorous oversight of businesses by city agencies are all part of the new order since Bill de Blasio's landslide win in November. As the mayor's chief liaison to the private sector, Ms. Glen leads the administration's struggle for corporate hearts and minds. Her boss's dismal early poll numbers don't make her task any easier.



But she has already shown her mettle in negotiations, squeezing developer Jed Walentas to build 40 more units of affordable housing in his $1.5 billion redevelopment of the Domino Sugar plant in Brooklyn. Mr. Walentas threatened to abandon the project. Ms. Glen, flexing her housing-finance knowledge—such as how a 0.1% increase in bond rates over 10 years need not hurt the returns on a project all that much—was able to persuade the developer to change his estimates.



In post-victory interviews on radio and television, Ms. Glen drove home the point that in the de Blasio administration, private-sector returns would go hand in hand with social improvements.



"Those buildings are going to be there forever," she said later. "So the people who are the affordable tenants of those projects should be there forever."



The unusually large amount of commercial space proposed for the mixed-use Domino deal offered Ms. Glen and City Planning Commission Chairman Carl Weisbrod a unique opportunity to demand more affordable housing from Mr. Walentas. Future developments may not offer similar openings—and developers, who may not be as amenable to her civic-minded arguments, could elect to build under the current zoning, beyond the control of City Hall.



After her appointment, some political chatterers noted the irony of a mayor for the 99% bringing a Wall Street executive into his inner circle. Yet Ms. Glen also comes from civil-service aristocracy: Her mother was a state Supreme Court judge, and her father ran the city's Law Department as Ed Koch's corporation counsel.



She worked for David Dinkins and Rudy Giuliani before heading to Goldman Sachs to run its Urban Investment Group. There, she spearheaded $5 billion in low- and moderate-income development, including one of the first 50/30/20 mixed-income buildings—50% market rate, 30% middle income, 20% low income. It's something she hopes will serve as a model for the city.

Not stifling growth

Where Ms. Glen remains untested is in crafting an economic-development strategy for the city. There is none yet, although aides insist it's in the pipeline, along with the housing plan, which is due May 1. That will require a delicate balancing act.



"The difficult nut that the administration will have to crack is figuring out how to create all of the needed housing without displacing the very industries that we are seeking to expand," said Seth Pinsky, former president of the city's Economic Development Corp., citing growth opportunities like tech-assisted manufacturing in Brooklyn.



Ms. Glen, who has also met with labor leaders and City Council members, and toured city-sponsored incubators such as the Brooklyn Navy Yard in her three months on the job, said that encouraging businesses to hire more homegrown talent—and to pay those workers higher wages—will be part of the agenda.

Open to incentives

"We will do a really great job," she said, "if more people coming out of the public-school system, out of CUNY, out of some of these great training programs, are getting the jobs at Google, at [3-D printer company] MakerBot, in the back office of Citibank."



Mr. de Blasio campaigned on a message of raising taxes on the wealthy and curbing corporate subsidies. Ms. Glen believes tax breaks for businesses can still be helpful, provided the recipients are creating higher-wage jobs: "I don't think the mayor's ever said that there's never any reason to have incentive packages," she noted.



Those packages will be targeted at businesses that hire locally and pay well. Massive breaks for architecturally adventurous, Manhattan-centric projects, such as the Culture Shed at Hudson Yards, probably won't be part of the administration's economic-development plans.



"I think you can argue that the city has invested a lot in Hudson Yards," Ms. Glen said. "So that would not be a place where we would double down."



Indeed, last week the city and the Related Cos. announced a deal that would pay its contract service workers at least $11 an hour at Hudson Yards—after a broader push for higher wages killed the same developer's Kingsbridge Armory project in the Bronx.



Ms. Glen also wants to redefine the "affordable" in affordable housing, using neighborhood- or borough-specific area median incomes to better allocate sub-market-rate housing. "In some ways, as they say, 'What's porn? You know it when you see it,' " she said. "You can't design a whole program around 'I know what feels affordable.' You do have to put some metrics around what affordable housing is."



Still, developers have trepidations. Some are said to be holding back on land purchases for projects that would require zoning approvals. "There's a strong desire among developers for the administration to set its policy and create predictability so they can start to make choices," one real estate executive said.



So far, universal pre-K (which is hanging on funding from Albany) and the 200,000 units of affordable housing are the administration's two "big ideas." Those ideas are big enough for Manhattan Borough President Gale Brewer. "There are different kinds of big ideas," she said.



Ms. Glen acknowledges the de Blasio housing plan may not be as "sexy" as some of the economic-development ideas during the Bloomberg years, but argued that it would be no less transformational.



"You add all that up together," she said, "I think it's way sexier than a stadium."

Get Crain's Morning Insider Sign up for the Morning Insider email and receive political news and musings every morning at 6 a.m. More Newsletters ›

Comments