Re: “Taxes: Insult on top of multiple injuries” [Opinion, April 11]: Most people can’t fully digest working 114 days just to pay taxes. What might help people recognize the amount of time they are working just to pay taxes would be to break down that 31 percent of their labor that goes to taxes into daily or weekly chunks. Every day they work two and a half hours just to pay taxes or every week they work one and a half days just to pay taxes.

Roger Vander Wende

Brea

Who’s to blame for IRS delays?

Re: “Taxes: Insult on top of multiple injuries” [Opinion, April 11]: We are now feeling the repercussions of the IRS budget cuts bestowed upon us by our Republican-controlled Congress in their misguided effort to starve Obamacare. Congress thought that undermining the IRS would cause Obamacare to magically disappear. Instead, they have wreaked havoc on their constituents by making it nearly impossible to secure tax help from the IRS. Many people will be filing late or not at all, thus starving our government of needed tax revenue and tax refunds Americans are counting on.

2016 cannot come soon enough.

Tracy A. Odell Jr.

Rossmoor

Another diplomatic coup

Re: “Putin lifts ban on missile sales to Iran” [News, April 14]: While Ukraine begged the U.S. for defensive hand-fired weapons to stop Russian-backed aggression, the U.S. sends them packaged meals. Meanwhile, Russia plans on selling S-300 advanced anti-aircraft missiles to Iran. Another example of negotiations by the Obama administration.

Bill Ring

Mission Viejo

Lincoln’s real legacy

Re: “Lincoln’s legacy provides lesson in prudence” [Opinion, April 14]: Within President Lincoln’s legacy should be an acknowledgment of the birth of the autonomous administrative state that, with acceleration provided by the progressive movement, has created slaves of the productive people to the whims and desires of the public service masters. Not that we use them much anymore, but a fair reading of the Declaration of Independence and Constitution provides no basis for the taking from one to redistribute to another.

Chris Taylor

Newport Coast

Immigration bills not sensible

Re: “State Senate committee votes to subsidize health care for immigrants here illegally” [News, April 16]: A bill introduced by Democratic state Sen. Ricardo Lara would expand Medi-Cal eligibility to illegals, along with 10 other bills to protect the “rights” of illegals in California. The cost of Lara’s bill alone is $1 billion. Lara says we have to embrace this opportunity to be decisive and make a historic, sensible and humane change in health care and immigration policy.

It may be historic, but what is sensible or humane about laying a $1 billion plus burden on California’s taxpayers? This article should have been on the front page. Taxpayers should see how the Democrats prefer to spend taxpayer money on illegals’ “rights” and a bullet train rather than dams and catch basins for water. More than 2 million illegals in California use a lot of water, but I suppose that is one of their “rights.” When will California voters learn that the Sacramento Democrats are not interested in citizens’ “rights”?

Ed Bjork

Fountain Valley

Immigrant Rights bills are moral

We note that “Lawmakers want to further protect immigrants” [Front page, April 8] by, among other things, extending Medi-Cal health coverage to them, supporting their purchase of health insurance through Covered California and protecting them from discrimination.

That is why I and 19 members and friends of Irvine United Congregation Church support these efforts. According to the Bible, “For I was a stranger, and you invited me in.”

Keith O. Boyum

Irvine