TOP STORIES

It’s been since six years of Obamacare. It looks like the president is hoping – in part due to the presidential campaign rhetoric – to “broaden the conversation” on healthcare reform. “It’s important to lay out the next chapter in the [Affordable Care Act] — building a healthcare system that puts patients at the center and works better for all Americans.” – The Hill

LIFE SCIENCES

The Sequenom announcement yesterday about its patent appeal is a big deal. “The stakes could not be higher for the life sciences. And this is undoubtedly a breakthrough invention that illustrates the harm from the Federal Circuit’s ruling.” – PR Newswire & IP Watchdog

The Valeant overhaul is going to be long and painful. And, really, what will the company become after it is all said and done?

“It’s a soap opera,” said David Maris, an analyst for Wells Fargo. “Here you have something that’s unfolding at an incredible velocity. And you have very colorful characters.”

The accused CFO is not going quietly: “At no time did I engage in any improper conduct that relates to any restatement of revenue.” – Financial Times, The New York Times & Fortune

British Specialty pharma Atlantic Healthcare, which focuses on gastrointestinal disorders, raised $24 million from investors that include the founders of Salix Pharmaceuticals, among others. – FierceBiotech

Elusys Therapeutics anthrax drug Anthim has won FDA approval. – STAT

LifeWatch will pay $18.7 million to Highmark Blue Cross Blue Shield after an arbitrator ruled in favor of Highmark regarding payments for LifeWatch’s ACT elemetry monitoring services. – MassDevice

PAYERS-PROVIDERS

Up to two-thirds of seniors are taking five or more medications (up from about 53 percent in 2011.- Reuters

Anthem and its $15 billion legal showdown with Express Scripts. – The Washington Post

TECHNOLOGY

The tech company Tamr is offering its data preparation platform to help researchers affiliated with the White House’s Cancer Moonshot Task Force. – Tamr

Hooray! Evidence that investors came to their senses on wearables: investment dropped 20 percent in 2015. – CB Insights

A South Korean startup is developing a handheld sonogram device. – ZDNet

A perfectly timed overview of the “ransomware economy.” – Government Health IT

POLITICS

The American Health Information Management Association has launched a petition calling for a unique patient identification system.

“Remove the federal budget ban that prohibits the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) from participating in efforts to find a patient identification solution. We support a voluntary patient safety identifier,” the petition states. “Accurate patient identification is critical in providing safe care but the sharing of electronic health information is being compromised because of patient identification issues. Let’s start the conversation and find a solution.”

– AHIMA

Don’t overfund the Cancer Moonshot over screening and prevention, warn more than 70 public health deans (read the full letter). – Politico

Here’s why the FDA has recommended banning powdered medical glove. – The New York Times

A LITTLE BIT EXTRA

Horrific news out of Belgium this morning. At least 13 are dead and 35 are injured after two explosions at the Brussel’s airport. – BBC

Photo: Getty Images