PLANO, Texas--(BUSINESS WIRE)--Tyler Technologies, Inc. (NYSE:TYL) announced a new Tyler-wide continuous improvement initiative at Connect, the company’s annual educational gathering for users, held this year in Atlanta. Building on the company’s evergreen approach to software licensing, the company introduced EverGuide™ to nearly 2,800 public sector clients from 54 North American states and provinces and one U.S. territory.

EverGuide will provide the focus and structure to help public sector clients maximize, protect and get the most from their software investment by ensuring they receive maximum benefit from each enhancement released through the company’s evergreen approach to releases and updates.

“Tyler’s clients receive the latest technology developments, releases and updates without paying additional license fees as part of our evergreen philosophy,” said President and CEO John S. Marr Jr. “EverGuide is an extension of that evergreen philosophy, and our goal is to help clients continue to evolve and expand their use of the functionality and enhancements of their Tyler products. We see EverGuide as a catalyst for our clients’ organizations to embrace change, commit to training and developing their staff, and fully use the wide ranges of Tyler’s service and support offerings.”

Tyler Connect is an excellent opportunity for users of Tyler products to learn about product functionality, exchange ideas with peers, and view highlights of future software developments. The conference kicked off with product general sessions featuring a taped welcome message from Atlanta Mayor Kasim Reed, followed by three days of more than 700 training sessions across 32 educational tracks. Sessions included presentations and discussions on industry topics, such as Affordable Care Act reporting, transparency, public access, cloud solutions, and mobile applications.

Product tracks included classes for CLT Appraisal Services™, Eagle™, Eden™, EnerGov™, iasWorld®, Incode®, Infinite Visions®, Munis®, Odyssey®, Orion™, Tyler Public Safety™, Tyler SIS™, Versatrans® and other Tyler products.

Microsoft® was platinum sponsor for the conference, with gold sponsorships by Andrews Technology and ExecuTime™, a titanium sponsorship by Linebarger Goggan Blair & Sampson LLP, and bronze sponsorships by DataProse®, TimeClock Plus®, Sierra-Cedar and Brazos Technology. In total, 44 exhibitors and sponsors participated.

About Tyler Technologies, Inc.

Tyler Technologies (NYSE: TYL) is a leading provider of end-to-end information management solutions and services for local governments. Tyler partners with clients to empower the public sector — cities, counties, schools and other government entities — to become more efficient, more accessible and more responsive to the needs of citizens. Tyler’s client base includes more than 13,000 local government offices in all 50 states, Canada, the Caribbean, the United Kingdom and other international locations. Forbes has named Tyler one of “America’s Best Small Companies” eight times and the company has been included six times on the Barron’s 400 Index, a measure of the most promising companies in America. More information about Plano-based Tyler Technologies can be found at www.tylertech.com.