Erica Packer focusing on her children as she opens up for the first time since her marriage break-down

LOOKING radiant, Erica Packer has returned to the spotlight, following her highly publicised split from husband James.

And she says she has no plans to return to Australia.

The model, who flew into Sydney from Los Angeles on Friday, has posed for the cover of Vogue in a series of stunning portraits.

She said her priority is maintaining a stable environment for her children.

Packer, 36, has been based in LA with the couple's three children, Indigo, 5, Jackson, 3, and Emmanuelle 1, since separating from James last month.

With James spotted back in Bondi, Packer is staying in the couple's mansion in Vaucluse while she visits, but is returning to LA later in the week.

In her only interview since the split, Packer blamed busy lives and too much time spent apart as the cause of the break-down of the relationship, but said she remains on good terms with her ex-husband.

"The actions we take now, the way we behave, will affect three little innocent people for the rest of their lives," she said.

She will attend an exclusive event in Sydney tomorrow to launch her first cover for the fashion magazine.

Packer posed with her children for the magazine in July, in a series of exquisite images taken in the gardens of Chateau de Voisins, near Paris. The children appear happy and playful, even hiding under her dress in one photo.

She said she remains close to James's mother Ros and sister Gretel. "Gretel and Ros are amazing women. I really admire and appreciate my in-laws," she said.

"They are strong, they are there for me, and we are all in regular contact. We are - and remain - a family."

The model had travelled to Paris with Vogue, where she attended the haute couture shows. At the Dior show, she fell in love with a mauve full-length gown that she wears on the cover of Vogue, on sale tomorrow.

Packer has been a customer of the French fashion house since she wore Dior couture on her lavish wedding to the billionaire, in the French Riviera six years ago.

Packer, formerly Erica Baxter, added that she has not reverted to her maiden name but plans to continue to use the Packer name "for now" and to throw herself into her work for UNICEF's Erica Packer Project, which funds the building of schools in disadvantaged communities in Laos.

This weekend friends have been rallying around the popular model who said she has felt the loss of her mother Sheelah intensely during the past few months. Her Gunnedah-based mother lost a long battle with cancer two years ago.

"Not a day goes by when I don't miss Mum and wish she were here," she said.

"My mother and I were always close. I think losing my mum has been one of the saddest and hardest things for me.

"And going through all of this recently without her has been really hard."