People from techie bloggers to former President Jimmy Carter are upset about National Security Agency surveillance of U.S. citizens, and understandably so. Carter told NBC's Andrea Mitchell on “Meet the Press” that he thinks the NSA is reading his emails, and so he sends a letter the old fashioned way when he wants privacy. That may be a bit of paranoia on the former president’s part, but there’s nothing wrong with a little added caution. And Facebook founder Mark Zuckerberg said he has called President Obama personally to complain about the damage the NSA revelations have done to the tech industry. (Those revelations were ironically disclosed by Edward Snowden, who himself violated the ultimate privacy rules – a national security oath – to inform the world of what U.S. intelligence-gathering agencies were up to.)

This is an important discussion to have, and while it may be a tad self-centered to imagine that the NSA is actually listening to all of our phone calls and reading all of our emails, the revelations of the agency’s data-mining activities have indeed been disturbing. Unfortunately, they have distracted from another insidious privacy violation – that of private companies, including those whose CEOs are complaining about the NSA.

[See a collection of editorial cartoons on the NSA.]

Try Googling anything about anything and you will be inundated with ads someone – or something – has chosen just for you. The idea is that the Internet is somehow doing us all a favor, figuring out who we are and what we want, and giving us ads that may direct us to the right products. But it instead feels like someone has gone through my trash, checked out the spines of the books in my home bookcases, and watched over me as I read a certain story in the paper. News sites tell me about stories I “might be interested in” based on another piece I clicked on and read. For the record, they’re usually wrong. If I order a book on Amazon, I’m sent emails suggesting other books I might want to read based on my recent purchase. Nope. They tend to completely misread me and my literary tastes, which is especially disappointing for a company in the book business.

This really hit home for me in the past couple of months. My mother, who recently passed away, was diagnosed with an aggressive and untreatable tumor in her brain stem. I was devastated and while I was told there was no hope, I still wanted to know what this illness was and how it would affect my mother, or at least her comfort level. I wanted to know how it happened, why something so awful and destructive could be visited on my mom. So I looked it up on the Centers for Disease Control website and other health-related sites.

From that hour on, I was inundated with ads about cancer – everything from hospices to shady treatments to dealing with grief over terminal illness and death. These ads, we are meant to believe, were there to help me. Instead, I wanted to find the people who designed the ads, and, even more so, the people who wrote the algorithm that sent them to my inbox and search engine pages, and throttle them. I have never felt so violated, as companies sought to exploit my intense pain at the speedy deterioration and death of my mother. It was as though some cancer treatment center had been following me around, listening to my calls and reading my mail, both on paper and online.

[See a collection of political cartoons on the economy.]

There are financial dangers, as well – remember all those people who made debit card purchases at Target and had their banking information stolen? And now, we find out, the federal government told 3,000 companies last year that their computer systems had been hacked. And yet, how many of us got letters (snail mail or email) from companies alerting us to the government tipoff, and encouraging us to either cut up our store credit cards or take other precautions?

I don’t want the government monitoring or interfering with my life. And I’m not convinced national security requires all that data mining. But when private companies invade our private lives and private pain, it’s about nothing more than money and selling. And that’s worse.