The community of St. John packed a town hall meeting Sunday night after the town's only grocery store announced it is closing in less than two weeks.

It was standing room only for dozens as more than 200 people showed up. Many came with words of frustration and disappointment after hearing about the store's abrupt decision.

"If you're serious, clip your Dillons card," said a resident from Stafford. "Kroger is doing you guys bad."

"I think the fact that they're giving us two weeks tells us what we need to know," said St. John mayor Juliann Owens.

Owens says she was told about the grocery store's plans on Friday. She tells KAKE News it doesn't sound like there's any way they can convince Dillons Market to stay.

"I was given several different reasons," she said. "Financial being one. The fact that they can't expand our store because it's a small 8,000 square foot store and there's no place for them to go."

Now, St. John residents will have to drive more than 25 miles to Great Bend or Pratt, or to a small family grocery store 12 miles away in Stafford.

"When you're over 80 years old you need somewhere that's close and convenient," said Jaqueline Moody of St. John. "They have everything that most people want."

Back at the meeting, residents were tossing around ideas for how to attract a new grocer to town.

"If St. John is fortunate enough to have someone come in, you have to support them 100 percent," said the Stafford grocery store owner.

If that doesn't pan out, there are talks of a volunteer-run independent grocery store that would be supported by the community. In the meantime, St. John residents plan to help out those who can't make the drive out of town to keep their fridges full.

"Right now we have groups that are forming to try to help those who can't get out and around," said Owens.

St. John city council plans to talk about funding a small town bus to take the elderly to either Great Bend, Pratt or Stafford to get groceries.

The St. John grocery store officially closes Saturday, February 6.