When Topekan Judy Arnold began researching to create a directory for Holton’s Catholic cemetery, she had no idea it would lead her to a distant relative — a World War I veteran whose grave had never been marked with a headstone.

Arnold obtained records from St. Dominic Catholic Church’s cemetery board for Mt. Calvary Catholic Cemetery, but earlier records were incomplete. She looked up obituaries by conducting research through the Kansas State Historical Society, the Topeka and Shawnee County Public Library, and the Jackson County Historical Society’s office.

Arnold, who retired from the Department of Veterans Affairs and whose husband, Merlin, was a career military serviceman, also was looking up veterans’ information.

“I found this person who didn’t have a stone and found that he was a veteran,” she said.

The man, Daniel B. Marshall, who served as an Army sergeant in World War I, died March 30, 1931, in a soldier’s home in Indiana at age 42. Arnold proceeded to complete the paperwork to get Marshall a military marker, but it wasn’t until after she had done some research that she realized he was a cousin of her grandmother.

“I didn’t know that at the time I ordered the stone,” she said.

Arnold said she hasn’t found any additional information about Marshall’s military service, and she has found very little about his life. He was divorced, and his remains were shipped from Indiana to his brother in Jackson County. He is buried with his parents and brothers, who she said all seem to have markers.

She isn’t sure why his grave was never marked, but says it is possible the family couldn’t afford it. Times were tough in 1931.

But 83 years and one day after Marshall died, he got his marker. Arnold said she is pleased with the way things turned out.

“It made me feel even better to know that he was related,” she said. “I think my grandmother would be pleased that there was a stone there.”

Several of Arnold’s family members are buried at Mt. Calvary, so when she visited the small cemetery in Duluth, in Pottawatomie County, and used its directory while doing genealogy work for a grandson who was traveling to Germany, she thought it would be nice to build a similar directory for Mt. Calvary. That was about a year ago, and she spent countless hours researching for it while her husband and others donated time and materials to build it.

Because of the Arnolds’ military background — Merlin retired in 2003 as a chief master sergeant in the Kansas Air National Guard’s 190th Air Refueling Wing — Judy also wanted to ensure veterans buried in the cemetery were recognized. She found that some Civil War veterans had no flag holders at their graves, and also looked for members of the VFW and American Legion’s auxiliaries.

She found that, of the nearly 500 graves in the cemetery, 68 belonged to veterans. About 20 graves were missing flag holders. Those veterans’ service ranged from the Civil War to Vietnam, she said.

While the directory was completed in December, Arnold says she likely isn’t finished with the project yet. There are still four unmarked graves in the cemetery that she hasn’t been able to identify, and she is still looking for obituaries of others interred there.

Still, she said she feels proud of her work.

“It’s been a very rewarding project for me,” she said.