AL.com Opinion About the writer

Guy Falkenberry is a Madison County Republican. His views do not necessarily represent the views of other Republicans in this area. He can be reached at gfalkenberry@gmail.com.

The mid-term elections are over. The people have spoken in a loud and clear voice. They have given control of the Senate to the Republicans and increased the Republican majority in the House. The people dealt President Obama a resounding repudiation of his policies and dictatorial style of governing.

What does this mean for the country? What can we expect from the President? Will the President reach across the aisle to work with Republicans; will he compromise or will he continue to ignore the American people and act like a king-dictator?

His answer is clear. The President has declared political war! The first shot was fired when President Obama granted amnesty to millions of illegal immigrants against the will of the American people and without Congressional approval, through "executive orders" even though there is NO Constitutional provision nor statute that explicitly permits "executive orders".

Of course this is nothing new to the President and the Democrats. Remember in 2009 when the Democrats controlled the House and Senate and passed Obamacare in the middle of the night without anyone reading the thousands of pages of the law and over the vehement objections of the American people. Remember when House Speaker Nancy Pelosi famously said - "But we have to pass the bill so that we can find out what's in it...."

New information has come to light from one of the architects of the Obamacare law, MIT professor Jonathan Gruber, that has confirmed what many of us knew all along; that the law would have never passed Congress without political deception, sleight of hand, underhanded backroom deals and outright lies.

Professor Gruber said, "This bill was written in a tortured way to make sure CBO did not score the mandate as TAXES. If CBO scored the mandate as taxes, the bill dies. Okay, so it's written to do that. In terms of risk-rated subsidies, if you had a law which said that healthy people are going to pay in - you made explicit healthy people pay in and sick people get money, it would NOT have passed... Lack of transparency is a huge political advantage. And basically, call it the stupidity of the American voter or whatever, but basically that was really, really critical for the thing to pass."

Our constitutional republic divides the government into three co-equal branches - Legislative, Judicial and Executive. The purpose of this separation of powers is to have built-in checks and balances and to prevent abuses of power. Any President, Democrat or Republican, has limited powers granted to him or her by the Constitution to keep him or her from abusing and or going beyond their Constitutionally granted powers.

The President takes an oath that says:

"I do solemnly swear that I will faithfully execute the Office of President of the United States, and will to the best of my ability, preserve, protect and defend the Constitution of the United States."

President Obama throughout his presidency has consistently violated the letter, intent and spirit of his oath of office and the Constitution. The President is acting like a king-dictator rather that the President of the United States of America.

The President is acting not for the good of the country as a whole but pursues policies designed to "transform - change" America, dividing us into small groups, rewarding people and groups who support his dictatorship and punishing others who do not.

The ideals that make America great; liberty, freedom, entrepreneurism, and individual responsibility are under constant attack by President Obama and the Democrats who are trying to replace our ideals with collectivism, central planning, an all-powerful central government, re-distribution of wealth and a social welfare state.

If the country is to survive this President, the Republican led Congress will have to fight a two-front war. The first front will be to combat and defeat the President's policies and agenda until the 2016 Presidential election and the second front is to conduct a nationwide campaign on why traditional, conservative, Constitutional principles are the best way to govern and reinvigorate the economy, making the American dream of prosperity available to all Americans.