This year, Michigan voters have a choice between a Senate candidate who has been a leader on women's rights and someone who says women don't want equal pay. They'll be deciding between a candidate willing to debate his opponent and talk to virtually any reporter who has a question, and one who hides behind millions of dollars of attack ads funded by the billionaire right-wing activist Koch brothers. Between Gary Peters and Terri Lynn Land, Peters is an easy pick for the U.S. Senate race in Michigan.

Advertisement - Continue Reading Below

Peters cosponsored crucial pieces of women's rights legislation, including the Protect Women's Health From Corporate Interference Act to overturn the Hobby Lobby decision and ensure that women get access birth control no matter what the religious views of their employer are, and the Women's Health Protection Act, which fought back against aggressive abortion restrictions. He also supported the Lilly Ledbetter Fair Pay Act, giving female employees the tools to fight unequal pay in court. He's pro-choice and opposed a Michigan law that blocks any insurance company, including private ones, from covering abortion care — even for women who are victims of rape or incest. The "rape insurance" law passed, and now if they want abortion covered, women have to get a separate insurance rider. For his efforts, Peters was the target of a smear campaign from Right to Life Michigan, which claimed Peterson wanted to make abortion "accessible and cheap for his daughters." What Peters actually said was a bit more nuanced: "As the father of two daughters, I struggle with how to tell them that the state we love and where our family has been for generations is now unfairly discriminating against them and makes health care less affordable."

His opponent, Terri Lynn Land, isn't as worried about unfairly discriminating against women or making health care less affordable and accessible — she opposes abortion in nearly all cases, even when a woman's health is threatened or when she's a rape victim. Land also supports the extreme Human Life Amendment, which would potentially outlaw abortion, in-vitro fertilization, and some forms of contraception. And while she now says she's for equal pay, she also says she would have voted against the Paycheck Fairness Act and in 2010, told a crowd at a women's club, "Well, we all like to be paid more and that's great, but the reality is that women have a different lifestyle. They have kids. They have to take them to get dentist appointments, doctor's appointments, all those kinds of things. And they're more interested in flexibility in a job than pay."

That's right: Women are more interested in taking their kids to the dentist than in getting paid at the same rate as their male colleagues for doing the same work.

When it comes to raising the minimum wage — most minimum wage workers are women — Peters supports it. A spokeswoman for Land says Land opposes it. Land herself won't say what she thinks, which is true for a whole sleight of issues from Medicare to defunding the Affordable Care Act to immigration to insurance coverage for abortion — quite possibly because her opinions are far to the right of most Michiganders. Instead of actually talking with voters and the press, Land relies on millions of dollars worth of attack ads, some funded by her (family money makes her a millionaire) and some by the Koch brothers. And Land has tried to purge voters from the rolls.

Peters has also used his time in Congress to co-sponsor legislation to prevent interest rates on student loans from going up. "If we're serious about giving all Americans a fair shot at the American Dream, then we need to get serious about making higher education more affordable," he said in a statement. And he's an advocate for LGBT rights — he fought the military's Don't Ask, Don't Tell policy, cosponsored the Employment Non-Discrimination Act, and when the Supreme Court struck down the Defense of Marriage Act, said, "No American should be denied the chance to legally marry and raise a family with the one they love and with all the benefits that entails." Land thinks marriage should be between a man and a woman.

Peters has also earned the endorsements of Planned Parenthood Action Fund, NARAL Pro-Choice America, United Autoworkers, and the League of Conservation Voters. He could just be another cog in the congressional machine. Instead, he's led on the issues that improve women's health and financial lives, that help more students go to school, and that move us toward fair treatment for lesbian and gay Americans. He's served Michigan well in Congress, and we hope to see him in the Senate next year.

This is part of Cosmopolitan.com's midterm election coverage. Share this article with #CosmoVotes and #CosmoVotesMI and make sure to vote on November 4. Find out how to register in your home state here.