Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share Anti-abortion groups as well as pro-abortion rights supporters gathered Saturday morning at the new Planned Parenthood clinic on South Seventh Street in Louisville. Marty Pearl/The Courier-Journal

Buy Photo A group of pro-abortion rights demonstrators bring signs to an anti-abortion rally in front of Louisville's new Planned Parenthood facility. Feb. 6, 2016 (Photo: Scott Utterback/The CJ )Buy Photo

Anti-abortion advocates rallied in front of the new Planned Parenthood on Seventh Street on Saturday to oppose the clinic’s attempts to offer abortion services and the placement of the facility “on the doorstep of west Louisville.”

"It is really not healthy for our community to have another abortion mill located right in the heart of the inner city," said Sisters for Life President Angela Minter, one of the rally's organizers. " ... I believe it undermines the morals of our community and encourages irresponsibility, for the black community in particular, because a lot of people are uninformed about the disproportionate havoc that abortion is having on the black community.”

It was a sentiment echoed by other members of the black community in attendance, including Rick Howland, 68, who lives in the Algonquin area.

“Eighty-some-odd percent of Planned Parenthood’s facilities are always in minority neighborhoods," he said. "They don’t put them out in St. Matthews.”

A spokeswoman from Planned Parenthood of Indiana and Kentucky said in a statement that "in many instances, we are the sole provider of essential health care for underserved populations living in the commonwealth," but she declined to comment further about the protesters' claims.

However, Betty Cockrum, president and CEO of Planned Parenthood of Indiana and Kentucky, said during a recent visit to Louisville that Planned Parenthood needed a larger facility so it raised money to buy and renovate a former warehouse on Seventh Street to ensure a "quiet, inviting, private place" for patients.

Once it moved to the new facility that replaced its former office on South Second Street, it applied for the license as a health clinic that would include abortion services, she said. Planned Parenthood has since suspended abortion services temporarily while it tries to resolve a dispute about the clinic's license application with the administration of Gov. Matt Bevin.

Kentucky previously had only one abortion provider, a private clinic in Louisville that also operates a part-time clinic in Lexington.

Saturday's event, which drew about 200 people total, attracted a small group of pro-abortion rights advocates who “felt sick” after hearing that the message of the anti-abortion rally would not recognize “the care that happens” in Planned Parenthood clinics, said Sara Wood, 28, of Germantown. The people who use Planned Parenthood are “healthy women, happy women,” she said, who rely on the clinic for things like intrauterine devices and other forms of birth control.

She carried a sign that read “Charm is deceptive and beauty is vain … but a woman without rights ain’t playin’.” She and other protesters danced to a playlist of female musicians – “celebrating our lady-ness,” Wood said.

While the dancing drew momentary ire from a couple nearby anti-abortion protestors, interaction between the two groups was limited. There was no exchange of obscenities or hostility like John Sohl, the president of Louisville’s Pro-Life Future, had seen at other events.

“There’s been videos of people cussing each other out, having obscene gestures and all the negativity, and we don’t want that,” said Sohl, 25. “Unfortunately, by its very nature, this is a controversial issue. We get that. But that is not our intention. We have to call attention to the negative, but ultimately, ... I hope most everyone here is trying to get across a message of hope, truth, beauty, goodness and freedom.”

Reporter Kirsten Clark can be reached at (502) 582-4144. Reporter Deborah Yetter contributed to this story.

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1T5AW7I