As George Osborne puts the finishing touches to his budget, voters may well be bracing themselves for yet another smoke-and-mirrors performance. Like so many chancellors before him, the government’s austerity champion has had to fend off plenty of accusations of double-counting, re-announcing and empty promises.



Related: George Osborne gets mixed economic news in week before budget

So what to make of the budget day pledges? The government insists progress has already been made. A spokesman said: “The government set out how it will spend £4tn over the next five years, so obviously it is far too early to make any assessment of policy announcements for that period.”

We take 18 announcements from the chancellor’s autumn statement and spending review in November and look at what he has achieved so far.

Cutting the deficit

What the Treasury said “Over the next four years, the deficit will have been eliminated and the government will be running a surplus – raising more than is spent.”



What has happened Based on the latest official figures on Britain’s public finances, things are not looking great for this year. Against the backdrop of softer than expected economic growth, government receipts have disappointed and experts say the deficit for this financial year will probably overshoot the £73.5bn forecast by fiscal watchdog, the Office for Budget Responsibility (OBR).

New homes

What the Treasury said By the end of the decade, 400,000 affordable new homes will be delivered, almost half of them starter homes sold at a 20% discount and 135,000 of them under the Help to Buy shared ownership programme.



What has happened Some traditional affordable housing has been replaced by starter homes, but councils will not have to require them on developments until the housing bill is passed. The Help to Buy shared ownership programme launches in April.

Funding social care

What the Treasury said Councils will be able to add 2% on council tax to pay towards social care in their areas.



What has happened Take-up has been fast but there are worries this change will raise households’ council tax bills without doing much to plug a gap in social care funding. So far, 143 of the 152 councils that can introduce the 2% rise have approved it or are considering it, according to the Local Government Association (LGA). That will raise £372m to pay for social care services but 152 councils that provide social care will receive £2.5bn less in revenue support grant funding from central government to run local services in 2016-17, the LGA says.

Enterprise zones

What the Treasury said £12bn set aside for a local growth fund and 26 new or extended enterprise zones.

What has happened The first 16 of the new and extended zones go live this April and the others start in April 2017. Business groups have welcomed the move to expand enterprise zones, which are hubs where companies can benefit from lower taxes and simpler planning rules. The hope is that they will see new companies and jobs spring up around England and help redress the long-standing problem of unbalanced growth.

Facebook Twitter Pinterest A nurse prepares medication in A&E at Royal Stoke University hospital in Stoke-on-Trent. Photograph: Alicia Canter for the Guardian

Nurses

What the Treasury said The government will replace direct funding with loans for new student nurses so that it can abolish a “self-defeating” cap on training places and create up to 10,000 new training places in this parliament.

What has happened The changes are due to come in for new students in August 2017. The public service trade union, Unison, is worried the shift from grants to loans will deter people from becoming nurses. Its general secretary, Dave Prentis, said: “This disastrous decision will mean nurses graduate in 2020 with over £52,000 of debt.” But the government says it needs to make the switch to loans to get more nurses and midwives into the NHS. The Department of Health is due to consult on how to implement the changes soon.

£600m more for mental health services

What the Treasury said £600m “additional funding” was pledged for mental health services.

What has happened The Mental Health Network, which represents NHS mental health trusts, notes that the £600m money was only due to be spent from the start of the new financial year starting in April. Stephen Dalton, its chief executive, says: “The £600m was never supposed to be for this year. It’s wrapped up in the [recently published] mental health taskforce, which is a five-year programme.” Unison says the £600m announced in November “simply replaced money that had been slashed from mental health budgets in previous cuts.”

Welfare savings



What the Treasury said The £12bn of welfare savings committed to at the election “will be delivered in full”.



What has happened This goal seem optimistic, says the Institute for Fiscal Studies. Picking over the autumn statement, the thinktank noted that less than half of those savings would be delivered by 2017-18.

Money for roads

What the Treasury said Transport capital spending will increase by 50% to a total of £61bn and that will fund the “largest road investment programme since the 1970s”. There will be more than £5bn spent on roads maintenance this parliament.

What has happened Much of the £61bn has been sucked into the additional costs of HS2, as well as another £700m to help Network Rail combat its overspend on electrification projects. A £15bn road investment strategy, for maintenance, converting the hard shoulder of motorways and new roads, had already been announced in 2014.



Whiplash claim crackdown

What the Treasury said The government will reduce car insurance premiums by £1bn by ending claims for injuries such as whiplash, projected to save an average of £40-£50 from bills annually.

What has happened The government has been talking to representatives from the claimant and insurance sectors but has not yet started consultations on the changes. The fear is that it will be years before such changes bring down insurance premiums.

The motorists’ group, the AA, is not getting its hopes up: “It’s disappointing that it’s taking time for new legislation to take effect but insurance companies could be expected to reflect the expected fall in small claims in lower premiums. That has yet to happen. The government is constantly playing catch-up with an industry that is finding ways to encourage people to make claims even when an injury hasn’t happened.”

Arts Council boost

What the Treasury said The government is increasing the cash that will go to “the Arts Council, our national museums and galleries”.

What has happened After fearing dramatic cuts before the autumn statement, arts leaders and museum chiefs welcomed this unexpectedly good settlement for the sector. But there are fears that cuts to council budgets will continue to put pressures on the arts and museums as local authorities look for savings.

Technology investment for courts



What the Treasury said Under-used courts will be closed and the money saved will be used to fund a £700m investment in new technology that will “speed up the process of justice”.



What has happened In February, the government announced the closure of 86 underused courts and tribunals in a move expected to raise £40m to reinvest in the justice system. So iPad-wielding judges may be just round the corner.

Prison closures and new modern prisons

What the Treasury said Old Victorian prisons that are not suitable for rehabilitating prisoners will be sold and the government will spend more than £1bn “in this parliament” building nine new modern prisons. Holloway prison – the biggest women’s jail in western Europe – will close.

What has happened The government wants to close Holloway by mid-2016 and is understood to be on track to build the nine new, modern prisons – five of which will open in this parliament. The Prison Reform Trust wants to see money raised from the Holloway sale being invested in community sentences and women’s centres and “not just funnelled down the prison-building drain”.

Facebook Twitter Pinterest Apprentices at work in Goldthorpe, South Yorkshire. Photograph: Asadour Guzelian

Apprenticeship levy and raising the number of apprentices

What the Treasury said The government had already said it wanted to create 3m new apprenticeships by 2020, funded by a levy on large employers. The apprenticeship levy launches in April 2017, at a rate of 0.5% of an employer’s pay bill.

What has happened: There has been encouraging news on the number of companies offering apprenticeships and the number of young people signing up for them. But there are worries among business groups that the new levy could prove to be counterproductive. The manufacturers’ organisation, the EEF, says it is disappointed that the government has told businesses what they will need to pay into the scheme but not what they can get out of it and that could start to hamper recruitment plans and put the 3m target at risk. The CBI business group agrees. “Many businesses are in the difficult position of having to reduce overall training or apprenticeship numbers to pay their levy,” said Neil Carberry, CBI director for employment and skills.

Additional clampdown on tax avoidance

What the Treasury said: There will be a fresh clampdown on disguised remuneration schemes, stamp duty avoidance and the abuse of the intangible fixed-assets regime and capital allowances.

What has happened: Hardly a budget goes by without new tax avoidance measures being announced and it remains to be seen what impact these latest changes will have. As Simon Wilks, tax partner at PwC, points out: “You’d be forgiven for believing avoidance and evasion has exploded in recent years when the reverse is true. Even without these measures, avoidance was on the wane.” Economists caution such crackdowns are unlikely to rake in big money for the exchequer.

Housing associations and right to buy

What the Treasury said: Right to buy was extended to housing association tenants, beginning with an immediate pilot scheme.

What has happened: Tenants of five associations have been able to register interest and apply, but no one will be able to buy until the housing bill gets royal assent later this year.



London homebuyer loans

What the Treasury said: A new Help to Buy equity loan scheme for London would let buyers in the capital borrow up to 40% of the purchase price of a new build home.



What has happened: The high price of London property has led to a rush of interest in the scheme, which launched at the start of February. The government said it expected 10,000 households to be helped; so far, more than 50,000 people have expressed interest and more than 300 homes have been reserved.



Aid

What the Treasury said: Aid funding will continue to be protected, including a new £1bn global vaccine fund to speed up the development of drugs to eliminate the world’s deadliest infectious diseases.



What has happened: This is an area where there has been clear progress. The £1bn Ross Fund - named after Sir Ronald Ross, the first British Nobel Laureate who was recognised for his discovery that mosquitoes transmit malaria - has been set up and the government set out in January how the money would be shared out.

Facebook Twitter Pinterest A road closed due to flooding near Endmoor. Photograph: Christopher Thomond for the Guardian

Flood defences

What the Treasury said: By 2021, 300,000 homes will be better protected from flooding, with £2.3bn for more than 1,500 flood defence schemes across the country

What has happened: Following December’s floods, when about 16,000 properties were flooded during the wettest December in a century, the government has made about £200m available to help those affected. The £2.3bn announced at the autumn statement will be invested over the next six years, but Labour has questioned whether is will be enough, saying that the government “underestimated the climate change risk”.