Wells Fargo isn't resting on its record numbers





Photo: Scott Olson, Getty Images Image 1 of / 2 Caption Close Image 1 of 2 Wells Fargo ended a record-setting 2013 with its best fourth quarter ever. Wells Fargo ended a record-setting 2013 with its best fourth quarter ever. Photo: Scott Olson, Getty Images Image 2 of 2 Rock Health CEO Halle Tecco says S.F.'s Mission Bay biotech hub is the perfect home for her 3-year-old company. Rock Health CEO Halle Tecco says S.F.'s Mission Bay biotech hub is the perfect home for her 3-year-old company. Photo: Rock Health Wells Fargo isn't resting on its record numbers 1 / 2 Back to Gallery

Wells Fargo is firing on most, if not all, cylinders.

The San Francisco bank reported a record $21.9 billion profit for 2013, including a best-ever fourth-quarter profit of $5.6 billion. An "outstanding year" indeed, as CEO John Stumpf called it.

"It reflects the strength of their diversified model," said Joe Morford, a bank analyst at RBC Capital Markets, noting in particular a loan growth of 9 percent, to $828.8 billion, and the bank's forecast for more growth in 2014. "Credit continues to improve," he said.

Some areas were stronger than others, like overall loans and deposits as the Wachovia acquisition continues to bear fruit, and wealth management, which accounted for 16 percent of the bank's revenues and 8 percent of its earnings.

"The increase in trust and investment fees was broad-based, reflecting higher assets under management ... driven by strong market performance and higher net flows," said the bank.

But there's more money to be had.

"There is still more opportunity out there," said Morford. A recent RBC report on Wells' wealth management units - which account for approximately $1.5 trillion in assets - identified "significant untapped opportunities" like increased cross-selling and streamlining services for its estimated 5 million affluent and high-net-worth customers, and charging them higher rates. Especially "if the Fed were to raise short term interest rates," said the report.

On the downside, there was a slight dip in revenue, from $86.1 billion to $83.8 billion. And mortgage originations - Wells is the largest originator in the country - dropped substantially, from $80 billion to $50 billion in the fourth quarter. At the same time, mortgage servicing revenue was way up, again reflecting Wells' diversified model.

Still, mortgage lending is a weak spot, as one analyst noted on Tuesday's earning call. "Given how rapid the decline in refinance has been and is likely to continue, are there any either other steps you're taking or strategic opportunities that you see kind of in the business over the next couple of quarters?" the analyst asked.

Look to the affluent and high-net-worth individuals was the answer. "Well, we announced recently that we're going to be doing some portfolio lending for jumbos and high-end, and we have an emphasis on that," said Stumpf.

Foot on the pedal: What better place for a VC-backed digital health accelerator to locate its headquarters than San Francisco's Mission Bay?

Rock Health - a 3-year-old company that provides seed capital, mentorship and operational support for digital health startups - moved into the city's biotech hub this week, close to UCSF, the California Institute for Quantitative Biosciences (QB3) and 57 life-science companies.

"Our new home is the perfect place for our entrepreneurs to gain firsthand insights into the challenges of health care providers and the real life experience of patients," said CEO Halle Tecco.

Rock Health has provided seed funding, usually in the $100,000 to $1 million range, for about 60 companies such as Lift Labs, a San Francisco startup developing digital tools for Parkinson's disease sufferers; Benefitter, a San Francisco software service for employers dealing with the Affordable Care Act; and Kit Check, a Washington, D.C., startup whose system enables hospital pharmacies to speed up and cut costs in processing medical kits.

Its blue-ribbon financial and other backers include Kleiner Perkins Caufield & Byers, Mayo Clinic, Genentech, GE, Kaiser Permanente, Silicon Valley Bank and Harvard Medical School.

"We are thrilled to have Rock Health join Mission Bay's world-class life science and technology cluster," said Joel Marcus, CEO of Alexandria Real Estate Equities, a California real estate investment trust focusing on biotech that owns and has developed much of Mission Bay, including Rock Health's headquarters at 455 Mission Bay Blvd. "This is a huge moment for life science, for Mission Bay and for San Francisco," he said.

Rescue or poisoned chalice? Accenture, the lead contractor building California's online health insurance exchange, has a new task: Fix HealthCare.gov.

Fresh from its, should we say, comparatively successful launch of Covered California, the global consulting and technology company has landed a $45 million, one-year contract to take over the national Obamacare site from the unfortunate CGI Federal, which was tarred and feathered for the disastrous HealthCare.gov rollout.

"We are honored to be part of the team helping the federal government meet the health care coverage needs of its citizens," said David Moskovitz, CEO of Accenture Federal Services.

Covered California has signed up approximately 500,000 residents for insurance coverage under the Affordable Care Act - more than a fifth of those enrolled nationwide. The majority of users joined in the last two months of the year, when even HealthCare.gov was seeing better days. And, as The Chronicle's Victoria Colliver noted in a front-page story Monday, Covered California continues to experience "glitches."

"Given all the challenges they face, with technical specs being changed all the time, they probably did the best job possible. But remember, they were being graded on a curve. Compared to CGI they look wonderful," said Micah Weinberg, a health policy consultant and senior policy adviser at the Bay Area Council.

"In retrospect, companies like Accenture might have been the best choice in the first place."