Have you recently been bounced by your doctor? Tell us your story in the comments.

CLEVELAND, Ohio -- The letter from a University Hospitals doctor gets straight to the point: "Sharon Family Physicians finds it necessary to terminate our patient relationship with you."

Ouch. A break-up.

Sent to a patient in Medina County and shared with The Plain Dealer, the letter is a rare example of a primary care doctor booting a patient from a local medical practice. No reason for the termination is given. The letter states only that the doctor regrets that a parting of ways has become necessary.

In an era of tightly regulated medicine, the doctor-patient relationship is more important than ever. But the letter offers a reminder that it is a two-way relationship, and that doctors are empowered to remove patients when they believe they cannot adequately care for them.

Dr. Todd Zeiger, vice president of UH's Primary Care Institute, said a termination can result from an array of circumstances, such as a patient skipping appointments, refusing to take prescribed medications, or ignoring other instructions meant to improve his or her health. In more rare instances, unruly behavior or physical threats can also prompt a doctor to end the relationship.

"It usually happens when a physician believes something in the relationship is broken and they can no longer provide appropriate care," said Zeiger, who also works for Sharon Family Physicians and is not the doctor who sent the letter. "Like any relationship, it only works if both parties are being forthright, trusting and contributing to the relationship."

The physician who sent the letter, Dr. Tyra L. Mone, declined through a spokesman to discuss the reasons for the termination due to patient confidentiality.

In terminating services to a patient, doctors are required to give 30 days notice and provide service to the patient if urgent care needs arise during the interim period.

The Affordable Care Act, commonly known as Obamacare, puts more pressure on the doctor-patient relationship to work effectively. The law supports a so-called "value-based" care system in which doctors are financially penalized for bad patient outcomes.

For example, if a doctor has a patient whose health worsens and results in multiple emergency room visits and re-admissions to the hospital, the doctor will make less money.

Zeiger said the reforms are inducing doctors and health systems to more carefully coordinate care, ensuring that patients get access to prescribed medications and are following through on doctor instructions. That means multiple people -- not just a physician -- are working with patients, although the most important connection is still with the primary care doctor.

"There is no doubt the relationship is extremely important for (value-based care) to be effective," Zeiger said, adding that patients and doctors are "more connected" in terms of the services provided throughout the health care system.

Zeiger said the trend toward value-based care has not lead to an increase in patient terminations. He said University Hospitals allows its doctors to make that call on a case-by-case basis.

"I can think of only two or three times where I've had to make that decision in 20 years," he said. "The message I hope the patient receives is that a different provider may be able to meet your needs better."