BOSTON, Sept. 16, 2014 (GLOBE NEWSWIRE) -- Marcia Wagner, the Managing Director of the Wagner Law Group, announced the opening of a second office in Florida, located in Tampa. "This second office will allow us to provide greater service to Florida companies," says Ms. Wagner. The firm currently has three additional offices – Boston, San Francisco and Palm Beach Gardens in Florida.

The office will be headed by partner Roberta Casper Watson, who is a nationally recognized attorney and Harvard Law School graduate. Ms. Watson joined the firm's Boston office in July 2013 as the head of the Welfare Benefits Department. She is an expert in ERISA, employee benefits, and health and welfare plan issues; she also handles matters with the Affordable Care Act. "Ms. Watson is an invaluable asset to the firm," says Ms. Wagner. "She will be pivotal in maintaining our standards of excellence while serving our clients in our new Tampa office."

Ms. Watson will be joined by paralegal, Meaghan Barnett, with whom she worked for 15 years. Ms. Barnett has over 20 years of experience working in employee benefits and ERISA law. She has drafted plan documents and employee communications for retirement and welfare benefit plans and monitored new laws and regulations regarding ERISA, COBRA, HIPAA, ACA, etc. "Ms. Barnett's exceptional abilities will augment our in-depth experience of our Tampa office," says Ms. Wagner.

Ms. Wagner also announced that Virginia Peabody has been named Senior Consultant. She has been with the Wagner Law Group for over 10 years and is responsible for providing a wide range of consulting services for the firm's clients.

The Wagner Law Group has an exceptionally strong cadre of attorneys. Six of the 22 attorneys are AV-rated by Martindale-Hubbell, a ranking which recognizes very high to preeminent legal abilities and ethical standards. Three attorneys are Fellows of the American College of Employee Benefits Counsel, four attorneys have been selected for the Best in America list of lawyers, four attorneys have been selected for the Massachusetts Super Lawyers list, two attorneys have been selected for the New England's Best Lawyers lists and one attorney has been selected for the Florida Super Lawyers List.

The Wagner Law Group, founded in 1996, focuses on ERISA law, employment law, labor and human resources, employee benefits, welfare benefit plans, corporate law, tax, estate planning and administration, real estate and litigation. Clients, which vary in size from sole proprietors to publicly-traded multistate and multinationals, include nonprofit entities and for-profit companies in nearly every industry.

Committed to ongoing education for their clients and colleagues, the firm regularly produces substantive newsletters and webinars, which can be accessed at www.WagnerLawGroup.com, plus tweets that keep followers up-to-date on recent developments in the industry. (@WagnerLawGroup)

For more information contact: Marcia Wagner Marcia@wagnerlawgroup.com (617) 357-5200