The 19-month saga of the struggling Daughters of Charity Health System took an unexpected turn Friday after the nonprofit hospital chain announced that it will be financed by an East Coast hedge fund.

The selection of BlueMountain Capital Management comes four months after Daughters' first suitor, Prime Healthcare Services, abandoned the Catholic hospital system at the altar, blaming "burdensome conditions" imposed by California Attorney General Kamala Harris on its $843 million proposed deal.

Daughters owns O'Connor Hospital in San Jose, Saint Louise Regional Hospital in Gilroy, Seton Medical Center in Daly City and Seton Coastside Hospital in Moss Beach, as well as two hospitals in Los Angeles.

Under terms of the new deal, the Manhattan-based BlueMountain -- not to be confused with Blue Wolf Capital Partners, the Manhattan-based private equity fund that has now twice failed to woo Daughters -- will initially infuse $250 million into the hospital chain. The hedge fund will continue to operate Daughters as a nonprofit, with an option to buy the chain after three years. The chain would then morph into a for-profit company.

Daughters said it will transfer control of the hospitals to an independent board of directors that will oversee the company that BlueMountain has started to manage the chain. BlueMountain also will honor current union contracts.

Advertisement

Robert Issai, Daughters' president and CEO said in a statement that BlueMountain's selection "ensures the communities served by the hospitals will have uninterrupted access to high quality health care" and that about 17,000 current and former hospital employees will see their current pension benefits remain the same.

Friday's news was welcomed by many hospital employees and patients worried about the hospital chain's fate since the Prime deal collapsed in March.

"I'm relieved that someone wants to acquire the whole system and keep everything in place, including all the contracts," said Jennifer Lawry, a nuclear medicine technologist at O'Connor Hospital.

Maribel Licardo, a longtime registered nurse at O'Connor, said she thought the deal was "better than Prime's, because (BlueMountain) will keep it nonprofit, and we can still continue a lot of the charity care work of the sisters.''

But her union, the California Nurses Association, which represents 1,800 nurses, is taking a wait-and-see approach. It wants assurances that all the hospitals stay open, retain current patient services and honor the collective bargaining rights and current standards for employees.

Less enthusiastic was the Service Employees International Union-United Healthcare Workers West, which represents 2,675 hospital workers in the Daughters chain. Since last fall, it had worked hard to undermine the Prime deal. Both then and now it had hoped bids by labor-affiliated Blue Wolf would prevail.

SEIU-UHW President Dave Regan said Blue Wolf would have protected critical services for local communities, "the essence of Daughters of Charity's mission for more than 100 years." He said his union is anxious to see the details of BlueMountain's proposal to ensure that the "community receives the best possible health care."

Daughters said it expects to file its application with the Attorney General's Office within two weeks, after which Harris' office must not only review the proposal but also vet it at community meetings. Harris is not expected to make a decision until late November.

Still, sources say the 12-year-old BlueMountain Capital is taking on the chain with the understanding it may face the same conditions established by Harris' office in February.

Industry observers say BlueMountain has already benefited from cuts that Prime had proposed -- and Daughters has since implemented -- to improve the chain's balance sheet. That includes shedding almost 300 of its 7,000 workers and shuttering some health care services at Seton Medical Center in Daly City and St. Vincent Medical Center in Los Angeles.

"Daughters did themselves a big service by undertaking those actions because it made itself more attractive to others who won't get saddled with all the baggage from the attorney general," said Steve Valentine, a Southern California-based hospital consultant. "They've given more flexibility to the new buyers."

Valentine called it "a good deal" because BlueMountain "appears to have a very strong and experienced management team, combined with strong financing."

In February, Harris -- who by law must review all hospital sales in the state -- allowed Prime to buy the chain, but only if it met 12 key conditions. Particularly onerous to the Southern California for-profit hospital chain was having to keep most of the facilities open as acute care hospitals for 10 years.

Key to any deal then and now was the hospital board's insistence that prospective buyers agree to purchase the entire chain to better manage the hospital chain's $350 million in pension debt and $400 million in tax-exempt bonds and other liabilities.

For now, BlueMountain -- which has $21 billion in assets under management -- is agreeing to do that.

"We are excited to provide substantial expertise and financial capital to DCHS," said BlueMountain in a prepared statement.

Experts say the health care sector is gaining traction with private equity and hedge funds that recognize a wealth of opportunities under the Affordable Care Act, which has greatly increased the number of Americans seeking health care services.

And there's another aim, said Stanley Altshuller, co-founder of Novus Partners, a financial research firm in New York City.

"Some hedge funds have been going into nonprofits to do greater good as well -- and help turn around the image of them being ruthless profiteering or predator investors," Altshuller said.

Private hedge funds operate with little to no regulation from the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission. Hedge fund managers try to reduce investment risk while maintaining a good return on investment.

Friday's announcement couldn't have come soon enough for Daughters, which said it expects to post a net loss of $65 million in fiscal year 2015.

Staff writer Sophie Mattson also contributed to this report.