NATIONAL HARBOR, Md. -- Roughly 85% of Medicaid enrollees will be in managed care organizations by 2020, a health consultant and former state Medicaid director predicted here.

That's in contrast to today, when currently nearly half of Medicaid enrollees are in managed care and roughly 78% of reimbursements come from fee-for-service, said Vern Smith, PhD, managing principal at Health Management Associates in Lansing, Mich.

"There is tremendous upside potential for serving this population going forward," Smith told the audience in his keynote address at the annual conference of the Medicaid Health Plans of America (MHPA), a national trade group of Medicaid health plans.

As Medicaid becomes a larger chunk of state budgets and enrollment grows under Medicaid expansion of the Affordable Care Act, states are turning to managed care to better handle costs, especially for certain populations, said Smith, a former Medicaid director in Michigan.

Michael Rashid, MHPA board chair, too noted the increase in Medicaid managed care during his address. "Traditional fee-for-service Medicaid -- to be honest -- has become a thing of the past," Rashid said.

A total of 36 states and the District of Columbia contract with managed care organizations on a risk basis, according to a 2012 Kaiser Family Foundation survey. Furthermore, half of states contract with managed care plans to provide only specific services, such as behavioral health, dental care, nonemergency transportation, or prescription drugs.

That number will only tick upward, Smith predicted; states making some sort of managed care change will grow next year to 35, up from 28 this year and 20 in 2012, he said. The growth comes from more care coordination initiatives and handling beneficiaries dually enrolled in Medicare.

Smith also noted that 14 states will have some sort of change to their managed long-term care in 2014, when only five did so the last 2 years.

"When Nebraska is doing managed long-term care, you know something significant is happening," Smith said. "That's exactly what is happening right now."

Additionally, 21 states will launch expanded Medicaid health homes next year, Smith said, as they try to better coordinate care amongst providers.

As managed care grows, so too does the risk to providers, who are increasingly responsible for their patients' care.

"You need to have a single entity that's responsible for outcomes and hold that entity accountable for that, and that's what we're trying to do in Arizona," Thomas Betlach, Medicaid director in the state, said at the MHPA conference.

In Arizona, the state Medicaid program has asked its managed care clients to share information on patients with primary care providers to help them manage patients.

Matt Salo, executive director of the National Association of Medicaid Directors in Washington, said Monday almost all of the people covered by the ACA's Medicaid expansion will be in managed care. But Medicaid programs and health plans will need to change the way they handle patients to realize gains from managed care.

"The potential value both from a quality standpoint and also a cost standpoint is huge," Salo said. "But so is the leap in terms of the complexity that is required."

Cindy Mann, JD, director of Medicaid and CHIP Services at the Centers for Medicaid and Medicaid Services, was to deliver to opening keynote address but had to cancel, citing the government shutdown, organizers said.