As the middle child in a family of nine, I know something about the chaos that can unfold when parents leave the home. I have the scars to prove it.

And that's what we're seeing in Trenton these days. Gov. Chris Christie has left the house, and unsupervised Democrats are darting off in different directions, taking orders from no one.

Where are the cigar-smoking political bosses when you need them?

As the year draws to a close, the casualties have been piling up. An effort to expand casino gambling to northern New Jersey failed, freezing out more than $4 billion of potential investment in a weak economy.

How the battle for north Jersey casinos is being hampered by 2017 gubernatorial race

A good plan to expand voting rights failed when minority legislators insisted on giving the vote to ex-cons. "If you're a black legislator in this state and you speak up for civil rights and black folks in particular, no one understands that," says state Sen. Ron Rice (D-Essex).

Democrats announced a package of expensive new initiatives — like tax cuts for seniors to scholarships for college kids — without any means to cover the cost. Have they learned nothing?

And a pair of Republicans promised to perform a magic trick by replenishing the bankrupt transportation trust fund without raising the gas tax. "Absolutely asinine," said Tom Bracken, head of the state Chamber of Commerce.

There was more like this, but you get the idea. New Jersey has lost its political mojo and is spinning out of control. The absence of the governor is at the heart of it, but Democrats seem determined to win a good share of the blame themselves. And they are succeeding.

"It's frustrating," says Tom Byrne, the former chairman of the Democratic State Committee. "Everyone I talk to about state government feels the same way. There's no sitting around and knocking heads together to get things done."

Granted, a few big things did move. But they were bad things.

The most shameless came in the form of a Constitutional amendment that would change the way legislative district lines are drawn. It's dry stuff, but most experts say it would result in Democrats winning more seats.

Republicans cried foul, and for good reason. This was done with all the openness of a tawdry one-night stand at an airport motel. The Assembly hearing took 20 minutes, with one person testifying.

Bang, done. It's likely headed for the ballot in November.

The second "success" was more damaging. State Senate President Steve Sweeney pushed a Constitutional amendment requiring the state to make full pension payments every year, as the public worker unions have long demanded.

The problem is that Sweeney asked the unions for nothing in return, even though their health plans are expensive throw-backs that could be subject to the "Cadillac tax" in Obamacare.

That's the one that knocked the wind out of Byrne. He's the top Democrat on Christie's bipartisan pension panel, a finance guy who spent months studying the numbers. Without cuts to health spending, he says, big tax hikes and meaty spending cuts on things like education are inevitable.

So here we are, drifting towards the waterfalls and unable to steer towards the shore.

If you look at the political forces causing this paralysis, it's a perfect storm.

First, the governor. He's not home. Business and political leaders complain they can't get phone calls returned.

And he can't do anything that would displease the Republican base anyway.

The best example is the state's most pressing crisis: the pending bankruptcy of the transportation trust fund. There is no way to solve it without a tax increase, as even Bracken and the business community say. But Christie can't sign a tax increase during his presidential campaign, so the crisis smolders, the trains break down, and the bridges crumble.

His proposal? He doesn't have one.

Second, the Democrats. The governor's race is two years away, but the party is already splitting into rival camps. The casino meltdown was a standoff between Sweeney, whose base is in South Jersey, and allies of Jersey City Mayor Steve Fulop — both of whom are running for governor no matter what they say.

"Of course I'm the bogeyman in everything," Fulop says of those who blamed him for the casino standoff. "It's easy to point fingers because of the failures in Trenton, because of their inability to get things done."

The third leg of this is history. Most of the state's big problems have deep bipartisan roots, thanks to bad government over the last two decades.

The worry is that it's not getting better. The parents are away. And the kids are misbehaving.

More: Tom Moran columns

Tom Moran may be reached at tmoran@starledger.com or call (973) 836-4909. Follow him on Twitter @tomamoran. Find NJ.com Opinion on Facebook.