TABERNASH — After wrapping the elastic line behind my back and around the unsuspecting instructor’s ankles, the dog somehow managed to slip from her harness like a four-legged Houdini and step aside to admire her handiwork. We had made it less than 100 yards before our skijoring instructor hit the snow-covered turf in a tangle of skis, poles and bungee cord.

“No problem,” professional dog trainer Louisa Morrissey said as she regained her feet. “The most important requirement for dog skijoring is a sense of humor.”

Morrissey, a 15-year practitioner of the Scandinavian sport that teams cross country skiers with their dogs, has pretty much seen it all. Her Silverthorne-based High Country Dogs training business originated under the title of Skijor-n-More, where she combined her passions for dogs and cross country skiing to establish a niche in Colorado’s alpine canine community.

“I had these two pointers that were so high-energy, and I really couldn’t get them the exercise they needed in the wintertime,” said Morrissey, a longtime nordic skiing instructor and former president of the Colorado Cross Country Ski Association. “When I saw skijoring, I was like, ‘Here we go.’ I already cross country skied, and it’s just a great fit for these hunting breeds that love to run and often need something to do in winter.”

While many Coloradans are more familiar with the winter carnival attraction of skiers racing behind horses, dog skijoring is a bit more akin to dogsledding. Teams of one to three dogs are fitted with sled dog harnesses and hooked up to a skier’s harness with a bungee and a short length of dynamic rope. There are no reins, just the skier’s commands and the dog’s desire to run.

With fast teams pushing the 20 mph mark, the Rocky Mountain Sled Dog Club offers skijoring divisions at several of its winter races, giving competitive types something to aspire to. But for many dog owners, simply enjoying a day on the snow with their dogs is enough.

To that end, Morrissey conducts clinics for beginners at ski touring destinations across Colorado, including Devil’s Thumb Ranch near Tabernash and Frisco Peninsula in Summit County. Participants should bring their own dogs and should be comfortable on cross country skis.

“My focus is on positive reinforcement and relationship building,” she said. “This is just a great, easy sport for people to do to get their dogs exercise, which also solves a lot of behavioral problems. And it builds a really nice bond.”

Through her evolution as a certified dog trainer and a member of the Victoria Stilwell (from Animal Planet’s “It’s Me or the Dog”) Positively Dog Training Team, Morrissey has come to recognize the benefits of providing pets with both exercise and a task to focus on.

The desire, and ability, to ski are the most important prerequisites on the human side. Depending upon terrain, any touring skis — classic, skate or telemark — will do. With some coaching, dogs often figure out their role in less than an hour.

“Any dog can do it, especially at a recreational level,” said Morrissey, who prefers to ski behind border collies. “What I really look at is the human-dog team, whether the weight of the skier and ability of the skier matches the dog. A small dog, obviously, with a heavier person who can’t ski very well would not be a good combination. But a lot of it is just doing it and finding a rhythm together.”

Finding a dog-friendly place to practice is also imperative, and there may be no better spot in Colorado than Devil’s Thumb Ranch, which rents skijoring harnesses to guests and opens several miles of groomed trails to skiers with leashed dogs. High Country Dogs will host five beginner skijoring clinics at Devil’s Thumb this winter, including one Sunday and others Feb. 15 and March 15.

Additional clinics will take place in Frisco (on Feb. 22 and March 14), and the shortlist of dog-friendly ski destinations extends to Tennessee Pass, Breckenridge Nordic Center, Snow Mountain Ranch, Crested Butte and the Aspen Golf Course, along with a few other groomed trails. Most of Colorado’s skijoring terrain will be found on jeep roads and snowmobile trails, however.

“As president of the Cross Country Ski Association, I realized there are probably over 1,000 kilometers of groomed trails in Colorado and maybe, at the most, 50 kilometers of those are dog friendly. So it’s a small percentage and I think it really speaks to, as dog owners, if we behave responsibly we can maybe ask for a little bit more,” Morrissey said. “And skijoring is perfect as a dog sport, because by nature they are on-leash at all times.”

Of course, that can also create its own breed of comedy with an excited young ski dog, like mine.

Scott Willoughby: swilloughby@ denverpost.com or twitter.com/ swilloughby