Following the full implementation of its electronic health record system, the Reading Health System is cutting 33 positions in the information technology department.

According to a statement from Reading Health System, in the last three years the health network’s IT division added positions to support the comprehensive build and implementation of Reading HealthConnect, its new electronic health record initiative. With the build and implementation complete, fewer positions in the IT division are needed.

The restructuring also addresses a shift from the support needed to maintain legacy information systems no longer in use following the implementation of Reading HealthConnect.

The reduction impacted 25 employees, and the remainder either transferred to other areas of the system or are a reflection of open positions.

Reading Health System is one of seven health care networks that in September 2013 formed Allspire, with one common goal of providing the most cost-effective and efficient health care and to respond to the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act.

Allspire agreed to gradually implement its first four key initiatives, and information technology topped the list. Five of the seven health networks already use an electronic health care record system, and AllSpire’s intent is to link the software system among the five networks to create one accessible platform for efficiency and effectiveness.

“With AllSpire, we are able to bring the best and the brightest of the health systems together to help improve across the seven systems,” RHS president and CEO Clint Matthews said in a previous interview with Lehigh Valley Business. “And this means better outcomes.”

Reading Health System is an integrated, nonprofit health care system serving communities in Berks and surrounding counties with one full-service hospital, one rehabilitation hospital and more than 1,000 physicians and providers across 46 locations. In 2014, Reading Hospital was the largest employer in Berks County with 7,510 employees.