— One game. Leto’s game.

For fourth-year coach Matt Kitchie, Friday night’s 18-15 win against Middleton, which snapped a 46-game on-the-field losing streak (not counting forfeit wins in 2010 and 2011) and earned him his first victory as the Falcons’ leader, the game will always be special.

But seeing the emotion on the faces of his seniors, who got the first win of their high school careers, that was a moment of pure joy.

“Even though it was one game, that’s the reality, it was just one game,” Kitchie said. “But for these kids, it was our one game, and I hate that it has taken this long, but it was that one game for our kids and that’s the greatest thing for me.”

With four seniors who have played all four years, and another four or five whom Kitchie said have worked through eligibility issues but were always there for practices, the win is something they will never forget.

Kitchie said he has faced a unique set of obstacles at Leto, and he and his coaches have made it about winning in small ways rather than on the scoreboard, but Friday’s victory proved all the previous hardships were worth the effort.

“We have seniors who have been with us for all four years and not on JV, not on varsity sniffed victory and they never quit,” Kitchie said. “It was a moment of joy, and it was unbelievable to be a part of just for those kids.”

Kitchie said the game also meant something to the community around Leto, and as the team bus returned from Middleton, the players were met by a host of athletes from the school’s other programs.

“To me, it is about our community and not just the football team,” Kitchie said. “When we got back to the school, the parking lot was filled with baseball players, soccer players, and really it was a community win and not just a football win. The kids were excited for each other, and I couldn’t be prouder.”

McIntyre’s growth key for Bulls

First-year Bloomingdale coach Brian Surcy, who served as a Bulls assistant before being promoted, said he has seen a big leap in the abilities of junior quarterback Isaiah McIntyre.

Surcy said it has been McIntyre’s growth off the field and his dedication to working on his skills in practice that have shone through.

The quarterback has led the Bulls to a four-game winning streak and has Bloomingdale (6-1) in the playoff hunt with two district games left.

“Over the last two weeks we’ve had some talks and I’ve let him know that we are going to go as far as his will wants us to go,” Surcy said. “He’s really taken that to heart. He has matured leaps and bounds on the field, but what he’s really making progress at now is just becoming a much more young man off the field.”

Surcy said Bulls quarterbacks coach David Grant has helped hone McIntyre’s abilities and that the coaches are seeing the consistency needed for future success.

“I think that all this work with our quarterback coach has really helped him improve,” Surcy said. “First of all, Isaiah is a special player, competitive as (heck) and has a desire to lead this team.”

McIntyre has thrown 11 touchdown passes the past two games and added three rushing scores and a receiving TD during the Bulls’ four straight wins. With three regular-season games to play, the Bulls already have matched the school record for wins in a season (6-4 last season).

Next up for the Bulls is a big district game at Newsome. Both teams (along with Wharton, which Bloomingdale faces in two weeks) are 2-1 in district play, with Plant leading at 3-0.

“We’re not looking anywhere further than Newsome,” Surcy said. “That is our one and only focus on a very tough Newsome team.”

Defense adjusts, rolls in big win

Armwood’s defense had a game plan against Lennard — protect underneath and allow its secondary to match up against the Longhorns’ deep passing attack.

On a few occasions, the plan allowed Lennard freshman quarterback Devin Black to find room to run, as he posted gains of 19, 9 and 6 yards.

However, that was short-lived as Armwood’s defense tightened and relentlessly pressured Black, forcing a number of hurries, recording a pair of interceptions and posting seven sacks in a 56-0 win.

“We had to wait, back up and get back on the ball,” Armwood’s Aaron Covington said. “We just had to fix our mistakes early, and we did that.”

Covington had the difficult job of covering one of the area’s most dynamic receivers in Diontae Johnson, who entered the game averaging more than 100 yards receiving per game. Johnson, Black’s favorite target, was held to four catches for 76 yards. Covington had a fumble recovery and a fourth-quarter interception.

“We had to shut him down and not let (Johnson) get loose with a lot of open space around him,” Covington said. “We were really not focusing on the deep balls, we were focused on shutting down those screens where he has all that open field.”

Seffner Chr. rescinds forfeit

Seffner Christian rescinded its forfeit win against Lakeland Santa Fe Catholic, a school grieving after the death of Gil Kromer.

The Crusaders were scheduled to play Santa Fe Catholic on Oct. 10, but the game was moved to Oct. 11 after about 25 students and employees at Santa Fe came down with a stomach virus. The game was then postponed before Santa Fe forfeited.

Kromer, 17, a starting tackle, died the next day at Tampa General Hospital of what was suspected to be bacterial meningitis.

“Out of respect to their team and school, we thought it was the least we could do,” Seffner Christian athletics director Andy Holmes said.

Top performers

Delvin Austin, King – The junior had a pair of defensive touchdowns in the Lions’ 28-10 win over Jefferson, taking an interception 50 yards in the second quarter and scooping up a fumble and returning it 76 yards in the third.

Derrick Baity, Plant – The senior scored on two long pass plays in the first three minutes of a 48-9 win over Newsome and finished with 200 all-purpose yards. He also had a fourth-quarter interception return for a score.

Logan Crouse, Bloomingdale – The 6-foot-6 wideout caught four touchdown passes from Isaiah McIntyre in a 38-14 win over Riverview, including one in the final minute of the second quarter and another just nine seconds into the second half.

Anthony Hollingshed, East Bay – The sophomore had a breakout performance, rushing for 235 yards and two touchdowns in a 21-7 win against Strawberry Crest.

Quentin Poteralski, Steinbrenner – The senior passed for 218 yards and four touchdowns, while adding 133 rushing yards and two 50-plus-yard scoring runs in a 55-40 win over Wiregrass Ranch.

Tribune reporter Nick Williams contributed to this report.