— Tampa Bay was hurt by an early controversial call Saturday night, but the Lightning did little the rest of the way to help themselves.

The result was a 4-2 loss to the Capitals in front of an announced crowd of 18,506 at Verizon Center.

Caps center Nicklas Backstrom recorded his first career hat trick, while Braden Holtby finished with 26 saves to hand Tampa Bay (19-9-3) its third loss in the past four games.

Tyler Johnson and Matt Carle scored late goals to make it close, and Ben Bishop stopped 24 shots in losing his third consecutive start.

The Lightning grabbed some momentum after killing off two early Washington power plays, then appeared to score the opening goal as Valtteri Filppula circled behind the net and found Steven Stamkos alone with the net empty as Holtby overplayed Filppula at 9:56 of the period.

But after calling the goal good on the ice, officials Dave Jackson and Justin St. Pierre held a lengthy discussion and eventually ruled that Holtby was interfered with by Ryan Callahan, who looked to have been pushed into the Washington goaltender by defenseman Brooks Orpik, even though Holtby put himself out of position to try and make a save.

It’s the third disallowed goal due to goaltender interference called against the Lightning this season, and Saturday’s play looked similar to a goal Chicago scored against Tampa Bay earlier this season when it was ruled Anton Stralman initiated contact with Kris Versteeg into Bishop and a tying goal was allowed to stand. Callahan said after the game he didn’t know if Orpik pushed him into Holtby.

“I feel that we are writing the book on it and I don’t know what the right answer is because it’s just a different explanation every time,’’ Lightning head coach Jon Cooper said. “So it’s really, really frustrating. I don’t know, in my eyes only, how that is not a goal. I think something has to be taken into account, too, and take everybody out of the picture and see if the goaltender would have got back. I don’t think he would have, it doesn’t matter who was there.

“It’s tough, and I don’t have the answer. . . . We make up a lot of rules to open up scoring and this seems counterproductive. But there were four (officials) out there and they saw it one way, and how can you argue. I guess (they) thought their guy had the chance to make the save, that’s the way the rules are set. We know what the rules are going in, and I guess I shouldn’t get so ticked off because I know what the rules are.’’

That could have been one momentum swing, but perhaps the biggest came early in the second when Washington took two simultaneous penalties to give the Lightning a full two-minute, two-man advantage at 6:49. But the only quality chance created came when Callahan got a piece of a rebound to put the puck behind Holtby, but the netminder was able to reach back with his stick and pull the puck back before it crossed the goal line at 7:39. That was one of four shots on goal during the 5-on-3 chance, which created just six shot attempts total.

“Our power play needs to capitalize on those opportunities,’’ Callahan said. “The last couple of games it has definitely been hurting us. Everybody on that power play knows we have to produce when we’re out there, that’s why we’re put out there, to put the puck in the back of the net. As of late we haven’t been doing that, those are big power plays and we have to find a way to get the puck in the net.’’

Perhaps Tampa Bay needs to have more of a shooting mentality.

“Maybe I just got to start blasting the puck and get back to some old habits and good things are going to happen,’’ captain Steven Stamkos said. “Early on (in the power play), take a few shots on net and if it doesn’t go in, create some scrambles then we can make some plays. We’re trying to be too cute. We have to find a way to be better.’’

Washington instead grabbed the momentum as Backstrom scored on a backhander at 10:33 of the second period and added his second of the night with 1:20 left in the period. Just after the Lightning failed to convert on an early third period power play, Backstrom completed the hat trick at 2:17 of the final period.

Johnson and Carle scored 1:55 apart in the final five minutes to make it close before Eric Fehr scored an empty net goal with 38.1 seconds left to send the Lightning into another loss in which they helped determine on their own, even as circumstances may not have went their way.

“It’s not a matter of our work ethic or anything like that, we just have to bring the mentality to play a full 60 minutes,’’ defenseman Victor Hedman said. “It’s just small things, I think we are on the right track. Obviously one win out of four is not good enough, but we feel we are in a good spot.’’

eerlendsson@tampatrib.com

(813) 259-7835

Twitter: @erlendssonTBO