Congress

Q&A: Rep. Ted Lieu

California Democrat Ted Lieu has a degree in computer science from Stanford University.

Ted Lieu is that rara avis on Capitol Hill -- a member of Congress who knows what he's talking about when it comes to technology.

Lieu has a degree in computer science from Stanford, and can dive in when questioning witnesses about the particulars of the out-of-date computer languages still at use in the federal government. He's also a lawyer, an Air Force veteran (and a member of the USAF Reserve), and a firebrand when it comes to privacy rights, as he showed in a recent hearing on encryption, when he counseled a panel of law enforcement witnesses to "just follow the damn Constitution."

As a freshman Democrat, Lieu doesn't have a lot of clout on the Hill. He occupies a cramped three-room warren of offices on a high floor in the Cannon House Office Building, where the air conditioning barely reaches. But he's making a mark as president of the small 2014 class of House Democrats, and as a vocal member of the House Oversight and Government Information Technology Subcommittee.

FCW spoke to Lieu in his office before an IT Subcommittee hearing on cybersecurity at the Department of the Interior. This is an edited transcript of that interview.

FCW: You've been outspoken in opposition to efforts by law enforcement to obtain access to encrypted communications. Computer scientists say that backdoor access, even by law enforcement, introduces risks. Do you think the people advocating for more law enforcement access understand these objections?

LIEU: I respect law enforcement. But their mission is to catch bad guys and prevent bad things from happening. Their mission is not to really think about privacy or think about what could happen if you put in an encryption key. It is clear it will help them catch bad guys. But there's a whole series of other consequences, such as you're weakening encryption systems. And this key is really neutral -- it's just a series of ones and zeros. The computer can't tell if it's the FBI director entering this key or the leader of Hamas or a criminal. All they know is, if this code matches it unlocks encryption. You already have problems with governments being able to keep secrets, so I don't see how there's a way to have any government entity to have some secret encryption key that only they can enter, because eventually someone will figure it out that's not the government. The other problem -- we'd essentially be forcing a private sector product to be weaker because of some possible chance in the future that they might need some information. That seems like a really huge and disproportionate proposal. Because now you're weakening every single iPhone on the off-chance that some terrorist might use the Apple iPhone. And it's so easily defeated. As of right now, there are programs on the Internet where two people can encrypt, which already makes it so law enforcement can't tap.

FCW: On the OPM hack -- with your background in computer science, what are you impressions of the government's cybersecurity posture, and overall approach to IT.

LIEU: Both the private sector and the public sector have problems with cybersecurity. You've seen it at OPM, but you've seen it at Anthem, Target, Home Depot, and on and on. This is clearly a cultural problem in the public and private sector. Within government, I think it does vary by agency and department. The Department of Defense figured out very quickly that we are in a cyber war, and every day hackers are trying to get our sensitive data. That's why they stood up U.S. Cyber Command. That's why they put in two-factor authentication. I was active duty in the Air Force, I'm still in the reserves. Just to use my word processor, it's not enough for me to have a password and login. I'd then have to stick in my physical ID card and a pin code. That makes it harder for foreign adversaries and domestic hackers to breach. Many of the civilian agencies, if you read the IG reports, just don't have that. In the case of OPM, for years they ignored IG report after IG report that said you need to do two-factor authentication. The last IG report, in 2014, said that OPM was in violation of the administration's own guidance. So it does vary by agency.

To me, there is no reason why OPM should be protecting the database of security clearance data. Security clearances are a national security function. It is not a personnel function primarily. If you are going to have an agency with years and years of weak technology and security controls, you can do that, but you just better not store the crown jewels of American intelligence at that agency, which is what we did. That's why [Oklahoma Republican Rep.} Steve Russell and I are working on legislation to move that responsibility out of OPM and into a department that has as its mission fundamentally either national security or intelligence or homeland security.

Every time I go on reserve duty, there are multiple emails that warn me about cyberattacks. There are designated units in the Air Force that try to fool you [with phishing emails] and tell you what you did wrong. There's annual training and refresher courses on cybersecurity. There's a huge culture within the Department of Defense that tells every employee that cybersecurity is really important. You don't see that at OPM, which wouldn't be necessarily so bad, if they didn't have national security information there. It would take a huge amount of resources to ensure that you never have a breach, ever.