Speaking for just over an hour, Gov. Matt Bevin called his budget sober and realistic. He admitted there will be cuts, about 2.5 cents of every dollar for the next 30 months.



"We are going to have to cut the budget, as many of you expected. It's been rumored, it's true. We're going to have to tighten our belts," Bevin said.

But he pledged to give money to education, the pension system and law enforcement.

Gov. Matt Bevin’s first proposed budget would make cuts of roughly $650 million over two years, and the savings would be used to shore up the state’s underfunded pension system and pay for a Medicaid expansion under the federal Affordable Act.

“We are looking to get our financial house in order,” Bevin told reporters before his first State of the Commonwealth address Tuesday night in Frankfort.

An early release of some budget details confirmed that many either feared or hoped for – widespread belt tightening.

Bevin is proposing a 9 percent cut in spending in the next two fiscal years that covered in his biennial budget proposal. He also said he will issue an executive order to cut spending by 4.5 percent in the remaining months of the current fiscal year, which ends in June.

Bevin said 100 percent of lottery money will go back to funding education.

For the most part, how those cuts are implemented will be left up to cabinet secretaries.

“What they do, how they do it, I’m deferring to them,” Bevin said. “I’m not a micromanager.”

Some areas will be spared from cuts, including the Department of Veterans Affairs, local school funding, public safety employees and social workers. The cuts are necessary to address the ailing state pension system, which Bevin said faces $30 billion in unfunded liabilities.

“This entire budget is about saving our pension system,” he said.

One proposal infuses the Kentucky Teacher Retirement System with $600 million over the next two years. There were fewer details on his proposal for the Kentucky Employee Retirement System.

In addition to using the savings from cost-cutting, he is also proposing dedicating any settlement money the state wins. The state often uses sues companies accused of wrong-doing or participates in class-action lawsuits against such companies, and reaps millions of dollars per year from settlements in those cases.

Bevin did not say how much he is budgeting for Medicaid in his press briefing.

Starting next year, Kentucky will have to begin picking up the tab for a Medicaid expansion under the Affordable Care Act, also known as Obamacare.

Bevin is proposing more money for the areas.

He is recommending $100 million in bonds to pay for workforce training programs. He is also proposing an additional $1.5 million for Child Advocacy Centers, which serve child abuse victims.

And his budget honors two initiatives passed in last year’s General Assembly, which call for more money to combat the heroin epidemic and reduce the backlog of untested rape kits and other DNA samples from criminal cases.

Bevin later talks of dismantling Kynect and enrolling Kentuckians instead in the federal exchange. He said the cost cannot yet be estimated but it says savings will be worth it.

House speaker Greg Stumbo doesn't agree with the proposal and while he's hesitant to talk specifics without seeing a more detailed budget, he believed the majority of it will pass the House and Senate.

"As things work as they historically do, it's likely 97 percent or so of the governor's budget would be accepted and that's just the reality of it," Stumbo said.

In closing, Bevin reiterated what he calls 'saving for a down payment of Kentucky's future.'

"This is your money we need to spend it like its your money because it is. Wisely, to be prudent. That's what this budget does," Bevin said.