• More scrutiny of Chicago’s police.

Chicago’s mayor, Rahm Emanuel, is calling on the police department and an independent police review board to immediately review training programs that guide officers on how to handle calls involving mental health crises.

Officers fatally shot two black residents on Saturday, while the city’s police department is already the subject of a federal investigation over its use of force. Mr. Emanuel is the subject of increasing criticism.

• All’s not quiet in Washington.

The House is on a break until next Monday, and the Supreme Court and the Senate are not back until the week of Jan. 11.

In the interim, a gulf is opening among Republicans: those in Congress who are convinced that the Affordable Care Act is collapsing, and Republican governors willing to expand Medicaid coverage through that law.

• No vacation for campaigns.

The field of presidential candidates is spreading out across the U.S. today. This campaign cycle has seen a rise of nearly 90 percent in the number of polls of Republican voters in the first three primary and caucus states.

One of the Republican candidates, Chris Christie, has at times overstated the significance of terrorism prosecutions he oversaw.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

And Marco Rubio is getting a lift on the trail this week from Representative Trey Gowdy, the chairman of the Select Committee on Benghazi.

• A deal on wartime “comfort women.”

South Korea and Japan agreed today to resolve the long dispute over Korean women who were lured or forced into sexual slavery for Japanese soldiers in the 1930s and ’40s.

Get the Morning Briefing by Email What you need to know to start your day, delivered to your inbox. Monday – Friday.

Under the terms, Japan will pay for services that support the women.

BUSINESS

• Stock markets around the world are opening 2015’s last trading week not far from where they started the year.

That could leave U.S. stocks with their worst annual performance since 2011.

In China today, equities tumbled more than 2 percent, their biggest loss in a month, as an overhaul of the way companies will be listed weighed on the market.

• North American movie ticket sales are expected to set a record this year, exceeding $11 billion, according to Rentrak, which compiles box-office data.

The total is being bolstered by “Star Wars: The Force Awakens,” which was dominant at the box office again over the weekend. It has surpassed $500 million in domestic ticket sales and $1 billion worldwide.

OVER THE WEEKEND

• India’s prime minister dropped in on Pakistan’s prime minister, who was celebrating his birthday, in a surprise diplomatic mission.

• The mob killing of an Afghan woman in March and the legal system’s response are calling into question Western efforts in Afghanistan to instill a rule of law and to improve the status of women.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

• The number of U.S. students earning high school diplomas is at a historic peak, yet measures of academic readiness for college or jobs are much lower.

• Foreign arms sales by the U.S. jumped by almost $10 billion in 2014, about 35 percent, even as the global weapons market remained flat.

• Peyton Manning, the Denver Broncos quarterback, denied using human growth hormone, a banned substance in the N.F.L., after a report linked him to doping.

NOTEWORTHY

• No longer perfect.

The Atlanta Falcons handed the Carolina Panthers their first loss of the season on Sunday, holding on for a 20-13 victory.

And a coin toss played a crucial role in the New York Jets’ defeat of the New England Patriots in overtime, 26-20.

Here’s the full scoreboard and our playoff simulator. The Bengals play the Broncos tonight.

• In memoriam.

Meadowlark Lemon, the Harlem Globetrotters’ top showman for more than two decades, died Sunday at age 83.

Ellsworth Kelly, who made abstract yet simple paintings that often used only one or two colors, died at 92 (slide show).

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

The Oscar-winning cinematographer Haskell Wexler (“Medium Cool” and “Who’s Afraid of Virginia Woolf?”) died at 93.

• What’s on tonight.

“East of Salinas,” a film in PBS’s “Independent Lens” series, is a glimpse into the lives of undocumented immigrants in the U.S. (10 p.m. Eastern, but check local listings).

And “Heroin: Cape Cod, U.S.A.” follows eight young addicts who live in what most people consider an idyllic locale (9 p.m. Eastern, HBO).

BACK STORY

“I think we’ll be just one of a crowd.”

That’s what the mother of Elizabeth Jordan Carr, born on this day in 1981, said when she arrived home in Westminster, Mass.

Photo

She was right. At the time, Elizabeth, the first baby in the U.S. to have been conceived outside a mother’s body, was national news. (More than a dozen others had already been born globally.)

Today, record numbers are seeking in vitro fertilization.

But the treatment represents a small fraction — about 61,000 babies, less than 2 percent — of the approximately four million annual births in the country.

In that first in vitro (“in glass”) fertilization, done by a husband-and-wife medical team, an egg was removed from Elizabeth’s mother and fertilized in a lab dish with sperm from her husband.

It was successful on the 42nd try. The newly created embryo was then inserted into the mother’s womb, and she had a normal pregnancy.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

A study published this month found that nearly two-thirds of women undergoing I.V.F. will have a child by the sixth attempt.

Millions of infertile couples worldwide have built their families with the technique. And now, scientists at Cornell University say the technique has been used for the first time to bring a litter of puppies into the world.

Victoria Shannon contributed reporting.

Your Morning Briefing is published weekdays at 6 a.m. Eastern and updated on the web all morning.

What would you like to see here? Contact us at briefing@nytimes.com.

You can sign up here to get the briefing delivered to your inbox.