Sue Cass, left, greets two of the daughters of Al Bartlett, Lois Youngman, left, and Nancy Barlett. The memorial service for Al Bartlett, long time CU physics professor, and Boulder activist, was held at Folsom Field on Saturday. ( CLIFF GRASSMICK )

University of Colorado physics professor Al Bartlett gave his famous overpopulation lecture 1,743 times before he passed away, according to his friends and colleagues. But his friend Steve Andrews told those gathered at Bartlett's memorial Saturday that he never tired of giving it.

"Given his druthers, you would be audience number 1,744," Andrews said.

The professor known the world over for his lecture died Sept. 7 at the age of 90. He had been diagnosed with lymphoma.

Friends and family gathered at the Stadium Club of Folsom Field Saturday, Bartlett's picture next to a window overlooking Boulder and the nearby foothills.

"It looks over the university he loved, the Boulder he loved, and the Rocky Mountain backdrop I believe adds to this moment," said Alan Cass, the curator of CU's Glenn Miller archive.

Before he came to CU, according to stories told by Bartlett's family, he hitch-hiked and hopped trains to see the country, at one point working as a cook on a ship. But someone on that ship eventually convinced Bartlett to head back to school.

"Whether he perceived Al's great intellect or didn't like his cooking, I don't know," said CU's physics department chair Paul Beale.

Regardless, Bartlett went on to teach at CU for 38 years, lecturing generations of students who came through his classroom.

"Al became one of the most respected and revered teachers in CU history," Beale said. "Al was a great friend and mentor to me, as he was to many people."

Bartlett first gave his lecture "Arithmetic, Population and Energy" to a group of students in 1969, warning them of the consequences of "ordinary, steady growth," of population and the connection between population growth and energy consumption. He would go on to give that talk in 49 states and seven countries, speaking to corporations, government agencies, professional groups and students.

CU's Environmental Center is training 50 volunteers to carry on Bartlett's lectures -- and had been working closely with the professor to preserve the lecture, leading up to his death.

Bartlett's oldest daughter Carol Braun said when she attended her father's talks with him she saw halls give him standing ovations and people stop him wherever he went to talk about his work.

"It was like traveling with a rock star," she said.

But his family said there was more to the man than his famous lectures. In fact, his daughter Jane Bartlett said when she was in grade school, instead of telling her class about her father's physics work, she chose instead to recount his other adventures.

"I stood up and proudly said, 'My father is a bum,'" she said. "Honestly, I had no idea what physics was."

His family said Bartlett loved camping and traveling during his free time. He was also an advocate for Boulder open space and helped initiate the "Blue Line" amendment in Boulder that keeps homes from being built farther up Boulder's foothills by restricting the city water supply to a maximum elevation.

"I learned from him we can all make a difference in our own way," Braun said.

Bartlett's granddaughter Anne Braun Zink likened the man people called "Big Al," to a majestic tree.

"He was someone you leaned on, learned from, measured yourself against," she said. "The only things bigger than my grandfather as a man were his mind and his heart."

Bartlett's youngest daughter Nancy Bartlett said her father went through life always seeing the science in everything he witnessed and looking for his next adventure.

"He would always say, 'Gee, I would love to take that road and see where it goes,'" she said.

The memorial ended with a slideshow of pictures of Bartlett enjoying all sorts of adventures around the world with his family, evidence of the many roads he did travel down.

At the end of the service, Cass concluded by simply stating, "What a beautiful life."

Contact Camera Staff Writer Mitchell Byars at 303-473-1329, byarsm@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/mitchellbyars.