More options: Share, Mark as favorite

Donald Trump has put forward a rather detailed tax reform plan. It has already been scored by several organizations, including the Tax Foundation and the Tax Policy Center. Some on the right, including “supply-siders,” have praised the Trump plan for its deep reduction in marginal tax rates on both the personal and corporate side. As I recently wrote for The Week:

Economist Arthur Laffer — the Reagan-era godfather of supply-side economics — says the Trump plan “sounds great” to him. Indeed, Laffer just told The Washington Post that he thinks Americans will find it so compelling that it will help sweep Trump to a landslide victory in November. (Perhaps the first-ever dynamically scored political forecast.) Economic commentator Lawrence Kudlow, another Reaganite supply-sider, calls it “an excellent plan that would substantially grow the American economy.”

Critics have pointed out that the Trump plan would lose trillions in revenue at a time of high government debt. What’s more, Trump claims his tax cuts would pay for themselves through faster economic growth, which seems highly unlikely.

Trump did little to answers questions or concerns on CNBC today:

When you put out a tax plan, you are going to start negotiating. You’re not going to say, okay, this is our tax plan, lots of luck, folks. There’s going to be negotiation back and forth. And I can see that going up, to be honest with you. and I know i am talking to your folks but, you know, in all fairness we are cutting. And during a negotiation I could see that going up. I don’t want middle to go up at all. But I could see that going up. and I think that probably will happen, because it’s a cut for everybody.

OK, where to begin? Trump seems to suggest a willingness to raise taxes on somebody to get a deal. Maybe it’s just the rich, or maybe it’s middle-class, too. Much depends on the meaning of the word I boldfaced, “that.”

Either way, raising top tax rates would be disappointing for supply-siders since the top marginal rate — especially on top earners — is a key economic lever for them. Oh, but isn’t Trump already raising tax rates on some rich folks, hedge fund managers, by taxing carried interest at higher ordinary rates rather than at preferred investment rates? Not so clear, according to the TPC:

Another consequence of the lower top rate on pass-through income is that carried interest would be taxed at a much lower rate than under current law, notwithstanding its reclassification as ordinary income (rather than capital gains), because the entities that earn carried interest income are organized as partnerships. Under current law, such income is taxed as capital gains, generally at a rate of up to 23.8 percent, including the Affordable Care Act surtax on investment income. Under the Trump plan, that income would be taxed at a top rate of 15 percent, a reduction of more than one-third.

In any event, perhaps a clarification will be forthcoming.