Packers strong safety Micah Hyde is tended to after being hurt in the first quarter Sunday. He left the game with a hip injury. Credit: Mark Hoffman

By of the

Sunday at a glance:

PLAYER OF THE GAME

One week after he was blanketed and held without a catch by Lions cornerback Darius Slay, wide receiver James Jones responded with his second-best game of the season. Jones was targeted a team-high 11 times Sunday and turned them into six catches for a game-high 109 yards and a touchdown. His average of 18.2 yards per reception provided a bit of big-play ability to a Green Bay Packers' offense that lacked downfield zip in recent weeks. His best moments came on a drive that bridged the end of the third quarter and the beginning of the fourth, when he made three catches for 68 yards. Jones hauled in a bobbled 37-yard pass from quarterback Aaron Rodgers deep down the left sideline and then made a toe-touch grab in the end zone for a 27-yard score. It was his second 100-yard game of the season and first since Sept. 28 against the Kansas City Chiefs. "We ran the ball very well, Aaron made some crazy throws and we just made some plays," Jones said.

MISSING IN ACTION

Running back Adrian Peterson entered Sunday with an average of more than 150 yards rushing in his last four games against the Packers, with a touchdown in each. During the week, linebacker Clay Matthews called Peterson the best tailback he's played against. Predictably, Peterson started out strong against the Packers and carried six times for 30 yards in the first quarter. He was well on his way to another 100-plus-yard game. But the Packers defense constricted and Peterson was a relative non-factor the rest of the game. He finished with 13 carries for 45 yards — a lowly 3.5 yards per carry average — a touchdown and a fumble. To put it another way, Peterson carried the ball just seven times for 15 yards in the final 45 minutes Sunday as the Packers silenced one of the best players in the National Football League. "Opportunities were kind of slim, and I think penalties play a role in that as well," Peterson said. "But we have to take our hats off to Green Bay. They did a great job containing us as a group today."

WHAT IF....

The Packers began their final possession of the first half with 2 minutes, 19 seconds remaining and a 9-6 lead. A 50-yard pass interference penalty on cornerback Terence Newman moved the offense to within striking distance and handed the Packers an opportunity to "double up," as receiver Randall Cobb described it, by scoring on both the last possession of the first half and the first possession of the second half. After a number of failed passes to the end zone, including a 15-yard touchdown to Richard Rodgers nullified by a penalty, quarterback Aaron Rodgers connected with Cobb for a 10-yard score on third-and-goal. The touchdown with :06 in the half pushed the Packers' lead to 16-6 at the break. They added to it with a 12-play, 61-yard drive on the opening possession of the third quarter that ended with a field goal by Mason Crosby. Ten points in a span of five minutes. Would the second half have played out differently if the Packers failed to build a double-digit lead?

IN CASE YOU MISSED IT

■ With Ty Montgomery inactive due to a lingering ankle injury, and with a hip injury to Micah Hyde in the first half, receiver Jeff Janis had an opportunity at kick returner for the Packers. He ran 70 yards on his first attempt to set up a field goal by kicker Mason Crosby.

■ Starting center Corey Linsley left the game in the first half with an ankle injury and did not return. JC Tretter took his place for an offensive line that allowed tailback Eddie Lacy to rush for 100 yards.

■ Quarterback Teddy Bridgewater missed a portion of the second quarter with a shoulder injury thanks to a pass rush that harassed him all game long. Bridgewater, who finished with a respectable stat line of 296 yards, one touchdown and no interceptions, endured 10 hits including six sacks and was chased relentlessly.

■ Rookie cornerback Damarious Randall played despite entering the game as questionable with a hamstring injury. He lined up opposite Sam Shields as a starter in the base defense for the second consecutive week. Casey Hayward played inside in the nickel defense.

BY THE NUMBERS

18.2 Yards per reception for wide receiver James Jones, who caught six passes for 109 yards and a touchdown to pace the offense.

22 Carries and 100 yards for tailback Eddie Lacy one week after he was sidelined with a groin injury for the loss to the Detroit Lions.

45 Rushing yards for Vikings' tailback Adrian Peterson, who had 30 yards in the first quarter and was neutralized for the remainder of the game.

110 Yards in penalties for the Vikings, who were flagged eight times and had one enormous 50-yard pass interference penalty.

5 Field goals for kicker Mason Crosby, who connected from 42 yards, 47 yards, 40 yards, 42 yards and 52 yards one week after missing a potential game-winning attempt against the Lions.

6 Sacks of quarterback Teddy Bridgewater, including two from defensive end Datone Jones, as the Packers snapped a three-game sack-less streak.

UP NEXT

Packers (7-3) vs. Bears (4-6)

7:30 p.m. Thursday, Nov. 26 (NBC)

Lambeau Field

The Packers will enter Thanksgiving with a tremendous confidence boost after a dominating win over the Minnesota Vikings. With the running game back on track and the pass rush bursting through the line of scrimmage repeatedly, the Packers should be eager to face the Bears in the third of four consecutive division games. Playing better football than they were earlier in the season, the Bears nearly knocked off the Peyton Manning-less Broncos on Sunday. Packers fans also will give thanks to Brett Favre (and Bart Starr) during a halftime ceremony where Favre's name will be unveiled on the Lambeau Field facade.