BRIAN McDOWELL

Tribune reporter

Governor Sam Brownback’s appearance at the Venue in downtown Chanute on Tuesday was billed as a conversation with local businesses. However, the governor ended up having conversations with Chanute residents that he might not have expected at this event, as several residents involved in the local anti-poverty Circles program confronted Brownback about the effects of his policies.

While the governor was taking questions from the audience, Sara Maike stood up and described herself as both a “nobody” and the “poster child for poverty.” She said she survives on $1,000 per month, living in what she labeled the “crap shack,” and subsisting on basic necessities.

She stated that she can see a doctor if she gets sick during the day. However, any nighttime complications require a costly trip to the hospital emergency room. She added that some local clinics require a minimum $88 up-front payment, which is difficult for someone in her situation.

“Nobody chooses my life,” Maike said. “I don’t wake up saying that I am going to be poor or I am going to be mentally ill. I am going to skip breakfast because I need to pay my doctor bill. I make it work, because I make sacrifices.”

Maike said she has medical problems that do not enable her to work a full-time job, and outlined how ashamed she was to swipe the government-issued card she uses to acquire food at the local grocery store. She accused the governor of using his policies to punish people in her situation who are simply taking steps to pay the rent, utilities, food, health care costs, and put a little gas in the tanks of their cars. She added that it was difficult for anyone to do these things on only $25 a day.

Brownback replied that people aren’t blocked from doing any of these things under any of the state’s policies. He also touched on his background, growing up poor in nearby Linn County. He observed that President Lyndon Johnson launched a War on Poverty, and that since then trillions of federal government dollars have gone towards the goal of helping the poor in the last 50 years. However, according to the governor, the level of people in poverty now is exactly the same as it was before these programs started. He went on to suggest that these programs might have actually made the cycle of poverty more difficult to escape.

He emphasized that his programs aim to help people get out of poverty by stressing education, family structure, and work rather than receiving a government pittance. He noted the availability of classes at the local community college and asked NCCC President Dr. Brian Inbody to stand up and speak about the programs available for the 3,800 students currently at the school.

In a government based on the concept of “we the people,” Maike expressed that she doesn’t feel like her voice and the voices of others in her situation are heard that often.

“Please think of us when you’re signing these bills,” Maike said, “because there’s a few people that abuse the system, but it’s punishing all of us. Most of us would do anything for a job, but in the meantime, we have bills just like you do.”

Other Chanute residents and Circles participants facing similar issues contributed to this discussion as well. Tanika Bossell spoke up during a portion of the meeting in which Medicaid expansion and the effect that it could have on rural hospitals were being discussed. She talked about the need to transition more able-bodied people who are able to work off of Medicaid, so more services would be available to disabled individuals like her.

“I haven’t seen a solution yet,” Bossell said.

Brownback answered that able-bodied adults with no dependents who fall within a certain income range do not qualify for Kan-Care, but Bossell still wondered how Brownback’s program was actually getting them to work.

Job-training programs and direct work done with individuals were credited by Brownback with getting 6,000 people off welfare programs over the last year.

This part of the discussion was prompted by a question from Neosho Memorial Regional Medical Center CEO Dennis Franks, who asked the governor about the possible expansion of the Kancare 2.0 proposal. Franks said that taking this step could mean $2.5 million annually to the hospital, and asked if there was a way that he could work with the governor to get something done on this.

A threefold answer was given by the governor, who discussed the state’s revenue situation, the long waiting list for expanded care, and his opinion that work requirements need to be attached to government assistance.

“The hospital would do better and the region would do better if we expanded Medicaid to a broader cross-section,” Brownback said, “and that’s why I’ve been hesitant because I want to get the wait-list down before we can do that.”

Franks said he understood that Brownback wanted work requirements to be part of the plan, and that’s why legislators are pursing the “Indiana Plan” that would make work part of the KanCare effort. He noted that the federal government is opposing attaching such efforts to get able-bodied people back to work to any Medicaid-type program.

Brownback expects the federal government to be a little more malleable to plans like this as the Obama administration reaches its end, adding that he has added 80,000 more people to Medicaid since he has been governor. He added that if a person could get a minimum-wage job and hold it, they would qualify for Obamacare insurance programs.

This prompted Bossell to say that insurance obtained under Obamacare was too expensive.

“I’ve never been accused of pushing Obamacare,” the famously conservative governor replied, prompting laughter from the audience.

He agreed that expenses under the health care plan were among its problems.

Tri-Valley Developmental Executive Director Tim Cunningham asked the governor which waiting list he was talking about, and Brownback responded that expanded services in the managed Medicaid program include those with both physical and mental disabilities.

Cunningham then asked what the state had done to get this waiting list down, to which the governor claimed that KanCare had saved the state a lot of money. He said that half of the money went into lowering the number of patients on the waiting list.

Cunningham, whose organization helps people with intellectual and developmental disabilities, said that only 25 people with these conditions have actually been taken off the waiting list by the state. He added that hundreds of people get added to this list every year, while only a very small number are taken off.

USD 413 Superintendent Dr. James Hardy credited the legislature with equalizing K-12 education funding last year, but said that the district’s budget was cut almost $250,000 this year. He expressed concern about how the state’s revenue situation would affect school funding.

Brownback said that the overall numbers for school funding at a local level still went up from a couple of years ago, growing from $12.66 million currently to $13.45 million next year. He said that ideas are still being explored to increase revenues in this state, so the budget can be balanced.

Senator Jeff King made brief remarks, saying that the governor had learned from any mistakes that had been made and that the budget would have to be balanced.

“I’m not real excited,” Brownback said. “I’m not a big tax-raising guy and this is not the sort of thing I like doing. I always want to get taxes down, but we’re going to have to come up with a good revenue package.”

Taxes on cigarettes and alcohol, changes in income taxes, pulling back deductions and exemptions, and exploring the concept of a flat tax were mentioned as ways to possibly accomplish this. He solicited people in the state to come forward with other ideas to raise revenues and balance the budget.

In the face of numbers released earlier this week that showed a revenue shortfall of $90 million, the governor touted charts that showed that Kansas has the fastest growing job growth rate in the region and fast-rising wages, along with a low unemployment rate. It is his goal to create 100,000 new jobs in his second-term. He talked about the recent growth of airplane manufacturing in Kansas.

The governor’s local appearance closed with CPA Phil Jarred asking about whether more of the self-employed could be made to pay income taxes to help fund necessary programs in the state. Brownback responded that he favored a zero-tax on all small-business accelerators, which is the primary job creator in the state. The governor added that the income tax formula is being revisited, as the personal income in the state grows and as Kansas experiences net taxpayer migration from Missouri.