Patient Engagement of the Financial Kind

As patients adapt to their heightened financial responsibilities, health systems and hospitals must help make sure patients pay for as much of their bills as possible.

This article first appeared in the March 2016 issue of HealthLeaders Magazine.

With more healthcare costs shifting to patients through high-deductible health plans and other trends, health systems and hospitals are facing the need to develop a new skill: asking patients for more money. To rise to this challenge, revenue cycle innovators are engaging patients as financial partners from hospital registration to bill collection, and every point in between.

“In today’s healthcare environment, everybody owes something for their healthcare, and this is a cultural shift,” says Jane Berkebile, system vice president of revenue cycle for OhioHealth in Columbus. In the fiscal year ending June 2013, OhioHealth posted total revenue at $2.1 billion, with net income pegged at $348.7 million.

This cultural shift includes a patient learning curve laden with risk for healthcare providers, she says. “Very few people budget for healthcare expenses. It usually comes as a surprise for them. … If someone has a health incident and they have a $10,000 deductible, that’s a big shock to them.”

As patients adapt to their heightened financial responsibilities, health systems and hospitals must reach out early and often to help make sure patients pay for as much of their bills as possible, Berkebile says. “We’re more likely to get paid if there is at least an expectation that there is an out-of-pocket expense and we expect the patient to pay it.”

While rising to this bill-collection challenge, healthcare providers must avoid pressing their patients too hard, she says. “We walk a very fine line. … We don’t want to be seen as having heavy-handed tactics. It’s more a conversation.”

Point-of-service collections

A robust effort to engage patients as financial partners can generate impressive revenue cycle results, including higher point-of-service collections, lower bad debt, and less spending on financial assistance, Berkebile says.

OhioHealth posted $22 million in POS cash collections at the health system’s four central Ohio hospitals in 2015, she says. “We stress the need for communication with patients. We set targets. We track the dollars we collect.”

POS cash collections have increased every year at OhioHealth since 2009, when the figure was $9 million, according to health system records.

Berkebile says POS cash collection is a key focus for the training and education unit within OhioHealth’s revenue cycle team. The training and education unit has about nine full-time staffers, and it provides instruction to revenue cycle team members and many employees outside the department who work with patients. “It is critical that all of our physician practices know the policies for registration, point-of-service collection, and messaging to the patient. The last thing you want someone to do is say, ‘Don’t worry about paying for that.’ ”

Financial partnering with patients helps minimize bill-collection bad debt at OhioHealth, which tracks bad debt on a monthly basis. Bad debt accounts for less than 2% of gross patient revenue “across the whole organization,” she says.

“Bad debt as a percentage of gross patient revenue is considered excellent if at or below 2% of gross patient revenue. Starting at a target of 2% of GPR, we have continued to whittle that down as we have made progress. As we bring on new facilities, our initial target is always 2% GPR.”

Assessing the propensity of patients to pay also helps to contain the budget line for financial assistance at OhioHealth, Berkebile says, noting many low-income patients benefit from the financial counseling services offered at the health system, such as Medicaid enrollment facilitation.

In Ohio, the expansion of Medi-caid under the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act has been a boost for OhioHealth and the health system’s low-income patients. “That’s a benefit to the patient,” she says of the access to medical services that comes with Medicaid enrollment, adding that the health system’s “charity care has been cut roughly in half” since Ohio expanded Medicaid to provide coverage to more low-income adults in January 2014.