Summer is a time for beer. In Europe, it’s also a time for rumors about beer-company mergers.

Getty Images

The usual suspects include Anheuser-Busch InBev, SABMiller PLC and Heineken. Like a lager left in the sun too long, speculation about a big-money play by any of these has so far gone flat.

Will this summer be any different? Big deals are back—with a number of giant acquisitions, or proposed acquisitions, shaking the global healthcare, food and spirits industries. That’s put a renewed microscope on any possible consolidation in the beer business, say bankers and analysts.

Here’s a rundown of the dream deals that analysts have been weighing up during the Summer of 2014:

AB InBev buys SABMiller: A combination of the world’s two biggest brewers in a deal potentially worth in excess of $120 billion. This deal has been rumored for about as long as these two giants (both the result of mega-mergers themselves) have been around. Although a merger would bring control of around 40% of the world’s beer supply to one company, ABI and SAB have few overlapping territories. That means antitrust issues could largely be overcome by selling off SAB’s assets in the U.S. and China. SAB’s shares are up nearly 24% since February, in part because of deal speculation. “The odds have shortened that AB InBev will one day make a bid,” said Bernstein analyst Trevor Sterling.

AB InBev buys Heineken: Some observers feel this would be a better fit for ABI, the maker of Budweiser and Stella Artois. “Forget SABMiller,” wrote James Edwardes Jones of RBC Capital Markets in a research note published last week. “Ownership of the Heineken brand would be transformational for ABI’s global ambitions, and the combined business would have a genuinely global footprint.” A big obstacle to any deal would be convincing members of the Heineken family to give up control of the company. There are reasons to suggest the family could benefit from a tie-up: Heineken’s total return to shareholders is 240% over the last decade, compared with 630% for ABI, according to RBC.

SABMiller merges with Diageo: A left-field idea, perhaps, but one that could suit both companies. For SAB, a deal helps fend off ABI. And spirits giant Diageo could get a boost from SAB’s distribution channels. That could help Diageo’s Guinness brand, in particular, but could also ease some of the pressure at Diageo from falling high-end spirits sales in places like China. “A merger of the world’s number one spirits and number two brewing business would create a potent new force,” according to analysts at Barclays. Diageo’s shares rose sharply in late June on reports it could merge with SAB.

Representatives of AB InBev weren’t immediately available to comment. SABMiller, Heineken and Diageo declined to comment.