Covered California Despite the “open” sign on Web portal for California small businesses, the site has been shuttered.

(Editor’s note: Updates with statement from Accenture, says vendor will be retained for overall Covered California contract.)

There’s another Obamacare-related computer problem that has surfaced, but this one won’t be as devastating to the Affordable Care Act as those responsible for the program’s rocky start in October.

While the Department of Health and Human Services was touting another 1.1 million enrollees to the nationwide health program on Wednesday, the Obamacare exchange in California, Covered California, served notice that a Web site designed to help small businesses get their employees insured would have to shut down — for several months.

The Web portal known as the Small Business Health Options Program, or SHOP, has been shuttered until the fall because design flaws have made it “cumbersome” for small businesses to go online to get coverage for employees, said Larry Hicks, Covered California spokesman.

“It wasn’t as efficient as it could have been, or should be,” Hicks said. “We decided to take it down and retool it, redesign it.”

Accenture /quotes/zigman/565535/delayed /quotes/nls/acn ACN is the lead contractor on Covered California’s SHOP program. Hicks said it remains to be seen if the company will be retained on that program or what direction Covered California will take. Accenture will remain the lead technology contractor overall for Covered California, he later added.

In an email response, Accenture spokeswoman Joanne Giordano pointed out that Covered California officials acknowledge the SHOP portal worked as designed.

“Accenture built the SHOP portal to the original, agreed specifications but then Covered California received good feedback from brokers and agents and is being responsive by focusing now on ways to enhance it,” Giordano said.

There are no reports of similar issues with other states’ SHOP portals.

Despite the length of the shutdown, it’s unlikely this technical issue will create the same furor as the troubles with the HealthCare.gov web site that stumbled out of the gate when Obamacare opened for business in October. The reason: SHOP is serving only small businesses of less than 50 employees. And those businesses aren’t required to provide coverage for their employees but plan on doing so anyway and are seeking assistance though the public exchanges.

Further, Hicks said “the vast majority” of the 571 businesses representing 4,490 workers and dependents were filing paper applications anyway. Companies that want to go through public exchanges to insure workers can still do so, he added. Another 200 companies representing 1,200 people are being processed.

Follow Russ Britt on Twitter @russbrittmktw.

Follow Health Exchange on Twitter @MWHealthBlog.

More health-care news from MarketWatch:

Moody’s says new Obamacare proposals would hurt insurer ratings

Molina shares climb back on rosy forecast

Medicines Co. plummets after FDA panel rejects drug