Fransen Pittman General Contractors laborer Dante Conti, left, and carpenter Troy Anderson install bracing cable Friday for temporary stabilization of the old MetroLux Theater, 3120 Denver Ave., that will be the future home of Foundations Church. ( Steve Stoner / Loveland Reporter-Herald )

If it's difficult to imagine the past life of the Metrolux building in Loveland — gutted-out now and lined with piles of rubble — it's almost impossible to picture its future use as a place of worship.

But not for members of Foundation Church.

Ever since the non-denominational church purchased the long-vacant building two years ago, members have been waiting and planning to move in.

"I've been in a number of times, and you just kind of close your eyes and envision what the big sanctuary room is going to look like," Foundations Church Executive Director Scott Mead said. "We're all very excited to be able to see a building that's been an eyesore for a long time come alive again."

Permanent Home

Demolition work inside the 33,000-square-foot building at 3120 Denver Ave. began this month. The building has been vacant since October 2005, when the new Metrolux 14 opened in The Promenade Shops at Centerra.

Foundations Church purchased the property for $1.8 million in early 2012 from a group of investors.

"Ever since then we've been in the planning stages," said Bob Sorensen, one of the elders at the church.

A full build-out is designed, but this is just phase one, which Sorensen said includes finishing about half of the space. Church offices currently at 1905 W. Eighth St. will remain there at least for a couple of years before moving into the upstairs of the old Metrolux, he said.

Advertisement

The top priority — and what church officials hope to have complete late this year — is the main auditorium space, a nursery and youth meeting areas.

"A permanent facility will allow our various ministry groups to meet during the week, instead of at people's homes," Mead said.

The auditorium space will have a stage and seating for about 1,400 people for the three Foundation Church services each weekend.

Since forming in late 2011, Foundations Church has held its services at Thompson Valley High School.

"They've been meeting at a temporary facility, and everybody's ready to be in what we consider to be our home," Sorensen said.

Destruction Phase

The project is one of many pieces and some surprises, too. Church officials knew, for example, that theater walls would have to come down to make the large open space needed for services. What they didn't know was that once those long-standing dividing walls were removed, the stability of the building would be in question.

So initial work has focused on stabilization, with crews installing helical piers as deep as 40 feet under the existing foundation. Another main focus will be leveling the sloped floors that had previously held aisles.

The church has a demolition permit for the space, and officials hope to have a building permit in the coming weeks.

"A lot of destruction has to occur before construction can happen," Sorensen said. "We're in the destruction phase."

The first phase of the project is expected to cost just more than $5 million. Sorensen said the church sold construction bonds to members, and the support was overwhelming.

"We were limited to raising $5.3 million and we could have sold $6 million. We had to turn people away," he said.

The construction schedule depends on all those moving pieces and surprises but Sorensen said the hope is for Christmas services to take place in the new space this year.

Contact Reporter-Herald Staff Writer Jessica Maher at 970-669-5050 or maherj@reporter-herald.com. Follow her at Twitter.com/JessicaMaherRH.