Everyone seems to have a lobbyist these days. Even, it turns out, the popular family sports bar, Buffalo Wild Wings. This week the chain reg

Everyone seems to have a lobbyist these days. Even, it turns out, the popular family sports bar, Buffalo Wild Wings. This week the chain reg

Everyone seems to have a lobbyist these days. Even, it turns out, the popular family sports bar, Buffalo Wild Wings. This week the chain registered an in-house lobbyist to influence members of Congress on issues relating to minimum wage, health care, taxes and immigration reform. So basically every hot button issue that Americans care about.

Tim Elhert who has previously worked with Target, Family Enterprise USA and the National Restaurant Association will be joining the Buffalo Wild Wings Team as director of government relations and public policy. Specifically Elhert will work on bills relating to the raise of the minimum wage, and relating to full-time status being seen as 40-hours a week for healthcare purposes, according to the lobbying registration. Unfortunately the filing does not say where the company stands on these issues.

This is Buffalo Wild Wings's first foray into federal lobbying although they are a member of the National Restaurant Association which has a very robust lobbying presence. In 2013 the association spent over $2.2 million lobbying on a variety of issues. At the beginning of May the group also hosted a fly-in to Capitol Hill, bringing over 700 restauranteurs to Washington. The Affordable Care Act's definition of full-time employee was a focal point of conversation for that event, which is something Buffalo Wild Wings is obviously vested in as well based on their lobbying registration.

Oddly enough, while Buffalo Wild Wings is green to independent lobbying, they do have an active company PAC, which this year has given money to three Republicans, which should give you some idea as to where the company stands on the issue. So far the PAC has given $2,500 to Senator Rand Paul. They have also given $2,500 to Representative Erik Paulsen and $1,000 to Representative John Kline, both of whom are from Minnesota. Buffalo Wild Wings is headquartered in Minneapolis.