Good Tuesday Morning, Fellow Seekers.

Well, that didn't take long. Barely a week after he won the Democratic nomination, Pennsylvania Republicans have begun the general election campaign against York County businessman Tom Wolf.

On a new website, the statewide GOP accuses Wolf of trying to raise taxes while serving as Revenue Secretary under former Gov. Ed Rendell.

They also take aim at his support for the federal healthcare law and a severance tax on Marcellus shale natural gas drillers.

The GOP also breathlessly charges that (and these are their words not ours):

"When Tom Wolf served as Revenue Secretary our tax burden was the highest ever, and Wolf tried to raise taxes even higher.

Tom Wolf is an extreme tax-and-spend liberal with a history of supporting income and sales tax increases!

Tom Wolf supports ObamaCare—one of the largest tax increases in American history!

Tom Wolf supports massive new energy taxes—including a state-level cap-and-trade tax."

The latter of the two charges are correct: Wolf does support a severance tax (and legislative Republicans are now considering one to balance the 2014-15 state budget).

And he has proposed boosting the base rate of the state's 3.07 percent income tax. But he's also proposed a "universal exemption" that would result in some of the poorest Pennsylvania's paying no income tax at all.

As far as the Revenue Secretary thing goes, that's already been debunked.

As an administration official, Wolf had no power to raise taxes, only to implement those passed by the Legislature. Thus, his desire to raise taxes is akin to our desire for another cheeseburger when we have no money. It ain't happening.

That includes a state income tax hike proposed by Rendell and passed when the state House and Senate were under Republican control in 2003. And Wolf wasn't even Revenue Secretary at the time.

We'd suggest the GOP get its glass house in order before it starts throwing stones on that one.

The rest of the day's news starts now.

Doctors at UPMC in Pittsburgh have implanted the state's first wireless pacemaker, The Post-Gazette reports.

And not a moment too soon, because climate change will also boost health problems for Pennsylvanians, the PG reports.

In which we welcome new PoliticsPA Managing Editor Nick Field to the fold. Good luck sir.

The Turnpike Commission has opened electric car charging stations in Western PA, The Tribune-Review reports. And is it just us, or do they look like giant iPods?

As we pray to the journalism gods, the Philadelphia Inquirer and Daily News go up for auction today.

A two-alarm fire razed buildings in East Allentown on Monday, The Morning Call reports.

Should "union workers be blamed for big markups at the Philly Convention Center?" PhillyMag asks. We know what some of you will say.

What Goes On.

There's a noon rally in the Capitol rotunda for a gift ban for lawmakers. No one's around today - odd timing, that.

What Goes On (Nakedly Political Edition).

The House Republican Campaign Committee holds its annual southwestern golf outing today at the Pittsburgh Field Club. Admission runs $750 to $7,500, depending, we suppose, on how much you like both Republicans and golf.

Senate Minority Leader Jay Costa, D-Allegheny, hosts a 5:30 p.m. reception at The Plaza at Grandview in Pittsburgh. Admission runs $100 to $500, which doesn't even get you golf with the Republicans.

Heavy Rotation.

Here's one to get you bouncing on a Tuesday morning. From Passion Pit. It's "Carried Away."

Tuesday's Gratuitous Baseball Link.

Baltimore edged past Milwaukee 7-6 on Sunday afternoon after a hard-fought 10 innings. The O's Nick Hundley contributed some clutch play on the way to the win.

And now you're up to date. See you all back here later today.