Challenging what was trumpeted as a key victory for Obamacare, California residents whose Medi-Cal applications have been stuck in limbo for months have filed a lawsuit against the state, saying the delay in receiving health care has caused them and hundreds of thousands of others to experience pain and suffering.

A coalition of legal and health advocates filed the lawsuit Wednesday in Alameda County Superior Court on behalf of those who applied for Medi-Cal through Covered California, but who have gone months waiting for an answer on their eligibility.

As of Sept. 1, about 350,000 applications remained stuck in a backlog, down from 900,000 reported in May.

As a result of delays, some patients listed in the complaint say they have gone without medications or have suffered depression due to unexpected health issues and to the high cost of medical bills.

In one case, a Visalia woman named Frances Rivera said her adult son, who worked part time and was considered low-income, applied for Medi-Cal in January. He died of a pulmonary embolism in April, still uninsured. A letter of acceptance into Medi-Cal came to his home in June, according to the complaint.

By law, the state’s Department of Health Care Services must make some kind of decision in 45 days after the application has been filed. The lawsuit aims to press the state to follow that regulation.

“We cannot have a system that discriminates like this ... people are going without care,” said Katie Murphy, an attorney with the Pacoima-based Neighborhood Legal Services, of Los Angeles County, one of the organizations that filed the lawsuit on behalf of Medi-Cal applicants.

Earlier this year, Covered California and DHCS announced that 1.9 million people had enrolled for Medi-Cal, the state’s version of Medicaid. The number was celebrated as a victorious example of how well Covered California, the state’s health insurance exchange, had been able to reach so many of the state’s uninsured. It also showed that under the Affordable Care Act, millions of people would be able to have some kind of health care coverage.

But in May, DHCS reported that 900,000 of those applications had not been processed.

The cause of the backlog was the result of a surge in enrollment as well as technology problems and communication gaps between the state and county welfare systems.

Some of the issues have so far been remedied, said DHCS spokesman Anthony Cava.

“We have reduced the total number by more than 250,000 since early July,” Cava said in an e-mail response. “We will continue our joint work with the counties to process these cases, and we expect more progress in the coming weeks.”

Advertisement

Cava said those who need medical help should go seek care, regardless if they are covered.

“If they are approved for coverage, Medi-Cal will cover the costs of care that they received while their application was pending,” Cava said.

While Murphy acknowledges that the state has worked to reduce the backlog, she said there were many ways the department could have worked faster and better. For example, if there is information missing on an application, but otherwise it appears that the person is eligible, then coverage should be provided in the interim.

She said the technology and resources need to improve before more people enroll. Although residents can apply for Medi-Cal year around, a surge of new applications will likely come when Covered California’s open enrollment begins in November, Murphy said.

“I think a lot of people with good intentions have been working on this,” she said. “But it’s not acceptable when people need care. These are life and death cases.”