LITTLE ROCK — Two days after coming in second to Texas Sen. Ted Cruz in the Iowa Republican caucus, presidential candidate Donald Trump took several swipes at Cruz during a campaign rally Wednesday evening in Arkansas’ capital city.

“We don’t need a president who was born in Canada, do we?” Trump said, a reference to Cruz’s birth in Calgary, Alberta, Canada. Cruz’s father was born in Cuba and his mother in the U.S.

Speaking at the mostly full Barton Coliseum, a 10,000-seat arena at the Arkansas State Fairgrounds, Trump accused the Cruz campaign of misleading Iowa voters into believing that Ben Carson was dropping out of the race and that not participating in the caucus would be a violation.

“This political stuff is dangerous, and these political people are really, really dishonest,” he said.

Trump also said Cruz has dishonestly claimed that Trump “loves Obamacare,” even though he has pledged to repeal it. He said Cruz helped get John Roberts confirmed to the U.S. Supreme Court, and Roberts later became the swing vote when the court voted to uphold most of the health-care law.

“Ted Cruz gave us Obamacare,” he said.

Cruz was not yet a senator when Roberts was confirmed in 2005, but as solicitor general of Texas, he advocated for Roberts’ confirmation.

Trump’s speech drew frequent cheers from supporters, but it also was interrupted several times by shouting protesters who were then removed by security guards. Trump sometimes heckled his hecklers.

“You see these people who shout, they’re usually lonely and by themselves,” he said.

Outside the arena, protesters lined the street holding signs with slogans such as “Love trumps hate” and chanting, “Hate is not great! Get it out of our state!”

Trump said he is confident about Tuesday’s New Hampshire primary, where recent polls have shown him with a strong lead. He said he was happy to be in Little Rock, where he said a friend, whom he did not name, once received excellent care for cancer.

Trump stirred up the crowd by pledging to fight illegal immigration from Mexico.

“What are we going to do at the border, folks?” he asked

The audience began chanting, “Build a wall! Build a wall!”

“Who’s gonna pay for that wall?” he asked.

“Mexico!” the crowd yelled.

Trump said that as president he would end America’s trade imbalance with China, which he called “the single greatest theft in the history of the world,” by making better trade deals than the Obama administration has made.

“I’m not angry at China. I’m angry at our leaders for being so damn stupid,” he said.

Trump told the crowd he would not hold back in bombing terrorists overseas.

“We gotta get ISIS out of there. We gotta knock the s—- out of them,” he said.

At the end of his speech, Trump took a few questions from the audience. One person said he was taking his finals at Arkansas State University when police responded to a possible shooter on campus and asked Trump if he would get rid of gun-free zones. Trump said he would.

Another audience member asked Trump if he would protect Christian churches’ tax-exempt status. Trump said he would.

“Christianity is under siege. … You can’t say ‘Merry Christmas’ anymore. If I win, folks, we’re all going to be saying ‘Merry Christmas,’” he said.

The rally was Trump’s second campaign stop in Arkansas since announcing as a presidential candidate. He spoke at a Republican fundraiser in Hot Springs in July.