(REUTERS / Lucy Nicholson)People sign up for health insurance at an enrollment event in Cudahy, California March 27, 2014.

Some half a million American Christians have ditched traditional health insurance in favor of nonprofit healthcare sharing ministries such as Samaritan Ministries International and Medi-Share.

The nonprofit sharing ministries basically help families pay for health care bills, with each family assigned to different groups. Whenever one family is in need, Samaritan Ministries International or Medi-Share sends money directly to the family in need, along with written prayers, the Oregon Live reports.

There are some nonprofits that require their members to pay monthly dues for future healthcare needs. The distribution of the money is left to the nonprofit group, the report details.

These nonprofit healthcare sharing ministries have existed for decades already, but interest in them have surged when the Affordable Care Act was passed in 2010. This is because the law excludes members of such groups from health insurance or paying a yearly fine, The New York Times explains.

The catch in these nonprofits is that there is no guarantee that the medical bills of those in need will be paid off by the members. However, all the members are advised to trust God to provide for those needs. The system basically helps Christians obey the biblical commandment to share one another's burdens, the report relays.

In an interview with the Times, member Sarah Doyle said it takes some faith on their part to rely on the system.

"There's a little bit of fear going into it. What if people don't pay their share and what if the money doesn't come in?" said Doyle. "But that's where the faith-based part comes in — I'm really going to rely on God."

The coverage of nonprofits also has limits. Pre-existing conditions, preventive care, mental health, and injuries incurred from immoral or reckless behavior are not covered. Also, those who contract sexually transmitted disease from extramarital affairs and those injured in riots or drunk-driving incidents cannot be covered.