Hundreds of people — University of Missouri students, administrators and Columbia residents — gathered on the roadsides around Faurot Field Saturday to show their support for former MU football player Michael Sam, who came out a week ago Sunday, and to drown out a protest by a group from Kansas.

MU students Kelaney Lakers and Alix Carruth organized the event when they heard members of the Westboro Baptist Church planned to come to Columbia to protest Sam yesterday afternoon. They noted that Texas A&M students organized a similar event when Westboro members announced they would picket a funeral there. The group never showed up for the funeral.

You must login to view the full content on this page. Screen Name or Email Password Forgot? Remember me on this computer Login Screen Name or Email Now I remember! Or, use your facebook account: facebook Need an account? Create one now.

Fourteen Westboro members showed up in Columbia yesterday afternoon and stood at Providence Road and Stadium Boulevard near the football stadium.

They held up signs with derogatory slogans about Sam and homosexuality.

But they were far outnumbered by Sam supporters, who made a half-mile-long "human wall" along Stadium near Faurot Field.

The group included MU administrators, students and even former MU football players. Capt. Brian Weimer of the MU Police Department said about 500 people turned out to show their support.

Cathy Scroggs, vice chancellor for student affairs, attended the event and said she was impressed that so many students came out in the cold to show their support for Sam. "Their presence says it all," she said.

Scroggs said administrators attended the event because "we wanted students to know we support them."

David Tipton was among the community members in the crowd of students. He said he attended to support Sam and show people that the community's voice is louder than Westboro's.

This isn't the first time members of Westboro have visited Columbia. About half-a-dozen protestors came to Columbia in July 2012 to picket the funeral of a Columbia soldier who died in Afghanistan. Thousands of residents turned out to counter protest.

MU student Craig Jaworski yesterday carried signs saying, "You're perfect just the way you are," and "free hugs (or kisses)."

Many of the students were wearing clothing or pins showing their support for Sam. The Missouri Students Association handed out 1,000 "Stand with Sam" buttons to administrators, athletes and students.

Sam acknowledged the support during halftime of the MU basketball game against Tennessee yesterday afternoon.

He was with former coaches and teammates as they accepted the Cotton Bowl trophy. Sam got a turn holding the trophy and then saluted fans, shook hands with students and did his signature sack dance.