Photo

Good morning.

Here’s what you need to know:

• U.S. and allies hit ISIS in Syria.

Forces launched missile and bomb strikes from the air and sea against the militants today with the aid of five Arab countries.

At the same time, the Islamic State released a new video of a captured British journalist saying U.S. involvement in Syria will mirror its misadventures in Vietnam.

President Obama said this morning that “we’re going to do what is necessary to take the fight to this terrorist group.”

• Bold proclamations.

The United Nations convenes today in New York for the largest gathering of world leaders ever to address climate change.

Though pledges will be made, it is not intended to be a negotiating session for a global climate deal for the 126 heads of state, including President Obama.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

The leaders of China and India, two countries among the biggest emitters of carbon gases, are not attending.

• Scrutiny on security.

The director of the Secret Service, in New York today to manage protection at the U.N. General Assembly, is feeling some heat after last week’s White House breach.

An Iraq war veteran who had been stopped twice before remains in custody after he made his way through the front door Friday.

• Dire forecasts for Ebola.

The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention said the number of cases could total 1.4 million by Jan. 20 in a worst-case estimate.

In the best-case scenario, its report said today, the epidemic could be almost over by then.

And a report by the World Health Organization raises the possibility that the epidemic could become a constant presence in West Africa.

• Terrorist is jailed for life.

Sulaiman Abu Ghaith, Osama bin Laden’s son-in-law and the most senior confederate of his to be tried in a U.S. civilian court, was sentenced to life in prison today in Manhattan.

He was convicted in March of conspiracy to kill Americans and providing material support to terrorists.

• Dissident in China also gets life term.

A professor who became a symbol of peaceful resistance by ethnic Uighurs to Chinese policies was sentenced today after being found guilty of separatism.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

It is one of the harshest sentences imposed in years on a political dissident there.

• Uncertainty in Scotland.

Alex Salmond, the outgoing first minister, told Scottish politicians they need to hold England’s “feet to the fire” over promises made before the Scots rejected independence last week.

It was the Scottish Parliament‘s first session since the referendum.

• Suspects in teenagers’ deaths slain.

Israeli forces said today that they killed the two men suspected of abducting and killing three Israeli teenagers in June.

The suspects were killed as they “came out shooting” from a building in Hebron where they had been holed up.

• Louisiana judge rules against marriage ban.

The state’s ban on same-sex marriage is unconstitutional, a state judge ruled Monday. A U.S. District Court in Louisiana had upheld the state’s law this month.

MARKETS

• Wall Street stocks are lower. Europe shares ended down sharply, and Asian indexes closed mixed.

• Senate Finance Committee leaders say they will work on bipartisan stopgap legislation to limit companies’ ability to evade taxes by incorporating abroad.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Administration rules issued Monday were seen as having little substantive effect.

• Citizens Financial Group, the U.S. unit of Royal Bank of Scotland, prices its shares today in the largest initial offering of an American bank since 1999.

• Jimmy Choo, the luxury shoe brand, is planning an initial public stock offering in London next month.

NOTEWORTHY

• Taking the throne.

“The Lion King” musical has grossed more than $6.2 billion worldwide, surpassing “The Phantom of the Opera” to become the biggest-earning show, movie or other work of entertainment in history.

• Another Stephen King novel headed for TV.

The streaming company Hulu has said it will create a nine-hour series based on “11/22/63,” a time-travel book about the Kennedy assassination.

“Under the Dome,” a CBS hit on Monday nights, is also based on Mr. King’s work.

• Warming up for the Jeter send-off.

The Yankees are opening the stadium early for Derek Jeter’s final home games this week to let fans watch his batting practice.

• Unlikely duo reunites.

Lady Gaga and Tony Bennett today release a collaborative jazz album, “Cheek to Cheek,” featuring duets and solos. (They also did a song together on his album “Duets II.”)

Other new albums out today are John Mellencamp’s 22nd full-length album, “Plain Spoken,” and Kenny Chesney’s “The Big Revival.”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

• The Boss’s birthday.

Bruce Springsteen, winner of 20 Grammys, turns 65 today.

BACK STORY

Are the Muslim Brotherhood and the Islamic State the same?

In fact, the two are very different — and very much at odds.

The Brotherhood was founded in Egypt in 1928 as a religious revival that doubled as a movement against Western dominance.

Yet it has renounced violence for at least 40 years, holding firm even after the Egyptian authorities killed hundreds of people last year as they protested the military’s ouster of the president.

The Islamic State, an offshoot of Al Qaeda’s Iraq affiliate, embraces violence, executing captive Shiite soldiers by the hundreds and beheading Western hostages.

The Brotherhood denounces the Islamic State as a bloodthirsty perversion of the faith, while the Islamic State's scholars argue that Brotherhood officials might deserve beheading for participating in godless governments.

They do have something in common: the quest for a caliphate, or rule under a Sunni religious leader.

But even there, they differ. The Brotherhood’s caliphate is a remote, end-times idea. The Islamic State proclaimed its caliphate in June.

David D. Kirkpatrick contributed reporting.

Your Morning Briefing is posted weekdays at 6 a.m. Eastern.

What would you like to see here? Email us at briefing@nytimes.com.