There has always been something slightly peculiar about the Republican Party’s designation as the favorite to win the Senate this November. Among the competitive races, it hasn’t had a clear lead in the six states where it needs to win, and it has enjoyed a significant advantage in only three Democratic-held states: in South Dakota, Montana and West Virginia.

The Republicans’ advantage has been more about the large number of opportunities across a range of red states, rather than any actual breakthroughs there in which Republicans have taken a big lead.

Arkansas could be the first state where the G.O.P. turns a big opportunity into a big lead in the polls.

For much of the summer, an onslaught of partisan polls contaminated the polling averages in Arkansas, making it hard to discern whether Mark Pryor, the Democratic incumbent, was trailing or leading his Republican challenger, Tom Cotton. There were very few nonpartisan polls, and they often disagreed. Two traditional live-interview surveys from NBC/Marist and New York Times/Kaiser Family Foundation gave Mr. Pryor a large lead among registered voters, while other polls showed Mr. Cotton in a much closer race.

Over the last month, however, a new wave of polls makes it fairly clear that Mr. Cotton, the Republican, now has an advantage. Since July, there have been eight surveys that weren’t sponsored by some element of the Democratic campaign apparatus; all but one show Mr. Cotton with a lead.

Photo

Several of these eight surveys are of dubious quality, but two were traditional live-interview surveys, by CNN/ORC and NBC/Marist, that reached voters with cellphones. Both polls show Mr. Cotton with an advantage among likely voters, by two and five points, respectively. The most recent YouGov panel data also shows Mr. Cotton ahead, by four percentage points.

It shouldn’t be a big surprise if Mr. Pryor has fallen behind. Arkansas voted for Mitt Romney by 24 points in 2012, and Mr. Pryor faces a capable challenger. Many political reporters wrote Mr. Pryor off at the beginning of the year, expecting him to follow in the footsteps of Blanche Lincoln, an Arkansas Democrat who was pummeled in 2010. Mr. Pryor has plainly avoided Ms. Lincoln’s fate, but no one will be struggling to explain a modest loss.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

It will be very difficult for Mr. Pryor to mount a comeback if he is indeed behind, as the state’s undecided voters overwhelmingly supported Mitt Romney and disapprove of the president’s performance.

Nonetheless, Mr. Pryor has somewhat more hope than one would initially guess for a candidate trailing in seven of the last eight polls. Those hopes are kept alive by evidence that Mr. Pryor might lead among registered voters at this late stage, and by an unusually large gap between registered and likely voters in support for him.

All the way back to April, two polls of registered voters by The New York Times/Kaiser Family Foundation and NBC/Marist gave Mr. Pryor a double-digit lead. Then over the last week, CNN/ORC showed Mr. Pryor ahead by seven points among registered voters, even though he trailed by two among likely voters. Two other surveys, from YouGov and NBC/Marist, showed Mr. Pryor tied among registered voters, but trailing by four and five points among likely voters. Over those three recent polls, Mr. Pryor leads by just over two points among registered voters and trails by nearly four points among likely voters. Mr. Cotton has not yet led among registered voters in a traditional live-interview survey.

A six-point gap between likely and registered voters isn’t unprecedented, but it is larger than usual. It is also a little hard to explain. Arkansas is not a state where Democrats are unusually dependent on young and nonwhite voters, who tend to turn out in low numbers. The state’s eligible voters are 79 percent white, well above the 70 percent figure nationwide.

Arkansas Polls Since July 1 Excluding polls sponsored by the Pryor Campaign, the Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee, and the Arkansas Democratic Party Senate General Election Dem. Rep. Margin Adjusted margin + – Ark. YouGov 39% 43% Cotton +4 +4 + – Ark. Marist College 40% 45% Cotton +5 +5 + – Ark. Opinion Research Corporation 47% 49% Cotton +2 +2 + – Ark. Rasmussen Reports 44% 43% Pryor* +1 +1 + – Ark. Public Policy Polling 39% 41% Cotton +2 +4 + – Ark. Hendrix College 42% 44% Cotton +2 +2 + – Ark. YouGov 46% 50% Cotton +4 +4 + – Ark. Gravis Marketing 42% 53% Cotton +11 +9 *Incumbent Note: Adjusted margins include adjustments for pollster house effects.

There’s not a huge generation gap, either, in which Democrats fare far better among younger than older voters, causing Democrats to suffer big losses when young voters stay home. When Democrats are competitive in Arkansas, it usually involves doing fairly well among the state’s older white voters, who used to reliably support Democrats.

John Kerry, for instance, won 54 percent of Arkansas seniors in 2004, according to the exit polls, and he was hardly an ideal candidate for the state’s conservative electorate. In 2010, Ms. Lincoln fared 5 points better among young voters than among seniors, but that was well below the average gap nationally. Neither the CNN/ORC nor the NBC/Marist polls show Mr. Cotton with a particularly large advantage among older voters.

So there’s some reason to wonder whether the polls are underestimating, for whatever reason, Mr. Pryor’s support among likely voters. You could somewhat strengthen that case by observing that the Democratic campaign polls that have been released show Mr. Pryor ahead, and that those surveys might merely reflect different yet defensible assumptions about the composition of the electorate.

The problem with campaign polls, of course, is that there is never a way to know whether the campaign pollsters are releasing their best data to make a serious case, or whether it’s just a selective release to advance their message.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Even if the public polling is accurate, one could also argue that the Pryor campaign has room to make gains by mobilizing its supporters over the final few months of the race.

But even if the polls were somewhat underestimating Mr. Pryor’s share of likely voters, or even if Mr. Pryor could narrow the gap between registered and likely voters, he would probably still trail by a slight margin. Mr. Pryor’s average two-point lead among registered voters would not be enough to withstand the typical gap between registered and likely voters, which is usually around 3 percent.

Yet of all of the possibilities, the likeliest one is that the polls are right. They usually are. That’s why Leo, The Upshot’s Senate election forecasting model, now gives Mr. Cotton a 75 percent chance of defeating Mr. Pryor.