Calvin Nemeckay wanted to do something to make his senior year in high school memorable. So, he shaved off his hair to raise money for cancer research. (Photo: Courtesy of Patti Verbanas/Rutgers Today)

When Dunellen High School senior Calvin Nemeckay landed the lead role of Oliver "Daddy" Warbucks in the school's spring musical production of "Annie," he decided to go for broke — and shave his head to really become the iconic shiny-headed character.

"I was looking for something crazy to do in my senior year, and this fit the bill," he said.

As he considered his decision, he began to understand something that people with cancer undergoing chemotherapy face: They lose their hair, and they lose a bit of their identity.

Nemeckay had seen the devastating toll cancer takes on people and families. In December, his longtime neighbor lost her battle with bile duct cancer. "It was sad to see her fight so hard," he said. "I decided to do something positive for others with cancer by using my decision to shave my head as a way to raise money for cancer research."

He contacted the Rutgers Cancer Institute of New Jersey and set up a fundraising website called "Going Bald for Cancer Research," which he is promoting in his school and community. His goal is to raise $1,000.

The 17-year-old who has been acting since he was 8 and plans to study theater in college is known as much for his generosity as he is for his thick, lush hair.

When Nemeckay told friends and family that he was going to shave his head to play a role, they were hesitant about his decision. "They loved my hair and didn't want me to change the way I looked," he said, "but when they found out that I was raising money for cancer research, they were all on board."

"We applaud Calvin's efforts to support scientific research at Rutgers Cancer Institute of New Jersey. His initiative and creativity in raising funds to support others are admirable. We are hopeful Calvin's unique approach to philanthropy and awareness inspires others to do the same," said Cancer Institute of New Jersey Chief Development Officer Joan Russo.

"I admit I became teary-eyed while watching Calvin's hair fall to the ground, but my husband and I are proud of him for raising awareness of the need to fund cancer research," said his mother, Pattie Nemeckay. "That's a great trade off for losing some locks of hair, which, let's face it, will grow back."

View Nemeckay's fundraiser by searching his name at cinjfoundation.donordrive.com.

See Nemeckay perform as Daddy Warbucks in Dunellen High School's performance of "Annie" on March 12, 13 and 14 at 7:30 p.m. and March 15 at 3 p.m.

Read or Share this story: http://mycj.co/1BOTSyB