HARRISBURG — Gov. Tom Wolf, making good on a campaign pledge, on Monday began the process of scrapping the Medicaid alternative briefly enacted by his predecessor and instead installing a full expansion of Medicaid.

“Today is the first step toward simplifying a complicated process and ensuring hundreds of thousands of Pennsylvanians have greater access to the health insurance they need,” Mr. Wolf said Monday in a statement. “Our approach will alleviate confusion, remove unnecessary red tape, and streamline the system.”

Mr. Wolf campaigned on undoing then-Gov. Tom Corbett’s “Healthy PA” plan in favor of a traditional Medicaid expansion, as permitted under the Affordable Care Act. Healthy PA combines federally subsidized private insurance for up to 600,000 newly eligible enrollees — mostly working poor adults — with controversial benefit changes to the current Medicaid program.

Despite Mr. Wolf's victory in November, the Corbett administration moved ahead with the implementation of Healthy PA, signing people up for coverage that began Jan. 1.

On Monday, Mr. Wolf directed state officials to submit a letter to the federal government withdrawing the “low-risk” health care package from Mr. Corbett’s plan from further federal consideration, which would have impacted the coverage of some Medicaid enrollees.

The governor’s office emphasized Monday no health care coverage would be immediately impacted by the steps Mr. Wolf has taken. So far, the state estimates that 156,000 individuals had already enrolled in the Healthy PA private coverage option.

“If you are already covered, your coverage will remain unaffected at this time and you do not have to do anything at this time,” according to a list of questions and answers about the program on the state’s website. “As Pennsylvania transitions to the new comprehensive adult package, the Department of Human Services will notify you of any changes prior to those changes taking effect."

A number of lawsuits are pending from advocacy groups over the implementation of Healthy PA. Other groups have complained the state has failed to process applicants in a timely manner, has asked applicants for unnecessary information — thus delaying applications — and has improperly denied eligible applicants.

“We are really excited and relieved to see this announcement and we think it is a step in the right direction,” said Kristen Dama, a staff attorney at Community Legal Services of Greater Philadelphia, a group that has brought three separate lawsuits over various aspects of Healthy PA. Those lawsuits are still pending, Ms. Dama said, though she is hopeful her agency can reach a resolution with the state.

Community Legal Services still has questions about the timeline of a transition and details of what benefits packages for Medicaid patients would look like, she said.

Much of the infrastructure and information technology work of any transition to a full expansion of Medicaid would have to be done in part by the private insurance companies who would have seen new enrollees under Healthy PA, but who for the most part also enroll the state’s Medicaid managed care patients.

“Certainly, there is a lot of work to be done,” said Michael Rosenstein, who coordinates the Coalition of Medical Assistance Managed Care Organizations, an association of those private insurance companies. “We have questions with respect to the regional composition of the program and about the transition, but many of our questions have been answered [by the Wolf administration].”

“We’re committed to making [this] work,” Mr. Rosenstein said.

A spokeswoman for the state’s Department of Human Services said it hopes to close enrollment in Healthy PA’s private coverage option in the spring, with the transition being fully complete by the fall. By that time, everybody who has signed up for private Healthy PA coverage will have transferred into the state’s existing HealthChoices Medicaid program.