Hospitals across the country announced a flurry of mergers, acquisitions and joint ventures in 2014, including nine in Illinois, according to a new survey.

Kaufman Hall, a Skokie-based health care consulting company, reported Monday that hospitals announced 95 deals in 2014, down slightly from 98 in 2013, but up 44 percent from 66 transactions in 2010.

Illinois' largest hospital system, Advocate Health Care, announced in September that it would merge with NorthShore University HealthSystem, the dominant hospital chain in the North Shore suburbs. The merger, which could close this year, is awaiting Federal Trade Commission approval. The consolidation would create a 16-hospital system that reported $6.8 billion in combined revenue in 2013.

Another Illinois deal, announced in June, closed last week. Alexian Brothers Health System said Monday that it and Adventist Midwest Health had finalized the creation of a joint company, which will include nine hospitals in suburban Chicago, creating the third-largest health system in the state and serving 3.8 million people.

Hospital consolidation has been on the rise since the 2010 approval of the federal Affordable Care Act, which requires hospitals to transition from a traditional fee-for-service model to one that rewards hospitals for good outcomes. Some hospital officials have said compliance under the law will be easier with greater scale. The consolidation trend is also fueled by declining hospital patient volume and tighter finances.

Hospital executives have said the deals allow them to offer more services to patients.

"Consumerism is really entering the health care equation," said Kit Kamholz, managing director of Kaufman Hall. "As people have transitioned to high deductible health plans, they are really looking for things ... such as ease of access, low cost, high quality and tremendous value. Those are all things that were less important when insurance companies were paying all the dollars."

There's also a huge amount of pressure on Medicare and Medicaid budgets, Kamholz said, which means hospitals are getting smaller reimbursement amounts.

Hospital occupancy rates have been declining for about six or seven years, he said, so beds aren't always filled.

"Every hospital in America today has some level of cost restructuring going on," Kamholz said.

Hospital executives have long been assessing how they will need to transform their facilities to make money and provide care under the new health care model. If they determine that changing their operations on their own is too difficult, joint ventures or mergers can be appealing, Kamholz said.

Kamholz said he anticipates the heightened hospital consolidation to continue "for the foreseeable future."

Leemore Dafny, professor and health economist at Northwestern University's Kellogg School of Management said she hasn't seen evidence that more scale helps hospitals manage care better. Merging can help hospitals gain more market clout to negotiate better rates from insurers, she said. But when rival hospital systems in close proximity merge, patients are hurt when they raise prices.

Dafny, who worked as deputy director for health care and antitrust at the FTC for about a year during 2012-13, said it's up to local and federal regulatory bodies to keep consolidation in check.

"That's the role of the regulators to say, look, if this transaction is the kind we see as historically problematic and the effects ... are harmful effects to consumers, then we're going to object to it," Dafny said.

ehirst@tribpub.com

Twitter @ellenjeanhirst