Infections, other preventable conditions, result in loss of Medicare payments.

Sanford USD Medical Center (Photo: Sioux Falls Business Journal file photo)

Two South Dakota hospitals are among more than 750 nationally that will see reductions in the amount of money that Medicare pays them after scoring in the bottom 25 percent for some preventable ailments.

Sanford USD Medical Center and the Brookings Health System will each see a 1 percent reduction in the amounts Medicare reimburses them during the current fiscal year. The Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Studies released data this month on hospital-acquired conditions as part of its Hospital Compare program. That program uses a host of measurements, including consumer satisfaction scores, readmissions and other data so that consumers have information about their health providers.

The latest data release scored hospitals on about a dozen complications, including post-operative hip fractures, surgical site infections, urinary tract infections related to catheters, bloodstream infections, sepsis and ulcers, among others.

The Affordable Care Act, also known as Obamacare, required CMS to make data more transparent to consumers, and it also transitions the way in which the government pays for health care, focusing more on the quality of outcomes than on the number of services a provider bills.

"We're in a transformational time," said Scott A. Duke, the president and CEO of the South Dakota Association of Healthcare Organizations.

Federal law requires CMS to reduce Medicare payments to all hospitals that score in the bottom 25 percent of the government's Hospital-Acquired Reduction Program. In the current year, 758 hospitals were penalized. Those hospitals will see a loss of $364 million that they would have otherwise received from Medicare. Last year, the first year in which hospitals were penalized, 724 saw reductions in Medicare payments.

Dr. Mike Wilde, Sanford's chief medical officer, declined to discuss the financial implications of a 1 percent reduction from Medicare.

"It's not so much about the financial penalty but really about the opportunity for us to improve as an organization," he said.

Sanford scored in the bottom 10 percent of hospitals nationally in a composite ranking of several patient-safety indicators, including accidental punctures or lacerations, post-surgical wound ruptures, medically induced lung damage and post-surgical hip fractures.

The scores were based on older data of patient discharges, Wilde noted. CMS' latest round of scores on hospital-acquired conditions were on patient discharges between July 2012 and June 2014. Since then, Wilde said, Sanford has taken steps to address issues identified in the scores through a dedicated team that assesses and monitors quality outcomes.

Wilde noted that the score applied to just one facility in a health care system with dozens of hospitals and clinics.

The Brookings Health System ranked in the bottom 10 percent of hospitals nationally in a score that assessed site infections on patients who underwent colon surgery or hysterectomies.

Jason Merkley, the system's president and CEO, said in a statement that CMS' latest data release was one component among many used by CMS to assess provider quality. When all those scores are combined, Brookings is one of the top performing hospitals in the state.

"Quality and patient safety are top priorities at Brookings Health System," Merkley said. "Even one hospital-acquired condition is one too many. As such, we continuously look for ways to improve processes and procedures and strive to deliver the highest quality outcomes for patients."

Two other South Dakota hospitals – Rapid City Regional and Avera St. Mary's – narrowly escaped being penalized. Duke noted that nearly two dozen South Dakota hospitals were not penalized, and he said that hospitals and nursing homes in the state have a long-standing tradition of keeping patients safe and supporting efforts to measure quality.

Critics of the government's effort to assess quality outcomes say the data aren't reliable indicators for hospital quality. They also say some hospitals that treat poorer patients end up getting penalized because their patients are more likely to have issues such as diabetes or obesity that can lead to more complications.

But a study released last year by the Stanford University School of Medicine concluded that when Medicare tied financial incentives to quality, patient care improved. The study found that blood clots after hip and knee replacements dropped 35 percent after Medicare stopped paying for treating post-surgical deep-vein thrombosis and pulmonary embolisms.

Duke said the indicators measured by CMS aren't perfect, but they are important. He predicted that in time, the ability to assess quality outcomes will improve.

"We believe they're not perfect, but they are getting there," he said. "We're on this journey. I've heard people smarter than me say it could take a good decade."

Follow reporter Jonathan Ellis on Twitter @argusjellis.

Read or Share this story: http://argusne.ws/1YsKd8f