For more than a decade, there was no immediate medical care or forensic examination available to sexual assault survivors in Boulder. Nothing in Longmont, or anywhere else in Boulder County, either. Anyone seeking treatment following such an attack would have to drive to Loveland or Lakewood to be helped.

Now, for the first time since 2002, that's no longer the case.

Boulder Community Health opened a brand-new Sexual Assault Nurse Examiner (SANE) program on Saturday, where staff will be on-call 24 hours a day.

"BCH has recruited and trained a team of nurses," said Debbie Delk, the hospital's nursing director, "who are committed to meeting the medical and emotional needs of sexual assault survivors while collecting the forensic evidence that will help in the successful prosecution of these sex offenders."

At SANE facilities, of which there are 20 across Colorado, sexual assault victims are given thorough physical examination, with documentation of injuries, as well as collection of legal evidence. They're also offered medications to prevent communicable diseases, as well as emergency contraception, when necessary. After being initially examined, patients can return for follow-up care.

Survivor advocates, BCH staff and law enforcement agree the program was long overdue for a return to Boulder, and say it will be enormously beneficial.

Victims of sexual assault no longer have to drive a few dozen miles out of town just to be treated. That will increase reporting, said Jessica Ladd-Webert, director of the Office of Victim Assistance at the University of Colorado.

Advertisement

"This is an underreported crime that affects not only campuses, but everyone in the community," Ladd-Webert said. "I think now we'll see an increase in people wanting to get medical evidence collected, then deciding they want to move forward with the criminal process."

It has been widely reported that one in four college women will be sexually assaulted. For men, estimates range from one-in-six to about one-in-ten, though accurate data collection on that front is nearly impossible, due largely to the stigma around male reporting.

Det. Sgt. Barry Hartkopp, of the Boulder Police Department's major crimes unit, said city police have responded to one or two sex assault reports per week over the last few months. With the opening of BCH's SANE unit, Hartkopp looks forward to working with survivors to process evidence more efficiently.

"Not only will it be helpful for the victims to lessen the trauma they have to go through after" being assaulted, he said, "but the sooner we can get that evidence, the better and more pristine it actually is."

Katharina Booth, the county's lead prosecutor on sexual assault crimes, said the District Attorney's office often found that survivors were disinclined to take any legal action because it was impossible to find help close to home.

"I kept hearing story after story from them as they came forward, and those were just the ones who were actively participating and working with law enforcement," Booth said. "But they'd tell me about not having access to medical care. They had taken themselves to the hospital in order to get some medical clearance, for concerns about sexually transmitted diseases, pregnancy, and otherwise, and weren't able to get that care."