SIGN UP FOR OUR NEWSLETTER

In an interview with the Daily Beast, actress Olivia Wilde said she will throw her support behind Hillary Clinton in the 2016 presidential election, despite having previously urged Massachusetts Sen. Elizabeth Warren to run for the post.

Wilde, who campaigned for President Obama during the 2008 election, called Hillary “a really exciting candidate for so many reasons, but she has a lot to prove to a lot of people.”

SIGN UP FOR OUR NEWSLETTER

“And I think she’s up for that,” Wilde added.

The actress, best known for her roles on the Fox television show House and Disney’s Tron movies, told the Daily Beast that the former Secretary of State would get her vote because of her focus on women’s rights.

“The fact that she feels the plight of women and girls as the most important issue of the 21st century is a huge reason why I’m supporting her,” Wilde told the outlet.

Wilde, who starred in a Funny or Die promotional video for the Affordable Care Act in 2013, said it would be important to “protect our new health care law, and I think Hillary would be focused on that.” She continued:

I think the equal rights of women in this country is something that’s still not a law and she would absolutely be focused on that. Our justice system is a mess and she’s aware of that. I think where she’ll face difficulty is with Wall Street. They’re afraid of the rhetoric she’ll use in her campaign and I think she’ll face a lot of pressure from her campaign to tone that down because of the donations they’ll receive from different banks. So it’s her responsibility to understand her base and that many of her supporters are further left-leaning than she is.

Wilde added that “it’d be great” if Sen. Elizabeth Warren entered the race:

“My dream is that Warren would be [Hillary’s] VP but that’s not happening in a million years,” the actress told the Daily Beast, laughing. “My ideal society!”

Wilde also discusses why she won’t run for office (“I’m not organized enough”), whether Daft Punk will be scoring Tron 3 (“I think we’d tremendously lucky to get them”), and why female filmmakers will be better represented in Hollywood (“I’m optimistic we’ll get to that point”) in the Daily Beast spread. Check out the rest here.