Skilled Nursing Providers Use OnShift's New PBJ Reporting Software to Collect, Review and Submit Staffing Data to Meet New Reporting Requirements

CLEVELAND, OH--(Marketwired - April 26, 2016) - OnShift, a leader in human capital management software for post-acute care and senior living, today announced that multiple OnShift clients have successfully submitted Payroll-Based Journal reporting information using OnShift's new PBJ Reporting software.

Lancaster Rehabilitation Center, Nebraska's largest skilled nursing provider with 293 licensed beds, is one of the organizations that has completed a Payroll-Based Journal submission to CMS using OnShift. Lancaster selected OnShift's Payroll-Based Journal Reporting software to collect and classify the required staffing information, provide visibility into direct care hours worked, and deliver a pre-formatted report ready for submission to CMS.

"OnShift has been an ideal partner helping us meet the Payroll-Based Journal reporting requirement," stated Amy Fish, Administrator, Lancaster Rehabilitation Center. "OnShift has simplified a very complex process. Their expertise in PBJ combined with user-friendly software has made the process much easier for us. I would highly recommend the use of OnShift to my fellow skilled nursing providers across the country to help them comply with the new PBJ reporting requirements."

OnShift's new Payroll-Based Journal Reporting software helps skilled nursing providers meet CMS' staffing reporting requirements in three easy steps. OnShift's PBJ software collects all required staffing information, including agency and contractor hours; provides a centralized view into staffing information so it can be easily reviewed and edited prior to submission; and delivers a submission-ready report that can be easily uploaded to CMS' Payroll-Based Journal system.

"OnShift is 100% dedicated to the long-term care and senior living industry. This commitment has allowed us to gain a deep understanding of the Payroll-Based Journal reporting challenges and to help our clients more easily navigate the ins-and-outs of PBJ," stated Mark Woodka, CEO, OnShift. "OnShift's Payroll-Based Journal Reporting software simplifies a very complicated reporting requirement and allows our clients to not only comply with the requirement, but to also be confident that the information submitted is complete and accurate."

In accordance with Section 6106 of the Affordable Care Act (ACA) all skilled nursing facilities are required to collect and electronically submit direct care staffing information electronically starting July 1, 2016. To facilitate the reporting process, CMS has developed the Payroll-Based Journal system. This system is to be used by providers to submit total direct care hours worked, including agency and contract staff, employee hire and termination date, and facility census.

Additional Resources

Learn more about the Payroll-Based Journal requirements

Whitepaper: 5 Steps to Get Payroll-Based Journal Ready

Request a Sneak Peek of OnShift's Payroll-Based Journal Reporting software

OnShift Web Site

About OnShift, Inc.

OnShift delivers cloud-based human capital management software and proactive services to solve everyday workforce challenges in healthcare. Our suite of products for hiring, scheduling and workforce analysis drives quality care, lower costs and higher performance by empowering providers to staff consistently and efficiently. Intuitive design, predictive analytics and customer success management are why thousands of post-acute care and senior living organizations rely on OnShift. For more information visit www.onshift.com.