ISTOCK

MANISHA THAKOR: You’ve worked hard, very hard, to get that coveted overseas promotion. You are about to embark upon the biggest professional challenge of your career, at least to date. If you succeed in this assignment, you will be positioned to carve out the career path you’ve always dreamed of.

What’s more, many companies that choose to relocate employees overseas offer them a foreign-service premium, a cost-of-living allowance and moving costs. If professional advancement and the adventure of living in a new country aren’t enough, consider negotiating these benefits with your employer.

There’s just one slight issue. You are not sure how to navigate the nuances of personal finance as an ex-pat. What issues are the most important to focus on? To find out, I turned to two of my colleagues at Buckingham and The BAM Alliance, Ernest Clark and Jim Cornfeld. Over the years, both of them have helped many people facing just this type of situation. They suggest starting with a big-picture, six-point plan to avoid some of the most common financial mistakes employees make when transferring to another country.

1. Know that as a U.S. citizen, all income, no matter where it is earned in the world, must be reported on your U.S. tax return. In 2015, if you are physically present in a foreign country for at least 330 full days in a consecutive 12-month period, you are eligible for a foreign income exclusion of up to $100,800 from your taxable income. But you still must report it.

2. Recognize that each country has its own income-tax laws and income-tax rates. Then assume you will have to pay that country’s taxes on all wages earned in that country.

3. Negotiate what amounts to the difference between your U.S. and foreign country tax payments in the form of a “tax-equalization package” from your employer. It works like this: The employee files returns and pays income tax due in both the foreign country and the U.S. Let’s call this step (A). Next, the amount of U.S. tax on the employee’s earnings is re-calculated as if his or her wages were earned exclusively in the U.S. We’ll call this step (B). Lastly, the employer would reimburse the employee the excess of taxes paid as a result of the foreign assignment, defined as (A) minus (B). 4. Ask for a “gross-up.” Alas, the tax-equalization package payment from your employer, as calculated above, is taxable at the federal level. For this reason, the employee may also want to request reimbursement for this additional U.S. income tax.

5. Make sure any CPA fees associated with your tax-equalization package are covered. In most instances, your company will pay for CPA fees related to preparing your tax returns and to calculating the equalization and gross up amounts. (Note that this is the return used in the tax-equalization calculation, not necessarily your full, final and submitted tax return).

6. Create your own team. A personal CPA you engage on your own behalf can help you accumulate the necessary tax-preparation information, review the equalization and gross up calculation, and address any other tax or logistical complexities your household may face as you move overseas. For example, there may be custodial or trading restrictions on your investment accounts. Or you may have questions about whether the U.S. government allows Social Security credit on income earned in the particular country you’ll be working in.

Consider these recommendations before you accept any position overseas. They just might help you avoid some common mistakes that could have a negative impact on your personal financial health.

Manisha Thakor (@ManishaThakor) is director of wealth strategies for women at Buckingham and The BAM Alliance, a community of independent registered investment advisers.

Read the latest Wealth Management Report.