Donald Trump's objectively awful healthcare "plan" continues to baffle and "exasperate" Republican policy types who are going to have be responsible for defending it—and him—should he get the nomination. None of them seem to have any problem now, however, unloading about just how much of a mess it is.

“If you repeal the Affordable Care Act, you’ve got to have a serious way to expand coverage to replace what you have taken away,” said Gail R. Wilensky, who was the administrator of Medicare and Medicaid under President George Bush from 1990 to 1992. “There’s nothing I see in Trump’s plan that would do anything more than cover a couple million people.” Robert Laszewski, a former insurance executive and frequent critic of the health law, called Mr. Trump’s health care proposals “a jumbled hodgepodge of old Republican ideas, randomly selected, that don’t fit together.” […] James C. Capretta, a senior fellow at the Ethics and Public Policy Center, a conservative nonprofit group, said Mr. Trump underestimated how difficult it would be to uproot a law that was now embedded in the nation’s health care system. […] "I just don’t see that in Trump’s vague plans to repeal the law and replace it with something beautiful and great.” […] Grace-Marie Turner, the president of the Galen Institute, a champion of free-market health policy, said Mr. Trump’s proposals were sketchy and inadequate.

All of which Trump's chief policy adviser, Sam Clovis, dismisses in a manner that's totally emblematic of the entire campaign. When it comes to policy, there just isn't any beyond a bunch of catch phrases and emphatic bluster from Trump.

Clovis says that his candidate is running against the political establishment, so these criticisms just don't matter because he's not relying on "traditional establishment Republican people" like them. Instead he has a half-dozen or so advisers who are "very prominent people," but who "are not ready to have their support of the Trump campaign known."

Yeah, I bet they're not anxious to be known.