November 29, 2014 marks the 150th year since the Sand Creek Massacre. On that fateful morning 150 years ago, Regiments of Colorado (U.S.) Volunteer Cavalry attacked a peaceful Cheyenne and Arapaho village along the Big Sandy Creek. The surprise attack resulted in the deaths of approximately 200 men, women and children. Those who lost their lives will be remembered as part of the commemoration activities planned at the Sand Creek Massacre National Historic Site throughout the day.

The public is invited to join staff for a series of free commemorative events, planned both at the park and in the town of Eads, Colorado.

Events planned at the park include the following:

8 a.m. to 1 p.m.—Monument Hill and upper parking area are closed. Visitor Contact Station, picnic area and lower parking lot will be open for activities listed below.

9 a.m. to noon—U.S. Postal Service representative will be available to cancel letters with the 150th Year Remembrance of the Sand Creek Massacre postal cancellation stamp.

10 a.m. to 10:30 a.m.—“The Sand Creek Massacre”: Join a park ranger in the picnic area for this insightful discussion on the surprise attack on the Cheyenne and Arapaho Village, which occurred 150 years ago.

12 p.m. to 12:30 p.m.—“And Still He Stayed”: Join a park ranger in the picnic area for this interesting talk on Cheyenne Peace Chief Black Kettle. Who was he? Why is he remembered today?

1 p.m.—Monument Hill reopens to the public. Visitors are welcome to explore the park on their own or join speakers in the picnic area for a brief discussion on the importance of the day and background for establishing the park.

The public is invited to the town of Eads to attend the following programs:

3 p.m. and 5 p.m.—Join park staff at the Crow Luther Cultural Events Center in Eads for a preview of two new film documentaries on the Sand Creek Massacre. Films will be shown to the public free of charge.

RELATED: Native History: Sand Creek Massacre Devastates Tribes, Intensifies Warfare

The Sand Creek Massacre National Historic Site is located in Kiowa County, Colorado. To visit the site, follow Colorado State Highway 96 east off Highway 287 near Eads, or west off Highway 385 at Sheridan Lake. Near Chivington, turn north onto County Road 54/Chief White Antelope Way or at Brandon, turn north onto County Road 59. Follow these roads to their intersections with County Road W. The park entrance is along County Road W a mile east of County Road 54 or several miles west of CR 59.

Large vehicles and motorcyclists: Eight miles of well-maintained county roads lead to the site.