Mayor Matt Appelbaum: 'It's time for us to catch up'

Christian Mockett takes a cigarette break on Friday, just north of Pearl Street on 13th Street in Boulder. ( Cliff Grassmick / Daily Camera )

Expanding Boulder's smoking ban Places smoking would be banned under the proposed ordinance: The Downtown Boulder Improvement District including the Pearl Street Mall but excluding alleys Any park, parkland of facility other than Flatirons Golf Course or Chautauqua, unless otherwise prohibited by sign Any open space or mountain parks Any trail, path, or multi-use pathas well as anywhere within 15 feet of a trail, path or multiuse path. Within 25 feet of any city library facility. Within 15 feet of any transit stop. On the city's municipal campus.

In efforts to advance the City Council's goal of "making Boulder as healthy and smoke free as possible," city staff members next week will introduce a proposed ordinance seeking to expand on the city's smoking ban to include nearly all city-controlled parks, open spaces, paths and trails.

The ordinance, slated for a study session on Sept. 23, also would ban the smoking of cigarettes, cigars, tobacco pipes and use of electronic "e-cigarettes" in a substantial portion of the city's downtown business improvement district as well as within 15 feet of bus stops and shelters.

Modeled after the smoking ban on the Pearl Street Mall, the ordinance caps penalties at fines of no more than $1,000 and jail sentences of no more than 90 days. The typical fine for smoking on the mall is $100, officials say.

The ordinance could be officially adopted by the end of this year.

Mayor Matt Appelbaum said that recently the city has fallen behind on the issue of smoking in public places. He said he strongly supports the proposed ordinance, and would even advocate expanding it beyond what is recommended in the downtown area.

"It's time for us to catch up and join with many other communities and recognize that smoking really needs to be prohibited in many areas where people want to linger and hang out and talk to each other and enjoy the outdoors," the mayor said. "I've long wanted us to reexamine our policy and expand it."

Notable exceptions to the ban are Flatirons Golf Course and, for now at least, Chautauqua.

The staff memo points out only one golf course in Colorado bans smoking, and that ban is confined to a few holes because of fire concerns. Flatirons' management felt that "the golf course stands to lose a significant amount of revenue if the smoking ban is implemented," the memo says.

Lisa Martin, Boulder's urban parks manager, said discussions are ongoing with the groups that govern Chautauqua.

"We are currently working with the Colorado Chautauqua Association to develop some kind of smoking ban that works for the park and the leased area of the property there," Martin said. "The executive director of Chautauqua took the proposal of a smoking ban to her board in June and they have discussed it this summer. She is taking it to them again in October."

Martin said if it is passed, the city would focus on education and warnings for several months before writing tickets and enforcing fines.

Earlier this year, city staff members took the draft proposal to a number of volunteer boards and commissions. The memo indicates a majority of the feedback was positive but among the issues raised was that the measure might be viewed as intentionally targeting the homeless.

If you go What: City Council study session considering a smoking ban on select city properties When: 6 - 7:30 p.m. Sept. 23 Where: Boulder Municipal Building, 1777 Broadway More info: Visit bouldercolorado.gov/city-council/city-council-meetings and click on "Most Current Study Session Packet"

After City Manager Jane Brautigam enacted a special rule at the beginning of this year banning smoking on the city's municipal campus — a rule that could be repealed and folded into the larger ban ordinance. Boulder police indicated the measure was a major influence on where homeless people chose to hang out downtown, with many moving to places nearer Boulder High School.

Resident Joseph Vavrus, a nonsmoker, said he was concerned about the proposed ban's impact on Boulder's poor and homeless populations when asked about it while he was on on the Pearl Street Mall, Friday afternoon.

"I like the idea of keeping it out of open spaces like Chautauqua and places you want to prevent litter. That makes sense to me," the 30-year-old said. "But banning it in public places downtown might disproportionately affect poor and homeless people who don't have places to smoke inside anyway, or money to pay their fines."

Appelbaum said the ordinance is not about singling out homeless people.

"This is about making the city healthier and move livable," Appelbaum said.

After downtown business owners pushed for the exemption, defined alleyways in the city's business improvement district would be exempted from the ban.

Some local smokers asked about the issue Friday, said even with that concession, the proposed ban goes too far.

"I guess the bus stops I can understand. There are people waiting for buses and don't want smoke blown in their face. But blocks and blocks where you can't smoke except for alleys? That seems excessive," Boulder Café staff member Christian Mockett said.

Three-year Boulder resident Audrey Brown questioned where the ban would end if all parks, trails and significant portion of the heart of the city were included as she smoked a cigarette just off the mall.

"I don't think it's right," she said. "Maybe we could set up designated smoking areas. That would be better. There are a lot of businesses down here and people have to walk two blocks to smoke on their 15-minute breaks."

Contact Camera Staff Writer Joe Rubino at 303-473-1328 or rubinoj@dailycamera.com