If we are adding people to the system without improving care, we risk increasing costs far beyond what is being planned.

By Nancy J. Winkler

State leaders in Harrisburg are about to begin an incredibly important debate about how to expand the access to healthcare coverage for hundreds of thousands of working Pennsylvanians. As part of that debate, they should include steps to improve the quality of care everyone receives.

Two national studies released in the last week reveal that not only are more people than previously believed dying due to preventable medical errors -- at least 210,000 annually, or more than four jumbo jets crashing every single day -- but that hospital acquired infections add almost $10 billion annually to the cost of care. Disturbingly, these findings come years after significant patient safety reforms were begun.

According to a new study published in the Journal of Patient Safety, between 210,000 and 440,000 people who enter a hospital are the victims of a preventable error that contributes to their death. This estimate -- even at the low end -- is more than double the 98,000 deaths estimated in a landmark Institute of Medicine's 1999 study.

It is, however, closer to the 2010 findings of the Office of Inspector General for the Department of Health and Human Services, which found that subpar care contributed to the deaths of 180,000 patients in Medicare alone every year. At those numbers, only cancer and heart disease kill more Americans annually. It should be noted the medical community does not dispute the 98,000 annual deaths, but has raised questions about the higher figures.

In Pennsylvania, the numbers are, of course, smaller, but equally shocking. According to a report released this year by the Patient Safety Authority, there were an amazing 6,462 “serious events” in Pennsylvania hospitals in 2012, and almost a quarter of a million “incidents”. As defined by the Patient Safety Authority, a “serious event” is an adverse event resulting in patient harm, including death.

Those “serious events” not only bring hardship to patients and their loved ones, but often add tens of thousands of dollars in new care costs to treatment.

Which is exactly what was found by researchers from Harvard, who in a new study found that the five most common hospital acquired infections (HAIs) (just HAIs, not all preventable errors) add almost $10 billion a year in new costs.

According to the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, one out of every 20 patients admitted to a hospital will pick up an infection there. In a bit of understatement,

Dr. Trish Perl, a professor of medicine and pathology at the Johns Hopkins School of Public Health in Baltimore, stated "This is real money, I mean real money" about the findings.

With changes to federal law that will restrict Medicare and Medicaid reimbursements to health care providers based on the outcome of care, not just its delivery -- a program began just last October -- we should expect care to continue to improve.

But if we are adding people to the system without improving care, we risk increasing costs far beyond what is being planned.

As the state moves towards expanding coverage in Pennsylvania as part of the Affordable Care Act, patient safety efforts should not only be part of the discussion, they should be a central focus of it.

Nancy J. Winkle is the president of the Philadelphia Trial Lawyers Association.