June 25, 2014 News Headlines

HANYS’ 46th Annual Conference Addresses Leadership During Transformation

Healthcare leaders from across New York State met in Bolton Landing June 18-20 for HANYS’ 46th Annual Membership Conference to discuss the transforming healthcare landscape and prepare for the challenges ahead. In addition to presentations of HANYS’ Community Health Improvement Award, Pinnacle Award for Quality and Patient Safety, and Distinguished Service Award, the Conference featured thought-provoking sessions on the transformation from fee-for-service reimbursement to population health management, the ever-changing healthcare marketplace, and the future of Medicaid in New York State. Presenters included Jason Helgerson, New York State Medicaid Director; Michael Irwin, Managing Director, Citigroup; and author and educator Ken Kaufman. Throughout the Conference, hospital and health system executives discussed the opportunities and challenges associated with the state’s Medicaid waiver program, shifts in the healthcare marketplace to risk-based systems, new care models and incentives, and meeting community healthcare needs.

HANYS Presents Distinguished Service Award to Bassett Healthcare CEO William Streck, M.D.

HANYS President Dennis Whalen (left) presents the Distinguished Service Award to William F. Streck, M.D., President and Chief Executive Officer, Bassett Healthcare Network (right). HANYS President Dennis Whalen (left) presents the Distinguished Service Award to William F. Streck, M.D., President and Chief Executive Officer, Bassett Healthcare Network (right).

HANYS presented the Distinguished Service Award to Bassett Healthcare Network President and Chief Executive Officer William F. Streck, M.D., at HANYS’ Annual Membership Conference. One of the longest-serving health system executives in New York State, with more than three decades leading Bassett Healthcare, Dr. Streck has also led the state’s Public Health Council and Public Health and Health Planning Council. He is known for innovative healthcare design, delivery, and policy expertise. “Under Dr. Streck’s visionary leadership, a single hospital in Cooperstown, with 70 physicians, has grown into a network of six affiliated hospitals, with 45 community- and school-based health centers, and more than 400 providers serving eight counties,” said HANYS President Dennis Whalen. “He has redefined the role of a rural hospital by embracing new models for effective, efficient, and sustainable patient-centered care, while also significantly expanding access. This is a great example of a way to deliver healthcare in a challenging, rural environment with a widespread population with significant healthcare needs.” Accepting his award, thanking all of his colleagues at Bassett and across the state, Dr. Streck told the audience they were fortunate to be engaged in the world of healthcare. “In our roles, we are able to be at the confluence of all the forces in our society, providing a service that is essential to all of our citizens,” he said. Dr. Streck, who will be retiring this summer, added, “It is a remarkable privilege to have the opportunity to change so many things.” He noted the progress in the healthcare field, and added “We have these difficult times, but we are here because we think we can do it.” Since 1979, HANYS’ Distinguished Service Award has recognized individuals who demonstrate extraordinary commitment to improving healthcare through service.

HANYS Presents 2014 Pinnacle Awards

HANYS' Board Chair Linda Brady, M.D., presents the Pinnacle Awards. Pictured (from top left, clockwise: (photo 1) Joe Lhota, Senior Vice President, Vice Dean, and Chief of Staff, accepts on behalf of New York University Langone Medical Center/Tisch Hospital; (photo 2) F. F. Thompson Health System President and Chief Executive Officer, Mike Stapleton (far right) and staff accept the award; (photo 3) Maureen White, Senior Vice President and Chief Nurse Executive (second from right) and staff accept the award on behalf of North Shore-Long Island Jewish Health System; (photo 4) accepting the award on behalf of Catholic Health System of Long Island’s Our Lady of Consolation Nursing and Rehabilitation Care Center is Patrick O’Shaughnessy, D.O., (left) Senior Vice President, Medical Affairs and Chief Medical Officer, and Dennis Verzi (right), Chief Operating Officer. HANYS' Board Chair Linda Brady, M.D., presents the Pinnacle Awards. Pictured (from top left, clockwise: (photo 1) Joe Lhota, Senior Vice President, Vice Dean, and Chief of Staff, accepts on behalf of New York University Langone Medical Center/Tisch Hospital; (photo 2) F. F. Thompson Health System President and Chief Executive Officer, Mike Stapleton (far right) and staff accept the award; (photo 3) Maureen White, Senior Vice President and Chief Nurse Executive (second from right) and staff accept the award on behalf of North Shore-Long Island Jewish Health System; (photo 4) accepting the award on behalf of Catholic Health System of Long Island’s Our Lady of Consolation Nursing and Rehabilitation Care Center is Patrick O’Shaughnessy, D.O., (left) Senior Vice President, Medical Affairs and Chief Medical Officer, and Dennis Verzi (right), Chief Operating Officer.

Celebrating significant achievement in improving patient care and reducing unnecessary hospital readmissions, HANYS presented four 2014 Pinnacle Awards for Quality and Patient Safety at its 46th Annual Membership Conference. “HANYS’ members are continuously improving the quality, safety, and efficacy of care in New York State,” said HANYS President Dennis Whalen. “These recipients represent some of the tremendous advances in redesigning the way care is delivered in communities across the state.” HANYS’ Pinnacle Award for Quality and Patient Safety for an Individual Hospital Unit honored New York University Langone Medical Center/Tisch Neonatal Intensive Care Unit (NICU) for the Improving Very Low Birth Weight Infant Outcomes By Standardizing Early Nutrition program. NYU Langone collaborated with other NICUs across the state to develop an evidence-based nutrition protocol that detailed how and what to feed premature infants based on their weight, as well as how to adjust the feeding plan. F.F. Thompson Health System’s Use of Visual Management to Eliminate Hospital-Acquired Conditions initiative received HANYS’ Pinnacle Award for Quality and Patient Safety for a Small Hospital. Employing visual tools, the hospital tracked infection-free days and created greater awareness of the use of best practices for eliminating hospital-acquired conditions. HANYS presented the Pinnacle Award for Quality and Patient Safety for a Large Hospital or Health System to North Shore-Long Island Jewish Health System for A System-Wide Approach to Reducing Healthcare-Acquired Pressure Ulcers. Representatives from across the system formed a pressure ulcer task force to decrease variability and promote a consistent approach to skin care across settings. Catholic Health Services of Long Island’s Our Lady of Consolation Nursing Home and Rehabilitation Care Center received HANYS’ Pinnacle Award for Quality and Patient Safety for a Post-Acute or Outpatient Provider for Managing Behaviors Without Medication: Providing Care to Special Populations, a multidisciplinary approach to reducing the use of antipsychotic medication for those with dementia.

HANYS Honors Bassett Medical Center with Community Health Improvement Award

Pictured accepting the awards from HANYS Board Chair Linda Brady, M.D., (top photo): Accepting the Pinnacle Award on behalf of Bassett Medical Center is Susan van der Sommen, Administrative Director of the Cancer Institute (left), and Christine Conkling, Manager of the Cancer Institute (right); accepting an honorable mention for NewYork-Presbyterian Hospital is Patricia Peretz (right), Manager of Community Health and Evaluation, and Andres Nieto, Director of Community Health Education and Outreach; accepting an honorable mention on behalf of the Hospital for Special Surgery for their Asian Community Bone Health Initiative is Laura Robbins, Senior Vice President of Education and Academic Affairs (second from right) and staff. Pictured accepting the awards from HANYS Board Chair Linda Brady, M.D., (top photo): Accepting the Pinnacle Award on behalf of Bassett Medical Center is Susan van der Sommen, Administrative Director of the Cancer Institute (left), and Christine Conkling, Manager of the Cancer Institute (right); accepting an honorable mention for NewYork-Presbyterian Hospital is Patricia Peretz (right), Manager of Community Health and Evaluation, and Andres Nieto, Director of Community Health Education and Outreach; accepting an honorable mention on behalf of the Hospital for Special Surgery for their Asian Community Bone Health Initiative is Laura Robbins, Senior Vice President of Education and Academic Affairs (second from right) and staff.

HANYS’ prestigious Community Health Improvement Award was presented to Bassett Medical Center’s Cancer Screening Outreach: Medical Screening Coach, which provides mammograms, clinical breast exams, Pap smears, and colorectal cancer screenings at a variety of community-based sites. “Bassett’s program is a great example of focusing on keeping your population healthy,” said HANYS President Dennis Whalen. “By bringing critical preventive screenings to residents in their own communities, Bassett is helping patients overcome significant healthcare barriers of socioeconomic status, geography, and lack of effective public transportation—and saving lives.” The Hospital for Special Surgery received an honorable mention for its Asian Community Bone Health Initiative, which helps older Asian adults better manage chronic musculoskeletal conditions, while also increasing access to care in a medically under-served community. By offering culturally-relevant education and programming, more than 530 older adults participated and reported increased physical activity, better understanding of chronic disease and symptom management, and decreased pain and fatigue. NewYork-Presbyterian Hospital was awarded an honorable mention for WIN for Health, a hospital-community partnership supporting children with asthma and adults with diabetes through care coordination. This program has significantly reduced asthma-related hospitalizations, emergency department visits, and missed school days. Graduates of the diabetes program reported successful diabetes management, and most participants continue regular communication with their coaches after completion. The Community Health Improvement Award was established in 1997 to recognize outstanding initiatives focused on specific community health issues, with collaborations and quantifiable results. This year’s nominees showcase a broad range of partnerships that extend far beyond the hospital walls, strategizing to meet New York State’s Prevention Agenda goal of making our state the healthiest in the nation. HANYS’ annual publication, Connecting With Communities: Community Health Initiatives Across New York State, profiles each nomination.

Change is Permanent State, Says Whalen

HANYS’ President Dennis Whalen addresses the membership. HANYS’ President Dennis Whalen addresses the membership.

In his address to the membership at HANYS’ Annual Membership Conference, HANYS President Dennis Whalen focused on the rapid pace of change facing healthcare leaders. “Change is not new in healthcare,” he said. “But there are characteristics that have changed. We get change every day, from all directions.” From questioning the fundamental way care is delivered, to the influence of communication, social media, expectations, and altered generational views—he said patients are evolving into consumers. “Who will be the Amazon of healthcare?” Mr. Whalen challenged the audience. He noted the increased need for reasonable and useful transparency efforts, as more consumers make decisions based on online information. While extremely significant and transformative, Mr. Whalen emphasized that organizational reform efforts are experiments. The Affordable Care Act and Medicaid waiver do not have guaranteed outcomes. “We can all point to reform efforts in the past where we were assured of the outcome, but what everyone thought was the answer was not,” he noted. However, he added, leaders must strive to make this experiment succeed. “We didn’t get into healthcare because it was easy,” Mr. Whalen continued, “we did it because of the mission and importance of work. That should be our inspiration every day. Change is difficult, the work is hard, but we have spent our careers learning and being experts on how to assess the problem and solution.”

Jason Helgerson Implores Hospital Leaders to Collaborate for Reform

Jason Helgerson speaks to HANYS’ members. Jason Helgerson speaks to HANYS’ members.