WASHINGTON – Ben Carson, who has been surging in the GOP presidential polls to a close second to frontrunner Donald Trump, is one of the most conservative of the 15 Republican candidates on most, though notably not on all issues.

Unlike Trump, Carson, 63, a retired neurosurgeon, is relatively soft spoken. Like Trump, he has a tendency to make contentious comments. Among Carson's most controversial, comparing America to Nazi Germany. And like Trump, he's benefiting as a "political outsider" from Americans' unhappiness, as reflected in polls, with politicians associated with a government they largely believe has failed them.

In the first caucus state of Iowa, Carson is picking up considerable support from evangelical Christians, a group that is also being courted by Louisiana Gov. Bobby Jindal's presidential campaign with significantly less success.

The latest New York Times/CBS poll, has Carson up from six percent a month ago to support from 24 percent of GOP voters, just behind Trump's 27 percent. None of the other candidates are in double digits. Jindal is down from 2 percent last month, to less than 0.5 percent in the latest poll, released Tuesday.

What follows is a sampling of Carson's positions on the issues, along with a few of his controversial comments.

Gun rights: Says he would "never advocate anything to interfere with 2nd Amendment rights." But he told radio talk show host Glenn Beck in 2013 that when it comes to semi-automatic weapons, they are fine in rural communities, but "if you live in the midst of a lot of people, and I'm afraid that that semi-automatic weapons is going to fall into the hands of a crazy person, I'd rather you not have it." But after he announced his candidacy, he told the conservative Blaze news team, that "in no way do I think we should restrict the rights, particularly the rights of law abiding citizens to have guns."

On same sex-marriage: Says that after Supreme Court ruling, same-sex marriage is the law of the land, but says he disagrees with doctors who say people are born either heterosexual or homosexual.

On taxes: Favors a 10 percent flat tax, without deductions and no break for low-income workers. Breaks for low-income workers are part of flat tax proposals by conservative GOP presidential candidates Rand Paul and Mike Huckabee. Citizens for Tax Justice said that Carson's proposal, which Carson likens to the Biblical tithe, would generate about $1.1 trillion a year, compared to the current $3.9 billion budget. Carson says government would be scaled back, but hasn't explained much beyond offering a five-year freeze on government hiring.

On abortion: Carson says he is personally adamantly opposed to abortion, and supports legislation to ban abortions after 20 weeks of pregnancy and finds abortions for convenience morally repugnant. But his campaign spokesman said Carson doesn't believe abortion, declared a constitutional right by the Supreme Court in 1974, can be banned via legislation, but requires changing "the hearts and minds of people."

On banking regulation: Carson differs from most Republican candidates, arguing it was a mistake during the 1990s to end federal regulations that banned banks from making risky investments – a change he says contributed to the 2008 financial crisis.

Climate change: Says the issue is distracting and irrelevant and that the United States would be best off if it achieved oil independence by intelligently drilling offshore.

Health Care: Despises the Affordable Care Act, and says instead wants an expansion of health care savings accounts, with accounts for the poor funded by those who can afford to pay for them.

On racism: Says arrests for "driving while black" remains a problem, but that his own presidential candidate is not hurt by being the only major African-American presidential candidate for 2016.

Carson has delivered speeches and comments that pleased his supporters for their candor, but were viewed as offensive by critics.

Among his most comments:

In 2014, asked by Breitbart news what he meant when he said that Americans are living in a gestapo age: Carson said he meant that the United States is very much like Nazi Germany. "And I know you're not supposed to say Nazi Germany, but I don't care about political correctness. You know, you had a government using its tools to intimidate the population. We now live in a society where people are afraid to say what they actually believe." Critics said it is one things not to be rigidly politically correct, but it was outrageous to compare America, despite all its problems, to a fascist Nazi government that murdered millions of civilians, tried to wipe out the Jewish population, conquered 14 European nations, killing, with its allied government troops, an estimated 14 million American and allied soldiers.

On the Affordable Care Act, Carson said, "You know, Obamacare is really, I think, the worst thing that has happened in this nation since slavery. And it is in a way. It is slavery in a way because it is making all of us subservient to the government."

On the 2014 scandal of veterans dying while awaiting health care, Carson said: "I think what's happening with the veterans is a gift from God to show us what happens when you take layers and layers of bureaucracy and place them between the patients and the health care provider."

Carson, who moved from a tough life in inner city Detroit to medical school and director of Pediatric Neurosurgery at Johns Hopkins Hospital at age 33, first rose to major political notoriety when he addressed the National Prayer Breakfast in 2013. As President Barack Obama watched from the podium, Carson criticized the Affordable Care Act, Obama's signature health law, and deficit spending. Carson, who turns 64 on Friday, told the Prayer breakfast that the United States could face the same plight as ancient Rome.

"Very powerful. Nobody could even challenge them militarily, but what happened to them? They destroyed themselves from within," Carson said in his Prayer Breakfast speech. "Moral decay, fiscal irresponsibility. They destroyed themselves. If you don't think that can happen to America, you get out your books and you start reading."

The second in a series of GOP presidential debates, one for the top 11 candidates, including Trump and Carson, and the other for the bottom four candidates, including Jindal, is Wednesday (Sept. 16) night on CNN.