The new healthcare options introduced this month can be complex—and confusing. To help you make sense of it all, Frank Lalli, former editor of Money magazine and author of an upcoming book on finding affordable healthcare, will answer questions through the month of October in his daily blog.

Q: I’m hearing that Obamacare is replacing Medicare, and I’m going to have to buy more insurance and pay more for my prescriptions. Is any of that true?

A: No, no and mostly no.

There has always been confusion about Medicare among its 50 million beneficiaries, but nothing like the mountain of misinformation and myths that are spreading as the Affordable Care Act, aka Obamacare, goes more fully into effect. Here are the facts.

Obamacare is not replacing Medicare. The root of this myth concerns the insurance marketplaces, called public exchanges, that are opening in each state to allow people to buy their own insurance with federal subsidies. Rather than replacing Medicare, the public exchanges are open to people under 65. In fact, it is illegal for insurers to sell an exchange health plan to Medicare beneficiaries. Let’s keep it simple. Obamacare insurance plans are for people under 65. Medicare is for people 65 and over.

People on Medicare do not have to buy more insurance. This myth stems from the law’s individual mandate, requiring nearly every one to get health coverage in 2014 or pay a penalty. But if you have Medicare, you have insurance. You don’t have to buy any additional health coverage. And don’t let some salesman try to talk you into a supplemental, medigap or advantage plan to avoid the Obamacare penalty. Hang up on him or close the door in his face. He’s at best misinformed or at worst a fraudster.

Few people on Medicare will have to pay more for their prescriptions; many will save money. Under Obamacare, individual seniors making more than $85,000 and couples making over $170,000 will pay more for their prescription coverage, called Medicare Part D. But experts say the new rule only affects about 5 percent of Medicare’s 50 million beneficiaries.

Far more people will see their drug costs drop year over year as Obamacare slowly closes the infamous donut hole.

The donut hole isn’t as complicated as it sounds. It is simply a gap in coverage that millions of people with high prescription bills have to face.

If you and your Part D insurer’s combined prescription costs top $2,850 next year, you’ll fall into the donut hole. You’ll then have to begin paying 47.5 percent of the cost of your brand-name drugs and 72 percent of your generic costs until your out-of-pocket expenses reach the “catastrophic” maximum of $4,550. After that, you pay 5 percent, and the government covers the rest.

Obamacare recognizes that the donut hole is a bummer – and stupid policy since it punishes chronically ill people who need costly medications to live. The reform law is shrinking the hole year by year and will eliminate it by 2020.

Before Obamacare, people in the hole paid 100 percent of their drug costs until they reached the catastrophic limit, and that catastrophic limit was higher than it is today. Now, at least they are getting steep drug discounts. All in all, the government estimates that people in the hole are saving more than $700 a year under Obamacare, and those savings will only increase as the hole slowly disappears.