Topics: Amy Ziering, Campus rape, Documentaries, Kirby Dick, Movies, Rape, Rape Culture, Sexual assault, sexual violence, The Hunting Ground, Entertainment News, Politics News

I have pretty much ignored the story of Jameis Winston, the star quarterback from Florida State who is certain to be among the first players selected in this year’s NFL draft – and who was accused of sexually assaulting a fellow student in December of 2012. I don’t follow college football, and the initial reporting on the assault allegations made the case sound “murky” or ambiguous. We use those words too easily talking about these things, don’t we? What happened two winters ago between Winston and an FSU freshman named Erica Kinsman – yes, his accuser has now come forward and identified herself – seemed like a classic “he said, she said.” It might have been about drunken miscommunication or a celebrity athlete’s sense of entitlement (I told myself) more than “rape-rape,” to use the infamous phrase of Whoopi Goldberg.

After seeing Kinsman speak for herself, in the biggest news-making moment of “The Hunting Ground,” Kirby Dick and Amy Ziering’s powerful documentary about campus rape and its consequences, I now view my reluctance to read or think about the Winston case in different terms. On one level it was a defense mechanism. On another it was the result of a cultural scrim that gets pasted over cases like this, a cloak of denial, obfuscation and phony mystery. In fairness to myself, that defense mechanism and the Cloak of Bogus Uncertainty can be found everywhere in our culture. Those were the very forces that led ESPN commentators Skip Bayless and Stephen A. Smith to describe the rape allegations against Winston as “terribly unfair,” suspiciously timed and quite possibly the result of some sinister conspiracy, after they surfaced late in 2013.

We see that ESPN clip in “The Hunting Ground,” not long after hearing Kinsman tell her story, and at least for me it touched an acutely painful nerve. Sure, Smith and Bayless are just a pair of TV jock-sniffers whose instinct was to rally around an alpha-male sports deity. But the combination of entitlement and bogus certainty and low-information sexual paranoia – coming from two guys who would certainly tell you, in earnest tones, that rape is a terrible crime that should never go unpunished – spoke volumes about the nature of the larger cultural problem. I watched that and I felt ashamed.

I want to circle back to that question of shame and collective responsibility, both because I can feel some male readers nervously hauling out their #NotAllMen tweets and their MRA FemiNazi-backlash talking points and because I believe that watching “The Hunting Ground” can be an eye-opening experience for many men, as it was for me. But I also want to make clear that this film is more about female agency than male agency, and that its real subject is the way young women have organized to share their experiences, tell their stories and confront the deeply entrenched bureaucratic resistance that has shamed and defeated so many assault victims who dared to ask for justice and accountability. Erica Kinsman’s testimony is made more potent by the fact that she is one example among many. The true stars of “The Hunting Ground” are Annie Clark and Andrea Pino, who both survived sexual assault as undergraduates at the University of North Carolina and went on to form End Rape on Campus, the activist group that has spearheaded numerous anti-discrimination complaints and lawsuits based on the handling of assault complaints at colleges and universities.

That defense mechanism I mentioned earlier is not limited to men who don’t want to confront the widespread problem of rape and sexual assault and its consequences, although men are highly vulnerable to that form of collective blindness. It’s also not limited to college administrators (a dishearteningly large percentage of them female) who are eager to protect their brands by suppressing allegations and sweeping assault cases under the institutional carpet, although such tactics appear to have been universal among schools of all kinds from coast to coast. But those phenomena have undeniably fed into each other in toxic fashion, producing shameful delusions like the Smith-Bayless moment on a grand scale. Those guys had no idea whether Jameis Winston had raped anybody, and they may well look back on that broadcast now with regret. But instead of treating the charge as an unproven question of fact – as they would have treated an investigation of shoplifting or drunk driving or murder – they proceeded from the assumption that it was unlikely and bizarre on its face, and probably reflected some hidden agenda.

In fact, that’s a good way of summarizing the net effect of our collective confusion and discomfort when it comes to rape and sexual assault – a confusion that gets magnified in the hothouse atmosphere of a college campus, where a cadre of young people is isolated from their families and communities. An entire class of violent crime, which turns out to be distressingly common on campus, has been ignored, denied, willfully misinterpreted or depicted as some kind of impenetrable mystery. Many young women, as we see in “The Hunting Ground,” have now taken it on themselves to dispel the aura of shame and doubt and self-blame that so often surrounds this issue. Their example is inspiring, but there’s still a long way to go.

If “The Hunting Ground” is not especially artful cinema, and could have benefited from a broader cultural context, it performs an invaluable service by attaching an impressive range of compelling human faces and human voices to the issue of campus sexual assault, which is sometimes presented as a controversial or divisive “feminist issue.” In this context, how you feel about such a label, or a gender-studies term like “rape culture,” is irrelevant. It’s about watching and listening while one young woman after another, using her real name, tells us a clear and straightforward story about being raped or assaulted by another student and about what happened later, which invariably involves the school administration doing its utmost to make the whole thing go away. These women come from Arizona State and Harvard Law School, from Berkeley and Michigan and Swarthmore, from the University of Tulsa and from Saint Mary’s College, a small Catholic school in Indiana.

At first, the story of Winston and Kinsman may seem anomalous, since it involves not merely a famous student-athlete but quite likely the biggest name in American collegiate sports. But Dick and Ziering make clear that in other ways it is all too typical. Kinsman told both FSU officials and the local police in Tallahassee that Jameis Winston had taken her to his apartment in a semi-conscious condition, quite likely after drugging her in a bar, and then had pinned her down on his bathroom floor and raped her, while she repeatedly told him to stop. Even Winston’s roommate, Kinsman says, could see that she wasn’t into it and told Winston to stop.