Michael Deng and his father in an undated photo. (via)

A dying Baruch College freshman was denied medical condition for hours because fraternity brothers researched the cost of an ambulance and found it to be cost-prohibitive, according to a grand jury report obtained by the NY Times. 19-year-old Pi Delta Psi pledge Chun "Michael" Deng was unresponsive and breathing irregularly after being brutally assaulted in a hazing ritual in the Poconos in December 2013. But by the time his classmates transported him to a hospital, it was too late for doctors to save him.

Deng had been a reportedly defiant participant in a hazing ritual known as the "Glass Ceiling," which one member of the Asian-American fraternity said was intended to test the mettle of students attempting to succeed in the predominantly white American business world. One frat member told cops that the hazing required blindfolded pledges to run a violent gauntlet carrying a 30-pound backpack symbolizing the burden of trying to break into the mainstream.

According to the Times, Deng was subjected to greater "Glass Ceiling" abuse than other pledges because he thought the whole thing was stupid:

Mr. Deng, a freshman at Baruch College whose parents emigrated from China, did not fall into line. He fought back, kicking one of the men lined up to tackle him, a fraternity brother told investigators. A second told the police he did not say the things he was supposed to, adding, “He got the ‘Bros’ mad.” So the brothers hit harder. One ran at Mr. Deng from 15 feet away and plowed into him with his head lowered, in a move known as the spear, student witnesses said. Others pushed him to the ground, the force of each blow amplified by the weight on Mr. Deng’s back.

After they finally transported Deng to the hospital, doctors determined that he sustained severe brain trauma during the ritual and was subjected to repeated blunt force trauma to his head, torso and thighs. Doctors found bruises throughout his body and said he also had traumatic asphyxia, "likely from hits or tackles magnified by his backpack’s heavy load."



The house where the hazing took place (NBC News)

After Deng collapsed outside the rented house where the pledge weekend was taking place, the brothers carried him inside, removed some of his clothing, and tried to force sugar into his mouth to revive him. They also contacted the fraternity’s national president at the time, Andy Meng, who allegedly told them to hide any fraternity items. And they spent an hour Googling phrases such as “Concussion can’t wake up,” “snoring but not waking up” and “pupils don’t dilate.”

What they did not do is call 911, because, according to fraternity member Kenny Kwan's statement to police, "someone looked it up and the bill/cost was too high." Kwan is one of five Pi Delta Psi members who will be charged with third degree murder—prosecutors say he tackled Deng with a 15-foot running head start. 32 others face criminal charges for their involvement in the hazing death and alleged cover-up (Meng, whose older sister is Queens Representative Grace Meng, is among them).

Pi Delta Psi has been permanently banned from Baruch. The Deng family has filed a civil lawsuit against the college and the fraternity, which also faces criminal charges.

"There's a variety of different levels of responsibility and involvement," Monroe County assistant district attorney Michael Rakaczewski told NBC. "From individuals who were actively involved to individuals who lied to the police to individuals who hid evidence to individuals who fled the scene."

An attorney for one of the frat brothers facing lesser criminal charges said, "It is regrettable that the D.A. and the Grand Jury made no distinction as to the individual culpability of each of the young man who was present. I believe a number of the defendants would be acquitted by a jury. The tragic death of Michael should not be used to ruin the life of so many young Asian American college students, the bulk of them fully cooperated with the DA and testified before the grand jury."