Reuters U.S. Secretary of State John Kerry

Secretary of State John Kerry plans to make global climate change a key part of his tenure and aims to become the lead broker of a climate treaty in 2015, the New York Times reports. The treaty would commit the U.S. and other countries to historic cuts in fossil-fuel production. Some are skeptical he can do it despite a history of work on the issue. “He’s had a lot of passion, but I don’t think you can conclude he’s had any success,” said Sen. John McCain, Republican of Arizona.

The number of Americans seeking to use their new Obamacare coverage for the first time is expected to spike next week, the Hill reports. But concerns linger, including that a sizable number of consumers who show up at the doctor’s office will discover they don’t have the insurance they thought they bought.

The head of the Electronic Transactions Association believes private companies, not the government, is best-positioned to fight the type of fraud that hit Target customers over the holidays. “In the case of our nation’s electronic payments systems, new government mandates would stifle marketplace innovations that hold great promise for providing consumer benefits and reducing criminal activities,” Jason Oxman writes in a USA Today op-ed. His organization represents more than 500 payments and technology companies.

What’s life going to be like in 2050? In a word, worse, according to a new survey from a Associated Press-NORC Center for Public Affairs Research survey. Overall, 54% of those surveyed expect American life to go downhill, while 23% think it will improve.

Everyone knows Congress can be entertaining. Is it ready for another entertainer? (Yes, another: remember Rep. Sonny Bono?) The Washington Blade reports “American Idol” runner-up Clay Aiken is taking steps toward a run for Congress from North Carolina. The filing deadline for the May 6 primary is Feb. 28.

– Robert Schroeder

Follow Capitol Report on Twitter @capitolreport

Follow Rob on Twitter @mktwrobs

More must-reads from MarketWatch:

Lockups for key economic data questioned

Google to a trillion, Buffett’s five-year miss and beware the animal spirits