FOX10 News is committed to bringing you the latest coverage in Mobile, that's why we were there every step of the way during the Donald Trump presidential pep rally Friday.

Officials estimate about 20,000 people were in attendance last night. That is not as many that Trump's campaign anticipated but still a large crowd for a political rally. Sources say Trump went straight to the airport after his pep rally last night, but he didn't leave without touching on some controversial topics.

People of all ages came to watch his speech at Ladd-Peebles Stadium. Trump talked about a wide array of topics, some had the crowd cheering, and booing. He started the night off with illegal immigration and he returned to that a couple times throughout the night. He then moved on to international relations, specifically with China and Japan, adding that he wants to bring jobs back to the U.S. Towards the end of his speech, he mentioned The United States military, saying he will make it stronger. He ended the night with a topic that got a big reaction from the audience: the Affordable Care Act.

Alabama Senator Jeff Sessions (R) from Mobile made an appearance after Donald Trump introduced him. He ran on stage and put a Donald Trump campaign hat on before addressing everyone in the stadium and welcoming Trump to Mobile.

Some people say they didn't go to support Trump's campaign. FOX10 News was there as people came and left the stadium, and the comments were mixed. Here's what some had to say:

"[I came] to be more educated on why I hate him, and have more fastened arguments. Also I thought it would be funny. I thought it would be a good experience, we are both from Ohio, and we just started at the University of Alabama, and it seemed like a great opportunity to hear a presidential candidate speak."

"I think because he resonates such enthusiasm and he will make America great again, I think we are here just to support that, because we really need that."

"It was interesting, no substance, but it was fun."

"I like some of it but not everything no."

"I think Trump has the guts to say what he thinks whether is politically correct or not."

Rally-goers were talking after the event, but Donald Trump was not. He did not show up to a scheduled press conference following his speech. First the press availability was scheduled for 6:30, then it was moved to after his speech. When all media outlets, national and local, gathered in the Ladd-Peebles lobby for the news conference, he was a no show. Those working on the Trump campaign tell us it was because it was "getting late," and that he was going to have to deal with a time change from the central to eastern time zone.

We have pictures from last night of Trump-inspired costumes and signs on our website homepage or by clicking on the link.

All content © 2015, WALA; Mobile, AL. (A Meredith Corporation Station). All Rights Reserved.