<p>Ortiz Industry co-founders Claire Ortiz, left, and Heather Park have some fun in front of their summer clothing line. (Ed Crisostomo/Orange County Register/MCT)</p>

By Jennifer Wang

In a promotional video, Brady Romberg, parkour expert and Justin Timberlake's stunt double, dodges a car hurtling through the streets of downtown Los Angeles. He back flips off a window ledge, drops down from a fire escape and takes off running.

He's doing all this dressed in smart-looking black trousers, a button-down and blazer made by Ortiz Industry, a "technical" fashion company that launched its first collection in March.

Romberg, like all the models and ambassadors who work with Ortiz Industry, is an athlete first. The company's lookbook shows a professional dancer doing a grand plié in four-way stretch pants that look like they belong in a J. Crew catalog; a triathlete sprints down the sidewalk in a pencil skirt with built-in shapewear and slim-line pockets.

To be clear, this is no Lululemon spinoff.

Co-founder and CEO Claire Ortiz ? who has designed apparel and led branding teams at Esprit, Wilson and Nike, where she helped start Michael Jordan's multimillion-dollar brand ? is creating a new market for what she calls "intelligent fashion," or technical, fashion-first clothing for the modern professional.

"We aren't just a fashion company. We're looking at society, at real life, real people, real things, and providing clothing that's different from anything out there," Ortiz said.

"Every piece has to add value," added co-founder Heather Park, who first worked with Ortiz at Nike. "We want people to stop worrying about appearance, sweating, fidgeting, and just focus on the task at hand. We study the way the world is changing in ways of commuting and movement and take all of that into consideration."

Both men's and women's collections (price points range from $110 to $450) boast thoughtful features like "Tuck Track," a material on waistbands that keeps shirts from sliding around and becoming untucked. Every item is machine washable; on many products, wrinkles disappear with body heat so they're "grab-and-go" from the dryer.

Over the past two years, Ortiz Industry has worked with chemists and R&D teams at major companies like Dupont and Optimer Brands, makers of "dri- release" moisture-wicking fabrics, to find new formulas and compounds for fibers that blend features like UV protection and biomechanical stretch in a variety of lightweight and ultrasoft textures.

Knit and woven manufacturers are brought in to create the new fabrics, which are rigorously tested by third-party agencies to ensure they do what they claim to do.

So far, Ortiz Industry has created a dozen proprietary new materials, and things are just getting started.

A RICH MARKET

The market for technical fashion stretches across all age demographics for both males and females, said Patrick Keat- ing, founder of venture capital consulting firm Keating International SAS, which advised Ortiz Industry during its initial $1 million seed funding round that closed last October.

Although the category is still emerging, Keating estimated that it could grow from $75 million in sales in 2012 to $250 million in 2016, as consumers become more familiar with technical fabrics in sports and manufacturing technology advances to allow large-scale production of specialized textiles.

"Just like in sports, people in business and their personal lives want to perform better, and Claire is creating one of the first fashion companies using the latest in technical textiles and manufacturing equipment and processes," said Keating, who sits on Ortiz's advisory board.

He noted that the company could do what UnderArmour did in the sports-apparel industry, rocketing from $5 million in sales in 2000 to $2.3 billion last year.

Research firm NPD Group has reported almost 80 percent of activewear ? which encompasses the yoga pants and board shorts worn around L.A. and O.C. ? is already used for nonsports activities. Ortiz considers this glaring evidence of a need for an entirely new apparel category combining fashion and a design ethos more commonly associated with activewear brands.

Shifts in the supply chain are enabling startup operations like Ortiz Industry to thrive. For instance, the fall collection launches in early August, but Ortiz headed to China in mid-June to design the new line and materials.

"We're working very close to season because the market's changed, and we've cut out many middlemen," she said. And wearing her own product helps: "We got off our fourth leg of a 48-hour trip, ready to head to dinner. No joke."

Indeed, the company, which employs four people full time and several contractors, has healthy growth projections: $2 million in revenue by the end of this first year. By 2017, it expects triple-digit growth and aggressive expansion, focusing on top-tier brick and mortar and e-commerce in commuter-friendly cities across Europe, Asia and Latin America. Footwear and accessories are already in discussion.

?CITY OF INDUSTRY'

Ortiz Industry's headquarters and showroom, all white walls and furniture accented by bright colors, overlooks downtown L.A.'s Pershing Square, a bustling transit nexus where urban diversity is on full display.

"We wanted to be where people work, where people live. L.A. is inspiring. It's a city of industry," Ortiz said.

In fact, it's a homecoming of sorts for Ortiz, who grew up in Santa Ana. In her early 20s, she started her first brand, Smoke Street Couture, out of a loft in the Arts District.

The challenge for Ortiz this second time around is getting consumers' attention in the Internet age, while still building a long-lasting brand.

"Based on extensive research ... our product plan is on target globally," she said. "We want to be extremely strategic and focused with distribution in the right channels for sustainable growth as well as brand positioning. In other words, we aren't going to go after all markets as fast as we can, just because we can."

For now, the company sells directly through its website, ortizindustry.com, and plans on hosting a variety of trunk shows and special events where people are able to touch and feel and try on the clothes.