Put "IT" and "H-1B" together in the same sentence, and you will find a ready-made news audience. Add "Infosys" to the mix and it will rarely surprise anyone who follows the controversial workforce visa program.

As the number one employer of H-1B workers by far, the India-based Infosys routinely finds itself at the center of H-1B news coverage. In fact, two recent articles in Computerworld focused on new suits that have been filed against the company over alleged workplace wrongdoing, centered on H-1B hiring practices.

The most recent article, published last week, discusses a suit filed by former employee Layla Bolton, who was hired as part of a 100-person team to work on the Affordable Care Act healthcare information websites.

The article says that Bolton was one of only three American workers hired by Infosys to work on the project and notes that she was "harassed because she was not Indian and excluded from work conversations by supervisors who spoke Hindi. People with less experience were promoted over her, and she eventually quit."

According to Computerworld, "Bolten is one of four IT workers from around the country suing Infosys for 'ongoing national origin and race discrimination.' The lawsuit claims that 'roughly 90%' of the Infosys workforce is South Asian, the result of 'intentional employment discrimination."

The second article concerns former Infosys employee Jay Palmer, whose own lawsuit against the firm triggered the well-publicized $34 million settlement the company made last year over allegations it had violated visa laws.

Palmer's first suit against the firm was denied by a federal court judge over technicalities, though the federal judge "seemed apologetic about the dismissal," Computerworld wrote. Palmer said he suffered harassment and threats for refusing to participate in an alleged scheme to put workers on business visitor, or B-1, visas when they actually required H-1B visas.

The judge also noted at the time that "an argument could be made that such threats against whistleblowers, in particular, should be illegal," the article reported.

The article said Palmer has now filed a new complaint against the firm, saying Infosys executives "retaliated against him by denying him work, bonuses and promotions and terminating him."

Read more

- check out the Computerworld article about Layla Bolton

- read the Computerworld article about Jay Palmer

Related Articles:

3 firms boycotted for favoring foreign IT workers

Inside the H-1B program: one employer speaks out

April 1 rush for H-1B visas could exhaust supply