ROSELAND, N.J., April 8, 2014 /PRNewswire/ -- ADP®, a leading global provider of Human Capital Management (HCM) solutions, today announced the availability of its new ADP Mobile Solutions Tablet App. Currently it's available on iPad® and can be downloaded from iTunes®. Designed for business executives, managers and employees, this tablet app enables greater oversight of human capital management data and tasks within any workplace environment.

To date, there have been more than 2.3 million downloads of ADP's Mobile Solutions App onto smartphones. With more employees and managers placing greater reliance on these and larger tablet devices to perform critical tasks, ADP has developed a tablet app that features additional self-service functionalities through a new, intuitive mobile dashboard. The mobile dashboard provides a complete view of HCM functions and data most relevant to the user all on one screen. Among the many features of the ADP Tablet App is the ability to easily access:

Pay & W2 statements

Time and attendance

Paid time off (PTO) requests

Benefit Plan information

Retirement account information

Account balances and recent transactions

Employee calendars

Worker profiles

"Mobile devices are no longer just exclusive perks for senior executives. They are critical assets that have empowered all employees to make smart workforce decisions," said Steve Roth, senior director and mobile product manager, ADP. "Our new ADP Tablet App includes functionality to allow managers a full view of their most critical data, enabling them to perform tasks efficiently and communicate with employees seamlessly."

The ADP Tablet App has "My Team" features for managers including the ability to view and approve time sheets and time off requests and respond to employee communications. Managers can also view a series of reports usually obtained through other ADP desktop or laptop solutions. These include employee payrolls, benefits enrollment and vacation requests.

For more information on ADP Mobile Solutions, please click here.

About ADP

With more than $11 billion in revenues and more than 60 years of experience, ADP® (NASDAQ: ADP) serves approximately 620,000 clients in more than 125 countries. As one of the world's largest providers of business outsourcing and Human Capital Management solutions, ADP offers a wide range of human resource, payroll, talent management, tax and benefits administration solutions from a single source, and helps clients comply with regulatory and legislative changes, such as the Affordable Care Act (ACA). ADP's easy-to-use solutions for employers provide superior value to companies of all types and sizes. ADP is also a leading provider of integrated computing solutions to auto, truck, motorcycle, marine, recreational vehicle, and heavy equipment dealers throughout the world. For more information about ADP, visit the company's Web site at www.adp.com.

The ADP Logo and ADP are registered trademarks of ADP, Inc. All other trademarks are the property of their respective owners. Copyright © 2014 ADP, Inc.

Media Contact:

Dick Wolfe

ADP

(973) 974-7034 Office

(201) 396-5954 Mobile

Dick.Wolfe@adp.com

Photo - http://photos.prnewswire.com/prnh/20140408/NY98684

SOURCE ADP