John Shagoury, President and CEO of Eliza commented on Eliza's participation at this year's WHCC, "The long-term growth and success of health plans is tied to how they communicate with members. If you engage consumers too often, you risk waste, repetition and member abrasion. Too little engagement or reaching them via the wrong channel results in a failure to shape behaviors and improve outcomes. At this year's WHCC, Eliza will demonstrate how behavior-driven analytics and multichannel communication strategies make individual interventions more efficient and effective and help health plans close critical gaps in care."

Health Engagement Panels:

In today's healthcare landscape, reaching consumers is more difficult than ever before. In a WHCC session moderated by Eliza Chief Revenue Officer David Morris, "Adopt Innovative Consumer Engagement Strategies and Increase Retention," panelists will discuss how to modify communications to address a diverse population using technology and interactive tools. Details of the panel include:

When: Monday, April 11 at 2:25 pm

at Moderator: David Morris , Chief Revenue Officer at Eliza Corporation

, Chief Revenue Officer at Eliza Corporation Panelists: Riaz Ali , Chief Marketing Executive at SCAN Health Plan Kristin Carman , PhD and Vice President at American Institutes for Research Mary Beth Jenkins , Senior Vice President and Chief Operating Officer at UPMC Health Plan Neil Pierce , Strategic Consultant at Humana Inc.



The Affordable Care Act introduced an influx of patients into the healthcare system, many of whom were never before insured and may experience socioeconomic barriers to care. In the WHCC session moderated by Eliza Chief Analytics Officer Ralph Perfetto, "Identify and Address Socioeconomic Barriers to Care throughout the Member Lifecycle," panelists will explore how plans quickly and effectively identify and address the needs of new and potentially high-risk members using member touch points to regularly assess member risk and socioeconomic vulnerabilities. Details of the panel include:

When: Tuesday, April 12 at 10:10 am

at Moderator: Ralph Perfetto , Chief Analytics Officer at Eliza Corporation

, Chief Analytics Officer at Eliza Corporation Panelists: Lisa Betheke, Senior Contact Center Manager at Exact Sciences Ellen Harrison , Senior Vice President Market Strategy and Consulting at Eliza Corporation Betsy Mazzoni , Quality Improvement Manager at Gateway Health Plan



About Eliza Corporation

Eliza Corporation ("Eliza") is the pioneer and recognized leader in health engagement management. Eliza combines technology, data, and analytics to provide the most advanced solutions and services that measurably improve quality, cost and care outcomes. Over 15 years and billions of interactions, Eliza has amassed the world's largest data asset of people's healthcare actions, behaviors and decisions through the Company's award-winning, multi-channel communications platform. For more information, visit elizacorp.com or contact 1.800.701.7864. Join Eliza on LinkedIn and Twitter.

All product and company names herein may be trademarks of their registered owners.

Media Contact:

Carolyn Peterson

cpeterson@elizacorp.com

6176502688

Logo - http://photos.prnewswire.com/prnh/20120917/NE75009LOGO-b

To view the original version on PR Newswire, visit:http://www.prnewswire.com/news-releases/eliza-corporation-to-moderate-two-health-engagement-panels-at-the-13th-annual-world-health-care-congress-300245764.html

SOURCE Eliza Corporation

Related Links

http://www.elizacorp.com