Entertainment

Pando in Two Hands

Bryan Brown purports to be puzzled – not annoyed, just puzzled. He wonders why the producers of Old School, a black comedy miniseries which starts this week on ABC1, typecast him as the criminal and Sam Neill as the detective.

“They never came to me and said ‘Which one do you want to play?’” he reflects. “They just said ‘We’d like you to play Lenny’ and they said to Sam ‘We’d like you to play Ted’. Why was it obvious to them that I should be the crim? I could have played the cop. Probably wouldn’t have been anywhere near as good as Sam, but I could have played the cop.”

Taylor is now a three-time loser, having been in axe victims Charlie's Angels and 666 Park Avenue

The explanation may be that one of the writer/directors of Old School is Gregor Jordan, Australia’s answer to Quentin Tarantino. Jordan was the writer/director of one of Brown’s great triumphs, the 1999 black comedy Two Hands. In that film Brown played a crime boss called Pando. How is Pando different from Lenny?

Ted and Lenny in Old School

“Pando was down deep a very nasty man,” says Brown. “Lenny’s a bit of a loser. Pando was never a loser until he got his brains blown out. Pando was power-hungry. Lenny’s far more vulnerable. Lenny’s just trying to work out where’s a safe he can get some money out of, and why he’s having such trouble with women.”

Advertisement

I caught up with Brown as he came out of filming a scene for a US blockbuster called Gods of Egypt on the sound stages at Sydney’s Fox Studios. He revealed that there was no question of typecasting there: “I play King Osiris, the God of Nature, which is appropriate. We speak with English accents, not American and not Australian. What’s lovely is that Geoffrey Rush plays my father. So I’m a youngster.”

Age seems to be an issue with Brown, who is 66. Asked if he had seen the final form of Old School, he said: “I watched the first couple of episodes with my son. He’s 21. Half way through, he said ‘I love this, I love the characters, I love seeing Sydney’. He asked me what I thought. I said ‘I think I’ve never looked so old in my life. I’m very confronted, and I can’t even get involved in the story. Lenny is such a loser and I’m so old.’

Rachael Taylor ... axed

“Then I watched it again and I went ‘Oh, that’s quite clever, and I see the relationships are rather good relationships, and so people will probably warm to it.’”

Brown admits he should have learned long ago not to be disturbed by first impressions of his own work. He was terribly embarrassed by one of his earliest films, Breaker Morant, in 1980.

“I saw a rough cut and I thought ‘Oh my god, I’ll never get another job in my life. I should never wear a moustache, why’d I let Bruce (Beresford) talk me into that?’ I didn’t want to go and see the movie. Then it came out and everybody said ‘Gees I love your character’. People round the world started asking me to act. So I went ‘Ah f---, I must be alright.”

Kieren Perkins, banker Photo: Getty Images

For Brown, work choices these days are mostly about strong characters and interesting relationships, and modern television is more likely to offer them than movies (though he doesn’t mind the occasional Osiris, just for fun). He’d jump at the chance to do another series of Old School.

If that happens, it will be because of the relaxed way the two mates Brown and Neill interact, even when punching and insulting each other. But they have different approaches to their acting, Brown revealed.

“We’re not playing a friendship, we’re just playing the script, but there is some level of comfort there.

“We do have different ways of approaching a script, that’s for sure. Sam’s always on my back about ‘Come on, lets go over our lines’. I really like to know my lines, don’t get me wrong, and I put in time to learn them, but he never thinks I do.

“I’ve got discipline but I don’t show it. So he thinks I don’t know, and when we get on the set, I’ve got it on the first take, and he can’t work it out. That’s just a little game I play with him.”

Old School is on ABC1 at 8.30pm Friday



Axe and it will be given

Last month this column interviewed Marg Helgenberger, one of the stars of Seven’s new sci-fi series Intelligence. At the time, she was waiting to hear if the show would be renewed for the US 2014-2015 season. That news has now arrived, and it’s bad. Intelligence has been cancelled after 13 episodes. The ratings here have followed the same trajectory as in the US -- big at the start but halving after just three weeks.

Three other US shows which received a visit from the axeman last week have not even started here yet: Nine’s sitcom Friends With Better Lives, GO’s sci fi drama Almost Human and Ten’s thriller Crisis, starring our own Rachael Taylor (who is now a three-time loser, having been in axe victims Charlie's Angels and 666 Park Avenue). They are joined in the newly-junked bin by The Crazy Ones (shown here on Foxtel); Suburgatory (GO!); The Carrie Diaries (Foxtel); and Community (SBS2).



But another Aussie got good news last week – Simon Baker’s series The Mentalist, shown here on Nine, has been renewed for another season (along with Seven’s Resurrection and Agents of SHIELD, Nine’s Mom and Arrow, and Ten’s New Girl and Elementary).

The Mentalist’s showrunner, Bruno Heller, has been commissioned to run a second series, Gotham, an origin story about the teenage Batman, Catwoman and Penguin. Hopefully he’ll offer the suddenly unemployed Rachael Taylor a job.

Right and wrong movers

The ABC’s most successful documentary series is Australian Story, which usually takes half an hour to cover the life of a special person. Recently the life of Kerry Packer proved to be too big for 30 minutes, and was shown over two weeks. Now the swimmer Kieren Perkins is getting the same VIP treatment, in a two-parter the ABC is calling All The Right Moves.

Perkins is an Olympic gold medalist who has managed the transition from sporting glory to banking obscurity while mostly staying out of the gossip columns (apart from when his marriage broke up in 2012). So the extended time is a bit puzzling – until you learn that the show is introduced by another golden boy, Grant Hackett. The tabloids were all over Hackett earlier this year when he went to an addiction treatment centre in the US after being photographed in a hotel lobby wearing a towel and searching for his four year old son.

The ABC may be hoping some viewers will watch on the expectation that Hackett will reveal a little of his own complex story in comparing his career with that of his one time rival.

Australian Story is on ABC1 at 8pm this Monday and next

The Tribal Mind column, by David Dale, appears in a printed form every Sunday in The Sun-Herald and The Sunday Age and also as a director's cut on this website, where it welcomes your comments.

David Dale teaches communications at UTS, Sydney. He is the author of The Little Book of Australia - A snapshot of who we are (Allen and Unwin). For daily updates on Australian attitudes, bookmark The Tribal Mind.