Posted on January 11, 2014

Jake Tapper Interviews Lone Survivor Vet Marcus Luttrell: "They Died For Nothing?"

Please enable Javascript to watch this video

CNN's Jake Tapper interviews former Navy SEAL Marcus Luttrell and actor Mark Wahlberg about the new movie Lone Survivor. Tapper asks Luttrell about the "hopelessness" that is portrayed in the movie about a failed mission in Afghanistan that resulted in him being the lone survivor.



For a primer of this interview, please read Business Insider.





JAKE TAPPER (voice-over): It's clear for Marcus Luttrell the battle, almost a decade ago, still cuts close to the bone today.



(on camera): One of the emotions I felt while watching the film is, first of all, just the hopelessness of the situation, how horrific it was and also just all that loss of life of these brave American men. And I was torn about the message of the film in the same way that I think I am about the war in Afghanistan itself. I don't want any more senseless American death and at the same time I know that there are dead people there and good people who need help. Was that intentional?



MARCUS LUTTRELL: Well, I don't know what part of the film you were watching, but hopelessness really ever came into it. Where did you see that? We never felt like we were hopelessly lost or anything like that. We never gave up. We never felt like we were losing unless we were actually dead. That never came across in the battle and while we were fighting on the mountain and it was just us against them.



TAPPER: Hopelessness, just the sense of all these wonderful people who died. It seemed senseless. I don't mean to disrespect in any way but it seemed senseless, all of these wonderful people who were killed for an op that went wrong.



LUTTRELL: We spend our whole lives defending this country so you tell me because we were over there doing what we were told to do was senseless and they died for nothing?



TAPPER: No, I'm not saying that at all.



LUTTRELL: That's what you said. So, let me just say that, yes, it went bad for us over there but that was our job. That's what we did. We didn't complain about it. We went out there and did what we did best and at the end, we weren't standing. They were. We were lucky. I was lucky. And the rest of the guys, we fought as hard as we possibly could. Never felt sorry for ourselves while we were out there. This was a job we were going after a high value target and, you know, it got switched on us.



TAPPER: Maybe it's just the difference between what a civilian feels when he watches this versus what a soldier does.



LUTTRELL: Absolutely.