EEOC Throws a Wellness Curve

With its third lawsuit in 2014, the EEOC has given employers pause when it comes to wellness initiatives and conflicting laws.

When the U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission recently sued a third employer in the current year for its wellness program, the result put HR leaders on notice. If you have a program in place or are thinking about starting a wellness program, confusion is sure to follow.

According to legal experts and other interested observers, the EEOC's legal actions, based on violations of the Americans with Disabilities Act and the Genetic Information Nondiscrimination Act, are in direct conflict with the Affordable Care Act, which encourages wellness programs for American workers.

The EEOC lawsuits involve Wisconsin-based Orion Energy Systems, Flambeau Inc. (also in Wisconsin) and Honeywell, in Minneapolis. And while they are far from identical scenarios, all involve wellness programs that the EEOC's Midwest office says crossed the ADA/GINA line.

In the latest legal development, a district court denied the EEOC's request for a restraining order against Honeywell. In that ruling, the court said Honeywell's program did not pose "irreparable harm" to wellness plan participants. No word from the court, however, on whether or not the EEOC would prevail if the lawsuit proceeds as expected.

Related to the Honeywell case, biometric screenings are frequently used as part of wellness initiatives. In fact, according to the non-profit National Business Group on Health, among large U.S. employers that offer wellness programs, about 75 percent use incentives to engage employees in these programs (though health screenings are not always included).

Naturally, employer groups reacted strongly to the EEOC's actions.

Steve Wojcik, vice president of public policy at the NBGH, in Washington, says the conflicting messages being sent by the government to employers about incentives to encourage employee engagement in their health would give any employer "reason to pause."

"We believe the EEOC needs to issue clear guidance that recognizes the importance of wellness programs and encourages employers to continue to offer them," Wojcik says. "In the meantime, employers should again review their programs for compliance, particularly the incentives, and clearly communicate alternative ways to obtain them."

Wojcik also warned that adverse legal actions could have a "chilling" effect on these programs and will jeopardize incentives for all employees who have benefited from them.

Brian Marcotte, NBGH president and CEO, adds that employers have been seeking guidance from EEOC regarding how the ADA and the GINA apply to wellness programs for years and the EEOC has yet to respond.

"The EEOC has had numerous opportunities to provide that guidance but has failed to do so," he says. "Their lack of clear guidance, plus the recent legal action, conflicts with the message of HIPAA [Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act] and the Affordable Care Act [ACA], which encourages the adoption and expansion of programs that benefit the health of employees and their families."

Gretchen Young, senior vice president for health policy with the ERISA Industry Committee, in Washington, didn't mince words about her organization's concern with the EEOC's decision to expand its legal net, especially in the case of Honeywell.

"The EEOC has apparently decided that it will be playing by a different set of rules, with no forewarning to companies whatsoever," Young said in a statement, adding that even though large American companies have invested a huge amount of time, money and manpower into making sure that their wellness programs comply with the ACA, the EEOC is now coming "out of left field" with a whole new set of rules and regulations to impose on these programs.

"What happened to the old-fashioned American value of letting companies know what the rules are before you slap them with a suit?" she says.

Young believes these suits by the EEOC will undercut efforts by employers to create a healthier workplace, put a damper on the future development of wellness programs, deny employees and their spouses the opportunity to live healthier lives, and ultimately, if left unchecked, lead to a "sicker population."

Sarah Bassler Millar, a partner and vice chair of the Employee Benefits & Executive Compensation Practice Group at Drinker Biddle in Chicago, said that based on how the Honeywell program has been described, it is similar to the majority of wellness programs she sees employers offering.

"It certainly does not seem to be pushing the envelope, which is what is especially troublesome about that case," she says.

Bassler Millar says the EEOC puts employers in a tough position because of the conflict between the laws - the ACA and HIPAA on one side and the ADA on the other.

"What is a plan sponsor supposed to do? They really are between a rock and a hard place," she says.

Bassler Millar advises employers that for now, the best strategy is to be aware, understand the risk associated with your wellness program, and then think about the things you can do to mitigate that risk. She cites employee communications that can help participants understand why wellness is important and what the employer is doing beyond the program itself and biometrics. For example, are they adding more healthy alternatives to cafeteria menus?

Newsletter Sign-Up: Benefits

HR Technology

Talent Management

HR Leadership

Inside HR Tech

HRENow

Special Offers

Email Address



Privacy Policy

"Employers must focus on the types of alternatives they are offering people to get awards by participating," she says.

Bassler Millar says the EEOC suits do have one potential silver lining: When the dust settles, employers will finally a better understanding and definition on how to structure wellness programs that don't violate the ADA and/or GINA.

"I would say three cases is probably a trend, so we are advising clients to be cautious and work closely with legal advisors to take the right steps, to mitigate risks," she says. "Some employers may do nothing and some will hold back or make it voluntary. There are a lot of employers asking themselves the question, 'Are we next?' "

Karen McLeese, vice president of employee benefit regulatory affairs at CBIZ Benefits & Insurance Services in Kansas City, Mo., says the EEOC actions are not necessarily bad for wellness; they do serve as a stark reminder that wellness programs are subject to HIPPA and non- discrimination rules.

"Employers must recognize that just because they cross t's and dot I's for HIPAA, it's not a pass for other laws that need to be considered," she notes. "That being said, for employers who have tried to do it right, the law has not been clear what needs to be done.

"We have a little bit of Wild West with the EEOC situation," she says.

McLeese says the EEOC lawsuits, at the least, could be reason for a "fine tuning" of wellness programs, along with the overall plea to get some guidance.

"We desperately need guidance regarding the ADA and wellness," she says. "It was like radio silence from the EEOC except to say 'watch out!' That's not fair to HR executives who are trying to have these plans and a healthy population."

McLeese's takeaway for employers right now is to not give up on wellness, but also make sure their plans are complying with what is known regarding ACA and HIPAA. She says it's about being aware there are other laws to consider, then assessing the employer's risk appetite.

"Above all, reserve the right to change your plan should the need arise," she says. "It's amazing how many plans subject to ERISA don't have that reservation of rights written into them. Don't make that mistake."

Send questions or comments about this story to hreletters@lrp.com.