When court documents revealed last week that prosecutors believe Wisconsin Gov. Scott Walker, a Republican, was part of a "criminal scheme" to improperly coordinate campaign fundraising for his 2012 recall election, the conservative cavalry came calling.

Radio talk show titan Rush Limbaugh, already an avowed fan of Walker, spent an inordinate amount of time on his program combating the accusations in granular detail.

[READ: What's Haunting Walker and Christie]

"The point is, there is no case. There was no illegal outside coordinating on behalf of Scott Walker. He has been found not guilty twice," Limbaugh said. "It's worse than a smear. It's journalistic malpractice … There is no story here. It's over."

Other right-aligned outlets like The Weekly Standard rushed to note that two judges have "already found that the case against Walker has no merit." The National Review Online's Ramesh Ponnuru penned a one-line post headlined "The Scott Walker Non-Scandal." Conservative Washington attorney Cleta Mitchell said the investigation is "ill-conceived" and should be halted. The Wall Street Journal editorial board lamented the widespread coverage of the revelation, writing that "the episode further underscores the injustice at the heart of this politicized investigation."

It's true that the John Doe investigation into whether Walker illegally coordinated with outside groups was stopped due to a judge's ruling. It's also true that no charges have been filed. Prosecutors may believe something, but they need evidence to prove it. At the same time, it remains true that the ruling is being appealed and there's a chance the probe against Walker and his aides could be resurrected.

While the legal ramifications remain murky, it's hard to argue that this entire case won't be used against Walker politically, either in 2014 as he fights for re-election or in 2016 if he launches a presidential bid.

But what's most notable about the fallout from the "criminal scheme" allegation is how quickly and forcefully the right came to Walker's defense.

It shows the promise Walker holds as a potential presidential candidate in the eyes of the conservative movement, even as he's been forced to focus most of his attention at home this year.

[ALSO: Rush Limbaugh: Scott Walker a Blueprint for How to Win]

"Walker is a nearly ideal compromise candidate between the establishment and the restive conservatives," says one lobbyist, explaining both the race to the governor's defense and the Democrats' eagerness to push the story.

It's a refrain that's become more common in GOP circles, especially as Gov. Chris Christie's image was dented following the "Bridgegate " scandal and Sen. Marco Rubio, R-Fla., has wilted in the fury around immigration reform.

A little more than a year ago, Rubio was often mentioned as the candidate most likely to bridge the gap between the tea party and establishment factions of the GOP. Now that candidate is increasingly perceived to be Walker.

In Iowa recently, one GOP consultant dubbed Walker just that: "the bridge candidate."

"He's the only one who I could see Bob Vander Plaats and Gov. Terry Branstad both supporting," the consultant says. (Vander Plaats is the most widely known conservative activist in the Hawkeye State, whereas Branstad controls the official party apparatus.)

It all makes Walker the candidate holding the most growth potential heading into 2015, as long as he checks his re-election box and nothing grows out of the incendiary belief he was at the center of a crime.