Asked and Answered: People aged 50 and above face a higher risk of developing shingles

Shingles (Photo: Getty Images)

Question from Pat: Why does the shingles vaccination cost so much? I have checked many places, and it always seems to be about $200. Shouldn't that be considered a “preventative” vaccination — which would be covered by insurance or medicare?

Answer: Arizona Republic health reporter Ken Alltuckerhunted down the following information to explain this scenario.

“The Affordable Care Act requires private health insurance plans cover the cost of preventive care based on the recommendation of expert medical bodies such as the US Preventive Services Task Force and the CDC’s Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (known as ACIP).

“ACIP has recommended the shingles vaccine for those aged 60 or older. The board of medical experts also studied the use of the vaccine for those 50 and above but made no recommendation for that age group. So that means private health insurers are generally required to cover the cost of the vaccine for those 60 and above, but consumers may be required to pay for the vaccine if they want to get the vaccine at a younger age.

RELATED:Quick facts about 10 essential vaccines

“For those with a Medicare drug plan, known as Part D, the cost of the shingles vaccine will be determined by your Part D plan.

“The Food and Drug Administration has approved the shingles vaccine for adults 50 and above. Although ACIP only recommends the vaccine for those 60 and above, it will again evaluate its recommendation after the CDC gathers more data about the vaccine.

“People aged 50 and above face a higher risk of developing shingles and that risk increases as people age, according to ACIP. Older with shingles may experience a burning pain called postherpetic neuralgia, hospitalization or other complications, according to ACIP.”

Do you have a question that you just can't get answered? Use the vast expertise of journalists at Republic Media to get to the bottom of it. As your guide, Andrea Hiland navigates the newsroom of azcentral.com and The Arizona Republic to find answers to what's puzzling you. From the serious to the silly, the controversial to the trivial, she will tackle the issues, big and small. E-mail your question to ask@azcentral.com.

Read or Share this story: http://azc.cc/1J6XNun