Big time: Juventus star Paul Pogba is expected to play in Sunday night's clash with the A-League All Stars. Photo: Getty Images

Juventus midfielder Paul Pogba hopes his club can hang on to the services of Arturo Vidal this season but says it's uncertain whether he will ever play alongside the Chilean again.

Vidal is the subject of a club-record transfer bid from Manchester United and is unlikely to play against the A-League All Stars on Sunday due to a knee injury that prevented him from completing full training with the squad on Saturday.

More than 5500 fans attended an open training session at WIN Jubilee Stadium on Saturday to watch the Italian champions go through their paces, but Vidal trained away from the rest of the squad.

The 27-year-old ran alone before some supervised drills in a blow for those hoping to see him play at ANZ Stadium on Sunday night. Pogba is likely to start in his place.

Advertisement

"We're hearing that Vidal is going but we don't know," Pogba said. "For the moment he's injured, he's trying to get fit. We want him to stay at Juventus. At the moment he's here so we won't speak about him leaving."

The young Frenchman, named the best young player at the 2014 World Cup, hinted Australian fans will likely see Juventus play their famous 3-5-2 "wing-back" formation despite a change of coaches. The system of play is somewhat synonymous with the club as it was used during their success in the 90s, and again throughout their recent three consecutive Serie A titles.

Pogba said new coach Massimiliano Allegri had not expressed a desire to change their formation or tactics, which means Sunday's game will be far from experimental.

"We just keep the same formation and he has, like, a good possession of the ball in training. It's quite similar. When you do three years with one coach, we won three times so we can't change everything. We have to keep some things and try to improve other things and that's what the coach is trying to do," Pogba said.

"It's not because we just change the coach, we expect to win the league as well and the coach, he won one scudetto as well. We trust him, everyone trusts him; the fans, the president, everyone, the team. For us it's just great to have him on our side and we just want to do well."

There has been talk Pogba could be set for a more advanced role this season to allow his attacking game to flourish but the 21-year-old said that may have to wait until after the All Stars game.

"A midfielder has to defend and attack. I think if I can create some goals then that's a bonus. I have to work hard for the team to defend and attack and if I can help the strikers to score, then I'm going to do this as well," Pogba said.

Juventus reportedly offered Pogba a bumper contract extension to tie the young star to the club until 2019 but are yet to reach an agreement. Pogba's deal expires in 2016 but he said he hadn't given too much thought towards his future as his focus was on his performance.

"Like I said in Jakarta, I'm just focused on the pitch, I'm just focused on Juventus and doing well on the pitch and that's it," Pogba said. "I didn't speak with any manager, with no one about my contract. For me, I'm just focused, I'm just training hard and doing well on the pitch."