SARASOTA — The moon is still out when the Sarasota Tsunamis swim team begins its morning practice at 5:45 a.m. at the Arlington Park Pool.

It's been seven months since the four-year-old swim team got booted from its home pool as the Arlington complex underwent a $1.1 million renovation. Things are a little different around here since the team returned to the water last Saturday.

New starting blocks line the pool deck. Once again, the team can spread out, instead of being packed into the six lane Boys & Girls Club pool it occupied during the Arlington repairs. Brand new halogen lights are set up under the surface of the water.

"They are brighter," Head Coach Ira Klein says with a laugh, "...and they are working."

Most of the Sarasota Tsunami's older members (the team has about 150 swimmers total) are preparing for the fall high school season and others are setting goals to qualify for larger championships throughout the spring, like the Florida Age Group Championships, Florida Zones or U.S. Junior Nationals.

Klein has more plans for expanding upon the team culture. He wants to groom his 14 and unders into a stronger team as they graduate to new age brackets. He wants to build the Tsunami masters team back up to 45 members, as many took a break during the team's seven-month hiatus from Arlington Park. He wants to continue to try to eradicate drowning in Sarasota through the Sarasota Swim Academy's learn-to-swim and "baby & me" programs, which his wife, Cindy, helps teach.

For now, the atmosphere is relaxed. Swimmers are working on kicking drills, and giggling between sets. Coach Julie Santiago, also the coach of Sarasota Christian's high school team, films a masters swimmer on an I-phone. Klein's been playing with a new coaching app on his phone that allows him to analyze his swimmers' technique.

"I went 1:04 on that one," Ryley Ober, 13, calls to Klein happily as she completes drills with teammate TC Smith.

TC''s dad, Mike Smith, of Bradenton, watches his son practice from a bench nearby. Because his son can't drive he transports him six days a week to Sarasota pool for practice times range that from 5:45 a.m. to 7 a.m.

"Some parents want to delay their kids driving," he jokes. "I can't wait."

The Smiths relocated to Florida five years ago to take care of an older family member, as well as to expose their son to a more competitive swimming community. TC , a distance specialist, made junior nationals last year in the 400, 800 and 1500 meter freestyle events.

"He has some lofty goals," Mike Smith said. "There is more depth to the swimming community here."

By the end of practice, team members practice "butt busters," a drill off the blocks that is suppos ed to simulate the tricky backstroke start that swimmers have to master to propel themselves over the water at the beginning of their races.

"The blocks are a lot better," Ryley says. "They don't wobble any more."

Ryley, a backstroke specialist like her teammate Michelle Narvaez, 13, is looking to perform well in the 200 backstroke this year.

By now, the sun is up and most will hurry from practice to school. But future plans aren't far from their minds.

"I want to win states in the 500 freestyle," TC, 15 and a sophomore at the State College of Florida collegiate school, says, "and finals at junior nationals in December."