The super-PAC pressuring Vice President Biden to run for his boss’s job is now accepting bitcoin donations from supporters.

Draft Biden 2016 said on Friday that it will accept contributions made with the virtual currency.

“This is in keeping with Vice President Biden’s strong support of technology and innovation throughout his career,” Joseph Schweitzer, the group's director, said in a statement.

ADVERTISEMENT

“Ready your mobile wallet and you’ll be able to simply scan-and-donate,” he added. “There’s no hassle with a card number, no delay and unparalleled cryptographic security.

Draft Biden 2016 said it would limit bitcoin donations to $100 per person in light of unresolved questions about how Federal Election Commission (FEC) regulations relate to cryptocurrency.

It would also require bitcoin donors to identify themselves via an online contributor form.

Draft Biden 2016 has helped lay the groundwork for Biden’s potential presidential campaign by fundraising and recruiting volunteers in early-voting states such as Iowa and New Hampshire.

It unveiled a logo earlier this year depicting the vice president driving a corvette with the slogan “I’m riding with Biden.”

The image appears in the same style as President Obama’s iconic “Hope” logo from his 2008 campaign.

The group’s web store, launched April 8, sells items with the illustration including bumper stickers, T-shirts, hooded sweatshirts and baby clothing.

Biden has not publicly stated whether he plans to seek the presidency in 2016.

Should he run, he would compete for his party’s nomination with Hillary Clinton Hillary Rodham ClintonTrump aide: 'Hillary is the one who’s got a gender gap' WaPo editorial board: 'No excuse' for Clinton email practices Overnight Finance: Puerto Rico bill clears panel | IRS chief vows to finish term | Bill would require nominees to release tax returns MORE, the Democratic front-runner, as well as Sen. Bernie Sanders Bernie SandersTop Sanders aide: DNC needs a 'unifier' as chair Wasserman Schultz fights to keep her job DNC chair: I'm 'focused on doing my job' MORE (I-Vt.) and former Rhode Island Gov. Lincoln Chafee.

Former Sen. Jim Webb (D-Va.) has also shown interest in entering the Democratic field in the coming months.