Tom Simmons started Boulder Shipping Services in May of 1985 as a small packaging store, sort of today's equivalent of a UPS store. His first crating job came when Sperry Univac and Burroughs merged and needed a crate built for a single computer. They called Tom and the rest is history.

Fast forward to 1992, when Randy Williams, a sales executive at the time for a freight company, showed up to make a sales call to Tom. They hit it off and became business partners. As Boulder Shipping Services grew, the space in Boulder became too small, and a more suitable space was found in Longmont. At that point, the name Boulder Shipping Services was change to Crating Technologies.

: Tom Simmons, owner, and Justin Adams, Sales Associate, at Crating Technologies in Longmont on Tuesday. Go to timescall.com for more photos. (Matthew Jonas / Staff Photographer)

Today, Crating Technologies also has an office in Denver, and 30 people working between the two locations.

They also launched Cratek Supply Co. and Colorado Loose Fill as partners in supplying all packaging needs. Cratek Supply Co. provides a full line of shipping supplies and can be found on the web at www.crateksupply.com. Colorado Loose Fill is a distributor of packaging peanuts.

We sat down with Tom in his office at 1 Bowen St., with the constant sounds of saws and hammering in the background.

1. As I understand it, you started out as a very small shop.

We started as a small shipping and packaging store in Boulder. We provided services to retail, to mom-and-pop shops around Boulder. If you had a Christmas present you needed packed and shipped, we'd take care of that. Then we started packaging bigger and bigger items.

2. As you look back over 30 years, what are some of the most bizarre or interesting things you have packed?

The most intriguing thing we did was packing up the mirrors for the Hubble telescope. It was as intricate a job as we had ever done.

We also have crated up 45 yearling ostriches. A yearling stands about 45 inches tall, and weighs about 50 pounds a piece. They were going to Korea. Ostrich eggs are a highly sought after product in Korea. So we met the ostrich farmer, who was from Nebraska, at the airport and we did the transfer into our crates and they were loaded up and sent off. That was an interesting one. We have done three flight simulators for United Airlines. Two 757 and one 747 simulators. They are enormous.

As far as size of project, we moved Intel out of Colorado Springs. That was a 1.4 million square-foot manufacturing facility just full of circuit board manufacturing equipment. We worked on site on that project for seven months. We shipped more than 300 40-foot ocean containers in that project. The smallest things we pack? We do sculptures, we do artwork.

3. Have you been involved in military operations? Do you work with the government in that capacity?

We helped mobilize ground satellite equipment for a local defense contractor, for the Desert Storm war. This meant we had to act really quickly, because they had to get this equipment on site as soon as possible to be effective for the shock and awe of it. That was a huge project for us.

Up until the year 2000, we had quite a bit of defense contract work. Now it depends if we're at war or not. We had a huge contract with a large aircraft manufacturer, whereby we were subcontracted to ship truck-mounted missile launchers to the Israeli government.

We work a lot in the aerospace industry, too. We have been working a lot recently with a local manufacturer on the next generation of the space shuttle. We actually packaged the prototype of the next shuttle, the whole thing. The entire vehicle, assembled.

4. How was your business affected by the recent economic downturn?

Crating Technologies is a strong company and does financially well in a good economy, and it does very well in a bad economy. What we found is when manufacturers are closing their doors, or moving their operations offshore to the Pacific Rim or whatever, they need to get their equipment to a new location. That's what we do. So we are very busy when the economy is in a downturn, very busy.

5. How much did you make last year?

Between Crating Technologies and Cratek Supply I anticipate this year we're going to gross just under $5 million.

You know when I started I had absolutely no idea. I started the business with $1,800 in cash. I thought I would be a small packaging store similar to what we see today with UPS shops. It just evolved into this. It's not because of any great features I have, it's because we have great people working here. My talent is I surrounded myself with good people.

Vince Winkel: 303-684-5291, winkelv@times-call.com or twitter.com/vincewinkel