Logan Elizabeth Keane debuts at 2:58 a.m. today

Erin Keane holds her newborn baby Logan Elizabeth Keane , as father Dan watches at Boulder Community Health. Logan Elizabeth, born at 2:58 a.m. Friday, was the first child to be born in Boulder County in 2016. ( Cliff Grassmick / Daily Camera )

Logan Elizabeth Keane of Broomfield is just hours old, and already a winner.

Logan has the distinction of being the first baby born in Boulder County in the new year, making her debut at Boulder Community Health at 2:58 a.m. today.

At 7 pounds, 6 ounces and 19 inches a length, Logan arrived just eight minutes ahead of the second baby, a boy named Kian Michel Molnar, born to Loveleen and Stephen Molnar of Broomfield at SCL Health Good Samaritan Medical Center in Lafayette.

But to Logan's mom and dad, Erin and Dan Keane, this wasn't a competition.

"I think we're just more excited that she's healthy and everyone is feeling good," said Dan Keane, 36, the building services manager for the recreation center at the University of Colorado.

Erin Keane, 32, said about seven hours after her daughter's birth, "We're excited to have the first baby in Boulder, obviously, and it's a great way to start off the new year with a new addition to the family."

Logan has an older brother, Ryan, who is 2 ½. Her due date, for the record, had been Wednesday of the coming week.

"We were not planning on having a baby today," said Erin Keane, who works in the marketing department of Vail Resorts at the ski company's Broomfield corporate office. "But I was in for a doctor's appointment yesterday, and the doctor said 'Let's go ahead and have it today.'"

She went home Thursday to Broomfield to gather her things, and returned to Boulder Community Health with husband Dan. Procedures to induce birth began not long after their 11 a.m. Thursday check-in.

Advertisement

"She took her time, and so we ended up having a 2016 baby," Erin Keane said "It was a 15-hour labor, a long delivery."

The new mom added that the decision to induce labor was not the result of any serious issues.

"They just said there was low fluids; she was ready to come out. She had cooked long enough," she said.

Dan Keane said he was at BCH throughout his wife's labor.

"It was certainly a long day, but at times you feel a little helpless, because there's not much that I could do," Dan Keane said. "It seemed to go a little easier than our first."

By late this morning, they were entertaining family visitors, including Logan's big brother Ryan. Both parents were sounding remarkably fresh, considering.

"Both Erin and I got an hour's sleep this morning, from about six to seven a.m.," Dan Keane said. "I think we were both nodding off, at that point. There was a little bit of a lull.

"We're just happy she's here. and happy and healthy."

Charlie Brennan: 303-473-1327, brennanc@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/chasbrennan