What happened to that libertarian moment again?

Yes, there was a time, not quite a year-and-a-half ago, when journalists seriously suggested that the country was entering a "libertarian moment" and wondered whether Rand Paul's presidential campaign would serve as its vanguard and herald. I'm thinking, of course, of Robert Draper's August 2014 New York Times Magazine cover story, and the debate it sparked (on the center-left and center-right) about the possibility of Paul's candidacy transforming the Republican Party into a vehicle for a consistently libertarian agenda. It would feature not just the standard GOP promises to cut taxes, spending, and regulation, but also a forthright embrace of open immigration, an end to the culture war and the war on drugs, and a foreign policy of much greater restraint than even Barack Obama has proposed and enacted.

The actual libertarian moment hit around the time that the Tea Party did. Rand Paul running for office was never going to be it. Instead it helped kill it.

The most, and arguably only, popular part of the libertarian program was smaller government. But no one delivered on that. Whether it was Rand Paul or Paul Ryan, ObamaCare wasn't stopped and government didn't get smaller. Instead some of the same pols went on to spend more money and fund the same programs that conservative activists hated.

And then things got even worse.

The big libertarian agenda at the top shifted from fighting ObamaCare and the size of government, which was popular, to illegal alien amnesty, legalizing drugs, opposing the War on Terror and freeing criminals, which put them on a collision course with social conservatives, nationalist conservatives and foreign policy conservatives.

To the average conservative though they just looked like RINOs, embracing elements of Obama's agenda. The left got excited because GOPers were turning to pro-crime "reform" efforts, and bringing some movement conservatives with them, while Rand Paul sounded to the left of Obama on the War on Terror and top Republicans were behind illegal alien amnesty.

Trump is part of the backlash. As was the rise of Carson and Cruz.

The base will grudgingly accept compromises on some issues in exchange for victories on others. The libertarian moment had lots of compromises and no victories to offer. Instead their banner policies became out-lefting the left on social issues and foreign policy without delivering smaller government.

And so the moment was gone.

The left got excited about the triangulation, but the right wasn't getting anything out of it.