It has been six years since the passage of the Affordable Care Act. There is good news and bad news.

The good news is that 20 million more people across America now have health insurance. Pre-existing conditions no longer are a barrier to access, children can stay on their parents' insurance until age 26, lifetime caps on insurance are a thing of the past and thousands of jobs have been created to handle the newly insured.

The bad news is that the costs of health care and insurance have continued to rise and are often pushed directly to the consumer in the form of higher copays and deductibles.

It is time we, the people, build on the successes of Obamacare and engage in respectful, transparent conversations that will investigate the continuing barriers to affordable health care and develop the will to fix them. Discussion must consider a single-payer system, such as Medicare.

The fact that health care costs have not been drastically reduced should not be a surprise. The ACA was developed by congressional committees heavily influenced by powerful, well-funded lobbyists for those interests who did not want their large profit margins jeopardized.

It was impossible to address such issues as hospitals built to rival five-star hotels, the still-too-large administrative fees, lack of cost transparency, and overpriced prescription drugs and medical equipment.

Costs have fallen or leveled off in some areas, but we, as consumers, have seen little relief on health care bills. Copays and deductibles are rising. The threat of bankruptcy continues to loom over families who have a catastrophic illness, accident or who require expensive prescription drugs to sustain life.

A recent Kaiser Family Foundation poll found that 24 percent of the public favors a single-payer system, and an additional 36 percent wants to build on the ACA.

Change is wanted and needed. Let's get the conversation rolling, leaving our ideologies at the door and with the health of our people as our beacon.