The Eye

Miley Cyrus, Patrick Schwarzenegger Show PDA At Tom Ford Runway Show: 'Wrecking Ball' Singer And Actor Boyfriend Shine In The Front Row

SIGN UP TO RECEIVE THE LATEST NEWS FROM FASHION&STYLE

(Photo : Getty Images: Charley Gallay) Miley Cyrus and Patrick Schwarzenegger get cozy at Tom Ford's runway presentation.

Miley Cyrus and Patrick Schwarzenegger may have sparked split rumors earlier this week after a plethora of reports suggested the young couple were heading for a breakup, however, the duo slammed rumors with lots of PDA as they attended their first fashion show together at Tom Ford's presentation in Los Angeles on February 20.



Hollywood Life reveals that Cyrus, 22, sat lovingly next to her man Schwarzenegger, 21, while watching Ford's fashion presentation in the front row.



Cyrus and Schwarzenegger sat close to one another, with the actor keeping a loving arm around her waist while Cyrus kept her hands clasped her hands in his.



Hollywood Life reveals that, in addition to showing some adorable PDA during the show, in which both stars looked flawless, the duo took the opportunity to gush over one another in a fun photo booth opportunity.



Cyrus posted a photo of herself and Schwarzenegger following the show in which she dons a stunning lace ensemble while Schwarzenegger appears to be on his knees gazing up at Cyrus' beauty.



The display of affection comes on the heels of reports that the couple were experiencing jealousy issues. Recent reports suggested that Cyrus was rude to her boyfriend at the "SNL 40" anniversary after party as she was upset that she didn't get to perform alongside Paul McCartney, putting her in a bad mood and leaving her to act poorly to her beau.



In addition, other reports suggested that Cyrus was caught being flirty at a pre-Grammy celebration with Rita Ora, instantly sparking split rumors between the couple.



Since then, both rumors have been squashed by the couple's constant displays of affection.



What do you think of the duo's loving relationship?



SIGN UP TO RECEIVE THE LATEST NEWS FROM FASHION&STYLE

© 2015 Fashion & Style.com All rights reserved. Do not reproduce without permission.