Klassen will face off in November against Loveland resident Alexi Grewal and incumbent Mayor Cecil Gutierrez

Daryle Klassen ( Jenny Sparks )

If anyone was surprised by Loveland City Councilor Daryle Klassen's decision to run for mayor, they probably weren't half as surprised as he was.

With his term for the Ward 1 seat he's held since 2006 set to expire this year, Klassen announced some time ago that he would not seek re-election. Since that announcement, he said he's been flattered by those who have approached him with another idea.

"For some months now, a lot of colleagues and other citizens have been pressing me and I was saying no," Klassen said last week. "I finally succumbed."

The dean of the current City Council and its Mayor Pro Tem, Klassen's history in local politics spans decades. He served eight years on the Larimer County Board of Commissioners, starting in 1985. It's that experience and background that Klassen believe give him the leadership skills necessary for the mayor's job.

And Klassen said he is concerned about trends he has noticed in the city. As a councilor, and if he were elected mayor, it's all about three words: First things first.

"I'm seeing a trend in Loveland city government to be all things for everybody and in today's economic world, this is not possible," Klassen said.

For Klassen, the first things that he believes should be put first are jobs and economic vitality, which directly relate to police, fire, transportation, water, electricity and other essentials. Only after those are provided for should government start looking toward quality of life issues like parks and museums, he said.

He would aim to maintain a fiscally conservative approach in the city, and thinks holding the mayor's position could also be a "grand exit" to his political career. Klassen said he would only seek one term.

Klassen is one of three contenders for the mayor's seat; he will face off against incumbent Mayor Cecil Gutierrez and Loveland resident Alexi Grewal.

Jessica Maher can be reached at 669-5050, ext. 516, or maherj@reporter-herald.com. Follow her on Twitter: @JessicaMaherRH.