Photo: Getty Images Very few of us are ready for the new PPACA reporting requirements. Many of us are aware that reports are due at year end, but haven’t even looked at the rules. Should we be concerned? The answer depends upon your company size and how your organization funds its group health benefits. What are we talking about? The requirement mandates applicable large employers (those with 50 or more full-time equivalent employees) and small employers (under 50 full-time equivalent employees) sponsoring self-funded health plans to report on group health coverage offered to employees or to disclose that health coverage was not offered to employees in 2015. There are two reports employers must prepare: (1) an annual information return that is filed with the Internal Revenue Service (IRS), and (2) statements to provide to full-time employees about the group health plan coverage offered. As such: Complete your profile to continue reading and get FREE access to BenefitsPRO.com, part of your ALM digital membership. Benefits:

Your access to unlimited BenefitsPRO.com content isn’t changing. Once you are an ALM digital member, you’ll receive: Critical BenefitsPRO.com information including cutting-edge post-reform success strategies, comprehensive service provider listings, educational webcasts and videos, resources from industry leaders, and informative eNewsletters.

Exclusive discounts on ALM, BenefitsPRO Magazine and BenefitsPRO.com events.

Access to other award-winning ALM publications including LifeHealthPro.com, ThinkAdvisor.com and Law.com. Register Now Already have an account? Sign In X Sign in with your ALM Account Remember Me Or... Sign In With LinkedIn

The bottom line is that these are important tax forms with potentially serious financial consequences to employers. Under the employer shared responsibility provisions of PPACA, often called “play or pay,” year-end is when employers tell the government, through these reports, whether or not they chose the “play” option by providing their full-time employees and dependents affordable minimum essential health coverage that satisfies PPACA mandates or whether they may have to “pay” the employer shared responsibility premium penalties outlined in the law. Experts predict that these forms will receive a very high level of scrutiny by the government, so employers need to produce accurate and complete reports. How will employers know if this reporting requirement applies to them?Applicable large employers subject to this reporting include all employers with 50 or more full-time employees and full-time equivalent employees, including governmental and nonprofit employers. A full-time employee is generally defined as a common-law employee averaging 30 or more hours of service per week, and an hour of service includes each hour in which payment is made or due to the employee, including hours worked, vacation, holiday, paid time off, or other types of leaves. Small employers with under 50 full-time equivalent employees offering insured group health plan coverage are exempt from the reporting requirements, with one exception: Small employers sponsoring self-funded health plans are subject to reporting requirements under Code § 6055.

This should be simple, right? Simple, probably not. Doable, absolutely yes. Keep in mind these are IRS forms. ThinkHR recently conducted an informal poll of its customers to determine how knowledgeable they felt about the reporting requirements and learned that 75 percent were not confident that they knew enough today to file the reports. In addition, PricewaterhouseCoopers (PwC) conducted a survey in the first quarter of 2015 with 480 employers in 36 different U.S. industries that confirmed these new requirements are presenting challenges and many employers have not decided how they will comply.