Greg Hardy broke his silence on social media Saturday night—one day after graphic pictures surfaced of injuries suffered by his former girlfriend.

Related Graphic images revealed from case vs. Cowboys' Greg Hardy; Jerry Jones responds

“Just had to say I express my regret [for] what happened in [the] past and I’m dedicated to being the best person and teammate that I can be,” Hardy posted to Twitter. “But mostly I am grateful [for] the opportunity to play in the NFL.”

Hardy refused to comment Friday, the same day Deadspin published a detailed account of the case Friday along with a gallery of photos that show the various injuries Nicole Holder suffered to her back, legs, foot, arms, neck and chin that evening in Charlotte a year-and-a-half ago.

The Cowboys defensive end had a guilty verdict in his bench trial expunged earlier this week.

David Moore reported Friday the NFL had access to these and other photos before issuing its suspension of Hardy in April. Sources said Cowboys officials were not allowed to view the photos, several of which were under a protective order, before Hardy signed with the club on March 18.

While the club was not granted access to visual evidence, sources stressed the Cowboys were aware of the photos and had an understanding of what was depicted. Owner Jerry Jones, executive vice president Stephen Jones and head coach Jason Garrett have said repeatedly that the organization did its due diligence before signing Hardy. The club’s stance: the Cowboys understand the serious nature of domestic violence but also believe in second chances.

Jerry Jones reiterated that stance in a statement released Friday evening.

“While we did not have access to the photos that became public today, we were and are aware of the serious nature of this incident,” Jones said. “We as an organization take this very seriously.

“We do not condone domestic violence. We entered into the agreement with Greg fully understanding that there would be scrutiny and criticism. We have given Greg a second chance. He is a member of our team and someone who is grateful for the opportunity he has been given to move forward with his life and his career.”

Hardy is expected to play in Sunday’s home game against the Eagles.

Latest on Greg Hardy and image reveal

Report reveals graphic images, interview details from recently expunged assault case against Cowboys’ Greg Hardy

Tumultuous timeline of Greg Hardy

Reaction

Gosselin: Greg Hardy’s ex-girlfriend revelation makes me shudder, but Cowboys will do nothing

Hardy is a bad dude, but how many other women are cowering from domestic abusers tonight?

Latest evidence: Dallas Cowboys are America’s Team of free passes to troubled players

Philly radio host: ‘Screw Greg Hardy;’ station helps raise over $10,000 for Dallas women’s shelter

Reaction from former NFL players: Has Cowboys’ Greg Hardy played his last game?

Ex-NFL punter posts Cowboys public relations number, blasts NFL for Greg Hardy

Media reaction: Sickening, disgusting and vile; Greg Hardy should never play another down

Hardy’s in-game outburst

Moore: Amid this drama, why would Jerry Jones talk about an extension for Hardy? Here’s why

George: The truth behind the shoving match, Greg Hardy-Dez Bryant spat on Cowboys’ sideline

Cowlishaw: Greg Hardy? Expect reeling Cowboys to permit anything, everything

Theismann blasts Cowboys execs for Greg Hardy; ex-NFL GM: It’s like Dez and Haley

Jets receiver gets emotional about Greg Hardy: ‘I don’t think that he learned his lesson’

Hardy responds and talks hot wives

The 10 most interesting things Greg Hardy said, including basing his Pro Bowl picks on hot wives

Columnist blasts Cowboy: Ray Rice apologizes, shunned; Greg Hardy doesn’t, welcomed

National reaction to Hardy comments about Brady’s wife, coming out ‘guns blazing’: Hasn’t learned; ‘worst possible metaphor’

Reaction to signing with Dallas

Greg Hardy: ‘I don’t care if [you] like me; happy to have an opportunity’

Dallas Mayor Mike Rawlings: ‘This was a shot in the gut’

WFAA-TV’s Dale Hansen: Jason Garrett a fraud or puppet

Domestic abuse is awful, but Greg Hardy deserves a second chance

What columnists, players, VIPs said about Greg Hardy

The Hardy file

Who is the real Greg Hardy? His upbringing, inconsistency, alter egos (Kraken, LeBron beater)

Breaking down Greg Hardy’s deal with Cowboys

10 things you might not know about new Cowboy Greg Hardy

Greg Hardy refuses to autograph Carolina Panthers helmet; pulls out $100 bill, signs it for fan