PHOENIX — Just when it seemed things couldn’t get any worse for the Rockies, it got worse Sunday with injury news regarding Brett Anderson, Carlos Gonzalez and Troy Tulowitzki.

Anderson, the left-handed starter who has already missed most of the season with a broken left index finger, has been diagnosed with a bulging disc in his lower back. Anderson will consult with a specialist on Monday to find out the next step, but according to Rockies trainer Keith Dugger, it’s likely that Anderson will miss the rest of the season.

Gonzalez, struggling to stay on the field because of a sprained right ankle and patella tendinitis in his left knee, was placed on the 15-day disabled list Sunday. The Rockies hope he can return to finish out the season, but there is a chance he will be shut down completely.

Taking Gonzalez’s spot on the 25-man roster is first baseman Ben Paulsen, who was recalled from Triple-A Colorado Springs. Paulsen started Sunday afternoon’s game against the Arizona Diamondbacks.

Tulowitzki, already on the DL as he battles problems in his left hip area, returned to Denver to continue treatment. He had been working out with the Rockies in Arizona, but he is not close to rejoining the team or going on a minor-league rehab assignment. According to Dugger, Tulo is still feeling “on-and-off discomfort” in his hip.

Tulowitzki will continue to consult with specialists to aid in his healing process.

Anderson, who left last Tuesday’s game against the Chicago Cubs in the fourth inning because of back spasms, had an MRI on his back Friday and it revealed a bulging disc between the L4 and L5 vertebrae in his lower back.

“We will consult with a spine surgeon here in Arizona on Monday. Dr. Chris Young,” Dugger said. “That’s pretty much what I know at this point and time. We will pretty much leave it up to (Young) to decide which direction we will go.

“I will tell you this: Brett is still not feeling very good, he’s having some issues — not so much back pain, but pain going down his leg. It acts like a typical disc herniation.”

Asked if there was any chance Anderson could pitch again this season, Dugger answered, “I doubt it. It will takes a couple of weeks to calm it down, even if we go the injection route. Then it will take a couple of weeks to get him on his core exercises. It’s a long haul, not a quick fix, even if we go the non-surgical route.”

Anderson is on the disabled list for the second time this season. He already missed 83 games because of a broken finger suffered during an at-bat in April. He underwent Tommy John surgery in 2011 as a member of the Oakland A’s.

At the end of this season, the Rockies must decide if they want to exercise their $12 million club option on Anderson’s contract.

Gonzalez was removed late in Friday night’s game for a double switch because the tendinitis was acting up again. CarGo was not in the starting lineup Saturday night and the Rockies made the decision to put him on the DL after Saturday’s game.

“We felt like we got to the point where he wasn’t getting any better and it wasn’t make any sense putting him out there,” manager Walt Weiss said. “We will give him some time to hopefully allow those nagging injuries to calm down.”

Gonzalez, hitting .238, has played in only 70 of the Rockies’ 117 games.

“I would like to see him back (this season),” Weiss said. “I don’t like to see players shut down the last part of the season. I think it’s important for them to be out there playing and go into the offseason with a healthy mindset and some confidence, as opposed to going into the offseason concentrating on their rehab. Hopefully we will see CarGo back out there.”

CarGo’s right ankle needs some more time to heal completely. As for the tendinitis, it’s a nagging injury that he’ll have to learn to work through, according to Dugger.

“We know it’s not going away over the night or over a week,” Dugger said. “There are multiple ways of handling this. But when these guys signed a contract, it’s for the full year. Unfortunately it is. And that’s part of our job to understand. This is a business and a sport.

“If we think that he’s getting worse, or that he’s at risk, or that he could injure himself, then we’ll take him out. Just like we did the other night, because mentally he couldn’t handle it. And physically, his body is breaking down. He’s had a rough go.”

Dugger said that while Tulowitzki is feeling better, multiple doctors are being consulted to try and isolate exactly what’s causing Tulo’s continuing discomfort.

“It could be a hip labrum or something like that that we can address through the season,” Dugger said. “He’s not ready to go on a rehab assignment … so he went back home to hit in the cages and use the pool for some higher-intensity exercises. Right now, he’s not close to going on a rehab assignment, but our goal is for him to finish the season.”

Dugger added, “It’s not a step back. It’s just something we are addressing and maybe the rate isn’t going at what we expected.”

Tulo suffers from a muscle imbalance in his left hip and groin area that dates back to the 2008 season when he tore a tendon in his left quadriceps.

Tulowitzki, who still leads the National League with a .340 average, has been on the DL since July 20 and has now missed 17 games.

Patrick Saunders: psaunders@denverpost.com or twitter.com/psaundersdp

Looking ahead

Rockies’ Jordan Lyles (6-1, 3.72 ERA) at Padres’ Jesse Hahn (7-3, 2.28), 8:10 p.m. Monday, ROOT; 850 AM

Don’t look now, but the Padres are quietly starting to play some solid baseball. Hahn, a 25-year-old right-hander, is part of the reason. Through 10 starts, he has compiled an impressive 1.06 WHIP. He’s struck out 57 batters in 59 innings. Opposing batters are hitting just .184 against him. No Rockies players have faced Hahn at the major-league level.

Tuesday: Rockies’ Yohan Flande (0-4, 5.77 ERA) at Padres’ Odrisamer Despaigne (2-3, 3.10), 8:10 p.m., ROOT

Wednesday: Rockies’ Tyler Matzek (2-7, 5.32) at Padres’ Ian Kennedy (8-10, 3.51), 4:40 p.m., ROOT

Thursday: Reds’ Mike Leake (9-10, 3.42) at Rockies’ Jorge De La Rosa (11-8, 4.34), 6:40 p.m., ROOT

Patrick Saunders, The Denver Post