Presto, icon, logo, news, education, pencils school schools teachers students classroom stockimage (Photo: Journal & Courier)

This school year has been a busy one for Kara Sloshower, a substitute teacher in the Wappingers Central School District.

"I got calls (assignments) on the first, second and third day of school," Sloshower said.That's a stark contrast to the 2013-14 year, when it took three weeks to get her first assignment.

In what's become a nationwide trend, officials in some local school districts, including Dutchess County's three largest, said they're struggling with substitute teacher shortages.

The county's 13 public school districts spent about $4.15 million combined on short-term substitutes during the 2014-15 school year, according to a Poughkeepsie Journal investigation. The expense is a drop in the bucket to overall school budgets — only 0.46 percent of the $900 million combined that Dutchess districts budgeted in 2014-15. The short-term substitute cost was about $4 million during the 2010-11 school year.

In Ulster County, the Highland, Marlboro and New Paltz districts spent more than $900,000 combined last school year.

The reasons for bringing substitutes into the classrooms remain similar from year-to-year. Illness is the most-listed reason for absences in every district, followed by reasons such as school business — professional development, conferences, workshops and more — family illness, and teacher personal days.

So what has changed? The last few years have been a tumultuous time in the educational field. Many districts have seen substitute pools shrink. There are also fewer classroom teachers.

Some substitutes sign up to work in multiple district pools, so a district's rate of pay could affect the number of available educators. In Dutchess, the average daily pay was $85 for substitutes with teaching certificates in 2014-15, ranging from $72 per day in Beacon and Wappingers, to $100 per day in Poughkeepsie.

It's harder to become a teacher now — New York implemented a tougher certification test in 2014. State teacher retirements have increased 10 percent since 2010 while the number of teachers has fallen 5.5 percent over the same time period, according to state records. The rise in retirements among the state’s teacher ranks is an ongoing trend as staff reach retirement age, face new testing and evaluation standards and cash out pensions. A 2014 National Education Association survey found that nearly half of all respondent teachers were considering leaving the profession because of standardized tests.

School officials also say substitute shortages have worsened as the unemployment rate improved, the Associated Press reported. A more competitive employment market means that job seekers "who might have settled for a part-time job such as substitute teaching" now want full-time jobs with benefits and higher salaries.

And the Affordable Care Act requires many employers to give full-time employees health care benefits. Many districts, already strapped for cash, have cut back on the time they hire individual substitutes to keep an individual's work week under 30 hours. This allows the districts to avoid paying for health care, according to the WorldTradeCouncil.org, an international research and consulting firm that focuses on educational and financial services.

Local districts

A number of local districts do track teacher absenteeism rates, though not necessarily substitute usage, according to responses the Journal received during its investigation. Eight of Dutchess' 13 districts were able to provide some data on substitute usage during at least one of the last few school years.

Arlington, for instance, had 9,829 absences — an absence can be a full day, half day, class period, etc. — that required substitutes in the 2013-14 school year. There were 9,572 absences in the 2014-15 year.

The substitute shortage has gotten "progressively worse" over the past three to five years, said Arlington Superintendent Brendan Lyons. "We’ve had some pretty intense professional development during the school year, days of training."

In Poughkeepsie, staffing some classrooms has been challenging this year. At least 17 teachers have resigned since July, though many of the spots had been filled again by late November, according to school board documents.

A likely reason for all the resignations: The high school and middle school are in receivership, which could be "creating a cloud or panic by some professionals," said Deputy Superintendent Ronel Cook. Superintendent Nicole Williams has the next two years to improve student performance. If she fails, the state will appoint an independent receiver — an individual, a nonprofit or another school district — to manage the schools.

The Poughkeepsie district also has the highest percentage of economically disadvantaged students in Dutchess — 86 percent eligible for free or reduced lunch as of 2013-14, according to state data. Some studies indicate that high-poverty districts generally have higher rates of teacher absenteeism than low-poverty communities.

Poughkeepsie's use of substitute teachers dropped 22 percent in one year: There were 6,975 teacher absences requiring substitutes in 2014-15 and 5,454 in 2013-14, according to information the district provided to a Journal Freedom of Information Law request. Illness was the reason listed for 52 percent of absences in 2013-14 and 55 percent last school year. "School business" was another top reason.

Poughkeepsie spent $1.5 million for long-and-short-term substitutes — more than $700,000 for short-term substitutes alone — during the 2013-14 school year, according to board documents. Cook attributed the unusually high expense to "several investigations going on, people on administrative leave. We had a huge investigation related to Regents tests at Poughkeepsie High School, several teachers suspended with pay."

In Wappingers, there were 8,896 absences that needed substitute coverage in 2014-15. About 44 percent of the absences were illness-related, 19 percent were listed as "district release," which district Business Manager Kristen Crandall said occurs when the teacher is out of the classroom for things such as "training or scoring." Nearly 12 percent of the absences were because of vacancies.

"We know there is a small pool" of substitutes, Crandall said via email. "Many of these subs are willing to travel to get (to) work...so (Wappingers) subs may be willing to go as far as Hyde Park or Carmel."

Impact

A teacher's attendance is considered a key component to a student's success. But 5.3 percent of teachers are absent on any given day, according to a 2012 report from the Center for American Progress.

“Children crave and need consistency,” said Stephanie Green, president of the Poughkeepsie teachers union. “Unfortunately, people do get sick…family members get sick…some days, we’re directed to sit in on meetings or take classes on field trips.”

Some Poughkeepsie parents have said their children spent class periods in school auditoriums when substitute teachers were unavailable this year.

Melissa Whitaker said her 13-year-old daughter has been "quite lucky" — the eighth-grader has only been in the auditorium "three times since September. My son's friends in seventh grade, however, went without a regular teacher (or substitute) for six weeks." Some substitute teachers may be afraid to work in the district" due to our bad reputation. That's unfortunate because we really have some amazing kids here. It's just the bad apples get more attention."

Teachers do leave prepared lesson plans for substitutes. In Wappingers, 9-year-old Alycia Conti said she "does the same stuff" she would normally do when her teacher is absent. And it's a "special treat" for her to see her favorite substitute teacher, Teresa Ayasse.

This is the first school year in which the state Education Department will expand its data collection on teacher absenteeism. Local districts will begin submitting individual teacher attendance data to the department this school year, said department spokesman Jonathan Burman. Until this year, the department collected aggregate teacher attendance from only the state's lowest-performing schools, including some in Poughkeepsie. The U.S. Department of Education started collecting teacher absenteeism rates in 2009 for its Civil Rights Data Collection.

And local districts have taken steps to boost substitute pools.

In Arlington, officials have raised substitute pay rates and have been "much more aggressive in terms of posting positions," Lyons said.

Poughkeepsie just upped its rate of pay in November for certified substitutes at the middle and high schools.

Green said she and other district officials are also trying to find different solutions to the substitute shortage. Some possibilities include reaching out to retired teachers to see if they'll register for the substitute pool and bringing students from local college teaching programs into city classrooms.

This school year, Wappingers increased its daily certified substitute pay to $86 in an effort to be more competitive, Crandall said.

Nina Schutzman: nschutzman@poughkeepsiejournal.com, 845-451-4518, Twitter: @pojonschutzman

Substitute teacher requirements

There's no certificate offered specifically for substitute teachers in New York, according to the state Education Department.

If you hold a state teaching certificate, you can work for any number of days in any number of school districts. But if you're employed on a long-term basis — more than 40 days — you have to be certified or working toward certification in the specific educational field or area. The rules are the same for individuals who are working toward certification.

If you don't have a teaching certificate and aren't working toward it, you can work up to 40 days in a school district in a school year.

Local school districts may impose additional requirements.

Your schools, your dollars

This is the first installment of “Your schools, your dollars,” an investigative series the Journal will publish occasionally that looks into where your school tax dollars go.

Inside

Spending trends for short-term substitutes chart, 4A

District-by-district substitute pools chart, 4A

Read or Share this story: http://pojonews.co/1YsJa8k